Truth Exalted IN THE WRITINGS OF THAT Eminent and Faithful Servant of CHRIST
John Burnyeat, COLLECTED Into this Ensuing Volume as a MEMORIAL to his Faithful
Labors in and for the TRUTH.

Prove. 10. 7. The Memory of the Just is Blessed.

Psalm. 112. 6. The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
AS the Tree is known by its Fruits, so I desire thee to- Taste of these, which
are here presented to thee, with a Serious and Unprejudiced Mind; which are but
Some of the Many Testimonies of the Love and Labor of the Deceased Author for
the General Good of Mankind, and particular Edification of the Churches of
Christ, that are Gathered in our Day by the Eternal Spirit; in and among whom
he was a Faithful, Able and Successful Labourer. The End of Books is the End of
Preaching, viz. Informing the Inquirer, Stirring up the Careless, Stopping the
Gainsayer, and Comforting and Building up those, whose Faces are turned already
Sion-ward; and that are Attended with many Exercises in their Journey to
Everlasting Habitations. And as the End is the same, so where the Servants of
Christ cannot come, Books may; that are the Testimony of their Care and
Ministry for others: They remain also with us, and are a Memorial of those that
writ them, when they are Gathered to their Fathers: and by them the Living
often Converse with the Dead; who yet Die not, but Live in their Labors, in
the Children they beget to God; in their Writings they leave behind them, as
Pledges of their Love and Care for the Flock; and in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, with the Spirits of the Just: To whom, and to God the Judge of
all, the Dispensation of our Day has brought Thousands; Blessed be his Eternal
Name for ever!

These following Writings I Recommend the more Earnestly and Pleasingly to thy
Solemn Perusal, Serious Reader, because they are very little Controversial;
they chiefly Refer to Practice, to an Holy and Divine Life, and Walking with
God. The First is an Account of his own Convincement, the Path he trod-in to
Peace with God out of a Wicked World, where the Heavenly Call found him: It is
Sweet, Lively, Instructive and Persuading to others to Try, as he did, and to
Embrace the Holy Truth. Then follows a Relation of his Travels and Ministry in
these Nations, and beyond the Seas; as Luke presented the Churches with the
Acts or Travels of the Apostles in their Infancy: A Pleasant and Seasoning
Lecture both for the Young, who love to hear of Voyages, to Excite them to seek
the Lord, his Way and Kingdom, and to Journey toward the New and Heavenly
Jerusalem; and to Quicken those more Aged, to shake off their Dust, the Earth,
that is too Apt to Contract and Stick upon them in the Daily Attention they
give to their Temporal Affairs; and to Lift up their Eyes, and see the Fields,
how White they are to Harvest, and how few Laborers there are to Take it in;
and what need there is of an Holy Care and Oversight of those that are already
Gathered; especially Considering, how many Eminent Ones of late are Taken from
us!

His Next Writings are Epistles of diverse sorts, to several Places and upon
different Occasions, containing Divine Truths and Strong Perswasives to
Faithfulness, Love, Holiness and Perseverance in the Way of God, Revealed to
them in the Light of Jesus Christ, the Great Light of the World, that
Enlightens every one, that comes into the World: Those that have any Spiritual
Savor, will Taste a Sweet Savor in them; and God will Witness to them, as he
is wont to do to the Labors and Writings of his Servants in the Hearts of
those, that with Seriousness shall peruse them.

His last Two Tracts in this Book (saving Two Epistles, that by coming too
late, are misplaced) are in Defense of the Truth against some Opposers of it,
and the only Controversy in the Book: The Soundness of his Answers, and
Moderation of his Spirit in delivering of them, are no small Commendation to
the Truth he defends, whose Faithful Servant he was; for it shows the Power it
had over him, how well he knew what he writ, and that he was not only a
Professor, but a Possessor of the Living and Saving Faith, that was once
delivered to the Saints; and is now again Restored by the Operation of the same
Holy Spirit.

I shall Conclude with saying; That as the Author was one of the Most-Eminent
of the Second Stock of Ministers the Lord Anointed and Sent forth in this his
Glorious Day, and was so Generally Witnessed in his Services in the Hearts of
his People; It is tenderly hoped, that those who loved him, will prize his
Remaining Testimonies, and be Good Examples to their Families in Reading such
Edifying Labors of the Brethren, that their Children and Servants may be
brought up and Instructed in the Religious Tradition of our Day, according to
the Testimony of the Blessed Truth in the Inward Parts: Unto which they are all
left, and the holy Teachings and Guidings of it, (and Thou, Reader, likewise)
that leads into the Way of Holiness, and into the Path of Endless Peace.

ON JOHN BURNYE AT' s Book.
GO, Little Book, speak out the Praise
Of him, that did thy Author Raise
An Eminent Apostle of our Days.
May He, that Blessed him, Bless thee too,
That thou the Way of Truth may show
To the Vain Gentile, and Benighted Jew!
(Thee,
Who spoke through him, can speak by
And make thy Readers Hear and See
The Saving Truths of thy Divinity.
A TESTIMONY Concerning the Life and Death OF OUR Dear Friend and Brother in
the Lord, John Burnyeat.
HE was a faithful Friend and Brother, and an able Minister of Christ Jesus,
who freely preached the Everlasting Gospel, and labored to keep it without
Charge, who was a True Apostle of Jesus Christ, and preached him Freely; both by
Sea and Land. He received the Truth in 1653. in Cumberland, and died in the
Lord in Ireland in the Year 1690. after he had stood those great Troubles,
Storms and Trials there; and was a great Strength to Friends in the time of
their late great Sufferings; He stood it out, when many were Ruined, and fled
to England for Succor, and remained, till after King William came in, and King
James went out of Ireland.

And then he went up and down Visiting Friends Meetings, that were gathered in
the Name of Jesus: And after he had intended to come for England; but there he
died in the Lord, and is Blessed, and Rests from his Labors, and his Works
follow him. He traveled and Preached the Gospel in Ireland, Scotland,
Barbados, Virginia, Maryland, New-Jerseys, Long Island, Road-Island, and up
and down in New England, and had many Disputes with many Priests and
Professors, that opposed the Truth; but the Lord gave him Dominion over all,
and to stop the Mouths of the Gainsayers, and he turned many to the Lord, and
was a Peacemaker; and he preached in his Life and Conversation, as well as his
Words. And he traveled with me from Maryland through the Wilderness, and
through many Rivers, and Desperate Bogs, where they said never English Man nor
Horse had Traveled before; where we lay out at Nights, and sometimes in Indian
Houses, and many times were very hard put to it for Provisions: but the Lord by
his Eternal Arm and Power did support us, and carry us through all Dangers;
Blessed be his Name for ever.

And he was an Elder, and a Pillar in the House of God: and the Name of the
Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance; but the Name of the Wicked
will Rot. He was a Man Endued much with the Wisdom of God, and in it had a Care
of the Welfare of the Church of Christ, to keep in Peace, out of Strife and
Contention: and labored with the Apostates and Back-sliders to turn them to
Christ and his peaceable Truth; So that they might Study to be Quiet, and keep
in the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lord's Peace. And much more I might write concerning our Dear Brother in the
Lord, I knowing him very well, and his Travels and Service in the Lord's Power
and Truth; and so does the Church of Christ, among whom he will be missed.

But he is gone to his Rest; and the Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power is able
to Raise up others in his place.

The 13th of the 9th Month, 1690. G. F.

The Testimony of Friends in Cumberland.
COncerning that Faitful Servant of the Lord John Burnyeat, belonging formerly
to Pardsay-Meeting in Cumberland, he was born at Crabtreebeck in the Parish of
Lows-water in the said County; his Parents were of good Repute, and his
Education was according to his Parentage. The Lord visited him in his young and
tender Years, and inclined his heart after good things; whereupon he gave
himself to Reading the Scriptures, that thereby he might be informed of those
things, that made for his Soul's Peace; and going from one Man to another, who
were counted Men of Experience, yet found no true Satisfaction, until it
pleased the Lord to send his Ministers to turn his Mind to the Invisible Word
of Life, which he gladly received into his heart, and came to Wait in
Humiliation, to feel the Operation of it. So that he was brought forth Early in
the Day of the breaking forth of God's Light and Power in our Age, when it
pleased God to Visit many People in diverse Nations of the World, and to make
known his Everlasting Truth in the North-Country; which Day of Light, and
Truth, and Grace many waited for, and were in a readiness to Receive with Joy
and Gladness of Heart; amongst whom this our Dear Friend J. B. being called by
Grace to the Knowledge of the Lord, his Truth and Power, and receiving the same
in Love, Faith and Obedience, he came to Witness the Effectual working thereof
to his Sanctification, and so became a Vessel of Honor fitted for his Master's
Use, even Christ, and learned to Rule his own House well, in washing first the
Inside, and the Outside appearing clean also. Then his Light began to shine
before Men, to the Glory of God, that called him. And this being first done in
him, and for him, to his particular peace and satisfaction in the Lord's
Eternal Truth, then the Lord opened his Mouth in a few words in much
tenderness, which tended greatly to the comforting of his People; he always
being careful to wait for the Motion of the Word, and to keep close with it:
whereby he grew in his Gift, and was drawn forth to visit Friends in this
County, where we dearly loved him. He was faithful in the discharge of his
Duty, when called to give Testimony against the Hireling-Priests in the
Steeple Houses, to gather People from the Mouths of those Greedy Shepherds,
that feed themselves, and not the Flock, and did not profit the People at all.
And for these things he suffered Imprisonment a long time under a severe
Jailer, in a close, nasty place. For the Lord sent him forth in his joyful
opening Power and Spirit to preach glad Tidings of Salvation by Christ Jesus,
sometimes to the Spirits in Prison, and to them coming out of Prison, and
entering into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and to them who walked
steadfastly in that Glorious, pure Liberty (he that has an Ear to hear, let him
hear) whereby he was a blessed Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, both for
Convincing and Converting to God, and for the Refreshing, Comforting and
Strengthening of them in the Faith, Grace and Truth, that they might be built
on the Rock Christ, the Foundation, for all the Chosen of God in him throughout
all Generations, that Man might answer the End for which he was made, even to
Glorify God; who is worthy of Glory and Praise for ever!

He was a Man of an Excellent Spirit, and of deep Experience in the things of
God, and Mysteries of his Kingdom, which were richly made manifest unto him:
And it was his Delight to be Meditating therein; whereby his Experience was
daily increased unto the Conclusion of his Days. He was a Man tender of God's
Glory, and Earnestly sought the spreading and propagating of the Truth. The
Lord made his Travels successful, and he saw the Fruit of his Labor; and the
Lord blessed him with the Fruits of his holy Spirit, whereby he became well
qualified for the Work of the Ministry, a Nursing Father, lending a hand of
help to the feeble of the Flock, and comforting the Mourners in Sion. For his
Doctrine did drop as the Dew, and his Speech as the small Rain: He was a
Pattern of Righteousness to the Young Generation; over whom he was very Tender:
and to the Aged he could give Counsel; so that God made him a strong Pillar in
his Church, and clothed him with Divine Wisdom, that he was capable of
speaking a Word in Season to all, which was as a Nail fastened in a sure place.

He was one of the Lord's Worthies in his day, of a quick Sight and clear
Discerning, of a strong Arm and skilful Hand, whose Bow abode in strength, and
carried the Arrows to the Mark aimed at: like as the Men of Benjamin, that
could sling Stones to a Hair's breadth; so he fixed Judgment upon the head of
the Transgressor. And his Arrows returned not in vain, particularly against
that Wicked Spirit of Separation, wherever he met with it.

He was often concerned in Testimony against those that profess the Truth and
Way of God, and yet did incline to suit themselves to the vain Fashions and
Customs of the World, as Inlets to a wrong Spirit, and became evil Precedents
to others, especially Young People, that are too much employed in their Minds
with foolish Dresses and Fashions, that never knew the weighty Work of Truth
and Power of God in their Hearts to work a Change there; but were too apt to
look out at others. These things he did often testify against, as one having
Authority, being himself Redeemed out of those things by the Power of God.

His Innocent Deportment and blameless Conversation preached wherever he
came; Gravity and Patience was with him, Moderation in Meat, Drink and Apparel,
having laid aside all superfluity of Naughtiness and received with meekness the
Ingrafted Word; all which were as Ornaments upon him, and preached for the
Truth abundantly: as also did the many Living Testimonies he bore, that flowed
through him as Showers upon the tender Grass.

He was a True Labourer, who spared not his Life unto Death, and was willing to
spend and be spent, that he might gain upon the Sons and Daughters of Men, to
turn them from Darkness unto the true Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God. Oh! what shall we say of him! He was a faithful Preacher of the Gospel,
not only in Words, but in Life and Practice, and his Memory shall Live for
ever. For his Labor and Travel both at home and abroad, in Prison and at
Liberty has been such, as cannot easily be forgotten by many, who have reaped
the benefit thereof: For the Lord was pleased wonderfully to appear by him, and
sound through him, to the awakening many to Righteousness, and greatly
encouraging all the Faithful amongst God's People. In Sickness and other deep
Exercises he was as a skilful Physician, to Apply that which was suitable unto
all; yea, he was quick, sharp and nimble on the one hand to Search, as on the
other hand to Cure, heal, bind up and comfort: but unto the Hypocrites he was
Dreadful and Terrible (though he was a Man of large Bowels of Compassion.) Many
an untrodden Path he traveled, and passed through great Dangers both by Sea
and Land in visiting Friends not only in England, but also in Scotland,
Ireland, Barbados, New England, with the Islands adjacent, passing through
Wilderness-places and dangerous Waters. Through all which the Lord in a most
wonderful manner preserved him, with the rest of his Servants, and from the
hands of Wicked and Unreasonable Men, who was ever near him for his
Preservation both inwardly and outwardly.

And the Lord Clothed him with Humility before all, as became the Gospel he
preached, which he preached freely, counting nothing near nor dear unto him to
be parted with, suffered, or to be done, but a willingness was wrought in him
through the mighty Power of God, who always strengthened him to do, to suffer,
and to undergo all things whatsoever for his worthy Name's sake. And tho the
Lord had bestowed eminent Gifts on him, yet he would Condescend to the weak
Capacities of all, to reach to the Good in all, that he might lay a Foundation
to build upon. He had the Word of Reconciliation committed unto him, whereby he
was made Instrumental to Reconcile many to God by Jesus Christ, and one unto
another. And the Lord caused him to Triumph in Christ, and made manifest the
Savor of his Knowledge in many Places, and his Ministry is sealed in the
Hearts of many, who are satisfied of his Faithfulness unto God, who has
received him into his Rest.

Now although his Body be gone to the Dust, yet his Spirit lives; and that Word of
Life, which was his pleasure, remains for our Comfort, who are yet behind in
that Pilgrimage, which he has past through; and may be attended with the
Temptations, which he is delivered from; who has finished his Days-work: Whom
the Lord raised up to shine forth as a Glorious Star in several parts of the
Northern and Western World. And his Mild and Grave Deportment did so well
become his deliberate Ministry, that it greatly hightned his Esteem amongst his
Neighbors; so that he was not without honor in his own Country. And when at
any time he came into Cumberland, where he was born and educated his Neighbors
would abundantly flock to the Meeting to hear him. Yet he was far from Glorying
in his Gift, or desiring to be popular; but would rather Restrain such, who
would applaud him; he having Self in no Reputation He may be truly numbered
among the Righteous, who sought God's Glory and the Peace and Unity,
Flourishing and Prosperity of his Church, which Christ is the Head of. Much
more might we say concerning him, but shall attribute nothing to him, but to
the Lord' s Power, that did support him.

And now, if Samuel had cause to Mourn for Saul, and the Children of Israel
wept thirty days for Moses, much more cause have many now to mourn for the loss
of so dear a Friend. But though our Loss be great, his Gain is beyond
utterance; who has received the blessed Recompense of Reward for his Labors
and Travels, for all his Service and Suffering. And having finished his Course
and Time in this World, is entered into Life and Happiness everlasting in the
World to come. And we pray the Lord of the Harvest, to raise up other
Laborers, both in his Room, and also in the place of others, that have
finished their Testimonies for God and Christ, that God over all through Jesus
Christ may have the Honor, Glory and Praise from Generation to Generation, who
is blessed for ever, Amen!

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37. 37.

Broughton in Cumberland, the 22d of the 2d mon. 1691. Philip Burnyeat John
Tiffin. John Bancks. Tho. Laythes. Tho. Dockwray Chr. Wilson. Tho. Fletcher.
Rich. Head. Chr. Story. Peter Fearon. Jonathan Bowman. John Bowstead. Thomas
Wilson. Ja. Dickinson.


The Testimony of several Women-Friends in Cumberland.
IN brokenness of Heart and tenderness of our Spirits we have this Testimony
concerning our Dear Friend and Brother John Burnyeat; That he was one of the
Lord's Worthies, chosen and fitted by him for his Work and Service, and it was
his whole Delight to do the Will of God; so he came more and more to know of
his Doctrine, whereby he was made a good Instrument in the Hand of God, for the
Converting many from the Error of their ways to the way of Truth and
Righteousness. He was one, on whom that Prophecy came to be fulfilled, That
Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdom
shall be the Lord's. For he well knew, how to Divide the Word of God aright,
which dwelt plentifully in him as Deep Waters, and the Wellspring of Wisdom,
as a flowing Brook; so that he was often as Clouds full of Rain, emptying
himself at the Lord's Command, causing the Seed of Life to spring; whereby
God's Inheritance was confirmed. He was a Man of a Thousand, clothed with
Innocence and beautified with Humility; Words are too short to set forth the
Excellency of that Spirit, by which he was guided; Neither can we express
fully, what is in our Hearts concerning him. Yet shall we Attribute nothing to
him, but to the Lord's Power, that wrought effectually in him, to the making
him to shine. For he was an Instrument of Good to many, making a Difference,
saving some with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire, hating even the Garment
spotted by the Flesh: being found in that pure and undefiled Religion of
Visiting the Fatherless and widows in their Affliction; and through the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ keeping himself Unspotted from the World: and
therefore knew, how to Save upon Mount Zion, and Judge upon Mount Esau. Much
might be written concerning him, for we know, the very Desire of his Heart and
Bent of his Spirit was, that God through his Son might Reign in the House of
Jacob, and the Kingdom might be the Lord's. He abhorred the Appearance of
Gathering to himself, and had Self of no Reputation; therefore the Lord
honored him with his Divine Presence, and made his Company (although dreadful to
the Back-sliders, yet) very desirable unto many, especially those who knew his
Integrity and Zeal for the Exaltation of the Name and Truth of God; in whose
Hearts he was highly esteemed for his Works sake, which shall follow him, although
he be at Rest from his Labor, being got to his desired Haven, where the Wicked
cease from troubling, where the Weary be at Rest. And there the Prisoners rest
together; they hear not the Voice of the Oppressor, for the Accuser of the
Brethren is cast down, Temptations cannot prevail; an Overcoming is known by
the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, who have not loved
their Lives unto Death. And To him that overcomes, says Christ Jesus, will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne; as I also overcame, and am sat down with my
Father in his Throne: he shall not be hurt of the Second Death, but with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and with all the Faithful in the Kingdom of God
without ceasing sing Praises unto him, who sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever-more; who is Worthy!

O the great Loss we have of him! How can we but Lament! Yet it is his
Everlasting Gain: For he shall never Return to us, but we may go to him. And
that Word of Life, in which his Life was hid, yet remains for our support;
which, as we are careful to keep to, will preserve us, as it has done him, to
Enter into that Mansion of Glory, the Lord has in store for all the Faithful.

He was Dear unto us in the Lord, with whom our Souls were bound up in God's
Everlasting Covenant; And tho his Body is gone to the Dust, yet our Souls
rejoice with many more, in that we enjoy his Spirit, and are come to the
General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than that
of Abel; where our Joy is full, and our Spirits bowed and subjected to the Will
of God, where our Peace flows, and the Life arises, that fills our Hearts with
Praises, that Ascend as sweet Incense to the Lord God and to the Lamb, who is
blessed for evermore!

The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way,
Psalm. 37. 23.

And they that be Wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and
they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.
3.

Broughton in Cumberland, the 22th of the 2d Month, 1691. Margaret Fawcet. Jane
Wilson. Margaret Head. Jane Hall. Mary Wilson. Mary Bowman. Sarah Fallowfield.


An Account by Way of Testimony concerning our Dear Friend and Brother John
Burnyeat.
WE will leave to others the Account of his Birth and Convincement, that were
his Neighbors and Kindred; and shall speak of him only, as some of us knew him
from an Intimate Fellowship in diverse Services for above Twenty Years. He was a
Choice and Seasoned Vessel of Christ, the special Workmanship of his Power and
Wisdom, by which he was effectually qualified for the Ministry of his
Everlasting Gospel, thoroughly furnished, may We say, to every good Word and
Work, God called him unto. Deep and Large in his Gift, reaching, what was
seasonable to every State; in Judgment sound, free in Utterance, Zealous for
Holiness; severe against Unsound and Dividing Spirits: Most tender to Penitents
and returning Prodigals, affectionate to the Brethren, und careful over the
Flock of God, that they might Answer their Heavenly Call, and grow in the
Truth. Of a grave and steady Temper, yet sweet; Hardy in his Constitution, and
Undaunted and Unwearied in Mind: He was the Father of many Children in Christ,
who through his Ministry were begot again to a Living Hope; and the Builder up
of more through the same, in the precious Faith of God's Elect. For this he
often Traveled through this Nation, and sometimes Scotland, and the
Plantations in America; but Ireland in a more peculiar manner, both at his
first Entrance upon his Ministry, and of latter Years, where he Married and
chiefly resided, and where he laid down his Head in Peace with God, and Love to
his People, and good Will to all men, being about the 59th Year of his Age, and
is entered into Eternal Habitations, to praise the God of his Mercies in the
Living Family of the Spirits of the Just for ever.

He was indeed a Man of an Excellent Spirit and Divine Understanding from God,
and deep in the Knowledge of the Heavenly Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and
also of the Depths, Wiles and Subtle Workings of Satan, wherein he lies in wait
to beguile the Children of Men: and the Lord many times opened him in his
Heavenly Wisdom to declare of them, that those who had regard to God, and the
Peace of their own Souls, might be preserved out of Satan's Snares. He was an
able and powerful Minister of the Gospel of Salvation, a Strengthener of the
Weak, and an Incourager of the Upright and Sincere-hearted, to continue to the
end: But he was indeed dreadful to the Hypocrites and Rebellious, and all the
Opposers and Gainsayers of the Truth. A skilful Marks-Man, yea, one of the
Lord's Worthies of Israel, a Valiant in the Camp of the Lord, and an Undaunted
Warrier in his Holy Host; and his Bow abode in strength, and Wisdom was given
him to direct his Arrows to the very Mark; so that the Sturdy were wounded, the
Meek were comforted, the Tender in Spirit refreshed. And was by the Lord made
Instrumental to wound that Self-separating and Dividing Spirit, thad had for
want of Watchfulness in the Divine Light and Faithfulness to God's Spirit and
Truth in the inward parts prevailed over some, who notwithstanding in a
disguise, and under specious pretenses, endeavor to sow the Seeds of
Dissension, Discord, Separation and Division among the Gathered of God. And the
Lord blessed his Labors greatly, and so preserved him in a Holy Conversation,
and in a meek, tender, bearing, healing Spirit, that he promoted both by
Doctrine and Practice that holy Truth he professed and was a Preacher of, and
made full proofs of his Ministry in many Lands and Countries: and at the great
City of London, where he was made Instrumental to the Good and Comfort,
Refreshment and Edification of many; and was Valiant there (as in other places)
in the time of Trials, Sufferings, Storms and Persecution.

And he was also a great Incourager of the Good in Young and Old, and as a
tender Father and loving Brother, to those who were young in their Testimonies
for the Truth, and would rather help a Young Branch to strengthen it in its
growth, than to bruise or hurt it in any measure.

This short Testimony we Dedicate to his Memorial, that shall be had in
Everlasting Remembrance; for his Name is Written in the Lamb's Book of Life,
where none can blot it out: Our Brother, our Friend, and our beloved Companion
in the Heavenly Fellowship, with whom some of us have sometimes Traveled in
England and Ireland upon diverse Services for the Truth's sake; and Blessed was
our Labor of Love together. He was an Apostle among the Chnrches of Christ,
and he is a fixed and bright Star in the Firmament of God's Heavenly Power and
Kingdom for ever. O Friends! you that knew him, know the Loss of him in the
Church of Christ, with other Faithful Brethren since departed, worthy of double
honor; concerning which sad Providence we have this to say to you, It points
plainly to us the Evil that is to come upon the Wicked and Unfaithful, and the
great Calamities that are at the Door. The Lord fit us all for them, that we
may find an Interest and Sanctuary in the Truth above the Reach of this Evil
World; which they will want, that do not prefer it above the chiefest Joy.

London, the 10th of the 11th Month, 1690/1. Stephen Crisp. Charles Marshall.
William Bingley. John Field. Francis Stamper. Jasper Batt. William Penn.
Benjamin Antrobus. John Vaughton. Benjamin Bangs. Samuel Waldenfield. John
Butcher.


A Testimony of several Friends in Ireland, in whose Hearts it sprung, and who
gave it forth in the behalf of our Dear Brother John Burnyeat.
AS for our Dear Friend and Worthy Brother in the Lord John Burnyeat, late of
Dublin deceased, whom some of us have known many years, we have this Testimony
in the Truth concerning him, viz. That he has been steadfast in the Lord's
Work, an able Minister of the Gospel, and faithful Lobourer, who had a Word in
Season to Minister to the several Conditions of Friends and People, dividing
the Word aright; a Strengthener of the Weak, and a free Feeder of Christ's
Lambs and Sheep (with the Food he had freely received) to the Comforting many.
His Testimony for the Power of Truth and Righteousness was clear, many were
Convinced by him. His Conversation was so heavenly, and becoming the Principle
of Truth, he was a Preacher of, that we know no one, that can truly Charge him
with any thing, that might spot his Profession or Ministry. He was a Man
excellently well qualified for the Work, whereunto he was called of God, the
Lord having endued him with a large Measure of his Spirit. He had great
Openings and Discoveries of the Mysteries of God's Kingdom: he had also the
Tongue of the Learned, and was fitted for every good Word and Work the Lord
employed him in. His Qualifications were beyond many; and tho little in
himself, yet in the Lord a Mighty Man of Valor. In all times of Suffering and
Exercise he failed not to be in the Front; he was a Valiant in Israel, and a
Pillar in the House of God: He did Sympathise with the Afflicted, seeking the
good of others; and above all the Honor and Prosperity of Truth was in his Eye.

When he took his Wife amongst us, how Careful and Circumspect was he of
Truth's Honor, and the Concord and Unity of Friends and Brethren! And where he
came among Friends, he would not be Idle, but did often Visit the Sick, and
Comfort those that were in Distress or Affliction. For indeed, he was a true
Servant to all honest Friends, as well the Poor as Rich; and would freely
Administer of his outward Substance to such as stood in need. He was meek and
gentle, and of a healing Spirit; and it was the unspeakable Love and Mercy of
God to us in this Nation, and particularly this City of Dublin, to order his
outward Abode and Settlement amongst us. By whom many were Convinced of the
Truth, and turned from the Evil of their Ways; and the Peace of the Church, the
Unity and Fellowship of Friends Increased. He was one of the Archers of Israel,
who could shoot to an Hairs-breadth, to the wounding of the Hairy Scalp of the
Wicked one, and the putting of the Lord's Enemies to Silence.

He was a Messenger of Glad Tidings, and directed us to the blessed Light, that
God had caused to shine in our Hearts, when we were Strangers to it? yea, then
did it Appear, as a Witness for the Lord against all Ungodly Practices. It was
a Day of Glad Tidings to many, when the Lord made him one of his Trumpets to
us, to sound his Gospel to the reaching God's Witness in our Hearts: Oh! that
it may not be forgotten by any of us, who have been turned to God! He had a
true Love for all Tenderhearted Friends, and traveled for their Growth and
Prosperity in the blessed Truth, not only in these Three Nations, but also in
the Western Islands and America, to the turning many to the blessed Way of Life
and Salvation, as by following Accounts will appear.

He was a true Pattern of Godliness and Piety, in an humble, meek and
in-offensive Conversation, Apt to Teach, Ready to give heavenly Advice and
Instruction: a good Example in all things. An Early Comer to Meetings, and a
diligent Waiter therein: Many times he would sit a pretty while in Silence,
(not being forward to speak) Reverently waiting upon the Opening of the
heavenly Life (like the good Householder spoken of) to bring forth of his
Treasury things both New and Old. He was deeply Experienced in the Work and
Service of the Lord, and was a great Comfort and Support to many in their great
Sufferings and hard Exercises; and did mightily Strengthen and Encourage
Friends in their several places of Abode. Twice, during the late Troubles he
visited Friends in Munster, and in this Province of Lynster, unto whom he was
very open; and had large Meetings: for in many places the World's Teachers were
fled, and left their Flocks. Many times in the Public Meetings he would bear a
faithful, plain and clear Testimony against Superstition and Idolatry, and
against that Loose, Wicked, Blasphemous and Unclean Spirit, that many gave up
to be led by. As soon as the way was open to the North, he visited Friends
there.

Now after the Death of his Wife he had some Intentions to go for England, and
sent his Son thither; but seeing the Troubles of Wars coming on, and that many
Afflictions and Exercises would attend us, and that many People being possessed
with great Fears, fled for England; at which time many Testimonies came from
Friends of sundry Meetings, for all to mind the Lord's preserving Power, and
not to let Fears take hold of them, as it did of others, who knew not the Lord;
Our Dear Friend, though he had an Opportunity, had no Freedom to go for
England; but gave himself up to stay with Friends here, and bear a part of the
Sufferings, that might attend us. In which time he was a precious Instrument in
the Lord's Hand for the Comforting his People in the time of great Afflictions
and Calamities; for he was a Cheerful Encourager of us. He was a Dear Friend, a
True Brother, a Diligent Over-seer and Tender Father; a Perfect and Upright Man
in his day, who feared God, and eschewed evil. And though he sought the
Salvation of all, yet could not bear with Deceitful Men, and Evil Workers, who
professed the Truth, yet brought Dishonor to it; against such he had a Just
Indignation and Godly Zeal. Oh! the Remembrance of his Fatherly Care over God's
Heritage in keeping things in good Order, is not to be forgotten: For his Care
was great, that the Professors of Truth might walk answerable to it in a Chaste
Life, and Blameless Conversation.

And in all his Travels, into whose House he entered, he was Content with what
things were set before him, were they never so mean; which was great
Satisfaction to many poor, honest Friends, amongst whom his Lot was cast. He
would not usurp Authority over his Brethren, but was of a healing Spirit and
Lamb-like Nature, and of a good Report in all his Travels.

Our Dear Friend and Brother did greatly delight to Read the Holy Scriptures,
and would often and with great Earnestness Advise Friends frequently to read
the same, and the Young and Tender in years more especially* as also Friends
Books, wherein the Principles of Truth were Treated of; that so none might be
Ignorant of the Principles of the true Christian Religion, now again preached
and clearly held forth.

He was at our Province-Meeting at Rosean-Allies a little before his Decease,
where he bore a Living, Fresh Testimony amongst Friends to our great Comfort,
and Exhorted Friends to Faithfulness. From thence he went to Montroth, and had
a Meeting there; and from thence to Ballinakill, and had a Meeting there. So he
came to the Monthly Meeting at New-Garden, where many heard him bear a living,
sweet Testimony in the Opening of the Word of Life, to the Refreshing of their
Souls. After Meeting he came home with our Friend John Watson to his House; and
feeling himself not well, took his Bed, and was visited with a Fever; and
continued sick for the space of Twelve days, All which time he was preserved in
his Senses, and in a sweet Frame of Spirit; and did often say, he was sine at
Ease, and quiet in his Spirit. The Lord did Attend him with his heavenly Power
and Presence, to his Comfort and our great Satisfaction. He said to John
Watson, That he ever loved the Lord, and the Lord loved him from his Youth, and
that he felt his Love. He was wonderfully preserved in a sensible Condition to
the Last; and on the Eleventh day of the Seventh Month 1690 about Two of the
Clock in the Afternoon he quietly and peaceably Departed this Life about the
59th Year of his Age, and is gone to his Rest with the Lord, and his Works
follow him.

And as he honored the Lord in his Day, so he was honored with the Company of
many Ancient Friends from several Parts of our Province, to Accompany him to
his Grave at New-Garden, where he was Decently Interred the Fourteenth day of
the same Month; and there we had a good Meeting, to the great satisfaction of
many Friends and others.

And now surely, If David did well in Sorrowing for Absalom, we have Reason
greatly to Lament the Loss of so Dear, Tender, and Upright-hearted a Friend,
whose Labor and Travel was great both in Body and Spirit, faithfully to serve
the Lord, his Church and People, and to Exalt his Glorious Name, and propagate
his Living Truth in the Earth, and to preserve Unity and Peace in the Churches
of Christ. But believing, it is the Lord's Will, that is done concerning him, in
a Holy and Reverend Resignation and Submission thereunto, we ought to be
Content; knowing, it is his unspeakable Gain to be Absent from the Body, and at
home with Christ.

And thus, Dear Friends, We that yet remain, do see, how the Lord is pleased to
Remove from among us many of our Ancient Friends and Faithful Laborers in the
Gospel of Peace, who have been serviceable in this Day for the Gathering and
Confirming of many in the Truth, that we may walk therein. And Friends, we that
are yet behind, are the more immediately concerned for to Labor in the
Heavenly Gift of his Divine Grace, the Lord in his Love has bestowed upon us,
that so we may come up in this Gospel-day to succeed them, that are gone before
us to their Rest in the Lord, in bearing a Faithful Testimony to the blessed
Truth; that our Memorial may live to Ages to come, as this our Dear Friend and
Elder Brother's does amongst God's People this day: who having Faithfully
finished his Course here in great Patience, and an humble and holy Subjection to
the Will of God, has now received a Crown of Immortal Glory, which is laid up
for all the Faithful Followers of the Lamb, and Lovers of the Appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ: To whom and the Father through him be Glory and Honor both
now and for ever. Amen.

Dated in Dublin the 22th of the Second Month, 1691. Anthony Sharp. Roger
Roberts. Amos Strettel. John Watson. Henry Hillary John Hawks.


An Account of John Burnyeat's Convincement: Together with a Iournal of his
Travels.
IN the Year 1653. it pleased the Lord in his Love and Mercy to send his
faithful Servant George Fox, with others of his faithful Servants and
Messengers of the Gospel of Peace and Glad-tidings, whom he furnished with the
eternal power of his Word, in the wisdom and power of which he proclaimed the
Day of the Lord unto us, in this County of Cumberland, and the Northern Parts
of England, and discovered the right Path of Life unto thousands that was in
Error, seeking the Lord, but knew not where to find him, nor how to come
acquainted with him, although he was not far from us: But this blessed man G.
F. one of a thousand may many say, and chosen before many thousands, was sent
amongst us, in the power of the most High, filled with the strength of his
Word, in the wisdom whereof he directed thousands unto the Light and Appearance
of Christ Jesus their Savior in their own hearts, that he might come to know
him, and the Glory of the Father through him, in his Appearance, and so come to
believe in him, with the Heart and with the Mouth confess him unto Salvation;
and blessed be the Lord and the Day of Mercy in which he visited; he was
pleased to make his Labor of Love effectual unto thousands, in which he sent
his Servants to labor, amongst whom it pleased the Lord to grant me that
favor to keep a share of the benefit of this blessed Visitation, whereby I
came to be informed concerning the right way of the Lord, and directed unto the
true Light, which the Apostle was sent to turn People unto in his Day, and so
from the Darkness and from the Power of Satan unto God and his blessed Power,
which in my waiting in the Light I received; through which deep Judgment did
spring in my Soul, and great Affliction did grow in my Heart, by which I was
brought into great Tribulation and Sorrow, such as I had never known before in
all my Profession of Religion, so that I might say in Spirit, it was the Day of
Jacob's Trouble, for the God of Heaven, by the Light of his blessed Son which
he had lighted me withal, which shined in my heart, let me see the body of
Death and power of Sin which reigned in me, and brought me to feel the Guilt of
it upon my Conscience, so that I could say he made me even as it were to
possess the sins of my Youth, and for all my high profession of an Imputative
Righteousness, and that though I lived in the act of sin, the guilt of it
should not be charged upon me, but imputed it to Christ, and his Righteousness
imputed to me. I found it otherwise when I was turned unto the Light, which did
manifest all reproved things; then I came to see that the guilt remained while
the body of death remained, and through the power thereof was led into the act
of sin; then I saw there was need of a Savior to save from sin, as well as the
Blood of a Sacrificed Christ to blot out Sin, or Faith in his Name for the
remission of Sins past; then began the warfare of true striving to enter the
Kingdom, then Paul's state seen, to will was present, but to do many times
power was wanting; then was that cry known, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death! and free from the prevailing power of the
Law which remained in the Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, which
brought into Captivity to the Law of Sin; then, when this War was truly begun,
all my high conceit in my invented Notional Faith, and my pretense and hopes of
Justification thereby was overthrown; so that all that I had builded for
several years in my Profession, after the days of my Youth, in which tender
stirrings was in me, after acquaintance with the Lord, and the knowledge of
him, and peace with him, was seen to be but a Babel-Tower, which God brought
Confusion upon, and so that which could never be perfected to reach to Heaven,
being out of the Faith of his Covenant, and that which never could bring truly
to trust in his Word, and rely thereupon, but led out into the Invention,
willing and self-acting, though another thing talked of; and then seeing all my
Works confounded by the visitations of God, and by the springing of the day
from on high which discovered things as they were, seeing them all end at
Babel, and the God of Heaven bringing Confusion upon them, I was amazed, and
fear beset me on every side, and I began sometimes to fear I was undone for
ever, for that had entered my heart that had turned the fruitful Field into a
Wilderness, and made that, which I thought had been as the Garden of Eden, a
Forest, and so the Day of God discovered all to be Desolation, Dryness, and a
Heath, and so brought my Soul to a deep Lamentation, to the beginning of such
Sorrows as had never been known by me before; then did I lament and bewail my
self many a time, and wish my self in a Wilderness, where I might neither meet
with Temptation nor Provocation from without, my weakness was such to withstand
in my spirit, for all my Notion I had to talk of my Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ being but my own, which by his Spirit I had no seal
for, and so but a Presumption, I saw clearly it was my own Invention, and so
but like Adam's Fig-leave Apron, in which he could not abide God's coming; O
the woe that overtook me! O the distress that seized! O the horror and terror
that sprung in my Bosom! O the poverty and want that my Soul saw it self in
through the springings of the discovering Light, toward which the Eye thereof
was turned. And as this Light did spring, which the Apostle of old had wrote
of, it manifested all things, not only the want that I was in, but also the
reproved things, and then sin became exceeding sinful, and the load and burden
of it became exceeding grievous, and all the pleasure of it was taken away from
me, and many more in that day, and then we began to mourn after a Savior, and
look for a Deliverer, and cry for a Helper, and a Healer, for the day of the
Lord that made desolate, had overtaken us, and the Fire and Sword that Christ
brings upon the Earth, by which he takes away Peace, had reached unto us, and
yet we knew not from whence it came, though the Burning and the Judgment
thereby was begun, by which the Filth was to be taken away.

And now in this Distress deep was our Groanings and our Cries unto the Lord
which reached unto him, and he was pleased to hear, and show mercy; for we
often assembled together, as the Lord's Messengers, whom he sent amongst us,
had exorted us, and minded the Light of Christ in our Hearts, and what that
discovered, and in our spirits, through its assistance, warred and watched
against the evil seen therein, and according to that understanding received,
waited therein upon the Lord, to see what he would further manifest, with a
holy Resolution to obey his will, so far as we were able, whatsoever it cost
us; for this I know was the Condition of many in that day; we valued not the
World, nor any Glory nor Pleasure therein, in comparison of our Souls
redemption out of that state and freedom, from that horror and terror, under
the Indignation of the Lord, we were in because of the guilt of sin that was
upon us; and so being given up to bear the Indignation of the Lord, because we
had sinned, we endeavored to wait till the Indignation would be over, and the
Lord in mercy would blot out the guilt which remained that occasioned wrath,
and sprinkle our Hearts from an evil Conscience, and wash us with pure water,
that we might draw near with a true Heart, in a full assurance of Faith, as the
Christians of old did, Hebr. 10. 22. but alas we had not boldness, for the
living Faith was wanting, and a true heart we had not to draw near with, and
therefore could not have full assurance, but was compassed with fears,
horrors, and amazements, and yet came to know that there was no other way, but
to dwell in these Judgments, and wait in the way thereof, understanding that we
must be redeemed with Judgment, for as was said of Zion, Isaiah 1. 27. and so
waiting therein, we began to learn Righteousness, and strongly to desire to
walk therein, and could no longer be satisfied with a talk thereof; and thus
waiting for, and seeking after the Lord (though greatly ignorant of him) in a
deep sense of our own unworthiness and unpreparedness to meet him, because of
the polution of our Hearts, which was seen by his Light that did shine therein,
we were still bowed down in spirit, and afflicted and tossed in Soul, and not
comforted, and our Hearts unstable, like waters, and the waves going over our
Heads, and our Souls in jeopardy every moment, and our Faith so little, we were
ready to sink, like Peter, often crying out in the danger; and in that Distress
and vail of Tears we walked through; our Hearts became quite dead to the World,
and all its Pleasure and Glory, and also to all our former dead Profession, for
we saw there was no Life in it, nor Help nor Salvation from it, though some of
us had tried it thoroughly; we saw it was in vain to look to such Hills or
Mountains for Salvation; and then when we began to forsake all on both hands,
as seeing the Emptiness of all, both the Glory, Vanity, and Pleasure of the
World, and the dead Image of Profession, which we had set up in our
Imaginations and Inventions, and worshipped with our unprepared Hearts and
unsanctified Spirits, being Slaves and Captives to Sin, as all must needs be
that obeys it in the Lust thereof, according to Romans the 6 th and 16. I say,
when we had thus through the sight and sense of the unsufficiency of all (we
either had or could do) to give ease, help, or salvation, denied all, and as we
had been directed, turned our Minds unto the Light of Christ shining in our
Hearts, and believed therein, according to Christ's command, John 12. 36. and
so met together to wait upon the Lord therein. Then began the Profane to mock,
scoff, and abuse us, and our very Relations, and old Familiars, to be strange
to us, and offended at us, and did hate us, and began to speak evil of us, and
did think it strange that we would not run with them to the former excess of
Riot, as it was of old, 1 Pet. 4. 4. And also the Professor, even such as we
had formerly walked in fellowship with in our lifeless Profession, began to
reproach us and vilify us, and speak evil against us, and charge us with
Error and Schism, and departing from the Faith; and also began to reproach the
Light of Christ, as natural and unsufficient, and a false Light, and false
Guide. And thus Christ, in his Spiritual Appearance was reproached, vilified,
slighted, and undervalued, and set at naught by the Carnal Professors of
Christianity, as he was in his Appearance in the Flesh by the Jews, the Carnal
Professors of the Law, who saw not through the Vail unto the end. And in this
our weak state were we beset on every hand, and greatly distressed, tossed, and
afflicted, as poor Israel was when the Sea was before them, and the Egyptians
behind, and their hope so little that they looked for nothing but death, and
said to Moses, Because there were no Graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away
to dye in the Wilderness, etc. Exodus 14. 11. Thus through many Tribulations
must the Kingdom be entered by all that strives rightly to enter, according to
Christ's command, Luke 13. 24.

And when we were thus in our deep fears, and our Minds not well acquainted
with either right striving, out of self, in the light and seed of Life that
does prevail and give the entrance, or true waiting or standing still out of
our own thoughts, willings, and runnings which does not obtain, the Lord sent
his Servants (who had learned of him) to direct us in what to wait, and how to
stand still out of our own thoughts and self-strivings in the Light that did
discover, who often did exhort us to abide and dwell in the Judgment that we
received therein, and by them as we had been turned to the Light, so was our
Understandings informed, and we got to some degree of staidness in our Minds,
which before had been as the troubled Sea, and a hope began to appear in us,
and we met together often, and waited to see the Salvation of God, (which we
had heard of) that he would work by his own power. And after we had met
together for some time, as we had seasons and opportunities, and also sought
the Lord with traveling Spirits both night and day, when we were at our
Callings, and upon our Beds, (for we could not cease, our Souls were so
afflicted) being in our Assemblies exercised in the living Judgment that sprung
in the Light in our Souls, and looking for the Salvation of God, the wonderful
Power from on High was revealed amongst us, and many Hearts reached therewith,
and broken, and melted, before the God of the whole Earth, and great dread and
trembling fell upon many, and the very Chains of Death was broken thereby, the
Bonds loosed, and many Souls eased and set at liberty, and the Prisoners of
hope began to come forth, and they that had sitten in darkness to show
themselves, and the Promises of the Lord came to be fulfilled unto many, spoken
of by Isaiah the Prophet, Isa. 49. 9. and Isa. 42. 7. and 61. 23. and some
taste of the Oil of Joy came to be witnessed, and a heavenly Gladness entered
the Hearts of many, who in the Joy of their Souls broke forth in Praises unto
the Lord, so that the Tongue of the Dumb, which Christ the healer of our
Infirmities did unloose, began to speak and utter the wonderful things of God,
and great was the Dread and Glory of that Power, that one Meeting after another
was graciously and richly manifested amongst us, to the breaking, tendering,
and melting of our Hearts, Souls, and Spirits before the Lord; then our Hearts
began to delight in the Lord, and in his way that he had cast up, and with
great servency and zeal; then we began to seek after him, and to meet oftener
together than before, our Hearts being so affected with the presence of that
blessed Power that daily broke forth amongst us in our Meetings, through which
we were greatly comforted, strengthened and edified; for it was that same
Comforter our blessed Lord promised he would pray the Father for, and which the
Father should send, John 14. 16, and 26.

And then this being come and received, did teach us to know the Father and the
Son; and as we came into Acquaintance with it, and into the Unity of it, we
came to be taught by it, and so taught of the Lord, according to that New
Covenant promise, They shall be all taught of the Lord, Isa. 54. 13. John 6. 4,
5. Then was our Hearts inclined to hearken unto the Lord, and our Ears, which
he had opened to hear, was bent to hear what the Spirit's Teaching was, and
what he said unto the Church, who was the chief Shepherd and Bishop of the
Soul. And thus were we gathered into a right Gospel Exercise, and Gospel
Worship by him, and through whose Name we had received Remission of Sins past,
and whose Blood had sprinkled our Hearts from an evil Conscience, and who gave
the pure Water that washed and made clean; so that with true Hearts many began
to draw nigh unto God in the full assurance of Faith, as the ancient Saints
did, and was accepted, and had access by that one Spirit, by which we came to
be baptized in one Body, and so came to drink into one Spirit, and was
refreshed, and greatly comforted, and grew up together in the Mystery of the
Gospel fellowship, and so worshipped God, who is a Spirit, in the Spirit
received from him, which is the Gospel Worship, according to Christ's
appointment, John 4. 24. And then we came to see over all the Worships in the
World, which were set up either by Imitation, or man's Invention, and saw it to
be in vain to worship God, and teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men, as
our Lord had said, Matthew. 15. 9. and therefore were we constrained to withdraw
from them, and also many of us to go and bear witness against them in their
invented and traditional Worships, where they were ignorant of the Life and
Power of God.

And thus being gathered by the Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls, we became his Sheep, and did learn to know his Voice, and
to follow him, and he gave unto us Eternal Life, and manifested the Riches of
his Grace in our Hearts, by which we were saved through Faith, and delivered
from that wrath, fear, and terror, which had been so weighty upon our Souls,
and in measure from the power of that Death that had reigned, and made us
miserable and wretched, and came to partake of that Life wherein the
blessedness does consist; and so then the Lord becoming our Shepherd, he taught
us, and led us forth into green Pastures, where we did feed and rest together
with great delight. O the Joy, the Pleasure, and the great Delight that our
Hearts was overcome with many times in our reverent and holy Assemblies! how
was our Hearts melted as Wax, and our Souls poured out as Water before the
Lord, and our Spirits as Oil, Frankincense, and Myrrh offered up unto the Lord
as sweet Incense, when not a word outwardly in all our Assembly has been
uttered! And then did the Lord delight to come down into his Garden, and walk
in the midst of the Beds of Spices, and he caused the North Wind to awake, and
the South Wind to blow upon his Garden, and the pleasant Showers to descend,
for the refreshing of his tender Plants, that they might grow still more and
more. And now unto them that had known the Night of Sorrow, was the joyful
Morning come, according to that ancient experience of David, Psalm. 30. 5. and
such as had been in the foregoing deep Afflictions, Tossings, and Distresses,
came to witness the fulfilling of that great Gospel Promise; O thou afflicted,
tossed with tempest, and not comforted; behold I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires; and I will make thy windows of
Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant Stones,
and all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace
of thy Children; In righteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far
from oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from terror, for it shall not
come near thee, Isa. 54. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Thus then came we by him to be gathered into Covenant with God, and to witness
the fulfilling of the Promises of God, in whom all the Promises are Yea and
Amen, and so come to sit together in heavenly places in him, and so come to
feed upon the heavenly food the Bread of Life, that came down from Heaven,
which Christ the heavenly Shepherd did give unto us, who had gathered us from
amongst the Shepherds that fed themselves with Temporal Things from the Flock,
but knew not how to feed the Flock with Spiritual Food, for they had it not.
And now we coming to be acquainted with the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ in
our Hearts, became great Lovers of it, and Delighters in the Enjoyment thereof,
having already counted all things but as Dross and Dung in comparison of the
Excellency that we saw therein, and therefore was willing to suffer the loss of
all that we might win him, as it was with the Apostle of old; and blessed be
the Lord, many obtained their desire; they found their Beloved, met with their
Savior, witnessed his Saving health by which their Souls was healed, and so
became his Flock and Family, or Household of Faith.

And thus then, as his Children and blessed Family, we still did continue to
meet together twice in the Week, or oftener, and in his Name and holy Fear,
being gathered together, his Promise we did witness, according to Matthew. 18.
20. he was in the midst of us, and did honor our Assemblies with his heavenly
Power and Presence; and that was our great delight; and the sweetness of it did
wonderfully engage our Souls to love him, and our Hearts to wait upon him; for
we did find the ancient experience of the Church true, as testified in the
Scripture, because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is as Ointment
poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.

And growing thus into this Experience of the Goodness of the Lord, and of the
Sweetness, Glory, and Excellency of his Power in our Assemblies, we grew in
Strength and Zeal for our Meetings more and more, and valued the benefit
thereof more than any worldly Gain; yea, it was unto some more then our
appointed Food: And thus continuing, we grew more and more into an
understanding of Divine Things and Heavenly Mysteries, through the Openings of
the Power that was daily amongst us, and wrought sweetly in our Hearts, which
still united us more and more unto God, and knit us together in the perfect
Bond of Love, of Fellowship and Membership, so that we became a Body compact,
made up of many Members, whereof Christ himself became the Head, who was with
us, and did rule over us, and so further gave Gifts unto us, by which we still
came to be enlarged, and further opened, that we might answer the end for which
he had raised us up, and so far blessed us, and sanctified us through his Word
that dwelt in our Souls; and so we keeping still in our Zeal, and unto our
first Love, and keeping our Meetings, and not forsaking the assembling our
selves together, as the manner of some was of old, whose Example the Apostle
exhorted the Saints not to follow, the Lord's Power still continued with us,
and was renewed daily in our Meetings, by the Openings of which, our
Understandings was still more enlarged into the Mysteries of Life and hidden
things of God, so that many through the favor of God, grew in their Gifts, and
had their Mouths opened, and so became Instruments in the Lord's hand to bear
witness unto the World of the Day of the Lord that was broken forth again, even
of the great and notable Day that Joel had prophesied of, and Peter bore
witness unto; and also they were sent to bear witness against the World, and
its evil Deeds, with all the false Religions with which Mankind had covered
themselves withal in the Darkness and Apostasy which had spread over them, and
now was seen and discovered by the Light and Day of God.

And thus the Truth grew, and the Faithful in it, and many was turned unto God,
and his Name, and Fame, and Glory, and Power spread abroad, and the Enemies
Work and Kingdom was discovered, and struck at by the Lamb and his Followers,
which made him begin to rage, and stir up his Instruments to oppose the Lord's
Work, and with all subtilty to hinder People from following the Lamb, or
believing in his Light; and so with Pen, and Tongue, and Hands also, the Beast
and his Followers began to war, and to whipping, and scourging, and prisoning,
and spoiling of Goods, with reproaching, belying, and slandering the way of
Truth, and all that they could do to hinder the Exaltation of the Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ, blaspheming his Light and his Power, calling his Light
natural, insufficient, false Guide, with many reproachful Names, and calling
his Power Diabolical, and the operation and blessed work of it, which was both
to the renewing of the Spirit of the Mind, and also to the reformation of the
Conversation from Debauchery, Wickedness, Unrighteousness, and Witchcraft, even
like them of old, who said Christ cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince
thereof. But by this time, they that kept faithful to the Lord, and his Light
and Spirit in their Hearts, who had come forth through the deep Tribulation, as
before related, was confirmed, settled, and satisfied, and in the Life that was
manifested established, in which they saw over Death, and all men's profession
in it, and where they were, and what they sed upon, that cried out so against
the Light and Power of Christ, that was thus with us, and wrought thus in us in
our Meetings, and how they were but mocking at the same that those mocked at,
spoken of in the second of the Acts, when they thought the Apostles were full
of new Wine, and so drunk; for the high Professors of our days being ignorant
of the Holy Ghost, through their resisting of it, blasphemed the Life and
Power, and in the Death at the best did but feed upon the Tree of Knowledge.
For this I still right-well remember, that in my waiting upon the Lord, in the
deep Distress and weighty Judgment that was upon my Soul, to see if he would
appear and break through, and open and give relief from under that which kept
me down as Bars of Iron, that I could not arise nor asscend, nor have access,
although out of the Deep I cried unto him for deliverance; I say, I can
remember, that in the first notable inbreaking of the Power of God upon my
Soul, or pouring forth of the Holy Ghost upon me, the first opening in the same
unto me thereby, was a true discovery of the Tree of Knowledge in the Mystery,
upon which I saw I had been feeding, and all the Carnal Professors of Religion,
and how we had made a Profession of that which we had no possession of, but our
Souls in the Death, feeding upon the Talk of that which the Saints of old did
enjoy; and then I saw there was no getting to the Tree of Life, that our Souls
might be healed by the Leaves of it, and so feed upon the Fruit thereof, that
we might live for ever.

But as there was a coming under the wounding, slaying Sword that Christ
brings, by which the Life of the Old man comes to be destroyed, who would still
live in sin, and serve that, and yet profess Faith in Christ, and to be his
Servant, which is impossible, according to Christ's own saying, No man can
serve two Masters, etc. Matthew. 6. 24. and therefore I saw there was no remedy,
either I must be buried by that fiery Baptism of Christ's with him into Death,
or else there could be no rising with him into newness of Life; there might be
a rising into newness of Profession, Notion, and Words, but that would not do,
it was newness of Life I must come to, the other I had tried over and over; I
saw I must dye with him, or be planted with him in the likeness of his Death,
that is, dye unto sin, if ever I came to be planted with him in the likeness of
his Resurrection, and so live unto God, according to Romans the sixth. Then
when things thus opened in me, I clearly saw we had all been deceived, thinking
while we did live in the Flesh, and after the Flesh, and so in the Death,
feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, which was forbidden for Food, we might make
such a Profession as might bring us to reap Life everlasting; but I soon saw,
such as a man lived after, such as a man sowed such should he reap, and not
what a man professed, or what he talked of, and then I was willing to bow to
the Cross, and come under the fiery Baptism of the Spirit, and let that which
was consumable be destroyed, that my Soul might be saved, and come to possess
that which would endure and abide, and could not be shaken. Thus were the
Heavens shaken also, as well as the Earth, that, that which was not shakeable
might remain, according to Hebr. 12. 27. and so that which condemned the evil
Fruits of the Flesh (as they were owned by us so to be in our Profession) both
in our loose Conversation, and also in the desires of our Hearts, and fleshly
Lusts that therein sprang, unto the Judgment of which we did assent, even so
did that same Light and true Witness discover and condemn our fleshly
Profession of Religion in that same Nature and Mind which brought forth Evil,
or in which Evil did dwell and Rule, and so came our Heaven to be shaken, and
our Covering and Garment to be taken away, and we left comfortless and naked,
destitute and without a Habitation; and then we saw our sacrificing and our
sinning to be alike in the sight of God; for our Prayers was rejected, and all
loathed, because both was done in one Nature, and from one and the same Seed
and corrupt Heart; and therefore it came to be with us as with Judah of old, as
may be read Isa. 1. and Isa. 66. 3. where the Lord told Judah, their killing an
Ox, their sacrificing a Lamb, their offering an Oblation and burning Incense,
was as the slaying of a Man, cutting off a Dogs neck, offering Swines blood,
blessing an Idol. And thus we saw, for want of Righteousness, and keeping the
Commandments of the Lord, and forsaking of our own ways, and that which was
evil, our Religion was loathed by the Lord, and we rejected in all our doings,
and left in desolation and barrenness; for whatever we might pretend, that true
saying must stand, A good Tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, nor a bad Tree
good fruit; the Tree is known by its fruit.

And thus things opened wonderfully in us, and we saw not only common sins,
which all consess so to be, (though they live in them) but also the hypocrisy
and sinfulness of the Professors of Religion, even in their Religion, which was
performed out of the true Spirit of Grace and Life, which in the Mystery is the
Salt that every Gospel Sacrifice is to be seasoned withal, according to the
Example in the Figure; and therefore were we commanded to withdraw, and be
separated in our Worship, and wait to have our Hearts sanctified, and the
Spirit of our Minds renewed, that we might come before him with prepared
Vessels; for we soon learned to see this, that it must be true in the
Substance, as in the Figure; all the Vessels of the Tabernacle was to be
sanctified, consecrated or made holy; and therefore did we come out from among
such in their Worship that lived in Uncleanness, and pleaded for Sin, which
made unholy, and met together, and waited together in silence, may be some
times not a word in our Meetings for Months, but every one that was faithful,
waiting upon the living Word in our own Hearts, to know Sanctification thereby,
and a through cleansing and renewing of our Hearts and inward Man; and being
cleansed and made meet, we came to have a great delight in waiting upon the
Word in our Hearts, for the Milk thereof, which Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
in our so waiting, we did receive the Milk, or Virtue thereof, and grew
thereby, and was sed with the heavenly Food that rightly nourished our Souls;
and so we came to receive more and more of the Spirit of Grace and Life from
Christ our Savior, who is full of it, in whom the Fullness dwells, and in the
Power thereof we did worship the Father, who is a Spirit, and waited upon the
Teachings of his Grace in our Hearts; and he taught us thereby to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, godlily, and soberly in
this present evil World. And so we came to know the true Teacher, which the
Saints of old did witness, as says the Apostle, Titus 2. 12. and therefore
wanted not a Teacher, nor true Divine Instructions, though we had left the
Hireling-Priests, and also other high-flown Notionists, and sat down together
in silence, for that was our desire to have all Flesh silenced before the Lord
and his Power, both in our own Hearts, and from without. And as we thus came
into true silence and inward stilness, we began to hear the Voice of him, who
said, he was the Resurrection and the Life; and he said unto us Live, and gave
unto our Souls Life; and this holy Gift which he has given, has been in us as
a Well springing up unto eternal Life, according to his promise; and therefore
has it been our delight all along to wait upon it, and draw nigh with our
Spirits unto it, both in our Meetings, and also at other Times, that we might
both be taught and saved by it, for by it the Saints were saved through Faith,
etc. as Paul wrote unto them, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Now from the Year 1653. as before hinted, in which Year I was convinced of the
blessed Truth and Way of Life Eternal, unto the Year 1657. I was not much
concerned abroad in Travels upon the account of the Truth, save only to visit
Friends that were Prisoners for the Truths Testimony; but being mostly at home,
following my outward Calling, I was very diligent to keep to our Meetings,
being given up in my Heart thereunto, for I found great delight therein, and
many times, when one Meeting was over, and I at my outward Labor, in which I
was very diligent also, I did in my Spirit long for the next Meeting-day, that
I might get to the Meeting to wait upon the Lord with the rest of his People.
And I can also with safety say, that when I was there, I was not sloathful, but
in true diligence set my Heart to wait upon the Lord, for a Visitation from
him, by the Revelation of his Power in my Soul; and as I waited in the
Diligence, Patience, and Faith, I can say this for the Lord, and on his behalf,
with many more Witnesses, we did not wait in vain; he suffered not our
Expectation to fail, everlasting Glory, and Honor, and Praise to his worthy
and honorable Name for ever: The very remembrance of his Goodness and glorious
Power in those days revealed and renewed, overcomes my Soul. And so then in
diligence waiting, and the Lord so in mercy visiting by his power in our
Hearts, my Soul was daily more and more affected with the Glory, and
Excellency, and Sweetness of it, and with the holy Dread with which it filled
my Heart, for that became pleasant, and then my Spirit was bent to keep near
unto it, and to dwell in that holy Fear which the Father thereby placed in my
Heart. And then I came to see what David exhorted unto in the Second Psalm,
when he bid the Kings and Judges of the Earth be wise and. learned; and further
said, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. O the bowings of my
Soul! O the pleasant dread that dwelt upon my Spirit, and the reverent
tremblings that came over my Heart, which filled it with living Joy, as with
marrow and fatness! And then could I say in my heart, with David, will wash my
hands in innocence, and compass thine Altar, O Lord. O the pleasant drawing
near unto the Altar of the Lord (and that not unprepared) by many, whose Hearts
were filled, and their Souls and Spirits anointed with the true anointing from
the holy One, which John speaks off in his first Epistle, which is the
substance of what was figured out in that Ointment Moses was commanded to make,
Exodus 30. 25. which all the Vessels of the Tabernacle were to be anointed
withal.

Now when my Heart was thus fitted, filled, and furnished, as it was many a
time in our holy Assemblies, with many more, I know that sat under the same
dread and power with me; for our Temple and Tabernacle, in which we worshipped,
that were Children of the New Jerusalem, was but one, even the Lord God and the
Lamb, as John saw, Rev. 21, 22. And so it was in this Power that we sat and
worshipped; I say, when my heart was thus fitted and filled, then did I
endeavor to keep down my Spirit to the meltings of it, and great was the care
of my Soul, that I might no ways miss nor abuse this Power, nor let up a wrong
thing into my Mind, to be betrayed thereby; and then I knew, if I kept all that
was wrong down, sound Wisdom, and a true Understanding would be grown into,
even of those Mysteries that the World was ignorant of; for the Son of God
being come, it was he that did give the Understanding, to know him that was
true, as John said of old, in his first Epistle; and he was made Wisdom, as
Paul said, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So I often observed, and that with great care and
diligence in those blessed and pleasant Seasons, wherein the Lord did so
wonderfully appear amongst us, and filled our Hearts with the glorious Majesty
of his Power, how it was with my own Spirit, and whether that was subject, as
it ought, or no; for I clearly saw, the Enemy might beguile, and lead up into
the hights, and unnecessary pride and vain-glorying, in that which the Soul
might soon be deprived of, if it kept not humble; for it is the humble the Lord
teaches, and the meek he guides in Judgment.

And thus in the greatest Enjoyments I saw, there was need of care and fear to
be kept in; for as those that grew sluggish, idle, and careless in waiting in a
Meeting for the Power, did sit without the sense of it in a dead, dry, barren
state; even so such as weer not diligent to mind to keep low, humble, and
tender, and so to mind the Nature of the working of the Power, and the Nature
of their own Spirits under the Powers exercise; and also to watch against the
Enemies subtilty, who lay in wait to betray, might easily be led aside out of
the Powers way by the Stranger, even while the Power was a working, and Joy was
in the Heart: And thus for want of true Fear and Care, might the Soul come into
a loss e're it be aware; and I believe some have so done, and can scarcely find
the reason of it. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, it may truly be said, even
the great Mystery which Paul writes of in Colossians the first, Christ in us
the hope of glory, etc. And as he is there, great is the Mystery of his working
by his Spirit, to the opening and clearing of the Understandings of all that
rightly wait upon him: and it is the Soul in the Sanctification and Oneness
with the Life, the true Unction that comes to be a Priest, and so of the Royal
Priesthood, chosen and elected in God's Covenant, that comes rightly and
lawfully to eat of those holy things, and so to partake of the sanctified holy
Food. This I did observe, and therefore the Stranger is not to come nigh; this
was in the Figure signified, the Stranger was not to eat of the Passover, Exodus
12. 43. and the Command of God was to Aaron by Moses; that no Stranger should
eat of the holy things, etc. Lev. 22. 10. And Solomon says, The heart knows
his own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy, Prove. 14.
10. Much might be said, but this is the matter; its Wisdom, for the Heart that
has known his own bitterness in the Judgment and Distress, and through it is
come to this Peace and Joy to keep it, and not to let that which would have no
share with it there, come to intermeddle with the Joy, for if it do, it will
soon overthrow the Joy of the Soul, and bring to another state, and then have
no more pity in the Day of Distress, than the Jews had of Judas, when they bad
him look to it, what was that to them, when he had betrayed his Master.

And thus I continued, as I have said before, for these four Years, mostly
following my outward Calling, and attending and waiting upon the Lord in the
workings of his holy Power in my Heart, both in Meetings and at other times,
wherever I was, or whatever I had to do; for I found, that as my Heart was
kept near the Power, it kept me tender, soft, and living: And besides, I found
as I was diligent in eying of it, there was a constant sweet Stream, that run
softly in my Soul, of Divine Peace, Pleasure, and Joy, which far exceeded all
other Delights and Satisfactions; and this became the great Engager of my Soul
to watch with such diligence, for I did find the love of God to constrain. And
furthermore, I did observe, that if I neglected, or let my Mind out after any
thing else more than I ought, and so forgot this, I began to be like a
Stranger, and saw that I soon might lose my Interest in these Riches and
Treasure, and true Commonwealth of God's Spiritual Israel, which Christ had
purchased for me, and given me the earnest of to inherit.

And thus being mindful of the opening Wisdom of God, which was from above, and
heavenly, and not from below, earthly, I was preserved, and helped, and
succored in the needful time; and because of the Blessings and rich Mercies of
the Lord that my Soul enjoyed, I was willing to serve him in what I might, and
willingly received upon me a share of that Concern that became proper for me,
with others, to take upon us in the Church, that I might be helpful in all
necessary things. And thus I went on in the holy Fellowship of the Gospel of
Life and Salvation, with the rest of my Brethren and Sisters, and many joyful
Day we had together in the Power of the Holy Ghost, that was richly and
graciously continued amongst us, and daily poured out upon us; so that we still
grew in favor with God, and unity one with another, and received daily
strength from the Lord, and an increase of his Divine Wisdom and Spirit, which
did greatly comfort us. And in this our pleasant state I do well remember, my
Heart was satisfied, and settled into a content, where I was willing to abide;
but the Lord that had so dealt by me in Mercy, as I have said, began to stir in
my Heart by his Spirit to arise, and go forth in the strength of his Word, and
declare against the Hirelings that feed themselves, and not the People, and
kept the People ignorant of those good things, that he had made me and others
Witnesses of.

And when the Word of the Lord came unto me with this Message, it became a
great Exercise unto me, and I would willingly have shunned it, and have dwelt
in that Ease, Peace, and Pleasure the Lord had brought me into, but there was
none but in obeying the Lord, and giving up to do his Will, that I soon came to
know, for I was sure it was the Word of the Lord; and then I yielded in Spirit,
and longed for the Day that I might clear my self, and be eased of the Charge
that was upon me: for weighty was the Dread and Majesty of the Power of the
Word of Life that lived, and as a Fire burned in my Heart, that I could not
stay.

And when the first day of the Week came, in Obedience unto the word of the
Lord I went to Aspetry, the Place which the Lord set before me, to speak to one
Warwick a Priest, who when I came, was preaching in their Bell-house, who, soon
after I came in, with a Friend with me, began to put forth some subtle
Questions to provoke us to speak, that he might have an opportunity to cause us
to be haled out, and sent to Prison, but I resolved not to mind his Temptation,
but to wait upon the Lord; and when he could not prevail with his Questions to
get his end upon us, he spoke to the Constable to put us forth; who answering,
bid him go on, and said, They do not disturb us, etc. Then the Priest went on
with his Sermon, and finished. And when he had done, I began to speak to the
People, and the Priest he got away, and the People hurried me out, and kept me
and the Priest asunder, so that I got not to speak to him that Fore-noon. So I
came away with my Friend, and thought to have returned home; but immediately
after I was got out of the Town; the wrath and displeasure of the Lord in his
Word sprung dreadfully in my Heart, and a dreadful Cry was in me, from the
same, Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, etc. And then I
saw how I had let in a Fear upon me, in which I had shunned the Priest, and
spared him, for fear I should be sent to Prison for speaking to him, the Law
being such at that day, That whosoever did disturb a Minister, as they termed
it, should be sent to Prison, etc. And when I found out my Weakness in this,
that I had spoke to the People, and spared the Priest that I was sent to cry
against, then was I sore afraid, and my Heart filled with horror, and a sore
cry in me still, Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, etc.
then I knew not what to do, for the wrath of God was upon me; and another Cry
from the same Word was sounded in my Heart, saying, Babylon has sinned, all ye
that bend the Bow, shoot at her; spare no Arrows, for she has sinned, etc. Now
when it was thus with me, and I saw that I had not been faithful, but had mist
my Service; after I had come so far as the Common above Plumland, I sat me
down, and there I mourned before the Lord, whom I had so grieved, and humbly
desired of the Lord, that he would but grant me liberty to go again to clear my
self, that I might come into Peace with him again; and then let Life or Liberty
outward go, I did not value. So waiting upon him in this humble bowed frame of
Spirit, the Word of Life rose in me again, and opened my Heart, and sealed to
me I might go. Then I arose with boldness, and went with speed, till I came
there at the Worship house, and the Priest was preaching again in the
Afternoon, and I went in and stood before him, till he had done, and then was
my Heart filled with Peace, and I resolved in the Name of the Lord not to
spare, but speak the Word of the Lord faithfully, whatever I might suffer for
it; for in comparison thereof, I valued neither Life nor Liberty. So when he
had done, I spoke unto him what the Lord put in my Mouth: He immediately got
away and gave me no Answer. But I followed him so quick, and cried out after
him, so that he turned again to me in the Grave-yard, and then I did clear my
Conscience to him, and a great Dispute we had, for I did not spare him. At last
he went away, and would stay no longer. Then I spoke to the People, and did
clear my Conscience amongst them; and then I came away in peace, and my Heart
was filled with unspeakable Joy, and my Soul with Gladness. Then I saw, it was
good to be faithful unto the Lord, and to trust in him, and to obey his Voice;
and then I came to feel and see more and more, the woeful and dreadful state
that the Priests and Hirelings were in, who for their own earthly gain made
Merchandise of People; although they were defended by the Laws of Men, yet I
found the Laws of God they were in the transgression of, and so were in Cain's,
Corah's, and Baalam's way, in Envy, and Gainsayers of the Truth, and Lovers of
the Wages of Unrighteousness, and so such as Peter and Jude wrote of, 2 Peter
2. 15. and Jude cried Woe against, Jude 10, 11, 12.

Then some time after I was moved by the Spirit of the Lord to go to Lorton, to
speak to one Fogoe a Priest, who was preaching to the People in their
Worship-house, and I stayed till he had done; and there he did affirm in his
preaching to the People, that both he and they was without the Life of both the
Law and the Gospel. And then I spoke to him, and questioned him what he had to
preach, or to pray, that was without the Life of both Law and Gospel? But after
a few words, he fell into a rage, and stirred up the People, and they fell upon
me, and haled me out of the House, and did beat me, and the Priest did threaten
to put me in the Stocks. So I came away; and that day two Weeks I was moved to
go again to speak to the same Priest at Louswater, the Parish where I did then
dwell; and when I came in, the People beginning to look at me, and take notice,
the Priest bid them let me alone, if I would be quiet, he would discourse with
me, when he had done. So I stood still and quiet, waiting upon the Lord; the
Priest he prepared to go to Prayer, but when he saw that I did not put off my
Hat (for I could not so do, because I could not join with him in his dead
lifeless Prayers) Then instead of going to Prayer, he fell a railing against
me, and said I should not stand there in that posture. At last I spoke to him,
and did ask him, What he had to pray with, that was without the Life of both
Law and Gospel. But he continued calling out to the People, to take me away; so
that at last, my Father being there, and displeased with me for troubling their
Minister, came himself and haled me out of the House, and was very angry with
me. Then I stayed in the Grave-yard, till the Priest and People came out, and
then I got to him, and spoke to him again, but he soon began to be in a rage,
and to threaten me with the Stocks, and got away. And then I cleared my
Conscience to the People of what I had to say, and so came away in great peace
with the Lord.

Then not long after, in the same Year, I was moved of the Lord by his Spirit
to go to Briggham, to speak to one Priest Denton, who then was preaching in the
Steeple-house to the People; who in his Sermon, which he had before hand
prepared, had many false Accusations, Lies, and Slanders against Friends, and
the Principles of the Truth. I stayed till he had done, and then did speak to
him, but got little Answer; but immediately some of his Hearers fell upon me,
and did beat me with their Bibles, and with a Staff, or Staffs, all along out
of the House, and also out of the Grave-yard, that the next day I was sore with
the Blows, and so the Priest commanded the Constable to secure me, and a Friend
that was with me, and next day did cause him to carry us to Lancelot Fletcher
of Talantyre, who did order a Warrant to be written for us, and so sent us from
Constable to Constable, to the common Goal in Carlisle, where I was Prisoner
three and twenty Weeks. And when I wrote a Paper to the Priest, wherein I
answered his false Accusation, and sent it to him by a Friend, he would not
read it, but, as I was told, put it in the fire and burnt it.

Now while I was in Prison, something came upon me for Scotland, but I being a
Prisoner, and not yet deeply acquainted with the way and work of the Lord's
Power and Spirit, as in relation to such a Service, great was the Exercise of
my Spirit that I went under; and for want of Experience and a clear
Understanding, I was swallowed up, and for a time quite lost in the Deep, where
great was the Distress of my Soul beyond utterance; but the merciful God by his
powerful Arm and healing, saving Word of Life, did restore and bring up my Soul
out of the Deep, where it was for a time buried, and renewed Life and
Understanding, and caused the Light of his Countenance to shine, and the
Sweetness of his Peace to spring; so that I may truly say, he caused the Bones
that he had broken, to rejoice. And then when he had thus crushed and humbled,
and let me see how he could make all things become as nothing again, and so
hide all Glory from Man, then in his Goodness he revealed his Glory, and Power,
and Presence, and reviving Life, and so opened to my Understanding his good
Pleasure, which with all readiness and willingness of mind I gave up unto, in
my Heart and Spirit. So after my being kept about three and twenty Weeks in
Prison, I had my Liberty; and so came home, and followed my outward Calling
that Summer, and grew more and more into the Understanding of the Mind and Will
of the Lord, in that which I had a Sight of, while I was in Prison. And so
keeping to Meetings, and waiting upon the Lord in a true travel of Spirit,
after more acquaintance with him, and more enjoyment of his Power and Word, I
grew not only into an Understanding, but also into a degree of Strength and
Ability sit to answer that Service, which the Lord had called me unto.

And so then in the Faith, that stood in God's Power, about the beginning of
the Eighth Month 1658. I took my Journey into Scotland, and traveled in that
Nation about Three Months, and was both in the North and West of it, as far
North as Aberdeen, and back again to Edinborough, and so down West to Lithcow,
Hamilton, Air, and as far as Port-Patrick; and back to Air and Duglass: and
our Service was at their Steeple Houses, and Markets, and other places, where
we met with People; and sometimes at Friends Meetings, where there was any. And
our work was, To call People to Repentance out of their lifeless hypocritical
Profession and dead Formalities, wherein they were settled in the Ignorance of
the true and living God; and so to turn them unto the true Light of Christ
Jesus in their Hearts, that therein they might come to know the Power of God,
and so come to know Remission of Sins, and receive an Inheritance amongst the
Sanctified. And being thus clear of that Nation, we returned into England, and
came over the water to Bowstead-hill the first day of the Eleventh Month, 1658.

Then returning home, I followed my Calling or Trade again from that time,
until the Third Month 1659. and then I took shipping for Ireland, according to
what had been Opened unto me in the Truth, when I was in Scotland; and grew
mightily in me through the Strength of the Power and Word of Life, while I
stayed at my Calling at home, and kept to Meetings. For the Lord often filled
and enriched my Heart and Soul with his glorious Power, and so sanctified and
prepared me for that which he set before me: For often in Spirit was I carried
thither, and had it sealed unto me, that it was my place to go into that Nation
to serve the Lord, and bear witness unto the Truth, and call People to
Repentance, and hold forth the Way of Life and Salvation unto them. So I waited
till the full Season came, according to the blessed Counsel of God, in which I
found his leading Power with me, and to go before me; and so at the time
aforesaid I took shipping at Whitehaven, and landed at Dunacadee in the North
of Ireland, and traveled up to Lisbourne, and so up to Lorgan, and on to
Kilmore in the County of Armagh, and so up and down in the North for some time
amongst Friends, and had Meetings. And many People came to Meetings, and many
Convinced and turned to God from the evil and vanity of their ways. And then
from thence I traveled up to Dublin, and thence to Mountmeleck, and so forward
to Kilkenny, and so on to Caperqueen, and Tallow, and so to Cork and Bandon:
and back to Cork, and then to Toughal, and to Waterford, and to Ross, and to
Waxford; and had Meetings along, as I traveled: and according to that Ability
I received of God, I was faithful, and preached the Truth, and true Faith of
Jesus. From Waxford I came to Carlough and Mountmeleck, and so down into the
North, and spent some time there.

And so having gone through, and in the fear of God published his Name and
Truth, as I had opportunity, I then was willing to return home to England, and
for that end as I intended, came down to Carrickfergus, but before I got
thither, it came upon me that I should return back again to Lorgan and Kilmore,
and from thence to Londonderry. And so I sent word to appoint a Meeting at
Lorgan; and went on to Carrickfergus, and got a Meeting, where there was many
People at it; and I did clear my self unto them in the fear of the Lord, and
then returned to Lorgan, as I had appointed. And there I met with Robert Lodge,
newly come out of England, who had something in his Heart also to go to
Londonderry; this was about, or near the beginning of the Seventh Month 1659.
So Robert Lodge and I became concerned in one Work, Service, and Travel
together, and were truly united in Spirit, in the Unity of the Faith and Life
of Christ, in which blessed Unity and Fellowship of the Gospel of the Son of
God, we labored and traveled in that Nation of Ireland for Twelve Months,
after we met together, not often parting; but sometimes we were moved to part
for the Service's sake for a little time, and came together again: and the Lord
gave us sweet Concord and Peace in all our Travels; for I do not remember that
we ever were angry or grieved one at the other in all that time. And so we went
down to Londonderry together, and when we came there, were soon discovered what
we were, and then the People were unwilling to receive us, or let us have
Lodging for our Money. We were at their great Steeple-house on the first day,
and had a large time among the People to declare the Truth: but at last the
Major sent his Officers, who would not suffer us to stay any longer, but forced
us out of the City, and down to the Boat, and commanded the Boat-man to carry
us over, and not to bring us back again. So being clear, we took our Journey
toward Coalraine, and then to the Grange, and so to Antrim, and so up to
Lorgan, and so through Friends in the North. And then after some time we took
our Journey into the South, and did travel through a great part of the Nation,
as to Dublin, Mountmeleck, and to Arthlone, and Galloway, Limmerick, Cork, and
Bandon, and so through the South, and again into the North. And thus we spent
our time with diligent Labor and hard Travel, often in cold, hunger, and
hardships in that County, which then was in many Parts uninhabited: And in
Prison several times; once in Armagh, once in Dublin, twice in Cork; besides
other Abuses we received from many, because of our Testimony which we had to
bear for the Lord, in their Towns and in their Steeple Houses, and against
their Hireling-Priests, which sought their Rewards, and loved the Wages of
Unrighteousness, like Baalam; and worse then he, forces it from the People,
like the Sons of Eli, whose Sin was very great, 1 Samuel 2. 16, 17.

And thus having traveled and labored in the Gospel together for Twelve
Months, and many being Convinced and gathered to the Truth, we were clear of
our Service there, and in the Seventh Month 1660. we took shipping at
Carrickfergus, and intended for Whitehaven in England, but by contrary Wind
were driven to Kirkowbry in Scotland, and from thence came over Land into
Cumberland, and to Cockermouth: and then I again returned to my outward
Calling, and followed that, and kept diligently to Meetings, for it was still
my Delight so to do, and there to be diligent in waiting upon the Lord; for I
always found, that therein I received an increase of Strength, Life, and Wisdom
from the Lord. And as I found any motion upon me from the Lord to go to any
Meeting abroad, either in our Country, or any other, I went and cleared my
self, as the Lord gave Ability; and so did return again to my Calling, and so
to our own Meeting, where I did delight to wait in Silence upon the Lord: for I
loved that much, because I found an inward growth thereby through the Teachings
and Openings of his Spirit in my Heart; and when something did open in me for
that end, to speak in our Meeting, I gave up, for the most part, sometimes
ready to quench through backwardness, but that was hurtful; but I grew over it
by degrees, and increased in Faith and holy Confidence more and more.

Now from the Seventh Month 1660. unto about the First or Second Month 1662. I
was very much at home at my Calling: and then I was moved of the Lord to go to
London to see George Fox, and others of the Elders, and to acquaint him with
what was upon me from the Lord to go to America, which came weightily upon me
in Ireland, when I was there; so that I had a great travel in Spirit, and deep
Exercise in Mind, before I gave up. But when I had given up in belief, that it
was the Word of the Lord, and so gone through it in my Spirit, and submitted
unto his Will, the weight and exercise was removed, and I with my former
Openness again restored into my Service, and no more of that remained, but a
remembrance of the Prophecy or Opening which I had received, and Faith in the
Word, which, I was satisfied, was sure for ever. And therein I rested as to
that matter, until the time aforesaid that it came upon me to go and and
acquaint G. F. as also Ed. Borough, who were then at London, and Richard
Hubberthorn; for I loved to have the Counsel and Countenance of my elder
Brethren, who were in Christ before me. And then I did return through Yorkshire
home, and had some Meetings, as I came along; and stayed at home but a little
time, and was moved to go again into Yorkshire, and went through diverse
Meetings to visit Friends. And being, as I thought, clear to return home, I
came to Rippon to see some Friends, that were then Prisoners for meeting
together to worship God; and going into Prison to see them, and in the Love of
God speaking some words of Exhortation unto them, the Jailer took me, and had
me to a House in the Town, where the Major and the Chancellor, and several of
the Aldermen were together; and there the Chancellor chiefly took in hand to
examine me, and sought to ensnare me, that he might get occasion to Commit me
to Prison. And first, he would have my going to Prison to my Friends to have
been an Offense; but I pleaded, in so doing I had broken no Law. Then he said,
I spoke in Prison; I answered, There was no Law, that forbid us to speak to our
Friends, when we came to visit them. Then he asked me, when I was at Church,
and when I took the Sacrament according to the Laws of England? I answered, I
knew no Law I had broken, nor no evil I had done to any man; if any man had
evil against me, let him bear witness of the evil. Then he began to be in a
rage, and said, He would have an Answer e're we had done, etc. But when he
could not get an Advantage that way, he reached for a Book, and asked me, if I
would take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy? And when I answered, Not in
Contempt to the King, or his Authority, but in Obedience to Christ's Command, I
could not swear. Then he commanded the Clerk to write a Mittimus, and sent me
to the Prison, to the rest of my Friends, who were four and twenty before, and
there I was kept Prisoner fourteen Weeks. And because, when we sat down to
wait upon the Lord (for we fate down once every day together, and many times
Friends with us, that came to see us) I spoke something in Exhortation unto
Friends, and prayed unto the Lord, as he enlarged my Heart, that we might be
comforted and edified together, the Magistrates were offended, and sent the
Under-Goaler to take me away, and put me in the Dungeon from among my
Fellow Prisoners, who came at three several times, and every time haled me from
my knees, when I was at Prayer, and put me in the Dungeon, a little dark Room,
where I was one time two days and nights, another time three days and nights,
and the last time seven days and nights. There was a Bowling-Alley before the
Prison-door, where several of the Magistrates and others did use to come to
their Game, and hearing my voice, were offended; and so sent to take me away.
So after fourteen Weeks I was set at liberty, and in some little time I had
freedom to return home, and then did, as at other times, follow my outward
Calling, and kept to our Meetings at home, but when I was moved to go forth to
visit Friends, sometimes in our own Country, and sometimes into Yorkshire, and
Bishopric, and would sometimes be Two Months away, or thereabouts, and then
return home to my Calling or Trade: and so thus continued till about the
fore-end of Summer, in the Year 1664.

And then that which had been opened unto me four years before, began again to
arise in my Heart in that Word which lives for ever, and the living motion of
it began to press upon my Spirit toward the fulfilling thereof; and then I
saw, the Time drew near, and the Season was coming upon me, wherein the Lord
would have me go and fulfill his Word, that I had yielded unto in Spirit so long
ago. And then I began to prepare, and set my Heart to leave all things behind,
and give up all things else, that I might follow him: and so his Power wrought
my Spirit into a right frame, that I could easily leave all things; and then he
gave me time to settle and order my outward Concerns, and leave all things
clear. And then that Summer I took shipping for Ireland, and passed through
most Friends, and did visit them. And about the Seventh Month 1664. I took
shipping at Galloway in Ireland for the Barbados, and was seven weeks and two
days in sailing to the Barbados; and I stayed there about three or four
Months, and did visit Friends, and traveled and labored in the Work of the
Gospel, both for the Confirmation of those that were gathered, and for the
gathering of others unto the Truth, that they might partake with us of the like
precious Faith. And there I met with many that had been hurt by John Parrot,
and carried away with his Imaginations, who lead out of the Power, and from the
true Cross, into high Notions, and vain Conceits, and so into a fleshly
Liberty, and ease therein, from the true Spiritual Travel and right Exercise,
both in Spirit, and outwardly; pretending to be against Forms, and under that
pretense led out of the faithful and diligent practice, which Friends had been
gathered into, as to their meeting together, and waiting upon the Lord,
counting that a Form, which he did lead into a slight of, and so caused many,
both there and in Virginia, and other places, to neglect, or in a great measure
to forsake the Assembling of themselves together, contrary to Friends practice,
and the Counsel and Advice of the faithful Laborers, who first labored
amongst us, as also contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, Hebr. 10. 25. And
also, he in his new Notion led many to keep on their Hats in the time of
Prayer, when any Friend prayed, and condemned our reverend practice of putting
off our Hats at such times: and so in many things led such as were taken with
his Notion, out of true Order into Looseness, and such a Liberty, that the Cross
in most things was laid down by them, and their own Wills followed, and Truth's
Testimony let fall. But he ran out of the Truth so far at last, that many began
to see him, and what his Spirit led to; and so came to see their own loss, and
returned back unto their first love, and the Power of the Lord went over that
dark Spirit, with all the vain Imaginations they had been led into thereby; and
so Friends were gathered into their former Unity. Now because of the prevalency
of this Spirit, I had the greater travel and exercise among Friends in that
Island, and in other places of America, both in withstanding such as were high
and hard, and also to gather back and preserve such, as had in some measure
been betrayed, and yet were more innocent and tender.

And so when I had traveled and labored, as I said before, about three or
four Months in that Island, and was clear, I took shipping for Maryland about
the latter end of the first Month, and landed there about the latter end of the
second Month 1665. and so I traveled, and labored in the Work of the Gospel
in that Province that Summer, and large Meetings we had, and the Lord's Power
was with us, and Friends greatly comforted, and several Convinced. But a sore
Exercise I had with one Tho. Thurston, and a Party he drew after him for a
while, so that both I and faithful Friends were greatly grieved, not only with
his Wickedness, but also his Opposition that he made against us, and the
Disturbance that he brought upon us in our Meetings; and great was the exercise
and travel, that was upon my Spirit both Day and Night, both upon the Truth's
account, that suffered by him, and also for the People, that were betrayed by
him to their hurt, who were under a great mistake. But through much labor and
travel in the Lord's Wisdom and Power, that both I and other faithful Friends
of that Province had to search things out, and to clear things to their
Understandings, both as to what related to the Truth, and also Matter of Fact,
which he was guilty of, it pleased the Lord so to assist us, and bless our
endeavors, in manifesting the Wickedness and Wrongness of the Heart and Spirit
of the Man, that most of the People came to see him, and in the love of God to
be restored, into the Unity of the Truth again, to our great comfort, Truth's
honor, and their Everlasting happiness. But he himself was lost as to the
Truth, and became a Vagabond and Fugitive as to his Spiritual Condition; and
little otherwise, as to the outward.

So in the Winter following I went down to Virginia, and when I came there,
Friends there, the greatest part of them, were led aside by John Parrot, who
had led them into his Notions, as before is related; and they had quite
forsaken their Meetings, and did not meet together once in a Year, and had lost
the very form and language of the Truth many of them, and were become loose and
careless, and much one with the World in many things: so that the Cross of
Christ, for which they had suffered, was shunned by them, and so Sufferings
escaped, and they got into outward ease. For they had endured very great
Sufferings for their Meetings, and did stand faithful therein, till he came
among them, and preached up this Notion of his, by which he judged Friends
Practice and Testimony in the Truth, and for the Truth, to be but forms: and so
pretending to live above such things, drew them from their Zeal for the Truth,
and their Testimony therein so far, that they avoided every thing that might
occasion Sufferings. And thus they being seduced or bewitched, as the Galatians
were, into a fleshly Liberty, the Offense of the Cross ceased, and the Power
was lost: and when I came there, it was hard to get a Meeting among them. And
much Discourse I had with some of the chief of them, and through much labor
and travel with them, and among them, to maintain the Principles of Truth and
our Testimony and Practice therein, I obtained a Meeting; and the Lord's Power
was with us and amongst us, and several were revived, and refreshed, and
through the Lord's goodness, and his renewed Visitations, raised up into a
Service of Life, and in time came to see over the wiles of the Enemy. So after
some time I returned again to Maryland, and did pass through Friends, and
visited their Meetings, and in the first Month came again to Virginia, and did
visit them, and so returned again to Maryland, and landed at New York in the
fourth Month 1666. and spent some time there amongst Friends, in going through
their Meetings. And then took shipping for Road-Island in New England, and
there spent some time in visiting Friends, and their Meetings; where I had a
comfortable Service. And about the latter end of the sixth Month, I took my
Journey toward Sandwich; and when I was clear there, I took my Journey by
Plymouth to Tewkesbury, and so to Marshfield and Cittuate, and so on to Boston,
and did visit Friends, and had Meetings: And from Boston to Salem, and so on to
Piscatoway. And when I was clear there, I returned back through the Meetings,
and came to Hampton, Salem, Boston, Cittuate, Marshfield, and so by Tewkesbury
and Plymouth to Sandwich, and from thence through the Woods to Ponigantsit, and
from thence over unto Road Island. And after some time spent there, I took
shipping for Long Island to visit Friends in those parts; and when I was clear,
I returned again to Road-Island in the Winter, and stayed for some time; for
there was no going off the Island unto the Main, the Snow was so deep. And
about the latter end of the first Month I took shipping for the Barbados, and
landed there in the second Month 1667. and did spend that Summer there, and had
blessed and comfortable Service among Friends, large and full Meetings, and the
Lord's Power and Presence was with us, and several gathered into the Love of
the Truth. And in the seventh Month I took shipping for Bristol in England: and
after we had been Ten Weeks at the Sea, except one day or two, being beat off
the Coast with an Easterly Storm, and kept out at Sea in a great Tempest, for
the most part of two Weeks, at last we got into Milford-Haven, and there I
landed, about the 27 th of the ninth Month, 1667. and so did go up too
Haverfordwest in Pembrokeshire in Wales, where I met with a Meeting of Friends
the same day: and at that time I stayed four Weeks in that County, and had many
blessed Meetings. And then being clear, I took my Journey toward Swanzey, and
did visit Friends there; and so came up toward Cardiff, and so on into
Monmouthshire: and after I had visited Friends there, I passed over the Water,
and came to Bristol, and did stay there some Meetings, and so up into
Glocestershire and Barkshire, and so up to London, and stayed there some time.
And after I was clear of that City, I was moved to return again into Barkshire,
and Glocestershire, and so to Bristol, and so over into South Wales, and down
to Pembrokeshire, all along visiting Friends, and had blessed Service. And then
when I was clear of those Parts, I was moved to return again up through the
Meetings in South Wales, and to Gloucester, and and through Glocestershire, and
Barkshire into Buckinghamshire, and so up to London, and spent some time there
that Summer in the Year 1668. And after that I went over into Surry to see
George Fox, who then was traveling among Friends in those Parts, to assist
Friends in the settling of their mens-Meetings, and also to stir them up to
visit such as were fallen away from the Truth, and drawn back, and to see, if
they could be restored and brought again to a sense of the Love of God, and so
to Salvation and Life; which Work did prove very effectual for the gaining of
many. So after I had been a little with him, and at Horsham (with some Friends
that went from London with me) to visit some Friends that were Prisoners there
for the Truth's Testimony, I returned back again to London, and so took my
Journey for the North of England, through Hartfordshire and Huntingtonshire,
and then strait down into Yorkshire, and spent some time in visiting the
Meetings about Knaisborrough, Netherdale, Massom, Thirsk, and there-aways, and
then was moved to go down toward Crake and Malton, and so on to Killam and
Burlington, Scarborough and Whitby, and on into Cleveland, and so over into
Bishopric. And after some time spent there, I came over Stanmore, and so into
Cumberland, and came home to see my Friends and Relations; and stayed but about
a Week, or a few days more, and then took my Journey for London to the yearly
Meeting, that then was appointed to be about the beginning of the tenth Month,
and so was there about a Week or two: and then I took my Journey again into the
West through Barkshire and Glocestershire, and so over into South Wales, down
as far as Pembrokeshire, visiting the Meetings, and serving the Lord and his
People with faithfulness in the labors and travels of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus. And when I was clear of those Parts, I returned back again through
South Wales up to Bristol, and so up through the Counties, visiting the
Churches, and so up to London that Spring, in the Year 1669. and stayed about
two Months time in and about the City. And then I was moved again to go into
Buckinghamshire, and so through the Country, visiting Meetings in diverse
places, till I came to Bristol, and was at Bristol about the 25 th of the fifth
Month 1669. And from thence I went over into Wales again, and did pass through
South Wales, as far as Pembrokeshire; and from thence I took my Journey through
the Mountains toward North Wales, and did visit Friends in Radnorshire; and
from thence came down to Shrewsbury, and so on into Cheshire, and so through
Lancashire and Westmoreland home into Cumberland, and stayed there a little,
and did visit Friends. And then took shipping at Whitehaven for Ireland, and
landed at Belfast in the North, and spent that Winter in Ireland in the travels
and labor of the Gospel, and had blessed Service for the Lord and his People
in that Nation, and was richly comforted and refreshed amongst them in the
gracious presence of the Lord, that was with us, who is the Recompencer and
rich Rewarder of all that are given up in Faithfulness to serve him. So that
now none does lose their Reward under the Ministration of the Gospel, no more
then they did under the Law in the Figure, when he said, Who is there among
you, that would shut the Doors for naught? neither do you kindle fire on mine
Altar for naught, Mal. 1. 10. To him be Glory, and Honor, and Praise over all
for ever, for he is worthy! And when I was clear of that Nation, I took
shipping at Dublin, and landed at Whitehaven in Cumberland, and stayed a little
time in Cumberland, and then took my Journey for London to the yearly Meeting,
that was in the Spring of the Year 1670. and so spent a part of that Summer in
London, and thereabouts, in the Service of the Truth, until I could have a
Convenience to go for Barbados, that being upon me.

And in the fifth Month all things being ready, I and William Simpson went down
to Gravesend with many Friends from London, that did accompany us; and staying
there but a few days, we set Sail from Gravesend the eighth day of the fifth
Month 1670. and came to the Downs, and stayed there some days, and then set
Sail from the Downs the twentieth day of the same Month, and because of
contrary Winds we put in at Falmouth, and stayed two Nights there, and then put
to Sea again, and so set Sail for the Barbados, and arrived there the
thirtieth day of the seventh Month: so that we were twelve Weeks from Gravesend
e're we got Barbados. And then I stayed in the Barbados six Months, and had
great and weighty Service in that Island, before I could be clear. And my dear
Companion William Simpson, after he had been there was taken sick of a violent
Fever, that was very much among People at that time, and very many died; he was
sick but about six days, and then was taken away. At his Death, a very little
before his Departure, he gave a living, heavenly Testimony unto the Truth, with
wholesome Advice unto them that were about him, and departed in the Peace and
Joy of the Lord: an Account whereof may be further seen in a Book writ by one,
that was with him from his beginning to be sick, until he departed. I was with
him very much, but sometimes was constrained to leave him for the Service sake
that was upon me. He was a very Innocent man, and full of fear and reverence,
and ordinarily very open in his Testimony, and very sweet and pleasant; we
walked in great love and unity together; for he was a humble man, and had very
low thoughts of himself, and always under dread. He had gone through great
Sufferings and Afflictions, and cruel Persecutions for his Testimony and
Service sake, that he was called unto; he likewise had met with hard Buffetings
from Satan's Messenger, and sore Temptations, by which he had been wounded, and
sore hurt, through the wiles of Satan and his cunning slights; of which he
would be often speaking to me in our brotherly Fellowship and Communication,
wherein we would open our hearts and states one unto another: and in the
remembrance of things he was kept very low and tender, and near the Lord, and
took great delight in his Power, by which he had been redeemed, and his Soul
delivered, and he raised up into a good degree of Dominion, in which he reigned
at the last, and with great triumph departed this Life, and is blessed for
ever. My Heart is well satisfied, that it is even so; and when he was taken
away from me, my Heart was broken within me, my Spirit was bowed down greatly
in the sense of my loss, and I could not but mourn, though not as such that
have no hope, for my hope was firm concerning his well-being and gain that he
had obtained; but great was my loss, for I was left as one alone, as I had been
often before, to bear the burden my self, which was very weighty upon me at
that time, considering the state of the Church in that Island, and the care of
it was upon me; but the Lord was with me, and his Power did assist me to go
through my Charge, and clear my self, and free my self from the Blood of all
Men and Women. And so through all being guided by his Spirit in his Wisdom, the
Lord's Children and People were comforted, and my Soul and Spirit refreshed and
revived: and so in peace, clearness, and gladness I came away, and took
shipping for New England, and set Sail the first of the second Month 1671. and
arrived at New York the 27 th day of the same Month, and so did go from
New York unto Long Island, and did visit Friends on the Island, and other
places there-aways, and was with them at their Half-years-Meeting at
Oyster-Bay. And so being clear of those Parts, took shipping for Road-Island,
and was there at their Yearly Meeting in 1671. which begins the ninth of the
fourth 1671.
Month every Year, and continues for much of a Week, and is a General Meeting
once a year for all Friends in New England. And after that Meeting, when I was
clear of those Parts, I took my Journey toward Sandwich, and so did visit
Friends all along at Tewkesbury, Marshfield, and Cittuate, and so on to Boston,
and there had a Meeting, and so on to Salem, and Hampton, and Piscataway, all
along visiting Friends, and had many precious Meetings, and the Lord was with
us, and his Power was over all. And from Piscatoway I returned back again the
same way, and had blessed Service, and so through I came to Road-Island again,
and there I spent some time, (and went up to Providence, and did visit Friends
there) and so returned again. And when I was clear of those Parts, I took
shipping back again for Long Island, and landed at Oyster-Bay, and had some
Meetings: and then went down to Flushing, and so to Gravesand, and had some
Meetings. And then went over to East-Iersey to visit Friends there, and had
some Meetings: and then returned back again to Gravesand, and from thence went
back again to Oyster-Bay, and was there at their Half-years-Meeting, which
began about the eighth day of the eighth Month, and had a blessed time. But in
our Meeting for Business, we had an Exercise with several, that rose up in a
wrong Spirit against the blessed Order of the Truth, which by the Power of God
Friends were gathered into, and sweetly settling in. And chiefly their Envy and
Bitterness was against George Fox, and his Papers of Wholesome Advice, which he
in the Love of God had sent amongst Friends; and in that unruly, lose Spirit
and Mind they were gone into, being some of them filled with Prejudice, they
had written a Book, which they brought in Manuscript to the Meeting, and urged
to have it read. But I told them, we had the Papers there, and they might lay
down their Objections, they being there, and we would Answer them. But that
would not serve; but the Book they would read: and we sat in quietness, till
they had done. And when they had done, I reached for it, and by my memory, did
go over the Heads thereof, and did clear G. F. and Friends in our godly Care
and Intents, and opened the Service and Benefit of such Things which they did
Cavil at, and showed Friends the Advantage that was therein, both to the Truth
and them; and withal reprehended their Slanders and Falsehoods, with which they
had hurt the Minds of several young and newly-convinced Friends; and so opened
unto them, how it was the same Spirit, that of old led those that opposed the
Apostles, and endeavored to bring a slight, and begit a disesteem in the Minds
of the Believers against them, that watched over them for their good, and so
endeavored to lead them into a fleshly Liberty to shun the Cross, etc. And
when I had cleared my self, and informed Friends of the truth of Things, that
then by them had been objected against; Friends in general were satisfied, and
saw the Mistakes which they had let into their Minds, through the Insinuation
of those three men, that had been chiefly concerned in the writing of the Book,
and in the Opposition. And so the Lord's Power broke in upon the Meeting, and
Friends Hearts were broken, and great meltings in the Power there was amongst
us; and so in the same we blessed the Lord, and praised him, and prayed unto
him, and they were bowed, and went away. And so Friends were comforted, and the
Seed and Life reigned over all, everlasting Glory, and Honor, and Praise be
given to him for all his Mercies and Preservations, for he is worthy for
evermore.

And so when all our Meetings were over, and Friends in the heavenly Power and
Seed comforted, and the bad Spirits, and their evil Work confounded, and
brought under, as in the Minds of the Simple-hearted, that were like to be hurt
and betrayed by them, and so a coolness and calmness amongst Friends, I was
clear. And then took my Journey with some Friends that did accompany me, and
went to Flushing, and down to Gravesand; and when I had visited Friends there,
I went to New York, and had a Meeting; and then took shipping for Maryland
there, and set Sail the the 23 d of the eighth Month, 1671. We met with a sore
Tempest, a West-north-west-wind, that blew In our going down to Virginia we
were in great danger, and had like to have been Castaway with a North-west
Storm.
so hard, we could carry no Sail for some days; but at last we got into
Virginia, and then sailed up the Bay, and got to Pertuxon River in Maryland the
fifth day of the ninth Month, and there I landed with my Companion Daniel
Gould, who came with me from Road-Island, and did travel with me that Winter.
We visited Friends in Maryland, and I went down to Virginia to visit Friends
there, and found a freshness amongst them, and they were many of them restored,
and grown up to a degree of their former Zeal and Tenderness, and a great
Openness I found in the Country, and had several blessed Mettings. And then I
did advise them to have a Mens-Meeting, and so to meet together, to settle
things in good order amongst them, that they might be Instrumental to the
gathering of such as were yet scattered, and stirring up of such as were cold
and careless; and so to the keeping of things in order, sweet, and well amongst
them.

And thus having cleared my self in the Love of God, I committed them unto the
Lord, and the Word of his Grace, and so took Boat again for Maryland, and got
well thither at last; but met with strong Winds, and rough Weather, and some
danger: and so spent some time more in Maryland, till the Spring. And in the 2
d Month I appointed a Meeting 1672.
at West-River in Maryland, for all the Friends in the Province, that I might
see them together, before I departed, for I was determined to go as soon as I
could after that Meeting. And when the time appointed came, and Friends from
all Parts began to come, George Fox, with several Brethren, came from Iamaica,
and landed at Pertuxon, and from thence came straight to the Meeting. And there
were Friends from all Parts of the Province, where they dwelt, and we had a
very large Meeting, which did continue for several days; and a Men- and
Womens-Meeting for the settling of Things, that Men- and Womens-Meetings might
be established in the Province, according to the blessed Order of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, which Friends by the Power thereof were gathered into in most
places. And G. F. did wonderfully open the Service thereof unto Friends, and
they with gladness of heart received Advice in such necessary Things, as were
then opened unto them; and all were comforted and edified. And then when all
was over, and we all clear, and all sweet and pleasant among Friends, we
departed, and went down to the Clefts, some by Water and some by Land, and
there we had a large Meeting of both Friends and other People. And when that
was over, we departed, some went down to Virginia, and some stayed in Maryland.

And George Fox, Robert Withers, George Pattison, and I with several Friends of
the Province, took Boat and went over to the Eastern-shore, and there had a
Meeting on the first day, and on the second day we began our Journey through
the Woods to go over Land to New England. And took Horse at John* Pitts at the
Head of Tredaven-Creek, and did go through the Woods above the Heads of
Miles-River and Wye-River, and also headed Chester-River, and lay two Nights in
the Woods, viz second and third days at night. And on the fourth day we came to
Saxifrax-River, and did swim our Horses, and went over our selves in Boats or
Canowes. And so rode on to Bohemia-River, and there did cause our Horses to
swim, and went over our selves in Canowes. And then came to a Plantation called
Augustines, and there we stayed a little; and about three in the Afternoon we
set forwards, and some of us got to Delaware to Newcastle, and got Lodging; for
we were sore wet with the Rain: but To. Withers, and George Pattison lay in the
Woods all night, their Horses being tired. Next morning they came to us at
New Castle: We stayed there that day, and next day we got over the River. And
when we were over, we could not get an Indian for a Guide; and our Dutchman we
had hired, would not go without an Indian: so we were forced to stay there that
day. And the next day he rode about to seek an Indian, but could get none to
go; and so late in the Evening there came some over from the other side from
the Town, and we hired one: and so began our Journey early next Morning, to
travel through that Country, which now is called New Iersey; and we did suppose
that we traveled that day near forty Miles. And at the Evening we got to a few
Indian Wigwams, that is, their Houses; for we saw no Man nor Woman, House nor
Dwelling that day, for there dwelt no English in that Country then. We lodged
that Night in an Indian Wigwam, and lay upon the Ground, as themselves did: and
next day we traveled through several of their Towns, and they were kind to us,
and helped us over the Creeks with their Canowes; and we made our Horses swim
at the sides of the Canowes, and so traveled on. And toward the Evening we
got to an Indian Town; and when we had put our Horses to Grass, we went up to
the King's House, who received us kindly, and showed us very civil Respect. But
alas, he was so poorly provided, having got so little that Day, that most of us
could neither get to eat nor drink in his Wigwam; but it was, because he had it
not. So we lay as well as he, that was, upon the Ground; only a Matt under us,
and a piece of Wood, or any such thing under our Heads. So next Morning early
we took Horse, and traveled through several Indian Towns; and that day at
Night we lodged in the Woods. And so the next day, being the fourth day, we got
to an English Plantation, to a Town called Middle-Town, in East-Iersey, where
there was a Plantation of English, and several Friends; and so we came down
with a Friend to his House near the Waterside, and he carried us over in his
Boat, and our Horses also to Long Island. And we got to Friends at Gravesand
that Evening; and next day we took our Journey to Flushing on Long Island. And
the next day, being the seventh day of the Week, we took our Journey to
Oyster-Bay, and came there that Evening, and several Friends from Gravesand and
Flushing with us; for the next day their Half-years-Meeting did begin, which
was the cause of our so hard traveling. And besides, we did understand, that
those that had been so troublesome the Half-years-Meeting before, when I was
there, in opposing the Order of Truth, and reflecting so upon G. F. would then
be an Exercise to Friends; therefore George Fox did endeavor the more to get
to the Meeting. Which we did very seasonably; and it was of great Service to
the Truth, and great Comfort to Friends, for they were greatly under, when we
were come, and some of the chief of them began to fawn upon G. F. So we had our
Meetings very comfortably; first and second days public for Worship; third day
for our Men's- and Womens-Meetings for Business, about the Affairs of the
Church, as usually before. Then on the fourth day we had a Meeting with those
dissatisfied People; for G. F. would not suffer the Service of our Men- and
Womens-Meetings to be hindered by such a matter. And so on the fourth day, as
many Friends as had a desire to be there, did come; and the Lord's Power went
over them, and Friends were much satisfied. And he that was the chief
Instigator of that Mischief, to wit, George Dennis, who came from London, and
his Wife, not being well owned there by Friends, he now began to disown the
matter, and would have cast it upon others, and have willingly appeared clear
to G. F. but that I did prove under his own Hand, that he was a chief Actor at
the Half-years-Meeting before, and read the Book in our Meeting, whether we
would or no. And so things being fastened upon him, the Lord's Power went over
his deceitful Spirit, and they were all bowed, and the Truth exalted over all;
Glory to the Lord for ever, Amen.

Then after this we stayed a little upon the Island, and did go back to have
some Meetings, and returned again to Oyster-Bay: and there set Sail for
Road-Island the 29 th of the third Month, and arrived at Road-Island the
thirtieth of the same, and there stayed till the Yearly Meeting, which began
the eighth day of the fourth Month, which was the sixth day of the next Week
following; and at that General Meeting there were many Friends from most Places
in New England, where Friends dwelt, and abundance of other People came into
our Public Meetings. And we had Meetings for eight days together, every day a
Meeting, some public, and others Men- and Womens-Meetings, for settling the
Affairs of the Churches in the Order of the Truth; that all things might be
kept sweet, clean, and well. And when all was over, and the Service of the
Meetings finished, I took my Journey Eastward, to go through the Meetings in
the Eastern Parts of New England, and with me went John Cartwright and George
Pattison, and several other Friends to accompany us: and we left G. F. upon the
Island, and he went to Providence and the Narraganset Country. So we took our
Journey toward Sandwich, where we had a blessed Meeting, and were comforted,
and richly refreshed in the blessed Presence of the Lord's holy and blessed
Power, that was with us, and did open and enlarge our hearts. And when we had
spent some time with Friends there, we left them, and traveled on by Plymouth
and Duxbury, and had a Meeting at Marshfield, and another at Situate; and the
Lord was blessedly with us.

And at Situate some of the Elders of their Church came to our Meeting, where
were abundance of People in an Orchard, and stood up and made opposition: so I
ceased speaking to the People, and joined with them in Dispute. But the People
were so displeased at the Interruption they made, that they signified their
dislike, and would have them have stayed till I had done; upon which, they
said, they would forbear then, and come again. So they went away: and after
their own Meeting was over, they came again, and several Friends stayed with
me; and a great Company of People came with them. And then we went into our
Meeting House, which before would not hold the Multitude, and there began to
Dispute; and after some time spent, they always endeavoring to make Friends
appear to be in the Error, I said unto them before the People, If I must be
disputed with as an Heretic, and your Church esteemed as a true Church, I am
willing, we should come to the Rule Christ has left, and thereby be tried, and
that is, by our Fruits: and if you can prove the Fruits of your Church to be
agreeable to the Fruits of any ancient true Christian Church, I shall yield;
otherwise I must hold my Testimony against it, as a false Church, etc. But they
were mighty unwilling to join with me in that Discourse. But I urged the proof
of our Practice by Scripture, especially in such a great Point as that; and so
went on to reckon up the Fruits of their Church, which was to fine, and take
away Goods for not coming to their Worship, to Imprison, to Whip with Cruelty,
to Cut off Ears, to Burn in the Hand, to Banish upon pain of Death, and to
Hang; for they had hanged four of our Friends. All which Cruelties their Church
had executed upon us, and only upon the account of Religion. And if they could
prove these to be the Fruits of a true Christian Church, then I told them, I
would own them; otherwise they were to be denied. The proof of these things, or
to dispute upon them, they would willingly have evaded; but I stood upon it
necessary, that we might be known by our Fruits, and our Practice proved by
Scripture, which they pretended to be their Rule; or otherwise all was but vain
words, and an idle Notion, and they had nothing to do with Scripture, etc. And
then they were confounded, and knew not what to say; but one of them fled to
that Decree made by Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 26. But I showed, how inconsistant it
was with the Gospel Dispensation, Christ's Command, and the Christian's
Practice: and further said, I would prove the Indians, better Christians, than
they, by practice. And instanced the Indian King, who when they had banished
Nicholas Upshell (an ancient, grave, old man, against whom they had nothing,
but that he was called a Quaker) from his Wife and Family, and out of their
Colony, he being received by his Friends at Sandwich in Plymouth-Colony, they
stirred up the Rulers of the Colony to banish him out of their Jurisdiction,
which they did. And when the Indian King had inquired, Why they would send that
ancient Man sixty Miles through the Woods in the cold Winter to Road-Island?
and understood the Matter, he desired him to go with him, and he would keep
him, and none should molest him; or to that purpose: and offered him Land and
Kindness. So (said I) here was one that would entertain a Stranger, a Christian
Practice, according to Hebr. 13. 2. when your Church banisheth Neighbors from
their own Dwellings; an act of Cruelty, etc. Much Discourse we had, but at
these things they were confounded; some of themselves having been Actors in
Persecution upon our Friends, as Friends told me, after they were gone. So the
Lord's Power went over them, they could not stand the trial; and we parted in
the Peace and Love of God.

And next day we came to Boston, where we had a Meeting, and many People came
in, and several of Note. After a while, when I was speaking, came the Marshal
and a Constable, and many People following them. The Marshal bid the Constable
do his Office; the Constable, being a moderate man, said, So he did; he was to
see the King's Peace kept And so stood awhile, and heard me; and went away, and
told the Deputy Governor, he had been at our Meeting, but he heard nothing but
what was true, or no Blasphemy, or to this effect. So the People stayed, and I
had a blessed Season to open things to the People, and clear the truth of those
Scandals, which the Priests and others had cast upon it: and the People went
away greatly satisfied, and spoke well of the Testimony they had heard. Which
when Priest Thatcher heard, it appears he was displeased (for several of his
Children were there) and the old, angry, persecuting Spirit got up in him, and
next first day he stirred up two Magistrates in his preaching to the People,
and they sent, and took Friends at their Meeting, and committed several to
Prison. And we had appointed a Meeting for John Stubbs and James Lancaster the
third day of the next Week, who came after us through the Country: and when
they came, they were put in Prison, and banished out of the Colony. Thus their
old Fruits, like old corrupt Trees, they brought forth again.

So the next day we took our Journey to Salem, and there had a Meeting, and a
blessed Season: But there we met with some, that were gone into that foolish
Notion of John Parrots, keeping on their Hats, when Friends prayed, etc. So
after Meeting was over, where many People was in a Barn, we had a Meeting with
several of the Chief of Friends, and such as were gone after that Spirit; and a
great Discourse we had with them, in which we labored to bring them to an
understanding of that Notion they were gone into, and so labored to open and
settle the Minds of Friends in the ancient Truth, and blessed Power which they
had believed in, and received from Heaven; and then appointed a Meeting to be
the next Week against our Return. And so took our Journey toward Piscattaway,
and had a Meeting at Hampton, as we went, were several People came in, and some
of the Elders of their Church, and were greatly satisfied; and went away, and
gave a good report of the Truth, insomuch that Seaborn Cotton the Priest, was
greatly offended. And the first day following, he called the Chief of his
People together, and would have a Church-Act made, That no Members, nor Members
Children, should go to a Quakers Meeting; and it was to be confirmed by their
holding up their Hands: But those that were at the Meeting, would not assent;
but one of them did declare, what he remembered of the Heads of what he heard at
the Meeting, and maintained it to be Truth. So the Priest was in a rage, and
endeavored to stir up Persecution.

And after the Meeting was over, we went along to Piscattaway with Friends,
that came from thence to meet us, and stayed there till the first day, and had
a blessed Meeting: and also had a Meeting with the chief of Friends, both Men
and Women, about settling of Men- and Womens-Meetings: And Friends were very
open, and in sweet unity all things were settled, after we had opened things
unto them, relating to the blessed Order of the Gospel. And so committing them
to the Lord, and the Word of his Grace, we returned back again, and had another
Meeting at Hampton, where were several young People, who after the Meeting gave
me a Paper, in which they signified their desire to be satisfied in something,
that was as a Scruple upon their Minds: To which I answered, and gave them
great satisfaction. And when they saw my Openness and willingness to answer,
they with reverence, did ask me about diverse things, wherein they desired to be
informed; and unto all I answered, and gave them satisfaction, and so we parted.

Then I, with Friends with me, took our Journey toward Salem, and came there
against the time appointed, and we had the Meeting which we had appointed, with
most of the Chief of Friends; and it was about settling of Meetings to look
after the Affairs of the Church. And in the Meeting it was upon me largely to
open the Service of our Men- and Womens-Meetings, and the Duty and Care of the
Faithful therein; and when I had done, they did confess unto the Service, etc.
to be very good and right. So then we desired, that they would come into the
practice thereof; but when we partly pressed that, they would answer little,
but held back; some of them, who (like Diotrephes of old, who loved to have the
Pre-eminence, and so withstood the Apostle) did keep off in their Minds, being
of that Spirit I wrote of before in Virginia, who pretended to be against
Forms. And while we sat waiting upon the Lord, and staying to see what they
would come to; and George Pattison laboring to bring them to a Sense of the
Service, and so to come into the Practice, and they not being willing to say
any thing, my Spirit being very low, the Word of the Lord came unto me, and the
dread of his Power fell upon me: so that after some time I opened my Mouth with
a Lamentation, and said; I was sorry, or grieved, that I had that to say, that
I must declare unto them, and that was, That while they stood in that Spirit
they were in, they could not act in Unity with the Body in honor to the Head,
etc. and therefore after that, our Exhortation was unto them to Condemn that
Spirit, by which they had been led aside, and wait for the Universal Spirit of
Life, or to this effect; and so we left them, and they were greatly concerned.
So the next day we had a public Meeting amongst them, and after meeting came
away toward Boston. Then their Consciences being troubled, we had to do with
several of the Chief of them, who labored to have Reversed that I had spoken;
and said, It was very hard, etc. But I told them, I could not do it, the Power
had sealed it, and it must stand; it was, they must come to Repentance, and
Condemn that Spirit which had deceived, or to that effect. And so we left it
upon them according to the Word of the Lord: And since some of them have seen
it, and Condemned that Spirit, and given a Testimony in writing against it;
blessed be the Lord, who shows Mercy, and restores out of the Snares of Satan.

And so being clear of all those Parts, we came away strait to Road-Island, and
there we met with G. F. who was preparing to go Westward toward Long Island:
So he went away, and Robert Withers, James Lancaster, and George Pattison with
him. And from Long Island they went over to East-Iersey, and so over Land back
again to Maryland; and John Stubbs and I were left at Road-Island: John
Cartwright we left at Piscattaway, he went further Eastward; and after some
time came to John Stubbs and me at Road-Island. I. S. and I went up to
Providence, had a Meeting there; and as we returned, we had a Meeting at
Warwick, where none had been before; and several were Convinced, and did own
the Truth. And there we had to do with one Gorton, and his Company, who were by
other People there called Gortonians, but they called themselves Generalists:
They were of Opinion, All should be saved. But they were in reality Ranters:
for in our Discourse they would maintain, and say, No Creaturely Actions could
be Sin; and would have no Whoredom, nor Drunkenness, nor the like to be Sin,
but what was spiritual; the Outward action was but creaturely. And thus in
their filthy, unclean Spirits, they, like the old Ranters, made merry over the
reproof of God's Spirit.

So from thence we came down again to Road-Island, and there we spent some
time, and had a long Dispute with one Roger Williams, that sent us a Challenge
from Providence, with fourteen Propositions, as he called them, but they were
Charges; and he engaged to maintain them against all Comers; the first Seven
to be disputed on at Road-Island, and the latter Seven at Providence. We spent
in Dispute with him three days at Road-Island; but he could not make any proof
of his Charges to the satisfaction of the Auditory; for there was a great
Congregation every day: it would be tedious here to insert the Discourse, if I
were able; but I cannot remember it. There is a Book in Manuscript, of what was
taken in Shorthand of the Discourse at that present; besides there is a Book
in print, entitled, New-England-Fire-Brand quenched, etc. which is an Answer
to a Book of the said R. Williams, which gives some relation of some part of
the Dispute; to which I refer the Reader. William Edmondson came from Virginia,
and was also with us at the same Dispute: W. E. and I. Stubbs went up to
Providence, and spent one day with him there about the latter Seven, and so
cleared themselves to the People, and came away, when they had done with him.

So after some time together upon the Island, John Stubbs and I went over, with
several Friends that did accompany us, to Narraganset; and there we had a
Meeting the four and twentieth of the sixth Month at one Richard Smith's; and
next day took our Journey toward Hartford. We came first to New London, and
from thence to Norwich, and so to Hartford, and stayed there one day: and
several of the Professors came in to us, to Dispute with us. And the next day
we rode to a Town called Westfield, near thirty Miles, which was within the
Massachuset's Colony. And there was a Man and his Wife that received us; and we
appointed a Meeting: But when they heard of it, some of their Officers came to
us, and commanded, that we should have no Meeting; and so affrighted the
People, that none durst come to us. We had a little Discourse with their
Officers or Elders that came to us; but they would not stay, but cried out
against our Religion. We asked them, If they knew our Principles, that they so
condemned? Some of them answered, and said, Nay, they knew them not, nor did
not desire to know them. We asked them, How they could judge of them: and
withal told them, They were such as the Scripture did speak of, who spoke evil
of the things they knew not: and they were confounded, and went away; and so
scared the People, that none durst come near us.

So we came away to Hartford again on the sixth day of the Week, and on the
seventh day several came to us, and discoursed with us: and we desired that we
might speak with the Priest, and they had promised that we should; but when we
desired him to come, he, or they for him, made an Excuse, he could not that day
come from his Study. So the next day (being the first day of the Week) we did
go to their Meeting, and the Fore-noon stayed without, till they had done. And
when they had done, and came forth, we spoke to the People; but they got away,
as if they had been afraid of us; and none would stay. So we returned to the
Inn; and stayed there till the Afternoon. And then we did go into their
Meeting House, and stayed till the Priest had done. And then I stood up, and
called unto the People, and desired their patience a little to hear, I had a
word of Exhortation to them; and so began to speak. But immediately the Sexton
came to me to interrupt me: but when he saw that he could not stop me, then he
drove the People away. And when I saw the People most of them gone, I stepped
down, and thought to have gone forth after them; but he got to the Door, and
shut the Door to keep me in. Then I went round an Alley to get to a second
Door, but he got over the Seats, and shut that. Then I made for a third Door;
he also got to that before me, and shut that; and so made their Meeting House a
Prison, and kept us in, with a very few People that got not away, till the
People was gone, and then let us forth. So we came to our Inn again.

And after some time several of their Elders came to us, to dispute with us, on
purpose to keep the younger People away, as some of them confessed; and when we
came to Discourse with them, they would seem to charge us with breach of the
Sabbath in coming to their Meeting that day. We took the Bible to us, and said,
Come, first prove a Sabbath Day under the Gospel Dispensation, and then prove
our practice this day to be a breach of it, if you can, and vindicate Paul, who
disputed every Sabbath Day in the Synagogue, etc. and then prove by Scriptures
your practice this day, and show, Where any Christians drove the People away
from hearing the Truth? (for they had granted, we spoke nothing but Truth) and
made their Meeting House a Prison? And so we shut them behind the unbelieving
Jews, who gave liberty to Paul and Silas. And they were confounded, and could
not tell how to vindicate their doings; and so went away.

Then after they were gone, came into our Chamber many younger People, and we
opened many things to them relating to the Way of Truth, and cleared things up
from the Scriptures; and they were mightily satisfied. And when the old, dry
Professors saw, that the younger People were affected; they sent in a
Constable, to Command all to depart; but they answered and said, They were
Housekeepers many of them, and therefore he had nothing to do with them: so
they would not go. So we continued still opening the Scriptures unto them; and
they were affected. Then the Innkeeper, being one of their Elders, came and
took the Candle away, that we might not see to read in the Scriptures; and so
left us in the dark: then the People went away, being displeased. So the next
Morning, I. S. and I took our Journey Westward; and our Friends that came to
Accompany us, returned home to Road-Island. And we went from Hartford to
New Haven, then to Milford, and then to Stratford, and to Fairfield, and to
Norwich, then to Stanford, and so to Greenwich, where we met with Friends; and
there we appointed a Meeting. The Priest of that Town in his Pulpit had
preached against Friends, and often had boasted, how he would Dispute with the
Quakers, if any came there; so when the Meeting was appointed, the People came
with a great expectation, of what the Priest would do. But in the Morning he
rode away to Stanford to a Magistrate, and sent a Constable with a Warrant to
apprehend us; who came at the beginning of our Meeting, and took us, and
carried us away to the Magistrate at Stanford. The People being displeased,
many of them followed after us to Stanford, and our Friends also, to see what
they would do: and when we came there, many People was gathered about the
House, (for it was but two miles between the Towns) but after a little time we
were called into an inner Room, where the Magistrate lay upon his Bed, he not
being very well. And when we came in, there was none with him but two Priests,
the Priest of Greenwich, and the Priest of Stanford, nor none was to be
suffered to come in but the Constable, and one man of Stanford that was a
Merchant, as they said; he went in and out when he pleased. So the Magistrate
asked us many Questions, and we answered him; and he discoursed with us long in
many things, and we answered him; for he was very moderate. Then after a long
time one of the Priests put in a Question: then I said, If we must Discourse of
Divine Things, we did desire to be more public; for the People were without,
desirous to hear. Then the Magistrate said to the Priests, Master Jones and
Master Bishop, I desire you to go into the Public Meeting House with these
men, and there Discourse with them before the People; for, said he, they are
sober, rational men. So we accepted kindly of the proffer, and rose up, and
went forth; and the Priests came after us displeased. But when we were forth of
the Door among the People, we called upon the Priests to go up with us, as they
were desired; and so we went up, and they and the People also. And when we were
settled in their Meeting House, and many People, then the Priests put it upon us
to begin; and so we began with them first about their Wages, and so went on to
our Call, which they put upon us. And so about the Light, which they denied:
and so about Election and Reprobation, and free Grace. They affirmed, the Grace
of God had not appeared to all men, and that Christ did not dye for all men.
Several hours we spent; but the Discourse is drawn up in a Book in Manuscript,
and therefore shall forbear it here, for it is large. And so the next day we
had a Meeting at Greenwich, but the Priest came, and we had a great Discourse;
which is in the said Book. And the first day following we had a Meeting about
six Miles from thence; and then, being clear of these Parts --

We took Boat, and went over unto Long Island, to Oyster-Bay, and met with John
Cartwright; and so did visit Friends upon the Island. I. W. and I went over to
East-Iersey, and did visit Friends there; and had several blessed Meetings. And
returned back again to Long Island, and had several Meeings. And then being
clear of those Parts, John Cartwright and I came to New York, in order to get a
Passage for Maryland; and we set Sail from New York the first day of the ninth
Month, 1672. but set Sail at Sandy-hook out to the Sea the third day of the
same, and met with rough Weather; but the sixth day of the same we got in at
the Capes of Virginia, and on the ninth of the same Month we came to Anchor in
Pertuxon-River in the Province of Maryland, and so got up within a day or two
to James Prestons: but the North-west-wind blew so hard, that we could not get
up the first day. And then we did go through Friends in that Province, as the
Lord made way. And G. F. and Friends that were with him, who came over Land
together, were gone down to Virginia, and he also did travel over Land to
North Carolina, and there found some Friends, and returned back again over Land
to Virginia, and so came up the Bay again to Maryland, and while they were
below in Virginia and Carolina, we traveled among Friends in Maryland, and had
blessed Service.

Upon the first day of the eleventh Month we had a Meeting at John Baldwin's at
South-River, where were many Friends, and other People, who were come together
upon the Occasion of a Dispute which one Henry Pierrepoint had challenged us
unto, who was a kind of a Fifth-Monarchy-Man. The first thing we had to prove,
which he had assumed, was, That the Scriptures were the only Rule to try all
things by in matters of Faith and Doctrine. About which we had a great
Discourse: and we proved, That the Patriarchs had Faith and a Rule for Faith,
before any Scriptures we have, were written: and showed, what was their Rule.
We spent several hours in Dispute about the other three things, which he had
affirmed; but there is a Book in Manuscript, which is an Answer to them all:
therefore shall omit any further mentioning of it here. So after some time
spent in visiting Friends, from Meeting to Meeting, where many People came in,
at several places (and the Lord's Power opened us, and we were comforted, and
the Consciences of People reached) G. F. and the other Friends returned, and
John Cartwright took shipping for Barbados.

G. F. and I were some time together; and we were up at an Indian Town, at the
Emperor's House, where he had ordered the Indians, both Men and Women, to be
there at his House, to wit, the ancient and grave; the young People were at
another Wigwam. G. F. spoke unto them by an Interpreter for the space of four
or five hours, I suppose, it was nigh five hours, and they were very still and
quiet, and very attentive, and delighted (as we did perceive) to hear. And when
the time was over, and we clear, they showed us kindness, and were going to
hang a Kettle on the fire to boil Fish for us to eat, as they told us; but we
could not stay, having a great way to go by Water, and it was late. So we came
away to the Waterside, and some of them accompanied us till we took Boat: so
we came down the River again to Friends, and spent some time more in travel and
labor in that Province.

And James Lancaster, George Pattison, and I, took a Journey to visit some
People that was Convinced, up Potomick-River, but we did Ferry over
Pertuxon-River, and then traveled through the Woods on foot over Land, till we
came to them, and stayed a few days, and had a Meeting or two, and then
returned back again to Pertuxon, and on to the Clifts, where we left James,
being very weary. Then next day George and I traveled to West-River, and were
there at their Meeting. And next Week we got a Boat, and went over the Bay to
the Easternshore, and went up Miles-River to Friends; and from thence we went
to meet with G. F. to speak with him, having some Intentions to take shipping,
and to go for England with one John Ore a Friend, a Master of a Katch, that did
belong to some Friends at London.

And when we had been with G. F. a little time, we returned to Miles-River to
our Boat; and after a little time went away to go over the Bay toward
West-River, and through some exercise with contrary Winds. At last we got over;
and after a little time spent there with Friends, we departed, and went down by
the Clifts, where we met with G. F. come over the Bay. And stayed but little
there; but went on toward Pertuxon, where we took shipping, and set Sail out
of Pertuxon-River the 25 th day of the second Month, 1673. 1673.
and came out at the Capes of Virginia to the Sea on the sixteenth day of the
same Month. And when we had sailed but a few days, in a Morning early we espied
a Fleet of Ships behind us, about four and twenty, and then we stopped a little,
supposing them to be an English Fleet, that sailed out of the Capes from
Iames-River, two or three days before us. And when some of them came up to us,
they told us, it was the same Fleet. So we stayed, and went in company with
them, till we came about the Bank of New Foundland: and then we met with foul
Weather, which did part us one from another, so that we no more got all
together again. We were six that got together again in our Company, and kept
together, until we came into the Bay at Galloway in Ireland, where we arrived
the 24 th day of the third Month 1673.

And then from Galloway I traveled to Limmerick, and so to Charlefield, to
Mallo, and to Cork, and to Bandon, and as far almost as Baltimore, visiting
Friends, and having Meetings: and then returned back to Cork, and then took my
Journey to Youghill, and so on to Tallagh, and to Kilcomin, and to Waterford,
and so on into the County of Wexford, having Meetings in all these places; and
the Lord's good Presence with us, to our comfort, Glory, and Honor, and Praise
to him for ever!

And then I came up through the County of Catherlough, and the Queens County,
and so on into the County of Westmeath, having Meetings all along, and visiting
Friends, (and there George Pattison left me, and took his Journey for Dublin,
and from thence to London) but I took my Journey for Caan, and when I had seen
Friends, and had a Meeting or two, I took my Journey for the North, the County
of Ardmagh, and the County of Antrim, and those parts, and did visit Friends,
and had many precious Meetings, and the Lord was with us, and his gracious
Presence was our daily comfort; to him be the Glory for ever!

And when I had spent some time in the North of Ireland in the Service of the
Truth, I took my Journey for Dublin. And after some Meetings there, I took my
Journey into the County of Wicklow, and so through the Province of Munster a
second time, and also through Friends in Leinster, and in the North: so that I
did travel through most Meetings a second time in that Nation. And then being
clear of the Nation, I took shipping at Belfast the 25 th day of the tenth
Month 1673. and the 26 th we set Sail out of the Lough, and arrived at
White-haven in Cumberland in England the 27 th of the same Month, and stayed
about three Months in Cumberland for the most part. And then I took my Journey
out of Cumberland toward Newcastle, visiting Friends and their Meetings, as I
went along. And from Newcastle I went on into Bishopric, and through their
Meetings, and so on into Yorkshire, and through Cleveland, and to Whitby, and
Scarborough, Malton, and York, and had many precious Meetings. And so went up
to Massom, and from thence Robert Lodge and I, with James Hall, took our
Journey toward London to the Yearly Meeting in the Year 1674. and there stayed
some time (laboring 1674.
in the Word and Testimony which God had committed unto me) in that City. And
then I took my Journey into the Country, and went down into Buckinghamshire,
through their Meetings; and so on into Oxfordshire, to Worcestershire, and
Glocestershire, and to Bristol, and then back again, and so through to
Shrewsbury, and on as far as Wrexham in Wales, visiting the Churches of Christ:
and the good Presence of the Lord in his heavenly Power accompanying, we were
often refreshed and sweetly comforted together, to his Praise and our Joy, who
is our God for evermore.

And so from Wrexham in North Wales, I took my Journey with John ap John, who
accompanied me toward South Wales, and we did visit Friends, and had many
Meetings as we went along, in Montgomeryshire, Merionethshire, and
Cardiganshire; and so we passed on by the West-Sea into Pembrokeshire, and
there visited the Lord's People, and spent some time amongst them there. And
then we took our Journey through Carmarthenshire to Swanzey; and having a
Meeting or two, we passed on toward Cardiff, visiting Friends in
Glamorganshire; and then into Monmouthshire; and having visited Friends in that
County, we parted; he returned home, and I passed over the Water into
Glocestershire, and so to Bristol. And so continued traveling through several
Counties, visiting the Churches, and so to London; spent some time there, and
then went down into Essex, and visited Friends in that Country; and returned
again to London to the Yearly Meeting in the Year 1675. And from London I took
my Journey to Hartford, and so down Northward with John Graves and James Hall
to 1675.
York, and there we parted. And I went from York to Malton, and so to
Scarborough, and Whitby, and through Friends in Cleveland, and so to Stockdon
in Bishopric, visiting Friends, and having many precious Meetings. And then
passed through several Meetings in that County; and being clear, I then took my
Journey for Cumberland; and being there, I with several Brethren was desired to
come over into --

Westmorland to a Meeting appointed by Friends at their Quarterly Meeting in
Westmorland, which was to be at Powbank. So I went thither against the day
appointed, with John Graves, John Tiffin, Hugh Tickell, and Thomas Laithes,
where we met with several Brethren, that were come out of Yorkshire, at the
request of the aforesaid Quarterly Meeting. And upon that occasion many Friends
of Westmorland were come together; who, when we were sat together in the
Meeting, did present unto us several Disorders in many things, that were
contrary to the Truth; by which they had been grieved, and sorely exercised for
a long time in their Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, so that the Spirits of a
lose Company were set at liberty, and so much born up and countenanced by John
Story and John Wilkinson, that the blessed Order of the Truth brought forth
amongst us by the Power of God, was greatly slighted, and endeavored to be
trodden under by that lose Company, being thus encouraged by these two men,
that looked upon themselves to be Elders, and so, like Diotrephes, loved to
have the Pre-eminence; which brought great grief upon the honest and
simple-minded. So we hearing, what Friends had to say in that matter, and
observing, what was charged and proved, we desired Friends to give us another
Meeting, and let I. S. and I. W. be sent to, and desired to meet us, that we
might hear them face to face: although they had been desired from the
Quarterly Meeting, and several others, to come to this Meeting so appointed by
the Quarterly Meeting, and had refused; and withal sent us a Letter, denying to
come, and disowning our Meeting.

Nevertheless, we were willing to have another Meeting, which Friends of
Westmorland freely assented unto; and so it was appointed at Milthrop the next
day. And we (to wit) six or more of Cumberland and Yorkshire Friends, did our
selves go to them as Messengers, and did entreat them to go with us to the
Meeting, that we might hear them and the Friends of Westmorland, that were
agrieved, face to face, concerning those things that were in charge against
them; but they were so high, and so obstinate, that they slighted us all, or
any Advice we could give. And so after some hours discourse with them, in which
we thoroughly saw their Spirits to be wrong, we left them, and went to the
Meeting appointed at Milthrop, where Friends were waiting for us. And after we
were settled a little in the Meeting, we gave an acccount, how we had
endeavored to persuade them to come through all entreaty we could, but could
not prevail. And so we gave a hearing a second time to the Friends; and then we
of Yorkshire and Cumberland withdrew; and amongst our selves viewed the whole
matter, for it was in writing, and opened our Hearts one unto another. And
waiting upon the Lord, there fell a Weighty Concern upon us for the Truth's
sake, and the blessed Order thereof, with our holy Testimony we had been raised
up into, which by them had been slighted, and scorned, and reproached. So that
we could not pass it by, but in the Power of the Lord God, that was dreadful
amongst us, gave Judgment against that Spirit, that was grown so high, and
lose, and fleshly, as thus to undervalue the Testimony of God, and the
bringings forth of his holy Power in the Churches of Christ: that thereby all
might be kept sweet, clear, and in good Order. And when we had cleared our
selves in the rising and springing of the Word of Life, and drawn up our
Testimony in writing, we gave it unto Friends there, and so departed. Of the
Judgment given I shall say no more here, because it is in writing in many
places.

So I went over to Swarthmore, and stayed a Meeting there; and then returned
into Cumberland, and stayed there some Weeks, and visited Friends. And being
clear, I returned again to Swarthmore, in order to go over the Sands toward
Wales, which was before me. And when I was at Swarthmore, I was moved to go
over first into Westmorland, to visit the Meetings there. So I went over to
Sedber, and had a Meeting there; and then had a Meeting at Grayrigg, and then
came to Kendall, where I met with Robert Lodge, and so we had a blessed Meeting
there. And the next day we were at Preston-Meeting; and then I was clear of
that County.

And so after a little time, took my Journey into Wales through Lancashire and
Cheshire, and so coming to John ap John's, near Wrexham in North Wales, he did
go along with me. And in the first place, we went to a Quarterly Meeting that
was at Deloberon, at Charles Lloyds, for two Counties, (viz.) Merionethshire
and Mongomeryshire, and had a blessed Service for the Truth there among
Friends. And then went down into Merionethshire, and visited the Meetings: and
then to Mehuntleth, and had a Meeting. And then returned up into Radnorshire,
and visited the Meetings there in that County. And then took our Journey
through Brecknockshire, and Carmarthenshire, into Pembrokeshire, where we spent
some time amongst Friends, and had several precious Meetings. And being clear,
we took our Journey toward Swanzey, and Cardiff, and had several precious
Meetings in Glamorganshire, and then went over into Monmouthshire. And after we
had visited Friends, John went with me to the Ferry, and stayed to see me take
Boat, and then returned.

And I went that same day to Bristol, and stayed some Meetings there. And then
went down into Somersetshire, and did visit Friends there, and had many blessed
Meetings. And returned back to Bristol, and stayed some Meetings there. And
then went up into Wiltshire, and so into Glocestershire, and through Barkshire,
and into Oxfordshire, and so into Worcestershire, as far as Worcester, and
visited Friends, and had many precious Meetings through those Counties. And
from Worcester returned again down through Glocestershire, and had several
Meetings. And came again to Bristol; and from thence took my Journey through
several Counties, visiting Friends: And so came to London, and stayed there
some time in the Service and Work of the Gospel.

And being clear, I took my Journey for the North, and did not make much stay
at any place, till I came into Cumberland. And the reason of my so traveling
was, because of a Meeting, that was agreed upon by Friends to be at Draw-well
in Sedber-Parish, about the former Difference, that had been heard at Powbank,
that was among Friends in Westmorland, chiefly occasioned by the aforesaid John
Story and I. Wilkinson, and a lose sort of People, that they did countenance in
a Liberty, that the Truth would not allow; and therefore could not be born with
by such tender Friends, as were zealous for the Truth, who kept their first
love, and therein delighted to uphold that Ancient Testimony for the Lord,
against the Priests and their Tithes, Hire and Maintenance, with other things,
that were to be born Witness against through Sufferings: as also for Meeting
together to worship God, which from the beginning had been our practice against
such, there being diverse Statutes with Penalties upon us, for so doing; for
fear of which, the aforesaid I. S. and I. W. with such as had let in the same
fear through fleshly Reasoning, did shrink, and hide, and so let fall the
Nobility of that Testimony, which we had received, and were raised up to stand
for in the beginning. And so because of a failure in diverse things, and a
pleading for a Liberty, from under the exercise of the Cross, that the Offense
thereof might cease, the Faithful became concerned, to stand up against that
Spirit, that thus was like to weaken or overthrow the Faith and Testimony of
many, through its subtle Workings in and through diverse, who like them the
Apostle writes against in his Epistle to the Galatians, that to avoid
Persecution, endeavored to bring the Believers under Circumcision, that so the
Offense of the Cross might cease, or Sufferings for the Gospel might be avoided.

Now this Difference still continuing, and they abiding obstinate, and not
willing to receive Advice, nor bear the Judgment in the Truth placed upon them,
Friends in condescension, to see, if they could be gained, appointed a Meeting
at Draw-well near Sedber, that 1676.
they might have another opportunity, and be heard, what they could further
say. And then the Matters were fully gone through before many ancient, faithful
Brethren, that were there then assembled, who spent four days in hearing, and
going through the Matters relating to that Difference, that was then occasioned
through their Opposition to the blessed Order of the Truth, who withstood
Friends godly Care for the Preservation of the Dominion thereof in
Righteousness. And when all things were heard and gone through by the Brethren,
the Judgment was again given in the Power of the Lord upon that Spirit, that
they had let in, whereby they had been led into a Separation, and Division, and
Opposition to the Truth, and the holy Order and Testimony thereof; and they in
the same Power and Love, with great Bowels and Tenderness, sought to return
back again unto that Spirit of Love and Peace, wherein the Unity and Fellowship
of the true Body does consist. But alas! many of them would not be wrought
upon, nor prevailed with; but in that hardness the Enemy had wrought their
Hearts into, did persist, until they became open Enemies to the Truth, and the
faithful Witnesses of it, even to the Writing and Printing publicly against
them, and what the Truth does lead into: and so are become such as the Apostles
write of, that greatly withstood their words, and slighted them: of which both
Paul, Peter, John and Jude write. This Meeting at Draw-well was in the second
Month 1676.

From thence (after Friends had done what could be done at that time, with holy
Endeavors for the reconciling and gathering into the Heavenly Unity, and
making up of the Breach) I returned again into Cumberland with several
Brethren, to wit, I. T. I. B. Hugh Tickhill, Thomas Laythes, John Steel, and so
spent a little time in Cumberland, and then I took my Journey with John Tiffin
toward London. And in our Journey we came into Westmorland, to visit Friends
there, where we met with some of those, with whom we had to do at Draw-well;
and then they were grown hard, through resisting the Counsel of the Lord, and
had set up a Separate Meeting, and so run into the Self-Separation, and grown
more into the Enmity, and stronger in the Opposition, through Resisting the
love of God, that so richly was reached forth unto them in the Heavenly Bowels,
that by the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ were opened in the Brethren at the
aforesaid Meeting at Draw-well. For then did the Power of the Eternal God in
great Majesty appear, and in a weighty Dread was Judgment set and sealed upon
that Spirit, by which they had been betrayed; and by the same Power and Word of
Life was a Door opened unto them that had been betrayed, and an entrance in the
same set before them, and they with much brokenness and tenderness, in the
Power of Love, were sought to return, and be reconciled unto God, and unto his
People. But this great Visitation by them being rejected, they grew harder and
harder, until they grew, many of them, as before said, Enemies unto the Cross
of Christ; and so withered as to their Spiritual State, and so did become as
some of old, whom the Apostle wrote of, as Trees twice dead, and plucked up by
the Roots --

And then from Westmorland I went over into Yorkshire, had a Meeting at Sedber,
and went through the Dales to Massom, and visited Friends there-aways. And then
I. T. and I, with Robert Lodge, took our Journey to York, and from thence
toward London, visiting Friends by the way, and so came to the Yearly Metting
in the Year 1676. where there were many faithful Brethren assembled together
there from most Parts of the Nation: Amongst many things of Concern, relating
to the Truth, and the Churches of Christ, that Division in Westmorland was laid
before the Meeting, and how they were hardened, and had set up a Separate
Meeting, and so had withdrawn themselves from the rest of their Brethren, and
broken the Christian Fellowship: which thing, when understood by the Brethren
there assembled, was a grief unto them. And thefore under the sense thereof,
and in that Brotherly Love, with which their Hearts were filled toward them,
were there Two Epistles writ from the Meeting, one to I. S. and I. W. warning
and advising them, as Heads and Leaders in that Sedition and Schism, to
endeavor to break up that Separate Meeting, and to be Reconciled unto their
Brethren, before they did go abroad to offer their Gift. And the other was writ
to the Meeting, as Advice unto them to Return to their former Fellowship with
Friends, and lay that Separate Meeting down, and join with their Brethren in
the Unity of the Truth, etc.

But all this did not prevail with them; but still they grew higher and harder,
and went on in the strong Resolutions of their Wills. Only there were diverse
Particulars, that were for a time concerned in that Opposition and Separation,
whose Understandings the Lord opened, so that they did see the Snare of the
Enemy, and returned; and under a sense of the Lord's Judgments, did give forth
diverse Testimonies in Writing against that Spirit, by which they had been
Seduced, with a Confession of the Error they were led into; and so returned
into the true Fellowship and Unity with the Church of Christ, and were received
with Gladness. Glory to the Lord, who is the Savior and Healer of his People,
who now heals and saves by his Word, as he did of old.

I. Burnyeate.

A Paper of John Burnyeat's, that came to hand, since his Works were Printed.
The 27th Day of the 8th Month, 1677.
IN the Morning, as I was Laying upon my Bed, and my Soul greatly Afflicted
under the View and Consideration of the State of things, as it was among
Friends in the City of Bristol, and some parts adjacent, because of the great
Contention and Opposition; and when I was under the Exercise, and my Life
appeared Grieved, even until my Soul was brought into sore Anguish (at times)
and Grief, to see, how Hard some were and Unruly, and Obstinate: In this Travel
of Spirit my Heart being bowed, I said within my self, and before the Lord, and
unto him; I matter not, what I be, nor how much I be Abased: For we must pass
through good and bad Report, as the Faithful in former times did. And then when
I was thus gone down into the Grave of Self-denial, where I thought, I could
Lie and be Trodden upon; the Lord God signified unto me by his Holy Spirit on
this wise: Though thou be willing so to be, yet will not I be Trodden under (and
further said) There are some of them, that are as Dead Men before me, because
they have lifted up their Heel against me, and have rejected my Word, and
slighted, or set at naught my Reproof.

And further the Lord God signified unto me, That the Spirit of Core, and
Balaam had entered, which would shut Truth out of Doors, and pluck Christ from
his Throne, and lead away the Minds of People after their own Inventions to
worship the Works of their own Hands. And He further signified unto me, how
that the Plague of Leprosy, and sore Judgment of Hardness of Heart was upon
them; and they had lost their Beauty, and were not sit to come nigh the Altar
of the Lord, nor to be in the Lord's Congregation: and that he would Decide the
matter. And further he signified (to my Comfort,) There was a Priest to stand
between the Living and the Dead, with a Holy Censer and pure Incense, to make
an Atonement; and the Eyes of all the Tender and Sensible were to be toward
him, that they might Receive the Law from his Mouth, and that his Lips might
preserve their Knowledge.

And further, there was something also of the Spirit of Cain, which did appear
had Entered, even that which did Envy Abel's Acceptance.

When I had seen these things from the Lord, and it was showed me, I should
speak forth the Matter unto the People; my Heart was wonderfully broken within
me: And I cried, and said, Woe is me! must I be the Messenger to carry this
Message unto this People? And when I was under this Exercise, the Lord did
signify unto me; If I Delivered his Word Faithfully, then should I Deliver my
own Soul; but if not, I should Die for it; my Life should go for theirs. Then
did the Dread of the Lord's Word, and his Majesty strike me down, and made me
willing to be given up, without any more Reasoning: Blessed be the Lord for
ever, who both gives the Word, and Power to Deliver it.

J. B.

AN ABSTRACT Of some of John Burnyeat HIS LETTERS TO HIS Brother T. A. of
LONDON: Which is a Continuation of his Travels for the last Eight Years of his
Life, being all his own Handwriting.
Dublin, the 28th of the 8th Month, 1682.
I Am arrived here safe from Cumberland, and was at all those Meetings I had
appointed in Westmorland, viz. I had a large Meeting at Camsgill on the third
day of the Week, it being the General Meeting; it was a most pleasant day, the
Meeting out of doors very large, Friends so generally came in. And indeed, the
Lord's Power was with us; my Heart greatly enlarged unto Friends. The fourth
day following I was at Sedber, the Meeting without Doors by the Meeting House
(the Doors being shut up by the Officers, but) quiet and large. The fifth day I
was at Grayrig; sixth day at the Hight; first day at Swartmore; and on the
third day at Hawkes-head, and had a blessed Meeting; my Heart was comforted.
The fourth day we had a great Flood, hindered me from getting home that day; but
got to Keswick in Cumberland; and fifth day got home to our Meeting at Pardsay,
and was also there the first day, where the Lord enlarged my Heart to clear my
self heartily that day. The third day I was at the Mens-Meeting, where the Lord
was richly with us; Everlasting Glory be to him for ever. The fourth day early
I came down to Whitehaven; several Friends came with me, but the Ship being
ready, could not stay. So went on Board, and the next day in the Evening
arrived safe here at Dublin; where all is well. I left all our Friends well in
Cumberland,

Dublin, the 13th of the 9th Month, 1682.
It greatly pleases me to hear of Friends in England, and how it is with them
this Trying day. For as we love the Truth, and one another therein, we have a
Concern upon us for one another, and for the Truth in General: And therefore I
delight in the Truth's prevailing, and in Friends prospering therein. The Lord
stir up all concerned in their Places to be Faithful, that none may shrink in
the Day of Trial, etc.

Last Week was our Half-Years-Meeting, many Friends here, and a blessed Season
we had through the enriching Virtue of the Lord's Power, and in Love, Peace and
Concord all was carried on amongst us: and so all was sweet and comfortable.
Here is a Discourse of putting the Laws in Execution against Dissenters;
however, if the Lord suffer such a thing to be, I believe, it will be for his
own Glory at last, in the manifesting the Approved, and trying the Faith of his
People. But we are yet quiet, save some that are in Prison for Tithes. Our
Meetings are large and full in this Nation, and Friends tell me, there is an
Openness in many places. O! that we may be found faithful, that we may work
with him in his Vineyard and Harvest.

Dublin, the 6th of the 10th Month, 1682.
The Lord preserve us all in the Faith, that gives the Victory, and faithful to
God in this Trying day, wherein it appears, the Lord sees it meet to Try his
People, both in their Faith and Patience, that the Approved may be made
manifest. We have large Meetings in this City, and an Openness in diverse places
in the Country. I have been in the Counties of Wicklow and Carlow, and the
Queens-County, and at the Mote, and Edenderry: And to morrow I intend, if the
Lord will, forth again to the Province-Meeting at Rosen-Allies.

Cork, the 8th of the 11th Month, 1682.
I have been through these Parts as far as Castle-Salem, and had a Meeting
there yesterday was a Week, and so returned back again to Cork, to the
Six-Weeks-Meeting; where we had a blessed Season, the Lord's Power was richly
amongst us. And after to morrow, I think to go toward Toughill, and so into the
County of Tipperary, and then to Castle-Dormant-Meeting; and then for ought I
know, toward Dublin. I am comforted in my Service amongst Friends, who are
generally glad of my coming, and of what they have an Expectation of, in
relation to my Marriage: but my Heart is fully satisfied, in that I feel the
Lord's Goodness toward us, and in his Fear I do delight to wait upon him in
this, as in other things, and desire, that we may be a good Example. And
therefore I find it our way not to be hasty: The Lord give us wisdom to walk
so, as that he may be Glorified, and Friends in us Comforted. This I desire
above all Earthly Things.

Dublin, the 30th of the first Month, 1683.
I am concerned to hear of the Continued Sufferings of our Friends in England;
we are yet at Ease here, as from those things: The Lord work our Hearts more
and more into Thankfulness, and guide us in Wisdom, to walk worthy of these
Favors, that in displeasure he may never take them from us; but whenever he
is pleased to Remove them, it may be in his Love, for a Trial unto us, as I
believe it is with many of his Faithful Ones, whom my Soul desires, he may
still preserve in the Faith that gives the Victory.

I have been in the North, and did pass through Friends, and had a blessed
Service. I am intended to go forth of this City to morrow toward Wicklow, and
so through the County of Wexford to visit Friends there.

Dublin, the 10th of the 3d Month, 1683.
We have now Accomplished that Concern of Marriage, which we have for some time
been under; and blessed be the Lord, he has been unto us a comfortable Director
in our Undertakings in this Matter, to the Satisfaction of Friends in the
General, who were with us. And besides the Friends of this City, we had many of
the Friends of the South-end of the Nation, who were come to be at the
Half-Years-Meeting, and some the sooner upon our Account; and abundance of
other People. We had a blessed Meeting, several Brethren with us, and (the
Lord's Power assisting) all things were well, and we had Peace and Comfort, and
the Truth was honored, and not only Friends, but many sober People were
greatly affected with the Management thereof. Well; the Lord will honor his
Name and Way and People, if we be but careful to honor him. The Lord is good
unto us, we have Cause to mind his Goodness unto us: and truly that which is
chiefly in both our Hearts, is to seek his Glory, and above all things to
desire preservation in his Wisdom.

Dublin, the 4th of the 8th Month, 1683.
I have been a time in the Country, and came into the City again but yesterday.
I went to the Prevince-Meeting at Rosen-Allies, and have visited many Meetings:
I was comforted with Friends in the good presence of the Power that did attend
us. Things are pretty well among Friends, and our Meetings large and full. We
feel little of those Sufferings, that our dear Friends in England have heavy
upon them: The Lord preserve us Tender, Low and Humble, that we may be worthy
of such a Mercy from the Hand of the Lord.

Dublin, the 24th of the 5th Month, 1683.
Here is a Report abroad, that Meetings will be disturbed and broken up, but
nothing done yet; It must be Friends here, as well as in other Parts, that must
bear the Burden, as to the right part in Suffering; and I hope, it will be
Friends Care to be given up in the Innocence, to suffer for that Testimony the
Lord has raised in their Hearts, by which we have been kept Innocent and Clear
from the beginning under all Governments: And so never could touch nor join
with that which did seek the hurt of any. This must be our Cloak or Covering,
and that gives Boldness, and is and will be the Ease of the Spirits of all the
Faithful, and that which will answer the Consciences of our Adversaries. And I
believe, if some Suffering do come, it will work for good through Trying our
Spirits, Faith, and Patience, so that many may come to know themselves, and the
Lord and his Power also better thereby.

From the Marshalsee's Prison in Dublin, the 9th of the 6th Month, 1683.
We are very likely to partake in some measure of Sufferings with our Friends
and Brethren in England. The last first day the Major sent the Marshal to our
Meeting in the Forenoon, and I being speaking, he commanded me to go with him,
which after some Discourse I did. He commanded the Meeting to Disperse, but
Friends kept quiet in their plaplaces. I was carried before the Major, with
whom I had some Discourse to this effect: He asked me, Why we did act contrary
to the Government, having been commanded not to meet? I told him, We do nothing
in Contempt of the Government. But, said he, why do you not obey then? I said,
Because it is Matter of Conscience to us, and that which we believe to be our
indispensible Duty, to Meet together to Worship God. To which he Answered, You
may be misled. I told him, If we were misled, we were willing to be informed,
if any could do it. Then it was urged, Other Dissenters had submitted, and why
would not we? I said, What they do, will be no Plea for us before the
Judgment Seat of the Great God. So after some other Discourse, the Major
committed me to this Prison. The Professors have left their public
Meeting-Places: The Bishop of Dublin sent for them, and they Consulted
together, and with Consent returned this Answer, That they would forbear. The
Bishop also sent for A. S. and did to him require the same of Friends; but A.
S. told him, We could not forbear to Meet to Worship God, etc. So in the end
the Bishop said, If we would meet, we must take what did follow, etc. However,
I hope it will work for the honor of Truth: The Lord preserve Friends faithful
and valiant. I hope God has a Remnant, that will stand in the Trial: Though if
Sufferings do come hard, it may cause some to turn their Backs. Let the Lord
order, as he pleases; I know no better way, than to endeavor to be prepared
for Sufferings.

Dublin, the 9th of the 7th Month, 1683.
We are satisfied, that the Lord's Hand, is in all these things; and doubtless,
he has a purpose to Magnify his Arm, and thereby to Exalt his own Name and
precious Truth in the End; and in his so doing, his People shall be Comforted,
and receive the Reward, even every One, that endures unto the End. And truly,
as our Eye is unto him in our Exercise, we feel still a Ground for a sure Hope,
that abides as an Anchor sure and steadfast; by which we are held, that we
cannot be driven away. In this is our Comfort, when we seem as to the outward,
as if we had no surer Place, than upon the tossing Waves of the Troubled,
Tempestuous Sea; all uncertain, no stedfastness nor stay for Rest unto any in
Looking out. And therefore I often think, I am satisfied, it is God's way, thus
to blow upon the Nations with the Breath of his Displeasure, that all the
Waters (for the People are Waters) may be Tossed together, and that they may be
made Restless, and driven on Heaps, and into Confusion, and so become a Sea;
into which Babylon, as a great Millstone, must fall, to make her perpetual End.
Even that Mystery Babylon spoken of of old, that has so prevailed, and made
the Nations drunk, and gone over Peoples and Languages, not one People only:
and all that partake with her in her Sins, must partake with her in her Plagues
and Judgments. And therefore is the Lord calling out of her; but her Sins, her
Delights and Delicacies many are unwilling to part with: and that is the Reason,
why many stay there, that do not think themselves within her Borders.

But the Nations are drunk with her Wine, and know not what they are doing; for
their Understanding is lost. O! the sadness of that day! my Soul of ten does
view it; but the Greatness of their Sin does draw it down upon them: which is
come into the View and Remembrance of the dreadful God!

And therefore may all the Righteous Rojoyce, who truly feel Redemption out of
her, and are come through Christ the Seed to be Sons and Daughters of Zion, and
so Heirs of the peaceable Jerusalem, that is built upon the Rock and Foundation,
that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against.

We are here still detained Prisoners, and have of late writ to the Major; but
he answered, He would not set us at Liberty without an Order from the The Earl
of Arran.
Deputy. Then we wrote to him, and A. S. and S. C. did go to him, and he was
very kind to them, and told them, He had a greater Love for us, than any other
Dissenters, because he believed, that we did mean honestly.

Dublin, the 16th of the 8th Month, 1683.
I am now cleared of my Imprisonment; we wrote to the Deputy a few Lines, which
he carried to the Council. After which he sent his Secretary to the Recorder of
the City with his Order for our Release; which was very full and clear, without
any thing demanded of us. I have not heard, that Friends in any part of this
Nation are meddled with -- We enjoy great Favors at the Hand of the Lord: O!
that we may walk worthy thereof for ever, and be moved thereby to a Sense, of
what our dear Friends in England still suffer; and then will the Mercies we
live under, be rightly valued.

Dublin, the 9th of the 12th Month, 1684.
I have been through all the Meetings in Ulster, and did return home but the
third day this Week. I had a blessed time amongst Friends, and found things in
the main very well. I had large and peaceable Meetings, which is a Mercy I
desire the Lord may so sanctify unto us, as that we may walk worthy of them,
while they are afforded us: and when he sees meet to order it otherwise, we may
be prepared. I have been but little at home of late, and know nothing, but that
I may go next Week forth of Town again toward the other end of the Nation.

Dublin, the 17th of the first Month, 1683/4.
I came home this day: I have been through the most of the South and Western
Parts, and have had a good Journey, and Friends generally well, and all our
Meetings peaceable.

Dublin, the 21th of the first Month, 1683/4.
In my last I hinted, that I was but newly come home from visiting Friends in
the South-end of the Nation, and so from the Province-Meeting at
Castle-Dormant. I came home on the second day, and an appointed Marriage was to
be on the third day; which was accordingly, and abundance of People there was,
so that we had a good Opportunity, and the People generally This was Amos
Strettel's Marriage.
well satisfied: so that a very great Report of Recommendation is abroad
through the City concerning our Order and Method, and the Gravity and Solemn
Manner of our Accomplishing of it. It Is greatly our Comfort, when that in all
our ways we honor the Truth. I have had a busy Winter in Traveling, and
prosperous: and now I see nothing, but I shall have Liberty to stay a while at
home. The Lord is good to us, and orders things to our Comfort; and we are
comforted in him, and one in another: blessed be his Name for ever.

Dublin, the 9th of the 3d Month, 1684.
It is just the time of our Half-Years-Meeting, and there are many Friends in
Town. We had a very large Meeting, and very quiet and well. -- And things in
the general very well amongst Friends, as relating to Truth. We have Cause to
be Thankful to the Lord for his Mercies and Comforts we enjoy, who is the
Author of all Mercies and Comforts, sanctifying all things rightly to them that
fear and love him, through the sanctifying of their Hearts by his Word, that
keeps, bears up and upholds. O! the Lord keep all our Hearts stayed in this,
and then will all things work together for good, according to the ancient
Saying.

Crabtreebeck in Cumberland, the 12th of the 6th Month, 1684.
I left Dublin, sixth day was a Week; I have some intent to go over into
Scotland, but am not yet certain of the time: but do hope, if the Lord preserve
me in my Liberty, to Return into this Country again.

Graysouthen, the 19 th of the 6 th Month.) Between two or three Weeks time I
hope to be as far as Edenborrough.

Leith, the 6th of the 8th Month, 1684.
I have had a very peaceable and prosperous Journey, since I came into Scotland
hitherto. I came to Edinburgh at the time appointed, and stayed here one first
day: and then took my Journey into the North, and I. H. and I. T. with me, and
spent about three weeks there, and in my Journey: had Meetings, while I was
there, almost every day, and a blessed open Service (through the Lord's Power)
amongst Friends. For there is an open, tenderhearted People, and they were
glad of my coming; for there had not been any English Friend among them of a
long time. And being clear, I. T. and I came away this day a Week, and left I.
H. there; we got to this Town the fourth day of the last Week, and was at
Edinburgh the fifth day at their Meeting, and yesterday had a blessed Meeting
there in the Fore-noon, and here the Afternoon: and to morrow we intend to take
our Journey for the West; and do hope to be clear this day a Week to go for
England, and hope to be in Cumberland to morrow a Week (if the Lord will.)
Hitherto all has been very quiet where I have been; and I hear nothing, but
Friends Meetings are quiet all over Scotland, and Friends are suffered to be
quiet: but in some places they are very busy with some other People. Here has
been a pretty deal a-do about a Plot; but of these things we know nothing, nor
in such doings have no hand, and therefore about it desire not to meddle.
Though others doings may bring Sufferings upon us; yet still our Happiness is,
to be kept Innocent, that if we suffer, it may not be for evil-doing; and then
it will be well.

Eaglesfield, the 12th of the 9th Month, 1684.
And truly in this Trying day, wherein we are all of us like to have our Faith
and Love to God Tried, our greatest Concern always is, to be in our hearts
truly and wisely given up, and resigned into the Will of God, that we may
therein rest in and under whatsoever the Lord may order for us, or call us
unto; and then may we have peace in every Exercise, and have Dominion in our
Spirits over every Opposition, which are many, that the true Traveling Israel
of God does meet withal in this Age.

I got very well through the West of Scotland, met with no Disturbance: All was
quiet, when I was there. Our Meetings are quiet in Cumberland: I suppose, I may
stay yet about two weeks here.

Stockton, the 11th of the 10th Month, 1684.
I came out of Cumberland about two Weeks ago, and was at Strickland-head, and
then came on into Bishopric, and thought, I should but have touched at Darnton
and this Town, and so on into Yorkshire: But when I was at Darnton, it came
upon me, to give Friends a visit further in this County. And so I went to
Durham, and had a blessed Meeting there, and did visit the Prisoners. And then
went to Sunderland, had a Meeting there. And then to Shields, and to T. F. had
a Meeting there. And so returned to Sh^tton, and so to this Town, and had a
blessed Meeting in the Evening yesternight, it being their Meeting-time. They
are usually kept out of their Meeting House here; but yesternight we got in,
and the Meeting was full and peaceable: and so have all the Meetings, where I
have been. And now I am ready to go over into Yorkshire, and do hope to be at
York in about two Weeks time. -- I suppose I may be there first day come two
Weeks.

Grayrig, the 26th of the 11th Month, 1684/5.
I have had a very comfortable and peaceable Journey, and came through
Cleveland and the Moors to Whitby, and from thence up to Molton and to York --
Meetings have been quiet all along where I have been. Yesterday a Fortnight a
Constable was at the Meeting House, before I came, and stood in the way to
speak with the Friend that I came along with, it being just before the
Sessions. He had a Warrant, and was to give his Return at Sessions; and
therefore threatened, that if we would not forbear to meet that day, he must
carry us before a Justice. However, after we had Reasoned a while with him, we
parted, and went into the Meeting; and he went away, and did not come into the
Meeting. So we had a blessed Meeting, and parted in Peace; and the Lord's Power
was over all, to our great Joy.

This was all the Appearance of Molestation, I have yet met with: And I have
had a very good Season, and abundance of Meetings, since I left York. In
Yorkshire I was at Robert Lodge's House, and had his Company a pretty time out
of Yorkshire. I went to Lancaster, and when I had visited Friends, I came into
Westmorland to Preston-Meeting; and yesterday was at Sedberge: We had a
peaceable Meeting, but out of the Meeting House in the Street: the
Meeting House being locked up from Friends. I intend some Meetings in this
County, and so down to Swartmore, and on into Cumberland, as the Lord makes way.

Eaglesfield, the 25th of the 12th Month, 1684.
I have had a very peaceable Journey, and did visit Friends Meetings very fully
in Westmorland, and all quiet. And since I came into Cumberland, I was down at
Carlisle and the Border: And now my Service seems to be over, and I am
preparing to go home. And was at Workinton this day; and to morrow I intend to
go to Whitehaven, and to take the first Opportunity for Dublin. -- Thus far I
have been preserved very well through all my Travels; and now I hope I shall
get home.

Dublin, the 25th of the first Month, 1685.
I got well here last Night, but was put ashore in the North in
Strangford-River, about seventy Miles from Dublin, and about four and twenty
from Lisnagarvy: And being put ashore there, I found an Openness in my Heart to
give Friends a Visit in the North, and so spent near two Weeks among them, and
had many good Meetings. I am very glad, and my heart is truly Thankful unto the
Lord for his preservation through this last Journey so safe and clear, and
ordered my way so comfortably home, where I hope I may be of Service in my
place, and a Comfort to Friends. The Lord our God is to be minded by us in all
things.

I find things amongst Friends generally pretty well, as formerly, and Meetings
very large and peaceable here, and in the North. I am intended out of Town to
the Province-Meeting.

Dublin, the 16th of the 3d Month, 1685.
This Half-Years-Meeting we had a very great Appearance of Friends out of the
Country, many say, they have not seen so many ever before. And to our public
Meetings abundance of other People came, even far more than could get into our
House; and they were very sober: so that the Truth has a good place amongst
sober People. Though the Professors, who shrink and hide, we are informed, do
rail against Friends; they do seem, as if they were given up to hardness of
heart, and so set in their blindness and hardness, as to go on, till the Rod
come upon them. For they do not lay any thing so to heart, as thereby to be
brought off from the evil Error of their hard and prejudiced Minds. It does
appear, that they envy Friends good, and are offended, that we do not fly into
holes as they do. But as for Friends, they are very cheerful; and we have had a
very blessed Season, and kept in Unity, Peace and Concord in our Meetings and
Concerns: and the Lord's good Presence pretiously with us, to our Comfort and
Consolation.

And blessed be the Lord, he is not wanting unto us, both to sanctify our
hearts, and also to fill them with his Spiritual Mercies, and to Contribute of
his other Mercies and Blessings, whereby he may make our days pleasant unto us;
that with Gladness and Joy of Soul we may serve and praise him, who is worthy
for ever,

Amen!
Dublin, the 4th of the 6th Month, 1685.
Yesterday I came home, having been through the Southend of the Nation, and
between six and seven weeks away, and have had a very comfortable Journey
amongst Friends, and peaceable. Blessed be the Lord for his Mercies toward us.

Dublin, the 6th of the 7th Month, 1685.
I am glad to hear, that things are so still and quiet in England, and that
Friends have some little breathing time of ease from their sharp persecution.
It is the Lords mercy toward us: but our Innocence is that, which must speak
for us; and if we loose that, our defense would depart from us; and then there
would be none to fly unto: for vain is all help from below. Therefore it will
be our happiness to rest quiet, with our Faith in him, for he is able to
preserve, who promised them of old, he would give them favor in the eyes of the
King of Babylon. And it had been their safety to have trusted in his word; but
in their taking of their own way, they brought Ruin upon themselves; and so
will all do now, whose eye is not unto the Lord to stay their minds upon him;
but look out to follow their own Contrivances. I know, the Truth will keep out
of all such things, if Friends be careful to keep under the Conduct thereof:
But if fleshly Reasonings prevail in the Unbelief, then the Eye goes out, and
the Mind into the haste; so the Patience and Long- Suffering is lost, and the
Hope and Faith let fall. Then the Creature can neither trust in the Lord, nor
stay rightly for his Time and Season.

Our Meetings are very quiet and peaceable, which is a Mercy we greatly value,
and our Hearts in the Lord's Truth are at rest, and that is our Comfort. -- Both
there and here, and wherever we are, it will be our place to be prepared for
Sufferings; that is likely to be our Portion for the Truth: And it is but, as it
has been of old, If any will live Godly in Christ Jesus, he must suffer
Persecution. I am ready to go out of Town to visit Friends in the County of
Wicklow.

Dublin, the 19th of the 7th Month, 1685.
I am sorry, that so much Occasion of Offense should be given to some Friends
here, by some that take Liberty there (viz. at London) by running back into
such things, as the Truth Condemns, and so to be Encouragers of Pride and
Vanity, that will grow too fast, to the drawing down of the Displeasure of the
Lord upon Man. And therefore I would have Friends to stand in that which is
plain, and keep to the Cross in their Trades, and Dealings, and Clothes, and in
all things, that they may remain standing Witnesses for God in Righteousness
against Pride, and all the Vanity of the World; for therein will stand our
Safety for ever. I desire, that we may live up to the Truth in all Things, that
the Blessing may attend us.

And indeed, we had need to be Circumspect: For every Lawful Thing is not
Expedient, because there may be an unlawful Liberty strengthened thereby. The
Lord keep us all in his Wisdom truly Lowly and Humble, that we may still honor
him in all things, and remain a People through our Day to his Glory. For if
upon us in our Day we let the Spirit of the World prevail to the overthrowing
of our own Testimony, what Example and Footsteps shall we leave to them that
come after us?

I am full, and could say much, for my Heart is concerned to hear them, who
themselves are not so good as they ought to be, strengthen themselves by bad
Examples. For though some may be slow to mind that which is good, so as to
learn Good from the Example thereof; yet they are quick to take Encouragement
from the Contrary.

Dublin, The 18th of the 9th Month.
We have had a comfortable Season this Half-Years-Meeting, quiet and peaceable,
and in Love and Unity among our selves; so that we have cause to be truly
thankful unto the Lord for that Mercy, amongst all other Mercies we Enjoy from
his blessed Hand.

Dublin, the 29th of the fourth Month, 1686.
Though the World be full of Tumults, Disquietness and Amazements; yet blessed
be the God of our Salvation, who has brought us into a Degree of that Rest,
which the Distresses, that are from below, cannot Reach. So that there is
something known to Retire unto for a Sanctuary, that the World knows not;
neither can the Destroyer come into it. Therefore our Safety is, always to keep
our Interest therein, that we may have our Privilege unto our Mansion there,
and so rest in the Time of Trouble, where no Hurter nor Destroyer can come.

The Lord's Power is to be admired, loved and believed in for ever, who gives
us blessed Seasons, and Calms and Quiets. It Is true for ever, the Winds and
Seas must obey him; blessed are all that put their Trust in him. Fears and
Restlesness does possess the Hearts of many; but for our parts, we have an Eye
unto the Lord, and know, he has a hand in ordering of, or suffering all things
for Ends best known unto himself; and therein we Rest.

And I desire, that the Lord by the Indwelling of his Power in our Souls may
still so keep and preserve us in that Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, wherein
we may always know one another, and be a Comfort one unto another in the
plainness and simplicity of that blessed Truth, that saves and sanctifies from
all Unrighteousness, and Unites unto God, and brings into near Fellowship one
with another. For this is that which sanctifies, fits, and prepares the Heart
of Man for every good Virtue, and settles and composes his Nature not only for
heavenly Mercies, and that he may receive and enjoy them, but also for his
Station in this World, and the Enjoyment of Temporal Favors; that he may
receive and enjoy them with a Blessing, and in true Comfort; and also be a
Blessing and a Comfort in his place unto all concerned. This is the Happiness
and Advantage, that is to be witnessed through the Working and Indwelling of
that Eternal Power, which God Almighty has Revealed in the Hearts of his People
in this Day, as there is a faithful Minding of, and Subjection unto it, in the
true Love of it. And sure, many there are, which if they knew the comfortable
Effects of it, would not abide under its Condemnation, as they do: But it is,
as it was said of old, They will not believe, though a Man should tell it unto
them.

Dublin, the 6th of the 11th Month, 1688.
The Account of the Death of my dear Wife will be come to hand before this,
which is no small Exercise to me. But though my Loss be great, in having her
Removed from me, yet I believe, it is her Gain. For she has been under great
Weakness and Exercise of Body a long time; however, this I can say, she bore
her Exercise beyond Expectation; and told some Friends, She believed she was
kept the longer, because I was so unwilling to give her up. And I must confess,
it was hard, that it could not easily be got to, and that for several Reasons:
but when I saw, that it must be so, I was made willing, for her Exercises took
hold of my Spirit. The Morning of that day she did depart, she said to me, She
was afraid, her Passage would be hard: I told her, I did hope not. She was
under a great Exercise of Pain, but bore it with wonderful quietness, and sat
under it as one waiting for Deliverance; and very sensibly spoke to me a little
before her Departure. So she went away like a Lamb, without so much as a Groan.
We lived Comfortably together, her Nature was Good, Kind and Courteous, she was
Merciful, very Confiderate, and of a good Understanding: she will be greatly
missed in this place, for Friends had a good Love and Esteem for her; and I
have Experience and know, that many who seemingly might exceed in Appearance,
will come far behind.

Dublin, the 7th of the 12th Month, 1688.
We are pretty quiet here at present; but Peoples Hearts are like the troubled
Waters, no stay nor settlement, cannot tell what way to go to be satisfied, or
quiet in their Minds: only they that know the Truth, may rest there and be
quiet under the Covering of it; otherwise it would be mighty uneasy. I did
intend for Cumberland, but at present Friends could not well bear my going
away, neither have I freedom in my self: So I rest in my place, waiting the
Time and Season for it.

Dublin, the 13th of the 3d Month, 1689.
Our Half-Years-Meeting is over, where were Assembled many Friends and Brethren
from diverse Parts of the Nation, according to our usual manner. We enjoy our
Meetings peaceably and quiet generally over the Nation, and in most Places our
Meetings are large, and many People come in; and all People have their Liberty
in the Free Exercise of their Consciences in Matters of Religion. And as for
Friends and Truth, they are in good Esteem, both with High and Low. The Lord's
Care and Mercy over us has been largely manifest, and Friends do learn great
Experience of the Preservation of the mighty Arm of the Lord in this Great Day
of Trial, which is upon this Nation; yet to our Joy and Comfort Friends are
carried over it in the Faith of the Son of God, and have been preserved
miraculously, even beyond our Expectation in several places, where their Trials
have been very great, and the Dan gers, as to appearance, dreadful; yet Friends
have kept to their Habitations, trusting in the Lord, and following their
lawful Concerns and Business.

At this Half-Years-Meeting our Hearts were made more than ordinarily glad to
see one another Faces in such a time as this; and the Lord's Power and
Presence was with us, that Crowns our Meetings: And in the sense and sweetness
of the same are the most of our Friends and Brethren this Day gone toward
their outward Beings in the Peace of God, and in great Love and Unity, which
did pretiously abound amongst us in this our Meeting throughout all our
Concerns and Affairs.

The fourth day next I am intended to go into the Country toward our Province
Meeting; and do think to visit Friends, e're I return.

Wexford, the 5th Month, 1689.
I have had a very comfortable Journey among Friends, and for the most part
very large Meetings, beyond my Expectation, and very peaceable, viz. On the
third day at Tipperary, and fourth day at John Fennels. But at Tipperary I had
like to have been got hold of by the Rapperies, and lost my Mare; but I got
away and escaped, and rode back into the Town. Last first day we had a very
large Meeting at Edward Goodings; it was their Monthly Meeting. This day we
have a Meeting here, to morrow at Samuel Watson's, and the fifth day at the
Meeting that belongs to Lambs-Town. I think, Carloe-Monthly-Meeting is next
first day, I intend to be there.

Dublin, the 12th of the 8th Month, 1689
Friends, as far as I can have account, are in the General pretty well in
Health, and at Liberty, and our Meetings quiet and peaceable; and so are all
others, for ought I know. But many in the Country under Sufferings, as in
respect to the Loss of their Goods, by reason of the Wars this Land is greatly
attended with. However, our Friends their Eye is to the Lord, who doubtless
suffers not all these things to come to pass without a Cause, but to be a
Chastisement for the sinfulness of the Children of Men. O! that all would take
warning, to keep out of that which provokes him to Displeasure, that his Hand
might be removed.

And truly, that which is our Comfort and Stay in the midst of all, is the holy
Presence of his Power, that attends our Meetings; from the Evidence of which we
receive our Satisfaction, that the Lord is well-pleased with us. And this is
that which bears up our Spirits in the time of Exercise.

Dublin, the 25th of the first Month, 1690.
I had the Opportunity this last Winter to go through Friends both in Leinster
and Munster, which was a great Satisfaction both to me and them. Friends are
generally well, and our Meetings are full, and we enjoy them in quietness as
formerly: and the Lord's Presence is with us to our great Comfort, which is
valued by all, that are rightly sensible of it, as a great Mercy.

Dublin, the 21th of the 6th Month, 1690.
I have been visiting Friends in the North, and had an acceptable and
comfortable Season amongst them, and found them very cheerful. It is still to
be lamented, that Sin and Wickedness should so abound; but the Lord doubtless
will plead with all that grieve him in his own way and time; though he be
Long-suffering. And therefore it will be our Happiness, to rest quiet under his
disposing and ordering Hand, by which he will in his Wisdom and Power overrule
all Men and Things, who knows best, how to Execute Justice and Judgment upon
all, according to their Works or Deserts: For before him all things are naked
and bare, therefore he cannot miss in Judgment. We resting here, and waiting
upon him, it quiets our Spirits, and sweetens them: and also I can say, it
makes many bitter things sweet, and so sanctified, that we meet with Comfort in
Tribulation. And though it be both Natural unto, and Lawful for us in
Affliction reverently to pray for and desire Deliverance, and also when
obtained, to rejoice therein, and bless the Lord therefore; yet still our
Happiness is, to mind his Providence, and wise Ordering of all things, and
therewith to be Content, without either murmuring at, or struggling against,
what he seems good to bring to pass. And so here we shall all rest in one Fold
and Covenant, and seed in one Pasture together, and so have a Fellow-feeling of
one another Joy or Sufferings. For our Resting Place is but one in the Truth,
and our Salvation stands therein for ever: and therefore we need look at no
other.

John Burnyeat.

SEVERAL EPISTLES WRITTEN By J. B. to Friends from diverse Places.
Dear Friends,
IN the dear and tender Bowels of Love and Life do I dearly salute you all, who
are faithful to the Lord, without respect of Persons, in whose Life and Love I
feel you, and enjoy you, wherein my Heart is opened toward you, my dearly
beloved ones, with whom I am daily refreshed and comforted in Christ Jesus the
Fountain and Wellspring of Life and living Refreshment; who is our Rock and
daily Refuge, unto whom we fly and are safe in the day of storms and tempest,
when the floods arise, and the raging Waves of the Sea do swell and beat; yet
in the Light have we a safe hiding place, and a sure and peaceable Habitation,
against which they cannot prevail: As faithful to the Lord we abide therein,
whose Love toward us has abounded, and will abound, as we abide in that, unto
which his Love does reach, which is his own Seed; which he has raised in us by
his own Power and outstretched Arm: wherein the Issues of Live and Love are
known and received. Therefore, my dear Friends, keep to it, and feel it
continually; that fresh, and lively, and open-hearted, ye may always be in the
Life, that nothing may enter, that would vail the Seed, and oppress it; for
that will stop the Issue of the Love of God, which is shed abroad, and shedding
it self abroad in the Hearts of all the Faithful, whereof we in the
bountifulness of his Love have richly been made partakers of. Therefore as one
who with you have been partaker of the rich and endless Love of God, I do
exhort you, my dearly beloved ones, to continue in his Love, and all to abide
faithful in the Life, that Death again may not pass over any one; but that the
Life, which God has raised, may be felt, and that may rule over him, that has
the Power of Death in every one of us, to his own Praise and Glory, who has
redeemed us, wherein the comfort, strength and refreshment is rereceived daily
from him, who is the Life and Strength of all that wait upon him, and who is
near to preserve all them that are upright in their Love toward him. And
herein have we boldness, believing, that neither Tribulation, nor Affliction,
Persecution, nor Distress shall be able to separate us from the Love of God,
which we enjoy in Christ Jesus, although he may suffer great things to come
upon us (as it is at this day) to try us; nor yet to separate us one from
another, nor to break our Unity in the Spirit, wherein we feel and enjoy one
another. In which, my dear Friends, I feel you, and have you often in my
remembrance, to my great Joy and Gladness of heart: for ye in the Lord are my
Joy and Rejoicing many times, when all other Comforts are taken from me; but
only that, in which I feel and enjoy you, wherein our Unity, Life and Love does
stand, wherein I remain

Your Brother in my measure received, J. Burnyeat.
Postscript.
Dear Friends,
I Wrote a Letter in the Eleventh Month, before I went out of these Parts, and
sent with one, who did intend to pass through Cumberland; but I hear, it was
left in Yorkshire: which did something trouble me, because that I did not
obtain an Opportunity to send again so soon, as I could have desired, in regard
we traveled into the West toward Galloway and Cork: But at Dublin, when I was
there I wrote a Letter, which I partly believe, may be come to you. So being in
haste, I cannot give you an account, as I would desire; only Times are very
troublesome, in regard of the Distractions of the People in this Nation. We
were taken Prisoners, after we came from Dublin, at Ardmagh, and kept three
days: It is very hard to Travel in this Nation for us; but for the Seed's sake
we are freely given up into the Will of God.

Clanbrasel, in the County of Ardmagh in Ireland, the fourth day of the fourth
Month, 1660.


Dear and well-beloved Friends in Cumberland,
BRethren and Sisters in the holy Covenant of Life, with you is my life bound
up in the unspeakable Bond of perfect Unity, and unfeigned Love, wherein I
feelingly reach unto you in this day of weighty Trial, wherein every ones Faith
and Patience must come to be tried, and every ones Foundation made manifest
whereon he stands; blessed are they, whose Foundation and standing is in the
Power of Christ Jesus, the Rock of Ages, and Foundation of many Generations,
such shall stand immovable on the Rock in the day of Tempest, and shall be at
Peace, and kept in Safety in the Power, in the hour of Temptation, and time of
trial. Therefore, my dear Friends, as if I were present with you, my Bowels are
opened toward you, and my Life reaches unto you, in pure love, even desiring
that every one of you may truly feel and abide in the feeling of the precious
Life and pure invisible Power of the blessed God, which he has made manifest
in your Hearts, whereby every mind of them, that has been faithful to the
Lord, is changed and renewed, and redeemed, and made pure and sweet through the
virtue and goodness of the same, whereby our Souls continually are refreshed,
as we abide in the sensible seeling of the Lord's Presence. O! therefore, my
dear Friends, ye who have tasted of the Lord's goodness, and have been
nourished by his mercies inwardly, who have felt the weight of his love, and
the value of his truth in your inward parts, Mind that as your chiefest
treasure; my dear Friends, that the sweet Consolation, and the precious Spring
of the Father's love ye may feel opened in your Hearts from day unto day, and
from time to time. For truly Friends, large is the Lord's goodness, and
exceeding precious is the Fountain of endless mercies, which he has opened in
this day, for the refreshing of his own dear Children, whose whole trust and
confidence is in him alone: Therefore let none again incline in their minds
after the things in this Creation, or desire further to enjoy it, or any thing
in it, then you may enjoy them in the Covenant of God. This, my dear Friends,
is truly in my Heart from the Lord to lay it before you, and to warn you of in
his Name and Fear, I say, Friends, that ye, who have tasted of the Lord's
goodness in any measure, and have felt the working of his heavenly Power, to
the redeeming of your minds out of all visible things, and to give you an
entrance into the Inheritance, that never fades away; That ye may not look back
again into the Glory of the things of this Creation now in this day of Trial of
your Faith, but that all may be offered freely into the Will of the Lord; that
whatsoever you enjoy, it may be in his Covenant: that his blessing may richly
be felt in your inward parts, and his peace sweetly enjoyed in your Hearts. Or
else truly, otherwise, if any seek in the declining mind to hold any thing out
of his Covenant and pure fear, the blessing will not be upon that heart, but it
will be unto them, as the spoil, which the Children of Israel fell upon
contrary to the Word of the Lord; and like unto Achan's wedge of Gold, which
became a Curse in the Camp of Israel. Therefore let all with their all be
freely offered up unto the Lord in Righteousness, with an upright heart, which
is but a Service reasonable in this day from us, who have so largely been made
partakers of the richness of his Lovingkindness and Mercies, that so every
heart may stand open, purely waiting for the heavenly virtue, and for the
renewing of the heavenly gift, that every one may be strengthened by the same
in the inward man; that so we may all together with one heart truly rejoice in
the Salvation, and Consolation of the Lord our God, which we feel and enjoy in
Spirit. And furthermore, my dear Friends, that you all, who feel your hearts
and all freely given up unto the Lord, both you and yours into his Will, Mind
the Power which has made you willing, and dwell and abide in the sensible
feeling of that continually; that so every mind may be kept low and humble
before the Lord, sensible of the Rock of their Salvation, and of the Arm of
their strength and preservation; that so all fleshly boasting and glorying may
for ever be excluded out of the Salvation, Preservation and Keeping of all the
Redeemed of the Lord; that he alone, who is the Salvation of his People, and
the Keeper of Israel, may have the Honor and Glory, and the Praise, from the
Work of his own Hands, who is God over all, blessed for ever and ever, whose
Works will for ever praise him in all his Children.

From me your Brother, who is now Prisoner in the Dungeon in Rippon
Common-Goal, where I am separated from having Liberty to be amongst the rest of
my Fellow Prisoners, only because the Lord opened my Mouth among them in our
Meeting, when we were together waiting upon the Lord. John Burnyeat.
Written the fourth day of the sixth Month, 1662.
Barbados, the third day of the first Month, 1665.
Dearly Beloved,
UNto whom the pure love of my heart in the Covenant of Life does plentiously
flow forth at this time, my Soul dearly Salutes you all, who are faithful unto
the Lord, without respect of Persons, whose Minds are kept faithful unto the
unchangeable Power of Life and Virtue, wherein your Souls have been refreshed,
and by which you have been gathered into the belief of the Truth, and to the
Acknowledgment of the same; which in a good degree has been made manifest in
and among you. My Exhortation as a Brother in the Bowels of Love unfeigned unto
you, whom my Soul dearly loves, is, That as the Lord has appeared, and made
manifest his Power in your Hearts, even so wait ye, that your dwelling ye may
come to witness to be in the same. For Friends, ye know, that it is not
sufficient, only to know, that he has Appeared; but that ye feel your Dwelling
to be in the Power, and so in the daily sense of the renewing of his appearing
in your Hearts: that by it your Hearts may be kept open unto him, and so you
from day to day may know the renewing of his Presence, and the Virtue of his
own Life in you. O! my dear Friends, this is that by which every heart may be
kept sweet and living, and virtuous, and open unto the Lord so that the Issues
of his Love will become as a Refreshing River unto every Soul, that keeps
faithful unto him.

Therefore Friends, all mind your standing and your dwelling in the Power, and
wait for the Inward Operation of it in your Hearts, that by its dwelling in
you, and living in you, your Hearts may be kept tender, and contrite and broken
before the Lord. And Friands, beware of hardness of heart, I warn you in God's
Fear, for therein the deceitful Worker gets advantage, and Unbelief comes to
enter; and so such will come short of the Rest, that God has prepared for his
People, who through the deceitfulness of sin come to be hardened. And so
Friends, least this should come upon any one of you, and so ye fall short of
the Rest, Watch in the Fear of God, and keep down to the tender Principle of
Life every one of you in your own particulars, by which your hearts may be kept
out of the hardness in the tender- and brokenness of heart, in which state the
Lord is witnessed to dwell with man and in man, according to his promise. And
so will you know the growing of the holy Seed in you, into the pure Dominion,
by which that which would darken or harden, will be subjected, and kept in the
subjection; and so your Souls kept in the freedom of the Seed in God's
Covenant, where life and peace is witnessed: and so Heirs of the Promise, and
of the Blessing, being come into the promised Seed, Children of the Promise,
and so of Abraham through Faith, unto whom the Promise was made, and so blessed
with him, who is the Father of all the Faithful, through which we come to be
Heirs of the Kingdom, and so in it (according to the promise) come to sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in this day of the Gathering of the Gentiles,
and bringing home of the lost Sheep of the House of Israel.

Therefore Friends, mind your standing in the Seed Christ the true Vine, that
you may have life abundantly, and know its abounding in you. For whosoever goes
from him, the Life, the Seed, the Vine Christ Jesus, the Power of God, shall
wither, and decay, and die, and in the end be fit for nothing but the fire. And
that shall such know, who in the day of the Lord's Gathering, and tender
Visiting in Mercy and Lovingkindness, will not be won and gained into
Faithfulness; but slight the Day of their Visitation.

Therefore, my dear Friends, be faithful unto the Lord every particular of you,
in that which you have received from him, and wait to be guided by that in your
own hearts. And keep low and down to the Principle of Life in your own hearts,
that you may never become stiff-necked, nor hardened in your hearts again. For
this was Israel's Sin of old; whose hearts were hardened, and whose neck was
become like an Iron sinew, that it could not bend unto God's Took. For which he
was wroth with his People, and cast off his Inheritance in that day; so that
their Enemies had power over them, and laid their Dwellings desolate. Those
things are left unto us for an Example, that we might not fall after the same
manner of Unbelief, but fear; lest a Promise being left us of entering into his
Rest, we should fall short through Unbelief, and so loose the Inheritance, and
so by the Enemy have our Habitations luid desolate, and so be carried Captives
out of our Dewlling Place. These things, my Friends and Brethren, I lay before
you in the fear and love of God, which is weigty in my heart toward you all,
and so desire, that the Lord may preserve you all faithful unto himself, in the
feeling of his life and good presence, by which your hearts may be kept open
unto him, and so open in true Love one toward another, that as a Family in the
love of God you may dwell together: In which love my Soul dearly Salutes you
all, and so in it remain

To my dear Friends in the North of Ireland about Kilmore, Lurgan and that way.
Your Brother and Companion in the Tribulation and Patience of Christ Jesus, I.
B.

Bristol, the 25th day of the 11th Month, 1667. Dearly Beloved,
WIth whom in the Covenant of Life, Light and Peace I am one, wherein I am with
you, and in Spirit do reach unto you in that love, which many waters cannot
quench; in which my Soul at this time does very dearly salute you all, ye
Children of the Covenant, which have been born again of the Word Immortal, and
in the life of the true Seed remain; unto you all, without respect of Persons
does the love of my Soul reach, with the Salutation of my life in the power
that is endless: In which my desire is, that the Lord may preserve you all,
that as living Plants in the Vineyard of God you may flourish, and bring forth
righteous Fruits, and so be a honor unto the Lord in your generation, and then
you need not doubt, but the Lord will honor you in the glory of his Kingdom,
that is without end. And therefore Friends, the life of Righteousness in the
power, that is without end, do you all mind to live in; that fruits of holiness
in a godly conversation may be brought forth by you all; by which the Gospel of
Peace and Salvation comes te be adorned: and so the effects of Righteousness
you will all come to know, which is peace and assurance for ever. Which is that
you ought all to be mindful of, that the evidence of peace, by the testimony of
the living Spirit in all your hearts, ye may feel renewed daily; which will not
be without an abiding and living in the life of Righteousness, whatsoever
Notion of Profession may be held in the wrong mind, and not in the power and
life of Righteousness. For this Testimony is true and living, searching
narrowly under all Coverings, and breaking through all Vails, entering into the
inner Court, and breaking through into the Secret Chambers to see, what may
have a being there, or be worshipped. So that in vain it is to cover any thing
in this day, wherein the searcher of all hearts has appeared; and he is come,
whose Fan is in his hand, who sits as Resiners fire and as Fullers soap, to
cleanse and to purify his chosen Tribe, that they may be a peculiar People, a
chosen Generation, and a Royal Priesthood, to show forth the Praises of him,
who has called out of darkness into his mavelous light. And therefore, My
dear Friends, with open hearts and nakedness of Spirit do you all walk before
the Lord, not seeking any Covering, but that of the Spirit in the life of
Righteousness, that its Testimony and witness you may all have in your hearts
to bear witness with you unto Justification; that so ye may be clothed with
the white Robe of Righteousness in the power of the Lamb, and so become Kings
and Priests unto God, reigning over that in the power of the Lamb's Spirit,
which can never offer a Sacrifice acceptable, before which the hearkening and
obedience has acceptance: and so will the life of the true Priest be known to
spring in you, in which you are accepted, and so in the life of him that is a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck (according to the word of the
promise and of the oath) you will be a Royal Priesthood, offering up an
acceptable Sacrifice unto the Lord. And so my dearly beloved (unto whom my
heart in pure love is opened) keep your habitations in the Life of the Son, in
the Life of the Priest, that lives for ever, that you may never be rejected; in
him is the Father well pleased, in him are all our Offerings accepted, and
without him ye can do nothing: All Coverings and Robes without him are but as
filthy Rags, and all Garments without his power and life of righteousness are
no better, than a Menstruous Cloth, and abomination in the sight of the Lord.

And therefore keep your Garments clean, your hearts pure before the Lord, that
the acceptance you may never lose: and mind the living of the power in your
hearts, and your living in it unto God the Father, that as we have been
quickened together in the Resurrection of the Life, even so in the same we may
worship the Father for evermore. And so in this, Friends, does my heart's love
reach unto you all, in which my Soul does once more very dearly salute you all,
ye Children of the Covenant and of the blessed day of God Almighty, who walk in
the Light, my heart is ravished with pure love in the Remembrance of you: O ye
dearly beloved of my Soul, I have not forgotten you, neither have I been
unmindful of you, though outwardly we have been separated; but the ancient love
has lived in my heart, yea, and does live toward you all, which draws forth
strong desires in me unto the Lord, that in his Will I might see your faces;
which I hope, will be answered in his time: and until then I am freely given up
into his Will to stand out of time, being satisfied with the invisible union
and fellowship in the Spirit, that I have with you, which time nor distance of
places can never wear out, because that life and power, which is eternal, is
known; and that love which changes not, is enjoyed, in which I am one with you,
and remain

Your Brother in the Covenant, where Sin is blotted out, and Everlasting
Righteousness is brought forth, in which we worship the Father acceptably, I.
Burnyeat.

Barbados, the 30th of the 11th Month, 1670.
Dear Friends,
I Have had a great Exercise upon my Spirit concerning this late Observation of
a Day, or Fast, which was set forth and pretended unto; and seeing the pride
and vanity, that people was in, not like true Mourners and Fasters, and such as
would have the Judgment removed; and also seeing the bitter Cruelty, that
appeared as a part of the fruits of it; and furthermore, seeing the difference,
that did seem to appear in Friends minds, about the owning or not owning of it,
by submitting unto their Requirings, or doing to the contrary, as a testimony
against it; after I had passed under a deep Exercise in Spirit for some time,
at last the Lord God by his Eternal Word raised up my Spirit in the zeal
thereof, and did smite against all such Mockeries: and then in a heavenly
Revelation (my Understanding being opened, and closing with the Word) he showed
unto me, that it was to be Witnessed against by all, that stood in the
Testimony of God, and that those, that would weaken the Spirits of any in their
Testimony in this or other things, wherein Friends have a Testimony for God, it
was plainly showed me from the Lord, how they would draw a vail over the pure
in themselves, and in others, and in a cowardly, underly Spirit, by the
corrupted, sallen wisdom, would put the Candle, that God has lighted, under a
Bushel, or under a Bed, and so cover it for a while, until at last it would be
put out: so that we, like other Professors, at last by this Spirit would be led
to yield to any thing, rather than suffer; and so then the offense of the Cross
might cease. And then also there was another thing, which had been very long
under my consideration, of which, I was not hasty to judge or meddle, wherein
Friends have somewhat differed; but at this time was not minded by me, because
of the other, that was upon me. But when the Lord had cleared the other to me,
he brought up this also before my mind, which is about Sending Men, Horse and
Arms to the Training, Trooping or Playing, which is folly as to us; for which
many, that could not send, have suffered the spoiling of their Goods. And the
Lord then plainly satisfied me, that it was his Testimony, wherein Friends were
to stand, and that they that bore another Testimony either in words or action,
it was from that Spirit, and in that Wisdom, that would put a bushel over the
lighted Candle, and by degrees would put it out, and would lead us to crouch to
the Spirit of the World, until its large wing of Darkness would over-shadow us,
and become our Covering; and then we should be like others, that have lost
their Testimony. And then when the Lord had thus done, oh! how my Soul was
filled with heavenly, divine love toward all the willing Sufferers for the
Lord's Testimony! So that I can say, it was with me, as it was with Deborah,
when she said, her heart was toward the Governors of Israel, who offered
themselves willingly among the people; and then I could not but praise the
Lord. And so this is the Testimony, that the Lord did put into my heart, which
I am moved of him to give forth, for the comfort and satisfaction of all, that
desire to serve the Lord in their Generation, and to keep their Consciences
pure, and their Garments unspotted. And therefore Friends, keep in the first,
for he is the last, and shall stand, when all others shall fail. And reason not
with flesh and blood, but wait for the power, that it may open you; and as you
are kept open thereby, the wonderful things of God in it will be made known
unto you, and the depths of Satan will be seen also; and there will be a
growing in righteousness. For in the power is the righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith by which the just lives; which cannot be witnessed, where
the Testimony is let fall, and the Light covered, and the Talent laid in the
earth; though it may be tied in a white Napkin of fair Profession. For the Gift
or Talent is neither to be hid in the Earth, nor bound by any in any thing, but
to have its liberty, until by its own power all be subjected unto it self, that
God may be all in us all. This is the Testimony, that I am to leave with you in
these matters; and so being eased in Spirit, in the lasting love of God I remain

Your Brother, John Burnyeat.

Salem in New England, the 30th of the 4th Month, 1671.
Dear and Well-beloved,
YOU whom the Lord has called to believe, and to be partakers of his Divine
Nature, and of his manifold Mercies, that through the strength thereof you
might bear witness to his Name, and testify to his Truth in your Day, for
which the God of Wisdom suffers you to be tried, and your faith to be proved,
as it has been his way in all Ages for the proof of his people, that their
hearts might be tried, and their Love appear, how weighty it is to him, that
has loved them: whereby the Glory of the Truth, and the Excellency of it might
be made manifest.

And now my Friends, this is your day and hour of your Trial, wherein the Lord
by you (I believe) shall be honored, and you rewarded with that good Reward,
which shall outballance all the present Sufferings, unto which the Glory of the
present World is not to be compared. And though from you it is my Lot to be
separated, and so in the like kind not to suffer among you; yet I cannot say
but that I suffer with you; for my Spirit is not without a feeling of your
sufferings.

O! you dear Lambs of the Shepherd's fold, is it so, that the Wolf seeks to
devour? and is the Lion and devouring Bear let loose, that would snatch up the
Lambs? Fear not, though in his Mouth? We have a Shepherd, that will deliver,
and like David, will save from the power of the Destroyer, so that your Life
shall not come under his power: For God is on Israel's side to preserve, though
they would swallow up quick. And therefore let your Trust be in the Arm of his
strength for ever, and you shall know, that he is able to make up all to you
again.

Dearly beloved, My very Heart and Soul salutes you all in the Reach of that
Life, which by nothing that is visible, can be stopped; and in the sense and
enjoyment of that I am spiritually with you, wherein I may say, I do partake
with you both of the Sufferings and Tribulations, and also of the Joy and
Consolation, that abounds in your Souls, as the Reward of your Obedience and
Faithfulness unto the Lord, that has called you thereunto, and raised you up
for that purpose. And therefore let none look back, nor be dismayed, for the
Cause is the Lord's, and he will stand by you, and will plead your Cause with
all that rise up against you, and will bring your Righteousness to light more
and more, and show who are his, and approved in his sight. And he will also
discover and lay open the Cruelty of such, and manifest them, who outwardly
would show themselves to be Sheep, but are inwardly Ravenous, and so Ravening
Wolves; and so labor to lay waste the Heritage of the Lord to spoil his Flock:
They are such, who would not have the Lambs seed quietly in the green Pasture
of the Lord's pleasure, nor to lie still in the Fold of true Rest.

But blessed be the Lord for ever and ever, he has brought many to the
Mountain of his Holiness, where they shall not hurt nor destroy; even as he
has promised. And therefore let all mind their dwelling there, and be not
moved, and the Treasure will be known, and the Riches received, which all the
Spoilers from Babylon, and Men of War from Egypt shall not rob you of: For it
is from thence they all come to spoil Zion, and to rob her of her Glory. But
the Lord is her defender, and her King is in the midst of her, and Salvation is
round about her for Walls and Bulwarks; Glory, and Honor, and Praises to the
Lord our God for ever and ever! For he has taken to himself his great power,
and is going on Conquering and to Conquer: And will effect his own purposes,
and bring to pass his own Designs in despite of all his Adversaries; so that
when they think to pull down, he is building up; and in that way which they
think to destroy, he will establish, and so repair the Streets of Zion in
troublesome times, and build up her Desolations, and repair her Breaches, as
before has been prophesied. And seeing it is certainly thus, let us all trust
in him for ever; and wait upon him, that his power by us may be felt, and his
Love and virtue may be fed upon, which nourishes up the Soul to Eternal Life.

Dear Friends, the Aboundings of the Love of God which is in my Heart toward
you all, I cannot but signify unto you, amongst whom I have been a partaker of
such precious Mercy and rich Blessings, as we have enjoyed together, and as I
am satisfied, still abounds in your Hearts from the God of our Mercies. And so
Friends, this is a Testimony of my love unto you all; do you receive it in
particular, as if I had writ unto you all, one by one: For this it is the Lord
has made one in his Son, and brought us into Unity; as we abide in him, there
is no Separation, therefore cannot we be forgotten one by another.

Dear Friends, by this you may understand, that I am very well every way; and
going on in the Service, into which I am called. The last day but yesterday I
had a Meeting in Boston, but very few of the People came, they are still under
the fear of them, who are like them, and of that Generation, unto whom Christ
said, would neither enter-in themselves, nor suffer others. However, we had a
very comfortable and peaceable Meeting, and Truth is over them, and will bring
them under, and confound their Inventions. From

Your Friend and Brother, John Burnyeat.

To the Rulers, Ministers, and People of the Island of Barbados, who see and
take notice in any measure of the Hand of the Lord that is upon them, and have
desires in them to have his Judgments removed.
FRIENDS,
IT is Sin that provokes the Lord, and causes his Judgments in his wrath, to
come upon a Nation, a People, or a particular; and for that does the Lord visit
with his Rod, and many times smite with his sore Judgments. And while that is
lived in, the Lord will not hear, though man may cry, and make many Prayers, as
you may see in the Scriptures of Truth. Read Isaiah the 1 st, and see what the
Lord said unto Israel, when they were revolted, and become a sinful Nation, a
People laden with Iniquity: Tho they offered Sacrifices and burnt Offerings,
and called Assemblies, and observed the new Moons and the appointed Feasts, the
Prophet called them, the Rulers of Sodom; and said, Hear the Word of the Lord
ye Rulers of Sodom, give Ear unto the Law of our God, ye People of Gomorrah; to
what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices, says the Lord, etc. And
further told them, That though they spread forth their Hands, he would hide his
Eyes from them, and when they did make many Prayers, he would not hear; their
Hands were full of Blood: And therefore commanded them to wash, make clean, and
put away the Evil of their doings from before his Eyes, and cease to do evil,
and learn to do well; seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow, and then come and let us reason together,
says the Lord. So here you may see, this is the way for Man to cease from
doing Evil, and to learn to do well, whereby he may come into acquaintance with
the Lord, and to have his Prayers to be heard, and his Requests to be answered,
and so the Judgment to be removed. And also Daniel's Counsel to the King was,
that he should break off his Sins by Righteousness, and his Iniquities by
showing Mercy to the poor, that it might be a lengthening to his Tranquillity,
Dan. 4. 27. And all along in the Scriptures of truth, you may see, that Sin was
the cause why the Lord was angry with any People, and why his Wrath came upon
any Nation; and that the Lord (though he spared long many times) would not be
reconciled unto them, till they obeyed his call in turning from the Evil of
their ways; and if they would not be turned, at last he brought his Judgments
upon them to cut them off. As you may see concerning Israel many times, both in
the Wilderness, where the unbelieving and disobedient were cut off and
perished; and also, after they were come into the Land of Promise, how often
because of their Sins, he brought his Judgments over them, and Destruction upon
them, after that he had warned them, and by his Prophets called unto them, to
leave their Wickedness, and to learn to do righteously, and to amend their ways
and their doings: And because they would not hear, but continued in their Sin,
the Lord brought his sore Judgments upon them, and rejected them, and cut them
off, and laid the Land desolate, notwithstanding the multitude of their
Sacrifices, of their Prayers, and of their Observations. So that he that killed
an Ox, was as if he slew a Man, and he that sacrificed a Lamb, as if he cut off
a Dog's neck, and he that offered an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood,
and he that burned Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; and all this was, because
they chose their own ways, and their Souls did delight in their Abominations,
as you may read, Isaiah 66. 3, 4. And therefore were all their Performances
rejected of the Lord, and he brought their fear upon them; because when he
called, they would not answer, when he spoke, they would not hear, but did Evil
before his Eyes, and chose that in which he delighted not. So that all along
you may see in the Scripture, that it was not that which People did do as upon
the account of the Worship of God, that did at all please him, or appease his
Wrath, while they did Evil before him, and chose that in which he delighted
not; as is very evident from the Scriptures of Truth, in diverse Testimonies
therein to this purpose. Time would fail to mention all; and what was written
afore-time, was written for our Learning, and that we should take warning by
their Example, who sinned and continued therein till the day of Mercy was over,
Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 11.

And therefore since the Lord has stirred in you to take notice of his
Judgments, and of his Hand upon the People of this Island, prepare your Hearts
to seek the Lord in his own way; and before you do pretend to draw nigh unto
him that is Holy, or to Worship him, or to offer an Offering, or to keep a Day
unto him, forsake your Sins, Put away the evil of your doing from before his
Eyes, and learn to do well, that your Prayers may be heard, and that you may
keep the Day holy unto the Lord; and so observe the Fast which the Lord has
chosen, which is, To loose the bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free; and to break every Yoke; to deal thy Bread to
the hungry, with such like Works of Righteousness: And then the Lord has
promised, that such, their Light shall break forth as the Morning, and their
Health shall spring forth speedily, and their Righteousness shall go before
them, and the Glory of the Lord shall be their Reward. And then may such cry,
and the Lord will answer, and say, Here am I; when there is a taking away from
the midst of you the Yoke, the putting forth of the Finger, and the speaking of
Vanity, etc. Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8, 9. And therefore try your ways and your doings,
and let none think that the Lord is like a Man, that he will be satisfied with
fair Words or Pretenses; where his Voice is not hearkened unto and obeyed, but
Sin lived in, and the Fast kept which the Scripture condemns, which the Lord
has not chosen, as you may read Isa. 58. 2, 3, 4, 5, verses; for you may see
there, how that that People did seek him daily, and had a delight to know his
ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of
their God. They asked me the Ordinances of Justice (says the Lord) and they
take delight in approaching unto God; and then cried, Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our Souls, and thou take no
knowledge? The Lord gives the reason, Behold, says he, In the Day of your
Fast, ye find Pleasure, and exact all your Labors: Behold, says he, ye fast
for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; ye shall not
fast as ye do this day, to make your Voice to be heard on high, says the Lord.
Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul, and
bow down his Head as a Bulrush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him?
Will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable Day to the Lord? says the
Prophet. Nay, as I have showed before, this is not it; and therefore let every
one consider how they are prepared, to keep the Fast that God has chosen, that
the Fruits thereof may be brought forth by every one that pretends unto it, or
else their cry will not be heard on high; for the Lord knows every ones intent,
and takes notice of their doings; so that it is not every one that says, Lord,
Lord, that shall enter and be accepted, but he that does the Will of God. So
here you may see there is two Fasts, the one chosen, and the other rejected,
and the Fruits of both manifested, whereby they may be known, who are the true
Fasters, and who are not, agreeable to what Christ has said; every Tree shall
be known by its Fruit: And so let all mind what they do, and what they bring
forth; for they that fast for strife and debate, and do smite with the Fist of
Wickedness, they do not fast to the Lord; their Voice he will not hear,
according to the Scripture. And such who instead of setting the oppressed free,
of undoing the heavy Burdens, and of breaking every Yoke, do bring under
Oppression, and lay heavy Burdens, and make Yokes instead of breaking them,
such are not the People the Lord will accept in their Fasts, nor whose Prayers
he will hear: Because they walk not in the equal way of the Lord, but love to
wander, and have not restrained their feet, therefore says Jeremiah, The Lord
does not accept them, but will remember their Iniquity and visit their Sins;
and therefore the Lord commanded the Prophet, that he should not pray for that
People for their good; for said God, When they fast, I will not hear their cry,
and when they offer Burnt-offerings and an Oblation, I will not accept them;
but I will consume them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence,
Ier. 14. 10, 11, 12. So you may see all along, the Lord does not regard all
that Man can do, or may do, so long as he wandereth from God, and does not
restrain his feet from walking in the evil way. Thus has it been in all
Dispensations of the Scripture before, and therefore much more under this last
and most glorious Ministration of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is
professed by you, wherein the former comes to be fulfilled and finished, or
perfected, where Christ himself is the great Law giver, who gives out his
Ordinances and Precepts unto all his People, who according to the promise of
the Father, gives unto them the Spirit, and writes his Law in the Hearts of all
the Children of the new Covenant, Ier. 31. 33. which they are to observe and to
walk after; and if any one do otherwise, he ought to be dealt withal,
according to the command of this great Lawgiver, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. First to
be spoke to, and see if he will hear, either a Brother, two or three, or the
Church: And if he will not hear, nor be gained, then says Christ, Let him be
unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican. But he gives no Commission unto
Christians to persecute, to put in Prison, to take away Goods, to pull down
their Houses, to put their Feet in the Stocks, to root them out of the World
Root and Branch, no; nor to wish it so to be done unto them. But if any do, he
will reprove such, as he did the Disciples, when he told them, They knew not
what Spirit they were of, when they desired Fire to come from Heaven; for he
came not to destroy, but to save, as you may read, Luke 9. 54, 55, 56. And you
may see what the Apostle Paul says, who was a wise Master Builder; he says,
One Man esteems one day above another, another he esteems every day alike;
but between them, he says, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
So you may see, here is no forcing upon any Man, in those things that appertain
to the Worship of God; but as Christ overrules the Conscience, and persuades
the Heart, and brings Man into a belief that it is according to the will of
God, so that it may be done in the Faith, without which none can please God;
for says the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, Romans 14. 5, and 23.
Verses. And therefore as the Gospel is professed, let Christ's commands be
observed, and the Example of the Primitive Christians followed, who were
blessed in their Day, and had the witness of acceptance with God; who were
persecuted, but never persecuted any, nor sought to trouble any, as upon a
bodily or outward account, for their Conscience; though they did reprove them
sharply, that turned away from the power of Truth, and became Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose Belly was their God, who gloried in their shame, and
minded earthly things, and so served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
Bellies, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Now such the Apostle did bear Testimony against, or
any others that did unrighteously; but we do not read, that he either did, or
desired to have it so, that they that did not serve the Lord Jesus Christ,
should be put in Prison, or in the Stocks, or any such like bodily Punishment,
but left them to the righteous Judgments of the Lord at his coming, (having
warned them) and so not to have fellowship with them as Brethren; but according
to Christ's command, let them be as Heathens or Publicans. And so all may see
very clearly, that will read the Scripture with a single Eye, that it is not of
Christ, nor according to the Primitive Example of the Church in her best State,
to enforce the Conscience of any, to do any thing as a Duty to God, which they
themselves had not a persuasion unto, though they did very sharply reprove, and
very zealously bear Testimony against all such, who made Shipwreck of Faith and
a good Conscience, and turned from the guidance and leading of the Grace of
God, into Lasciviousness, Wantonness, and fleshly Liberty. And therefore I
cannot but desire, that all that profess Christianity, may follow the Example
of them that were the first and wisest Builders of Christianity, who laid the
Foundation so, that another cannot be laid. And he that would build upon this
that is already laid, otherwise than they builded, must suffer loss in the Day
when his Works come to be tried.

And therefore if any see the Lord's Rod, and his Judgments in these things
that is upon the People of this Island, let all such humble themselves under
the mighty Hand of God, and wait to feel his mighty Power, to subdue the Man of
Sin, and to bring under that which has oppressed the Soul, that through the
power of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the oppressed may be set free,
and every Yoke may be broken, that it may be witnessed which was spoken by him,
Ioh. 8. 36. If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed; and so then
People do come to the Fast that the Lord has chosen, and that Fast cannot be
accompanied with Cruelty; nor there is no smiting with the Fist of Wickedness,
nor bringing Oppression over the Just, where Christ is owned and followed (as
the Lord has appointed) as a Witness, a Leader and a Commander, for which he
is given to the People, as you may read in Isaiah 55. 4. But where these Evils
are brought forth, as the fruits of any Fast, by those that appoint a Fast, or
pretend to keep a Fast, is it not like unto Iezabel's Fast, that she caused the
Elders and Nobles of the City to proclaim, where the just Man was witnessed
against, condemned, and stoned to Death for nothing, but because he could not
give nor sell his Inheritance away, which the Lord had given him? And so we
desire the good of all Men, and that every one may take notice of his own ways,
how he walks before the Lord, and do unto others as he would be done unto; and
that all may be free upon the account of things that appertain to God, and so
left to the Judgment of him that knows all Hearts, that from him they may
receive Reward.

And as for those things wherein Man is concerned, if any Man do wrong or
injury to another in Person or Estate, we say, let such be punished according
to the Law, which was made for the Transgressor, and let Judgment run down as
Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, Amos 5. 24. This is the way the
Scripture largely testifies, wherein Man may come to be accepted, and the Wrath
of God appeased, and his Judgments removed, and so the right Desire answered.

From a Lover of Peace and Rigteousness, who truly seeks the good of all Men,
John Burnyeat.
Written in Barbados, about the 29 th of the 11 th Month, 1670. upon the
Occasion of a Fast, that was pretended to by the People of the Island, because
of a great Sickness that was upon them, whereof many died, of which my
Companion William Simson then died.
Dearly Beloved,
WHom the Lord has called and Sanctified, and chosen in the Son of his Love,
through whom he has visited you in this Generation, as he did the People and
the Gentiles in ancient Days; that you might partake of his Salvation, and of
the Power of his Life, and of the Glory of his Kingdom, with those that are
gone before you. I say, for this end has the God of Wisdom in his Love reached
unto you in that Country, with the rest in this Age, that have waited for his
Salvation, and have sought the rich things of his Kingdom in his own way. And
now I am satisfied, that many of you in your measures, can seal to the Truth of
Christ's Words, who said, Seek and you shall find; for as he is faithful that
has promised, even so we have found his Words sure and true. And now my
Friends, being its certainly so, as many can witness, that they have found that
which is Eternal, which belongs to Eternal Life, having been guided by that,
which the Cloud and Pillar of Fire in the Wilderness was a figure of; every one
with all diligence hold that fast, which you have received, that you may grow
in, and be guided by it in your further Travels in the Heavenly Journey,
toward the blessed Heavenly Canaan, which is still before you, as the Price of
the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. And therefore observe the true Mark,
and still press forward toward the same, as the Apostles and ancient Saints
did. And take heed I entreat you, unto your selves, and the exercise of your
Minds, lest your Eye inwardly be drawn forth to look at another Mark; for if
you do, then will not the Price be the same that was theirs, who was faithful
unto Death, and so continued unto the end, and obtained the Crown. Therefore be
you all watchful, to keep the Enemy of your Souls out of your Hearts, that he
may reign who is your Friend, for ever, who seeks your good, and brings Life
and Peace unto your Souls, under whose Government and peaceable Dominion you
will find Rest and Pleasure for your inward Man. And now my dear Friends, since
it is the Lord's Truth you have received, and his Holy Power that you have
felt, (in these Countries, even as his People in other parts) dwell you with
it, and in it with careful Minds, that you may therein live unto God, as such
that have a part in the first Resurrection, that you may reign for ever and
ever over the Power of the Second Death. And all take heed of the mysterious
Workings of the wicked one, who works in Deceit by Guile, in every transformed
Appearance, to draw the Mind out of the pure Center in the true Power, to the
Likeness and Image which has no Life in it, where there can be no
stedfastness, nor true reigning over the Will that is unruly and foolish.
Therefore my dear Friends, keep your Watch every one in your own Hearts
continually, that you may not be betrayed from that pure Life, that yields
virtue unto your Souls, and nourishes up to Eternal Life. For I know; that the
wicked one, in his deceitful Workings you have been acquainted with, and his
evil Design the Lord by his Power, in his Light, has discovered unto many of
you; so that you, by the same, have escaped his hurtful Snares, and yet lives
in that which must reign at last over all. And therefore keep your Habitation
in the Power that is unchangeable, wherein you may live for ever without
fading; for the Power fades not, but abides in its Glory for ever; so that the
first is the last, the Root and Offspring. Blessed are they that have kept
their first Love, and have stayed in their Righteous Habitation, into which the
Power did redeem them; they do still witness a growing from Grace to Grace,
from Strength to Strength, and from one degree of Holiness unto another, until
they come to be purely like him, who is their Redeemer, who shall change them,
and bring them from Glory to Glory, till they bear the Image of the Heavenly
Man, and be like him, that is altogether glorious, who is putting of his Glory
richly upon his Church, which is his People in this Day. And therefore you that
have received the Spirit of the Lord, and are acquainted with it, do you follow
it in all its pure leadings with faithful Hearts; for it will certainly lead
all the Faithful to know an increase of Glory. And take heed of the Spirit of
the World, which is not of God, but leads from him; that Spirit where it
prevails, causes to wither and sade, and brings Barrenness upon the Soul, and
Darkness and Death, and then the Glory is lost, and the Image of the Heavenly
then is not born, nor no Man in that is Heir of the Heavenly Inheritance.
Therefore it does behoove all to look to their standing, in that wherein the
Heirship is, that none may come short of that Crown, which Paul said, was laid
for him, and all them that loved the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
so the God of Love and Peace keep you all, in his Love, Fear and Wisdom, that
your Dwellings for ever may be in his Peace, which the World cannot take away,
nor rob you of; that so with the rest of his Heritage, you may shine in the
Light of his Glory, and dwell in the Richness of his Kingdom for ever and ever.
Amen.

Bristol, the 9th of the 10th Month, 1675. This is the Desire of my Soul for
you all, whom I truly love, and in the Life Salute, wherein I am your Friend
and Brother, J. B.

Taunton, the 7th of the 2d. Month, 1677.
My dear Friends in Cumberland,
UNto you my Love and Life reaches, and purely flows forth in that which Lives
for ever; wherein I do in the Innoceney and Life of Righteousness truly Salute
you all, whom the Lord has raised and called to be a part of the first Fruits
unto himself in this day of ours, wherein the Glory of his hidden Life he has
Revealed unto a Remnant, even that which from the Wise and Prudent of this
World is still hid; and from such, as turn back into that Wisdom, it comes
again to be Veiled, so that the Light of the Glory of it they lose again,
though they had a view thereof. And therefore blessed are all, who keep their
Habitation in that Power which never Changes nor Decays, the Glory of the
Heavenly things will be still in their view, by which their Hearts will be
enlarged toward the Lord, both in Love unto him, and a Living People to his
Honor in all things, that his Name may be Exalted, and the Testimony of his
Truth in its own pure Nature in every thing kept up, according to its
Brightness and Glory, as by the power thereof we were raised up in the
beginning, as the life of Holiness grew in us, dear Friends, that which
quickened and raised us from the Dead in years past, through which we Live unto
God; and as we keep in the same, we shall for ever be accepted by him, and be
well pleasing in his sight: but out of that you know none shall be regarded by
him, though ye might do much, for he did not regard them in the days of old for
all they could do, that did not keep in the Life of Righteousness, though they
might go far, even to the covering of the Altar with Tears. And therefore, as I
said, that by which you were first quickened and raised, is that in which for
ever we must be accepted, so that every one is to mind and wait for an
increase, and by experience of the growth of that wherein there is a coming
upwards, from a Child's State, to a farther growth, and still it is in the same
Nature, without degeneration from that which was first, and so the first is
witnessed to be last, and ye grow more and more into the fullness of Christ, in
whom all fullness dwells. And therefore my dearly Beloved, in all your Meetings
upon the Truth's account have an eye unto, and wait for an Enjoyment of his
Blessed and Heavenly and Heartbreaking Power of the Lord God among you, that
your Hearts may be broken thereby, and your Spirits melted into true Love and
Contriteness, and you preserved in that state, and then will your Hearts be
enlarged in the Heavenly Wisdom that is Pure, Peaceable, Gentle and Easy to be
Entreated, and in that Wisdom and Power in you all, in the same will all your
works stand to the Honor of God, and Comfort one of another, and your Eyes will
be always to the Promotion of Truth in Righteousness, keeping up your ancient
Testimony, into which God raised you by his Power in years past, and in the
Life and Power of God you will keep under, and weaken that which would arise to
trample his Holy Testimony under Foot, and so keep the House and Family of God
in Order, and keep to the Cross to that, which would be out in a Fleshly
Liberty, to make void the Cross of Christ, by which we were Crucified to the
World, and the World to us; for that which would be from under the Cross, is
the same that would lead into the World again, and so would make shipwreck of
Faith and a tender Conscience, and lead into headiness, hardness, stubornness,
and looseness again, and then do they Apostatise from the Life of God that is
in them, and become Reprobates concerning the Faith, and so through forsaking
their first Love, lose their Reward at last. And therefore the true Elders,
Elder Men and Elder Women ought to have this Care upon them over the younger,
that all may be preserved in the first Love, and first Zeal, that none may lose
that, nor draw back into a fleshly Liberty, down into the Wisdom that is from
below, which has not its Spring in, nor from that Heavenly Gift, which cannot
keep the Hearts pure, as the Heavenly does; and you know, it was the Gift of
the Heavenly Power, that first Quickened us, and made us to Live to God; and you
know, it is the same that keeps our Hearts Tender and Lively, by which we Live
for ever. For our Life that we now Live, is by Faith in him who is the Power of
God, and we Feed upon him, and his Flesh is Bread, according to his own Words;
for he is the Living Bread that came down from God, and still comes down,
therefore mind it, wait for it, and stand up for it, and be not starved again
upon the barren Mountains of your own Imaginations, where this Bread of Life is
not to be found. And dear Friends, keep your Men and Women's Meetings in the
Lord's Fear and Power, and keep in the Holy Care, where you may have a sense of
your concern in the Body, and feel your Place and Charge every one of you, and
be Zealous for Righteousness in the particular and in the general, and the Lord
will be with you, as he has been, I am witness: For none no longer dwells in
the Truth and Love, than they dwell in Righteousness, though they may make a
profession. And be not at all discouraged in your works for the Lord and his
Truth, by that Spirit that would bring a light esteem upon your Holy Care and
Godly Order in the Truth, for it is the same in Nature, that in all ages
endeavored to lay wast God's Heritage, and obstruct his Work, and laid
stumbling blocks in the way of God's Traveling People, to cause them to fall,
and to turn back again; the Lord will blast every desire, that those go about
in this matter who let in this Spirit, and bring his Life over it, and preserve
his People therein; that in this Life and Heavenly Liberty, they may Serve him,
and Praise him, who Lives for Ever, who is Everlastingly Worthy, to whom be
glory and Dominion, World without End.

Dear Hearts, you being Living in my Remembrance, as also the Heavenly Seasons
we had together, when I was last with you, my Heart is filled with Love toward
you; and in that I send these few Lines, as a Salutation and tender Greeting
unto you, that you may know you rest in my Remembrance, as I believe I do in
yours. So the God of Love and Peace keep you all in his Love and Fear unto the
End, that your Portion may be with him in his Eternal Kingdom, where there
shall be no Sorrow, but you may dwell in Pleasure for ever, and for evermore.

From your Friend and Brother in the Fellowship of the Gospel. J. B.

Dear and Well-beloved,
UNto you, who are the called of God in those parts, unto whom the visitation
of his Day has reached, and upon whose Hearts the Heaven'y Light thereof has
shined, in its pure spiritual breakings forth, so that you are become the
Children thereof, and do walk therein; unto you all does the tender Salutation
of my Soul reach in the love of God, and in the Fellowship, which is a Mystery,
which is held in a pure Conscience, and continued, as we walk and abide in the
Light, in which we have fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, and also
one with another, and so are of one Family and Household, partakers of that one
Bread, which all the sanctified in all Ages did feed upon; which is that which
we are to wait for in this Day, that we may live thereby unto God, and grow
through the Divine Nourishment thereof up into his Nature, and into his
Strength, wherein we may triumph over the Adversary, as the Ancients did of
old, and rejoice in the God of our Salvation, who is our Strength and Tower of
Safety for ever.

Dear Friends, Great and large has the Love and Kindness of our God been unto
us (who were Strangers, Aliens and Enemies in our minds unto him) in this, that
he has called and chosen us to be his People, and to bear witness unto his
appearance, and the shinings forth of his Light, and of the Glory of his
Presence, whereby he has richly comforted our Souls, and lifted up our Heads
above all sorrow, even when the Enemy has thought to sink us down into the
Pit. Thus has the Lord dealt bountifully with our Souls, and been a ready help
in the needful time; to him be the Honor and Glory for ever and ever! So that
now it behooves all, after so many Deliverances, Favors and Mercies, to stick
close unto the Lord, and seek his Glory above all, and that with all their
strength, that so he who is the good Husbandman, may be glorified through
every ones bringing forth of Fruit, according to Christ's command.

Now my Friends, this all observe, that none can bring forth Fruit unto God's
Glory, but as they abide in Christ the living Vine; from him is the Life
received, by which, every one lives unto God; and it is by the virtue of that
Life, that every one must act to his Praise. And therefore see, that you all
retain it in its own Purity, and live in subjection thereunto through your
whole Day; that you may be as fruitful Branches, abiding in the right Nature,
and bearing holy Fruit: And then will you feel the holy Dew abide upon your
Spirits, throughout your Age, that will preserve you from withering, your Leaf
from fading; and so your Fruit shall be ripe in due season, and not be untimely
brought forth in that which will not endure: For that in which we have
believed, will endure for ever. The Heavenly Power which God has revealed in
our Hearts, and made manifest for a standing Foundation, that is sure for ever;
upon which, as you all abide steadfast, the Gates of Hell, with all the power of
Darkness, shall not prevail against you, but you shall be able to withstand
him, and keep your Habitations in the Dominion thereof, and dwell in Peace upon
the Rock of safety, in the midst of all Storms; and sing for joy of Heart, when
those that forsake this Rock, shall howl and lament for vexation of Spirit. For
the Lord God will bring his Day and his Power over all, and upon all, that fly
to any shelter, or seek any other defense, that have once known his Truth; and
he will be unto such as a Moth, and as Rottenness, and their Strength he will
waste, and their Garment and Clothing he will destroy, and their Beauty and
Glory he will cause to fade; though they have been as a beautiful Flower in the
head of the fat Valley, yet will fading come upon them, even dryness at the
Root, and withering and decaying upon the beauty of their Blossoms. And
therefore let all keep unto that, and in that, which will not decay, come to
nothing, nor never be turned into Darkness, but abide in its virtue and glory,
in and by which the Lord has visited you, and through which his Day has
dawned upon your Souls, the Morning whereof you have known bright and clear, as
without Clouds, in which you have seen the Son in his Glory to appear unto your
Souls, with his Heavenly healing, warmness and virtue. Now Friends, this is
that which for ever is to be kept too, that the Day may be known to increase in
the light and glory of it, in its own clearness, without mixture, not mixing
with it your own Wisdom, Thoughts, or carnal Imaginations, which do prove such
Clouds, where they are suffered to arise, that they bring Darkness over the
understanding, and make the Day cloudy and dark, and so occasion wandering, and
to some turn the very Eyelids of the Morning into the Shadow of Death. And
through such things has the Enemy so prevailed over some, that he has brought
them again into the Night of Everlasting Darkness and Confusion, ere they have
been aware, whither he would lead; and thus as a Man void of Understanding,
over whom the Whorish Woman has prevailed, and so led down to the Chambers of
Death, have many followed those Steps, that have taken hold on Hell, where
Misery is sure to be met withal.

Dear Friends, that which preserves from these Dangers, is that Arm and Power
which God revealed in the beginning, by which (as we are Witnesses) he redeemed
our Souls out of many afflictions. And therefore, let it be every ones care, to
wait for a clear and sensible feeling of that same Power in its own pure
Nature, to spring in all your Hearts every Day, and then will your delight be
so in it, and your acquaintance (in a clear Understanding) will be so with it,
that you will never be deceived, so as to take any other for it. Then to your
comfort, will your Heavenly Peace spring under the Power and Government of him
that is the Prince of true Peace, and so will your Hearts be made truly glad,
and weighty, and ponderous, and not to be carried about with every Wind: For in
this is the true and sure Establishment of the Soul, with Grace in the Covenant
of Life for ever; and these are they whose Peace is of a standing nature, who
are not given to change. But this I have always observed, that where there is
an uncertain Spirit or Mind, though in some states into which, at times they
may come, they may have Peace, and feel some Refreshment, yet for want of
constancy and stedfastness (which is preserved through a true, watchful and
diligent attendance upon that which does not change, which is sure for ever)
they lose their Habitation, and their state of Peace, and come to be tossed in
their Minds, and afflicted in their Spirits; and also are the occasion of
tossing, affliction and distress unto others, who not being aware, may
sometimes be in danger to suffer with them, when they fly from the Word, that
should uphold, as it was with Jonah in the days of old. And therefore it is
good for every one, to have their Hearts established with Grace, and in the
Grace wait for a settlement, that under the pure teachings thereof, they may be
preserved from going into those things that will procure Woe; and so shall
every ones State in that which is good, be more and more constant, and then
will there be a growing, and going forward and not backward. For that which
does occasion any to linger, or draw back, is Carelessness, Unbelief and
Disobedience; and in such the Lord's Soul does take no pleasure. And therefore
in that which does not change, all live, by which all changeable and mutable
Thoughts, and Imaginations, and Desires will be judged down, and the spring of
Life over all will slow; and the First will be the last; for in that the Beauty
and Glory does stand for ever. And all that abide not in it, to grow in the
virtue thereof, (whatever they have been) at the best will be but as a fading
Flower in the head of the fat Valley, as it was with Ephraim; the Lord will
take no delight in them, but reject them, and cast them out, as such whose
Beauty is gone, whose Gold is become dim, and whose Wine is mixed with Water:
And so as reprobate Silver shall they be esteemed even of Men, because the Lord
has rejected them.

So the Lord God keep and preserve you all in that which was from the
beginning, and will endure unto the end, that in that ye may flourish and grow,
as the Lilly of the Valley, and the Tree by the Rivers of Water. This is the
desire of my Soul for you all, who truly love you in the love of God, wherein I
remain one with you, and am

London, the 10th of the 3d Month, 1677. Your Brother in the Truth, J. B.
Let Copies of this be sent to New England, Virginia, Maryland and Barbados.



Upon the 2d of the 10th Month, 1677.
ONE Oliver Morross, an Informer, came into a Meeting in Mahuntleth in
Mountgomery in Wales, where John Burnyeat, in the fear of God was speaking unto
the People, and Preaching the Gospel of Peace and Salvation unto them (for
their good) as he had received from the Lord; the said Oliver Morross,
Informer, with several Constables, and many other Rude People came twice into
the Meeting, to break up the Meeting, and made a great disturbance: But Friends
in quietness sitting still (only one who reasoned the matter with him) he at
last went out, and all his Company to the Stable, and there took all the
Horses, and Friends Horses, all they could find in the Town: But after Meeting
we got them again, they being then taken without any color of Law. But the
next day, being the 3 d day of the 10 th Month, the said Informer went to one
William Pugh of Mathauern, a Justice of Peace (so called) who came along with
him, and met John Burnyeat and Thomas Ellis upon the Road, and stopped them both,
and caused them to turn back to an Alehouse, where this Informer, and another
Man (which was William Pugh's Bailiff) Swore against them for Preaching at the
aforesaid Meeting, for which the Justice Fined them, and wrote a Warrant, and
sent for a Constable, who by that Warrant seized upon John Burnyeat's Mare, and
Thomas Ellis's Horse, with Saddles and Bridles; and so they were constrained to
Travel on their Way on Foot, till they could get to an Alehouse to get
Lodging. This Reward the Lord's Servants Received at their Hands, for their
Love and Good will to the Souls of People.

John Burnyeat's Mare was worth about 8 l. Thomas Ellis's Horse, about 3 l. 10
s.

John Burnyeat's Mare Dyed within an hour and an half after Seizure; and the
other Friends took the Mange and Dyed in the Informer's Hands within six Months
time.

J. B.

Dear and Well-beloved in the Lord,
WITH you my Soul has Precious Unity in the Spiritual Fellowship, and
Nearness, and Heavenly Oneness, which stands in that Life, by which we were
first Quickened; in which we Live, and in the Increase of which we grow into a
Heavenly Understanding and true Soundness, in Discerning and Judgment, whereby
the Faithful come to be more and more accomplished for their Places, and fitted
for every good Work, that so they may answer their Office and Membership in the
true Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head; of which Body we are made living
Members through his Love, who has called us, and in his Son chosen us to be
Heirs of Life.

Dear Friends, your selves know, that he who through his Bounty has blessed us
with Spiritual blessings, in Christ Jesus, so that we are made Stewards of his
Manifold Graces, who now does require answerable Service from us all, according
to our gifts received from him; and whosoever is found Faithful to their Gifts
and Places, shall certainly witness an Increase, and so grow in Grace and in
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and so come more and more
into true soundness, and to the Spirit of a sound Mind: For you know, how
richly the Power of Christ was Manifested in us and among us in the beginning,
and how wonderful it did work for the Redeeming of our Hearts out of the World,
the Vanity and Pleasures of it, that we might Love and Affect Heavenly things,
and delight in the glory of that which comes from Heaven. And in that day you
may remember the glorious and Heavenly Raptures we many times were raised up
into, and with admiration were ready to turn about and say, We will Behold this
Wonder, the Bush which Burns, and is not Consumed. But since that time many
have been the Exercises, and weighty have been the Trials that have been met
with in our Spiritual Progress, through which the Lord has led us; and many
Temptations has the Lord delivered us from, and led us out of; and many
Weaknesses has he passed by, and Trespasses has he in his great Mercy
forgiven; so that to this day we remain, and that in covenant with him:
Therefore have we cause to Praise him, and to Sing unto him. Now our present
state and capacity, to which he has brought us, is to be minded, and our duty
therein; for now many are come to be Free from being Servants or Slaves unto
the old Taskmasters; and though but in our Journey, yet there is something to
be done, which was truly Figured out in Israel's Travel; they were to fit the
Tabernacle with all the Services and Ornaments belonging thereunto, though in
the Wilderness in their Travel; and the Men and Women were both concerned (as
you may read) in the work to prepare for the Fitting of the Tabernacle,
according to the Command of the Lord. And this was after the Lord had appeared
unto Moses, showed his Wonders in Egypt, wrought that great Salvation at the
Red Sea, and manifested his dreadful Presence upon Mount Sinai; and given forth
his Holy Law, and his Manifestations, by which he Taught Israel to do his Will;
so that in the observation of which they were blessed; a lively Figure, of what
our Souls are Witnesses of, in the Heavenly Substance. So that now we are not
to be negligent, for it would not have been well in Israel to have answered
Moses (when according to the Command of God he put the People upon it, both Men
and Women, to Work for the Fitting of the Tabernacle) We had no such thing,
when we came out of Egypt, we had no such thing put upon us, when we began our
Journey; we will do as we did in the beginning: This would have been Rebellion
against him, that by the Hand of Moses brought them out of Egypt, and freed
them out of Bondage: And you know, what Judgments and Destruction he brought
upon them, that did rebel and gainsay, as Corah and his Company, who withstood
the Ordinance of God.

Oh! my dear Friends, methinks, I am as if I were talking with you of the
Lord's Mercies and former Loving Kindnesses and Dealings with us; and being
also under a present sense of our present state and capacities, to which he
has brought us, my Bowels within me are even Melted with a Holy Love and
Tenderness toward you; and in that Love I send these Lines, as the Salutation
of my Soul in that which Lives for ever, and as a signification of that entire
love, which in my Heart lives toward you; Wherein I desire, that both you and
I forever may so mind our present state, and our growth and the increase of the
Mercies of our God unto us, as to answer them by a Faithful Serving of him, and
one another in that love which thinks no Evil, and is never weary of doing
good, and yet will not vaunt it self. Now this is that which lives in my view,
the Power of Christ, which was so Richly Manifested in the beginning, did then
Work to the preparing of us to be a People fit to do his Will; and so it
wrought unto a Cleansing, Washing, and Sanctifying of us, that we might be Holy
Vessels fit for his use. Now being Prepared, the same power in the Faithful
works mightily, to the Fitting and Furnishing of us unto every Good Work, that
we might be to the praise of his grace, who has called us; and if we so be to
his praise, we must grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: And if we grow in the Knowledge of him, as we have known him to
save us from Sin, and to destroy the evil one, and so to be our Sanctification
and Redemption; even so we must Wait to know him to be made of God unto us
Wisdom, that he may be our Wisdom, and the Fountain of it unto us may be the
gift of his Holy Power in our Hearts. And so then, as it did mightily work in
our Hearts to Prepare us, even so will the same Gift be felt to work mightily
to furnish us with Wisdom, and to enable for every Good Work; and so you will
know him to be made of God Wisdom unto you. For the Holy dread of the Power
upon the Heart in Righteousness being felt, guides him or her in Wisdom that
Speaks; the same Holy Fear and Dread upon the Heart guides him in Silence, that
in Silence sits, whose mouth is not opened, and so he is made still, and
Christ your Head, who is one in the Man, and in the Woman, Wisdom unto you; and
so here all will be kept in your places, as you keep in Subjection unto him,
who is the Head, the Husband of the true Wife.

And dear Friends, mind his Heavenly Power, and keep under a Holy Reverence
unto it, and that will keep you Savoury and Reverent in your Meetings, and
clear and in a good understanding, and Subject one unto another; and so you
will be Co workers together, and helpers one of another, and so you will come
to have the benefit one of another gifts: And thus as Members, will you supply
in a Blessed Unity every one your Office in the Body. And therefore my Counsel,
as a Brother in Love, unto you is, Let all be Subject: None, in whom the tender
Life in a Heavenly Reverence does move for Counsel, Advice or otherwise, to
quench it, or to stop the Service; for in so doing others may be wronged, as
well as the particular, unto whom the Lord intends benefit by thy gift: For it
is not good to Stop; only let all take heed, that their own Spirits may be
Subject, that Christ may be head in all, and he may be your Wisdom. And be open
and ready in your Hearts to Receive Counsel, Help and Instruction one from
another, and keep down the forward, heady and rash Spirit, that would run
without Reverence, and speak without the true Fear, from that none will rightly
understand, nor have a true sense of the Weight of the Service of this Day.

O! it is fresh in my Heart, the Dread, the Reverence, the Fear, that our
Hearts were filled with in the beginning, in which we went about Truth's
Concern; this same is still to be Felt and Minded, and then all will be kept
Savoury; and in this will all your Meetings, your Care and Labor of Love be a
sweet Smelling Sacrifice unto the Lord.

And Friends, let your Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings be kept orderly for the
Service determined and aimed at, that you may be retired from the World, and
such not concerned in the Service Proposed for such Meetings; that so all that
come, may be either Capable of doing Service in a Reverent Mind, or to Learn
that which may be for Truths Honor, their own Good, and your Comfort; and then
will all you, who are concerned, get into your Service without Straitness, and
so will be a help one unto another in your particular gifts, and the Spring of
Life will be opened among you, and your Meetings will be Delightful unto you;
and you in that will be a Delight one to another; and then with one Consent, in
the Pleasant Unity you will do the Lord's Work together, as his Servants and
Handmaids, and a part of his pleasant Heritage, which he has Chosen, and upon
whom he rains down his (...) daily.

And so the God of Peace and Love fill your Assemblies with his Presence, Life
and Love, that you may Flourish, as the Plants of his Right-hand-planting, and
be faithful through your whole Day, is the desire of my Heart and Soul, who
Remain,

Your Brother in the Lord Jesus Christ, I. B.
To the Women's Meetings in Cumberland. From London, 20 th of the 4 th Month,
1678.
Dear Friends,
YOU whom the Lord has visited and reached unto by his own holy Arm of
Heavenly Power; for that blessed end, for which he has visited many Nations,
and appeared unto many People, that he might show Glory again unto Mankind,
which through Sin, they were fallen short of, that so in his Visitation he
might renew that Heavenly Image, whereby he might be glorified again among the
Sons of Men; and now in this great Day of Visitation, which has dawned upon
the Nations, you in these Countries have been visited and reached unto, and
graciously saved and delivered from the Snares of Death, and opened unto the
way of Life; so that you have both seen into that hidden Glory, and tasted of,
and been enjoyers of the power of that Life, which has no end. And now that
care which always ought to dwell upon your Hearts, is this, that you may keep
in possession that which you have received: That as was said of old, None may
take your Crown from you, nor none may fall short of that Rest, which is
prepared for the visited and redeemed of the Lord. The way you have known, God
has showed it unto you, and called you to walk therein; and the mark you have
seen, the Lord has set that before you, that you might press toward it, as
the ancient Christians did, for the Price of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus. And now dear Friends, that which I desire all may be concerned in, is,
how there is a pressing forward toward the Mark, and a going on in this way
which the Lord has cast up or revealed, and called you to walk in; for it is
he that travels on; that shall come to the blessed End, and obtain the Crown of
Glory; and not such as lingers or sits down by the way, either to take up a
Rest, or look for another Inheritance, besides what God has promised, shall be
the possession after the War is over, and the Conquest obtained. For Jordan
must be gone through, and the Canaanites utterly subdued, before any Man of War
sit down in his Inheritance: Therefore those Tribes, that had their Lots on the
other side of Jordan, were to go through Jordan, and continue in the War, till
all was subdued: And thus is the saying true, He that continues unto the end,
shall be saved; and he that is faithful unto Death, shall have the Crown of
Life. And therefore let a concern be always upon your Minds in this weighty
matter, that you may see how it is with you, and whether you are still in your
Journey upon your Travel toward the Mark for the Price: And as you must mind,
whether you are in your Travel, pressing forwards or no; even so you must mind
also, that you press forwards toward the Mark, or else you may come short of
the Price, the blessed Inheritance, and so be such as James speaks of, that ask
and receive not, because they ask amiss. For the Heavenly Wisdom is to be
sought after, and waited for, that comes down from above, which teaches and
guides in the Heavenly Way, the Heavenly Path of Life and Salvation, where
every ones steps will be sure, and their goings will be established, and their
understandings will grow. For the Just Man's Path, will be as the shining
Light, that shines more and more, unto the perfect Day: Here none will be like
those that beat the Air, or run at an uncertainty; the Apostle said, they were
not such, yet there may be such, whose Pains and Travels may be great.
Therefore still I say, let your pressing be toward the Mark, in the sense of
the Lord's power, which is the true Guide, and the true Cross, that mortifies
and crucifies the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, and keeps Self down in
the Death, out of the Reputation, for there is none due unto it. For whosoever
gives and seeks Reputation to it, which ought to be made of no Reputation, such
can never rightly seek God's Honor, nor work his Work, nor obtain the right
Price, nor attain the Crown, but must fall short at last: For it is in him that
crucifies Self, and makes it of no Reputation, that the Election stands, and in
whom the Heirship is for ever. And therefore, dear Friends, wait all to feel
his power in your Hearts, and diligently mind the blessed working thereof, that
you may feel, how it purges your Consciences from dead Works, and cleanses
your Hearts from Sin; for Sin defiles the Heart, that it is not prepared for
the Lord, he will not dwell therein. Therefore it must be washed, and dead
Works must be purged away; for no Man can serve the living God therein; it must
be the living Works in the living Power, wherein we must be accepted. And so
let all mind the living Power, which is the living Guide, which does guide in
the living Way, and keeps alive unto God; and so you will all be kept a living
People, and grow up in the living Wisdom that is from above, which is inwardly
taught by the living Gift, that is received from the Father of Lights, with
whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. And as you grow up in
this Wisdom, you will be constant, there will be an establishing, and such will
show out of a good Conversation their Works, with Meekness and Wisdom. But
says the Apostle, if there be bitter Envying, and Strife in your Hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the Truth; this Wisdom descends not from above, but
is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish: For where Envying and Strife is, there is
Confusion and every evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, and then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and
good Fruits, etc. And the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that
make Peace; so you may see the Fruits brought forth, manifest the Wisdom, from
whence it comes: The Heavenly peaceable Wisdom brings forth the peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness, and is full of Mercy, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, and full of good Works; but the Earthly brings forth the contrary.
Therefore says the Apostle, If there be bitter Envying and Strife in your
Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth: Say not, thou art in the
Heavenly Wisdom, while this lodges in thee, for this Wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly and sensual, and therefore can never establish, but
bring Confusion, because he is the Author of it, that can never work good.

And therefore dear Friends, let your Hearts be always kept in subjection unto
that Power, that bridles your Wills and crosses them, and keeps you lowly,
humble and gentle, where the daily dying, which the Apostle was in, may be
witnessed; and so you will see the true pressing forward toward the Mark, and
the true growing into Dominion over him that would hinder; and then, as James
says, Swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to Wrath; for the Wrath of Man
works not the Righteousness of God. Yet this I have often observed, Man in a
heat of Wrath would be working for God; but in that he cannot work the
Righteousness of God: Therefore well said James, Swift to hear, slow to speak,
slow to Wrath: And you know, that he whom we ought to hear, says, Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in Heart: And so as every one learns of him, and minds
the leadings of his Power, and the teachings of his spirit of Grace in their
Hearts, they will grow more and more like him, and come into his Nature and
healing Spirit, and so in his Grace and Life be Healers and Saviors: And
therefore was it said by the Prophet, they should be as Saviors upon Mount
Zion. Now Friends, every one mind this saving, healing power in your selves,
and bow in your Hearts unto it, and be still in your Minds and calm, and you
shall see how it will sweeten you, level your Spirits, and bring down that
which is high and losty, and hard, and you shall see, how the Mountains will
melt at the prefence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, and you
shall see, how the Winds and Seas obey your Savior, and into what calmness he
will bring your Spirits; and then when all is still, your Ear being opened,
which is the first Work of the Word, you will be swift to hear, and hearing,
your Souls will live: And you will come down out of all the noises, floatings
and swellings, into the calmness and stillness, where you will admire your
Savior, and say, What manner of Man is this, that even the Winds and Seas obey
him? And you will see, that though Jordan overflow her Banks, yet at the
leadings on of our Ioshuah, and at the entrance of the feet of our High Priest,
it must be driven back, that the Ransomed of the Lord may pass over dry-shod.
Much of this nature in Spirit may be read, as there is a harkening and keeping
low; but the forward, rash and hasty, are often tossed upon the Waters, and
very uncertain in their ways and doings; and therefore do produce unto
themselves much affliction of Soul and Spirit; for to them the promise does not
belong, where it is said, He will keep them in perfect Peace, whose Minds are
stayed upon him, because they trusted in him.

Now Friends, methinks the Way is plain, if every one would be careful to
attend upon the power and its openings, and give way thereunto, and be humble;
for its the humble he teaches his Ways, and the meek he will guide in
Judgment, and the willing and obedient he will feed, for the Promise is, They
shall eat of the good of the Land. And therefore I do beseech all, be mindful,
be you all careful, keep your Hearts out of the World, and the drowning,
surfeiting Cares and Pleasures of it, that you may neither be choked, nor
surfeited with the excess of that, nor so led up into the worldly Pleasures,
and Liberty out of the Truth, which that draws into, as thereby and therein to
forget the Lord, and overlook your inward State. For if any so do, they lose
the Glory, the Beauty and Sweetness of their Heavenly condition; and then they
grow weary of the Way of the Lord, and ready to say, as some of old, What
profit is there in serving of God, or in keeping of his Ordinances? And
therefore the God of Life stir you up, and awaken all unto Watchfulness and
Diligence, that you may grow rich in the inward Man, and be replenished with
the Virtues and Graces of God, that you may be a fruitful People in those parts
of the World, to the Honor and Glory of him who has called and visited you,
who is Worthy of all Glory and Honor, Praise and Dominion for ever!

And dear Friends, my Heart's love reaches unto you all, who love and fear the
Lord; and in the Love of God I dearly salute you all, and send this as a
Testimony of that Love, that still lives in my Heart unto you, and therein I
remain,

London, 1680. Your Friend and Brother, I. B.

Dear Friends,
THE Love of my Heart and Soul is richly extended forth unto you; and surely,
my Heart is affected with you in the Exercise you are under, and do endure in
this Day, wherein the Lord seems to be pleased to try you as in a Furnace of
Affliction, and to prove your Faith and Patience, that you may come to know the
value of it, even of that which is more precious than Gold that perishes. And
truly, my Heart believes, that the Lord does not suffer it to come upon you to
destroy you, but to try you; and when his good Will is fulfilled in that, and
they have filled up their measure, whose Hearts are hardened in their Cruelty,
he will find a way to deliver and bring forth his tried and proved People,
whose Hearts are right before him, and whose Souls are wisely set to seek him;
unto such shall all things be rightly sanctified, and the Blessing, and the
Peace and Glory shall rest upon their inward Man, with the richness of that
Life which comes from Heaven, for which you suffer; for it is your innocent
suffering for this, (as you have the Witness thereof in your selves) that
brings the Crown and Diadem of Glory to be put upon the Head of your inward
Man. So that the saying of the Apostle comes to be witnessed, The Spirit of God
and of Glory shall rest upon you. Oh my most dearly beloved Friends! How is my
Soul melted into tenderness, and my Heart broken within me, in the meltings of
the love of God toward you, and in the sense of your long and weighty Trials,
that you have endured and gone through; and yet for all must they seem, as if
they were but beginning. Is the strength of the hard-hearted such, that they
are resolved to make a full end, or to try what the Lord can do? Will they
prove their Arm to the utmost? Well, the Lord in his own time will manifest,
that it is but Flesh, and not Spirit, and therefore that which must decay and
wither, and be dried up, and so prove weak at last, when the unseen Arm of the
Lord, which they see not, nor know not, shall be revealed, and stretched out,
and made bare; which you that look not at things that are seen, have a Faith
in, which Faith is that by which you live, and in which you have your Victory,
and in which your Hope does fasten as an Anchor, both sure and steadfast: So
that though the Winds do blow, and the raging Waves do swell high, yet you are
preserved and kept from being overthrown and destroyed.

Dearly Beloved, methinks, I find a Word of sweet Exhortation in my Heart unto
you, whom my Soul loves, who may be, or are tried in this exercising Day with
Bonds or Imprisonments. In the first place, get into a quiet frame of Spirit
and Mind within your selves every one, and into a resignedness freely up into
the Will of God, out of time, looking as little at that, as you can; for if you
do, it will make your Exercises worse and harder. For this I have experienced,
that when a Man is freeliest resigned into the Will of God, and in a right
Spirit most given up to suffer for him, he is fittest to have his Liberty, and
most commonly it is the nearest unto him. Dear Lambs, I know there is sometimes
a Travel in Spirit, to get into a right place with the inward Man, when the
outward Man is in Bonds; but when the Heart once gets thither, all things are
made easy and comfortable by him, who said, his Yoke was easy, and his
Burden light. And now be all concerned thus to get through in your Spirits,
and then you will feel, that the Word of God is not bound, but free, and your
Souls will be free in it and its holy Power, and so be fed by the Milk of it,
that your Souls will draw spiritually from the blessed Breasts thereof, by
which you have been born again. And being thus in your inward Man renewed unto
God, and up into his Life, where the Habitation of Peace and Quietness is for
your Souls, that they cannot reach to bring a Disturbance to, and there feeling
your Ease, Joy, Peace and Pleasure to be such, that you can in your
Prisonhouse sing joyful Praises unto the Lord; then, my Friends, be vvatchful,
tender and kind one unto another, and over one another, that Love, Peace and
Joy may be maintained among you all, who suffer rightly and innocently for the
Truth of our God; that so you may be one another Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in
the Lord Jesus Christ your Life and Strength.

And dear Friends, where there is innocence and simplicity, bear one with
another, and help one another, that in your sufferings you may have fellowship
one with another; and so keep in the fellowship of the sufferings of Jesus
Christ, where all may be humble and tender, that so while others are striving
to provoke you to come out of your places, and to offend the Lord, you may not
provoke one another, nor be an occasion unto any one to go out of their place
in the Truth, and so to lose their Peace with the Lord and in his Spirit. For I
have observed, that there is a care to be amongst Friends, at such times and in
such conditions, when they are kept up together, that all things may be kept
sweet and pleasant, and that they may even join together in bearing the Burden
that is laid upon them; and those that are more grown, and deeper in their
experience, of what they are called unto, may help the weak, and so fulfill the
Law of Love.

And dear Friends, let not unprofitable Discourse be gone into, for that may
lead into a striving, that may hurt the unity, that should be kept in the
Light, and has sometimes grown into a Heat, which has set some Spirits
against one another, which should have been one, and kept in the Unity, where
the love and comfort is. And so all watching in the Light, and waiting to feel
the healing Power and Life in your Souls, there will be a sweetness and
Heavenly oiliness over your Hearts, in which you will have a delight one in
another, and in one another good; and this will help you all, and so the
strong comforted in the innocent and reverent care of the weak, and the weak
comforted in the Love, Care, Gentleness and Kindness of such that are strong:
And this preserves as a pleasant Family, to the Honor of the great Lord and
Father. And so then shall you see, how he will delight in you, and appear among
you, and enrich you, and bless you every one with a Portion from himself, out
of his Heavenly Bounty, and Divine rich Treasure, that none will want Bread,
nor refreshing Wine to nourish you in the inward Man; but the holy Gift in you
will be as a Well, springing up unto Eternal Life.

And so, you dear suffering Children of the Lord God Allmighty, my Heart and
Soul most dearly salutes you all, and in the Love of God I have Unity with you
in your blessed Testimony, for which you suffer; in which the God of all Grace
and Truth comfort your Hearts, and bear up your Heads over all your Hardships
and deep Sufferings, which, as I understand, are renewed and increased upon
you: That through him, for whom you suffer, who is your God, and the great Lord
of Heaven and Earth, you may be strong to endure and abide to the end, to his
Glory and Honor, who is over all, and Worthy of all, Blessed for ever, Amen.

London, the 20th of the 3d Monh 1682. From your Friend and Brother, in that
which shall outlive all Hardship, in which we have believed, J. B.
A Copy of an Epistle written to Friends at Bristol, in the time of their
Sufferings.



Dear Friends,
UNTO you, whom God has Visited in his Love and Mercy, and unto whom he has
showed Kindness through his Son our Savior, whom he has given for Salvation
unto the Ends of the Earth; unto you, I say, does the real Love of my Heart
reach forth, and for you in my Heart there Dwells a Care, that as God in the
exceeding Riches of his Love and Mercy has Visited you, and called you to be
Saints, through the Sanctification of the Word, and Purifying through Faith,
that you being made Holy, might become Heirs of Eternal Life through his Son
Christ Jesus, and of that Eternal Kingdom, into which no Unholy thing must
Enter. And now being you are called with this Holy Calling, thus to be Heirs
through Faith in the Seed, in whom the Election and Heirship does stand for
ever; do you all mind the Heavenly Rule and Government of this Holy Seed in all
your Hearts, that your Spirits may be kept in their Places, in Subjection and
Reverence unto him, whom the Father has Anointed, and whose Spirit the Father
has sent forth into your Hearts, to lead you into all Truth, even into him,
who said, I am the Truth, in whom the Fullness Dwells; that you might be in him
that is True, even in the Son, in whom the Heirship is: That so you may be
Heirs, yea, joint-Heirs with him, that is True and Holy for ever.

And now my Friends, being the Lord in Mercy has called you unto this high and
honorable Calling, to be Saints and Heirs in Christ, mind your Calling, and
what you are called unto; and be careful to keep in him, and walk in him, as
you have received him, and to sit together in him, in Heavenly places, as the
Saints of Old did: for the Heavenly Places are in him, the safe dwelling, and
he is the Way, and in him is the safe Walking; and therefore did the Apostle
exhort the Saints to Walk in him, as they had received him. Now my dear
Friends, all learn to know what it is to walk in Christ, the Power and
Righteousness of God, and then your steps will be sure; For he is the Light,
and Day, where there is no occasion of stumbling. And you are to mind your
Sitting together in Heavenly places in Christ, not a-sunder, not out of the
Unity, but together in him, who is but one in all, and holds all in Oneness, in
Life and Fellowship that abide in him. For he cannot be divided, his Coat was
without Seam; that was the Figure, and so is his Spirit, that is the Covering
of his Body now, which he has Purchased with his own Blood; it has no
Division or Seam in it, but is One, although it differs in Manifestation or
Gifts, as to degree or operation, because of the many Offices proper to the
distinct Members of one and the same Body, whereof Christ is the Head; yet the
Life through the whole Body, by which every Member is supplied with ability to
answer its place, is but One, and thereby is the Body kept in Unity. For the
Life does rule the Members of the true Body, and therefore that Member, that
goes from under the Government of the Life, must needs Die; Death comes over
it, and the Power of Death rules it: and hence comes the Breach of Unity, and
the Discord, and the Strife, and the Contention. And therefore let all your
Hearts be kept in the Sense of the true Life and Power of God, and in
subjection thereunto in true Love, Lowliness of Mind and Humility of Spirit;
and then in this right frame of Spirit you will be ready to serve one another
in Love, and not to rule over one another in Lordship; for that is not proper,
no, nor it is not Natural unto the Living Members of the Living Body, unto whom
Christ is the Head, and over whom he Rules. And so dear Friends, you all
keeping in the Power, and that ruling in your Hearts, that keeps tender and
lowly, you will be full of an holy Care, and the living Zeal for the Lord's
honor, and for the preservation of his People in Righteousness, that the Truth
may be kept a top, and Righteousness Lived in by all, that do make a Profession
of that honorable Name and Truth, in which we have believed, and through which
we have been Saved, and Sanctified, and made holy; and then will Unity, Love
and Peace spring and grow among you, and you will be a Joy and Comfort one unto
another, and strengthners and helpers one of another in this great Work, and
Day of God. And thus the Faithful keeping their Places, and their Care in every
Meeting, and minding the Order and Government of Truth in themselves, to be
kept in Humility, and the holy Tenderness in their own Hearts, there will be
that Sweetness and peaceable Reverence, that will be Savoury and Comely in the
Eyes of all. And in, and under the Government of this peaceable Spirit you
Living and Walking, you may then come to be rightly concerned to God's glory,
in the Blessed Order, which the Truth has led into, and by the Power of God is
now set up in the Churches of Christ, for the keeping of all out and down, that
are unclean, unruly and unholy, and preserving of the Camp of God in that
Purity, that is proper for it; that he that is holy, may delight to dwell
there, and abide in the midst thereof. And dear Friends, all you that keep your
habitations in the Lord's Power, neglect not your Gifts received from Christ;
but be you all concerned in your places, and according to your abilities for
the Honor of Truth; that every thing that would bring Dishonor to that worthy
name, by which ye have been called, and give Occasion of stumbling unto the
weak, may be removed in the Wisdom of God, or at least by the tender power of
God Judged out from among you; that the Camp may be kept clean, and
Righteousness may run down, and the glory of the Lord break forth upon you, and
you therein may shine to his Praise and Glory for ever more.

Dear Friends, I also was willing to let you know, that our Meeting this year
at London was very quiet, and peaceable; and blessed Unity and comfortable
Fellowship in the Power and Love of God was Witnessed among us, and we gathered
up in that together, into that care and concern, which the state of the
Churches of Christ in this trying day did require. For many of our Friends, in
diverse places of this Nation, are under great Sufferings for their Testimony:
But otherwise the Truth does prevail and gain upon many Hearts; and through
these Trials God will Magnify his Power in the end, and Crown his People with
Dominion; for through Sufferings will the Lamb and his Humble and Faithful
Followers have the Victory.

We had also account from diverse Countries, of the Prosperity of Truth, and the
State of Friends, at the Yearly Meeting now lately over, as Holland, and the
Country that way, and from Ireland and Scotland; and so had an account in
Letters to the Yearly Meeting of the state of things, and the affairs of Truth,
to our great Comfort. And therefore it is desired (that if the Lord should so
order, that we may Meet together, as hitherto we have done, and intend, if he
permit, to do) that you in America would endeavor to send over against that
time from your several Countries, an account of the Prosperity of Truth, and
how it is among you as to the Affairs thereof, that at that Meeting Friends may
have an account from you, as we have from other Parts. And for this end it was
desired by Dear G. F. (whom many of you know, has a general Care upon him for
the good of the whole Body) that at your Half-years-Meeting in the latter part
of the year, you might draw up an Epistle, which might be sent to be at London
at the Yearly Meeting every year, and so from your Half-years-Meeting in every
place, there may be an account given yearly, which will be a refreshment and
comfort to Friends. And therefore it is desired, that if this come in time to
your Half-years-Meeting, you would be mindful of it, and answer the desire of
Friends; and let Copies of this be sent to Virginia, Maryland, Pensylvania, and
New-Iersey, and to Long Island, and Road-Island, and to Sandwich, and where
there may be a Service, or to Situate, if the Half-years-Meeting be there, and
to Barbados, or the Leeward-Islands.

So with my Love to you all, in that wherein all the Faithful have Fellowship,
I conclude and remain

Your Friend and Brother in the Truth, I. B.
Hartford the 19th of the 4th Month, 1682.
An Epistle to Friends of Bristol, Directed to C. J.
Dear C. J.
IN that everlasting Truth and Seed of Life, through which the God of Truth
has reached us and visited us, is the living Love and true endeared Affection
of my Heart and Spirit Richly and Sweetly let forth and extended unto thee,
with thy dear Wife, and your Children; as also unto the Faithful and
true-Hearted to the Lord in that City, who in this Trying day are given up unto
God, both to Do and Suffer for his Name's sake; My Soul, I can still say, is
deeply Affected with your Suffering state, and be sure you are many times
livingly in my Remembrance, and that in the near Approaches of my Spirit unto
the Lord: for in that, in which the access and the true drawing nigh unto him
is experienced, do you live upon my Heart, and are brought very often into my
view, together with your Suffering State, under which it is the Pleasure of
your Heavenly Father to Try you, and to prove your Faith and Confidence, and to
let you know the preciousness thereof in the time of need. And now my dearly
Beloved, see all of you, that you keep in the Faith that gives the Victory, and
truly saves and defends; and know that ancient saying true for ever, The very
hairs of your Head are all numbered, and not one shall fall to the ground,
without your Father's Providence. And therefore let your Eyes be unto him, both
for Salvation and Preservation, and know, that he both can and will deliver,
when he sees good; for you know him that is the living God, that reigns, and
will reign over all, and in due time make all know, that he can do, whatsoever
he pleases in Heaven and in the Earth. And therefore mind your acquaintance
with him, and your knowledge of him, in that which may be known of him in your
Hearts, and your Unity with his Life in your Souls, that you may all feel the
Peace thereof, and the Holy Spring therein, which Man by all his Cruelty cannot
reach to put a stop unto: But when they that seek to destroy you, and to take
all Comfort from you, have done all they can, this Spring being open in your
Hearts, you have Comfort, Peace and Joy, that they neither know of, nor can
keep from you. Oh! you dear Suffering Children and tender Babes of the
Almighty, who are called unto this day and hour of Temptation or Trial, how
does my Soul Love you! how is my very Heart's Love let forth unto you at this
time, as at many other times! The Lord the God of Strength be with you, and
strengthen and fill your tender Souls with the Glory of his Life, and the
sweetness of his Presence, that your Spirits with gladness may Praise him in
the midst of all these Exercises, with which you are compassed. And now my dear
Friends, you being so in my Heart, with a living Sense of your Trials that are
upon you, methinks, I see the Wall with which the God of Israel does compass
you about, over which the Adversary cannot shoot an Arrow; tho his Boasting may
be great what he will do, as of Old it was. Oh! happy are they, that abide
within the compass of it, and so retire and spread their Cause before the Lord,
who is the living God. Remember the King of Old, who commanded silence, and
said, Answer him not a Word, and so returned to the Temple and to the Altar of
the Lord, and spread the Cause before him, and confessed the weakness of the
Daughter of Sion to bring forth; and also his Faith in the sufficiency of God's
Power, when he said, Thou art able to Save, etc.

Oh! my dear Friends, Live up to the Lord in your Spirits, and be Faithful, and
keep your Peace with him in the inner-Man, and mind your Unity with his Spirit,
and take heed of that, which would obstruct your Fellowship with his Life; let
no Fair Pretenses over you Prevail, that may have any tendency to bring your
Spirits into Bondage, or any straitness over your Hearts; for that Bondage will
prove the greatest Slavery: and this I do believe you right well know.

And now my Dear Friends, all of you minding your inward Freedom, and your
Spiritual Ease, in the Freedom and Liberty given you of God through Christ your
Savior; you will have a Dwelling and Habitation filled with Glory, Riches and
Comfort, over which the Enemies Cloud cannot come: and in that you will see
through to the end of all, that would either Darken, or bring Distress. And so
you will see, how good it is to trust in the Lord, and to rely upon his Power,
and be given up freely into his Will.

And so dear Hearts, my Love is truly unto you all, and in the Love with which
I have anciently Loved you, and in which I Love you as much as ever, do I very
dearly Salute you all, you tender Suffering Children, and with my Soul and
Spirit desire, that God in Mercy and Kindness may bless you with Spiritual
Blessing in Christ Jesus, and enrich your Souls with the Divine Fatness of his
House, and Pleasure of his Life, that you may have Joy every day, and delight
every Morning in your Bosoms; that so your Strength may be renewed, and your
Ability so increased, that you may be able to bear, what is upon you, till the
Lord see good to Work your Deliverance, and case you of the yoke and Burden,
that you bear. Which the Lord in Mercy take off, if it be his pleasure, is the
desire of

Your Friend and Brother in the Fellowship of the Sufferings and Tribulation,
and also of the Consolation, which we are called unto through Christ Jesus our
Lord. I. B.
The Copy of an Epistle sent to Friends at Bristol, in the time of their
Sufferings. Written at Eaglesfield in Cumberland, the 1st of the 6th Month,
1682.
Cork, the 25th of the 10th Month, 1682.
Dear Friends,
IN the Everlasting Covenant of Life and Peace, and in the pure spring of
Divine Love in the same, do I remember you, and in Spirit reach unto you, and
very dearly salute you all, who in the Faith that gives the Victory, do remain
and stand steadfast, and so keep your Habitations and Dwellings in the Heavenly
places, in Christ Jesus your Redeemer, who has redeemed you out of the
Wickedness that is in the World, unto himself, and so into his own Power and
Nature, which is righteous; that you might become the Righteousness of God in
him, and so be restored into the Image, Nature and State, in which Man was
Created, by him that made all things good, and Man in his own Image, that he
might delight in Man, and that Man might honor and glorify him. Now this Work
of Restoration, you know, God has sent his Son to effect and accomplish in
Man, and for Man, that again Man might honor his Creator, and become the
delight of his Maker, whose delight is to dwell in the Habitable parts of the
Earth, even among the Sons of Men. And therefore, that you may be his Delight,
and that he may take Pleasure in you, do you all keep in that which has
Renewed, or does Renew and change the Heart and Spirit of the mind, that in the
Newness thereof you may serve, and honor, and glorify him, from whom the
renewing Power and Word does come, that so the new Creation, the new Heavens
and Earth may be known, wherein Righteousness does dwell; and that you may have
your Conversation there, and so shine as Lights among this crooked and perverse
Generation, in whose Heaven and Earth Unrighteousness does dwell. And therefore
will the Lord (as the Apostle said) not only shake the Earth, but the Heavens
also, that that which cannot be shaken, may remain. And truly, I do believe,
that many ones Heaven will be shaken, before this searching, winnowing, trying
Day be over, that is growing on upon the Nations and People; for the Heavens of
many are grown over, and covered with Darkness and thick Clouds, and the Glory
thereof is gone, and the brightness and stedfastness thereof is lost; not a
Star to be seen, except a Wanderer out of its course, out of the Covenant, that
has greatly lost its Light, and so in the Clouds of Darkness driven to and fro
by the variable, uncertain Winds, that are, and may be suffered to blow, to
shake that which is shakable, and remove that which will not endure, that that
which cannot be shaken, may remain, and the Glory of that may appear, which
will endure.

Dear Friends, God has manifested that which is sure for ever, and will
endure, and stand, and last, and you have known the power of it; and as you
keep in the holy sense thereof, you will be steadfast, constant and firm in your
Minds, and not soon shaken, nor removed from your Habitation and stedfastness
in the Gospel of Christ Jesus our Lord, which is the power of God, which is
above all Powers, Thrones and Dominions, and will stand, and cannot be shaken.
For its above John's Ministration, the Gospel Power and Kingdom is, and he
that is least there, is greater than John; and is come to that which is surer
than a Reed, that may be shaken with the Wind; though it be not broken, yet it
may be shaken. And therefore they that would dwell there, and not come on to
Christ the Rock, that cannot be shaken, their Dwelling is not safe, their
Habitation will be thrown down, and their House made a Desolation. Methinks I
see it so in our Days, upon such that have sitten down short of the Eternal
Substance that ended all Shadows, John's, as well as those that were before
him. And therefore, dearly Beloved, you that have known the Eternal Substance,
the living Power of the Lord Jesus Christ manifested in your Hearts, by which
you have been quickened, raised up, and made alive unto God, keep to the Power
in your Souls, and mind its living in you, that you therein may live unto God,
and so abide a living People through your Age, God's living Witnesses in your
Day, without Alteration; and so be such as have not only been Hearers of the
Word, but Doers also; and so such whose House is built upon the Rock Christ
Jesus, which by the Storms and Winds cannot be thrown down. For the sure
Foundation being kept unto, you will abide, and endure, and the Lord will bless
you with inward Peace in your Souls, and true Pleasure in your Hearts, and you
will enjoy the true Riches and Heavenly Treasure, and learn (as you keep to the
power of God in your Hearts) to lay up this true Treasure in Heaven, through
the true Faith, where the Thief cannot come to steal, nor the Moth to waste or
corrupt. And then your Riches and Treasure, that you trust and delight in,
being thus laid up in Safety, your Hearts will be at quiet and in ease, and
settled in the Kingdom, in Heaven, where the Treasure is; and then Christ's
Words will be witnessed; Where the Treasure is, there will the Heart be also.
Oh my dear Friends, how true are these things! Happy are they that grow up into
the experience thereof, through the working, operation, and openings of the
true, living, Heavenly Power in their Hearts; such their Minds are kept free
from that which would entangle, and their Feet at liberty, that they may run
cheerfully the Race that is set before them. For the Riches, the Price that
their Hearts are upon, being before them, and the Mark also, that they look at,
this draws them to look forward, and press forward; so that they are not of
them that draw back to Perdition. And thus Friends, you may see, where, and in
what your profitable Exercise is through your Day, and where the lasting Gain,
Riches and Treasure is to be got, that will endure, and be your Portion, when
the Enemy and all his Instruments have done what they can. And this made David
say, he would not fear what Man could do unto him, for the Lord was his
Shepherd, he said, and the Lord was the Portion of his Cup, and the Lot of his
Inheritance, etc. And therefore keep your Hearts out of the World, and the
Riches thereof, which are uncertain; and also above the delighting in the Glory
thereof; and let your delight be in the Lord, and in the sweet and pleasant
Enjoyment of his righteous, peaceable Power all the Day long, that you may
still feel a Habitation therein, and a place of Safety to fly unto in every
needful time. And wait you upon its holy springings in your Hearts, that your
Souls thereby being united unto God, you may dwell in his Covenant, and so in
Unity with him and his blessed Son, and so feel the Fellowship, which is a
Mystery, held in a pure Conscience.

And dearly Beloved, live at Peace among your selves, and wait for the Spirit
of Love and Concord to spring in all your Souls, that the true Mark of Christ's
Disciples may appear among you. Remember what he said unto his of old, By this
shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if you love one another. And
consider what the Apostle said, He that dwells in God, dwells in Love, etc. And
therefore I entreat you, wait for the power of it in your Hearts, that you
therein may serve one another, and so the whole Body may be edified, the weak
strengthened, the faint-hearted encouraged, and the lame not turned out of the
way, but all helped forward on their way. And you all being thus in the
righteous holy Power, exercised for good, (which is that it will lead unto) you
will be a Strength and Comfort, and Crown of Rejoicing one unto another, and so
helpers forward of one another Joy in the Lord: Surely this is needful in this
Day, wherein Zion has so many Enemies; she had need to be as a City that is at
Peace within her self. So the God of Peace keep you all in the Dominion of his
Life, that therein you may reign over every hurtful Thing, and so dwell in the
holy Mount of Safety, where the Destroyer cannot come; and upon the holy Hill
of Zion, about which he has appointed Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks: That
so you may all witness Peace to be within her Walls, and Prosperity within her
Palaces. And so you may every Day witness high Praises in your Hearts and
Mouths unto her King, who is King of Kings, and reigns over all, who only has
Immortality, and dwells in the Light: To whom be Glory and Eternal Praises,
says my Soul, for ever and for evermore, Amen.

From your Friend, and one that truly loves you in the Truth, J. B.

Dear R. S.
UNTO thee with thy Dear Wife, C. H. R. U. and theirs, with the rest of Friends
there in Prison with you, does the living sincere Love of my Heart truly reach
and livingly flow forth; for I can say of a truth, that you are often near my
Soul, and livingly in my Heart, and that in my nearest approach unto the Lord,
when my Life opens, and my Spirit is let forth through the Power thereof, and
poured forth into his Bosom (as blessed be his Name, he gives us access by his
own Spirit) even then are you many times fresh in my Heart, and Livingly before
me, as if I were present in Body with you; and with great delight do I put up
my Supplications upon your account, unto the Lord our God, rejoicing to feel
the Lord so concerned for you, that by his own Spirit he so often stirs up a
remembrance of you in my Soul, and that upon such Holy occasions. Oh! blessed
be his Name, he is the Keeper of Israel, that neither Slumbers nor Sleeps, but
remembers his People, and his Eye is open to see their Afflictions, and his Ear
is open to hear their Complaints and tender Groanings; and no doubt, but he
will arise in his own due time, to work Deliverance and Salvation, and they
shall glorify him. Oh! my dear Friends, how is my Soul overcome in the weighty
Love of God at this time unto you all, who Suffer, or are given up to Suffer
for his Name's sake, that has Loved you and values your Testimony above all
things; and so are of that number, that love not your Lives unto Death, but are
given up to follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes. Oh! my Heart is affected
with you in your Testimony, and can say, as Debora of old, My Heart is toward
you, who offer your selves willingly among the People, now to Suffer in the
Lambs Battle (as they did to War in the outward War) for that is the way the
Lamb and his followers do overcome; he was made Perfect through Suffering: And
the Promise still is, The Lamb shall have the Victory; everlasting Glory, and
Honor and Praise to the Living God that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb
who is worthy for ever more.

And therefore my dear Friends, look not out, look not back, but to the Lord
your Rock and Strength look for Help and for Deliverance; for you know, that
its from him that Salvation comes, and not from the Hills and Mountains; for he
is the God of the whole Earth, and the Mountains shall Melt at his Presence,
and before him shall the Hills Fly, yea the Sea also shall Fly, and Jordan
shall be Driven back, that his Ransomed may pass on, his Redeemed People may
Enter into their Rest. Oh! theresore let us Cleave unto the Lord our Savior,
and so sollow Christ our Redeemer, who can cut a passage through the great
Deep; let us not be dismayed at any thing, that may rise up in our way to
oppose us, so long as our Leader is with us, and our blessed Rock attends us,
and we feel our dwelling within the Munition thereof; our Bread will be sure,
and our Water will not fail, and our Hearts will not be barren, nor our Souls
will not be faint; but we shall grow through the blessing of Israel's God, and
Live, when with all their cunning the enemies of the Truth have contrived our
overthrow. For there is nothing can hurt us more in the Trying Day, than want
of Faith in God's Power, and Arm of strength, which never failed them that put
their trust therein. And therefore my dearly Beloved, with whom my Soul is
bound up in the Covenant of Life, wherein I have Unity with you, and can say,
although you bear the Burden, yet my Heart is concerned for you, and also with
you in your Godly concern and Testimony, for which you Suffer; and therefore
cannot you be forgotten by me. For as we Love the Truth, and the Holy Testimony
thereof, for which you Suffer, and are in Bonds, in Spirit we are often as
Bound with you, and fellow-feelers of your Burdens. And furthermore, we cannot
propose to our selves any other, than e're long to be Sharers with you, to be
Partakers of the like Sufferings, Trials and Exercises; and therefore still it
is our safety to be Prepared in our Hearts, and into the Will of God to be
given up to Do or Suffer for his Name's sake.

For our days do seem to be like the Days of Old, wherein the Apostle said,
they were Killed all the Day long, and accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter. If
we look into the Scriptures, we have a Cloud of Witnesses; and so through what
was Written aforetime, which was Written for our Learning, we may have Comfort,
and our hope Strengthened, and so be Encouraged to Trust in the Lord our
Strength, and in whom our Hope is. And now it is still to be our care, as Lambs
or Sheep, to Live in Innocence, and so as Lambs to Suffer for our Innocence,
and for our Testimony, which we are called unto; and surely, I often consider,
what more Innocent Practice can we ever be found in, than in our Peaceable
Meetings, to Wait upon the Living God, and to Worship him in his peaceable
Spirit, by which our Hearts come to be cleansed of all Evil, and our Spirits
gathered into the Peace and Love of God, in which we Love God again; and not
only so, but have our hearts filled with Love and Good will toward all Men, in
the Peace and Sweetness of which, we are enabled to Pray for the Good of All,
even our Enemies. And if this must be misinterpreted, and our Righteous and
Godly Intents counted a Transgression of the Law, and a Breach of the Peace, I
do not know, what such who so do, can call Innocence: For surely, every one
whose Heart is rightly Exercised in this Godly Duty, which the Living God calls
us unto, must needs be Innocent before God, and in that Frame of Spirit,
wherein we cannot, nay, dare not desire the Hurt of any; but as the Truth
arises, Pray for all Men, both for Rulers and People. Thus, I know, under the
Exercise of the Righteous Power of Christ in our Meetings, are our Hearts
qualified; and then if we must Suffer for Well doing, under the name of
Evildoers, we shall be happy; and may satisfy our selves, with what Christ of
old said, The Servant is not greater than his Lord: For if they accounted him a
Blasphemer, and said, he had a Devil, and so Persecuted him; we may well look
unto him, and Comfort our selves in following such an Example.

And therefore be ye Comforted, you Faithful Sufferers with Christ, and for
him, and Comfort your Hearts in the Recompense of Reward, which is with God for
you; and wait for the Spirit of God, and of Glory, that it may rest upon you.
And never look out, for your Cause is Good; it is that which God has called
you unto, and you are happy in your Nobility and Valor; and whosoever shrinks
from their Innocent Testimony in this matter, will suffer Loss in their Inward
Condition: for if any draw back, such shall know, the Lord will not go with
them, nor have any Pleasure in them, nor be their Comforter, but Reprover.

And therefore my Soul desires, that all may be Valiant for the Truth, and
stand in the Power thereof, unto what the Lord has called unto, that so you
may be together as a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid. For though the
Foxes have Holes, and the Fowls of the Air have Nests, yet remember what Christ
said to the Man, that said he would follow him.

And so the Lord give you all Valor and Strength, and Enrich you with true
Patience, which the Tribulation works into in the right Exercise, that so you
may all grow up into the true Experience, and so into the Hope, which makes not
ashamed; that the Love of God may be shed abroad in your Hearts every day, by
his Spirit, which he has given you: And then will you all feel a dwelling in
his Covenant, and in his Peace.

And so in this Covenant, Peace and Love, I very dearly Salute you all, and in
it do I still remain,

Your Friend and Brother I. B.
Castle-Salem in the West of Ireland, the 30th of the 10th Month, 1682.
J. B's Epistle to Friends in Glocester-Prison.
Dear Friends,
UNTO you, who are Faithful Sufferers in that City, with the rest of the
Faithful in that City and Country, who in your Hearts are given up to Suffer
for the holy Name of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, who has Called and
Redeemed, Chosen, and given you Hearts not only to believe, but also to suffer
for his Name's sake, and thus has counted you worthy as Vessels of his Choice;
unto you all, I say, in the Name and Love of Christ Jesus our Lord, I send
Greeting, and with-all the tender Salutation of my Soul and Spirit in that near
Affection and holy Union, into which, by the power of the Holy Ghost we have
been gathered and united: So that as Members of that one Body, into which we
have been Baptized by that one Spirit, (wherein the true access unto God does
stand) we have our Fellowship together, and so drink together into that one
Spirit, and are refreshed with the Water that flows from the living Rock, that
followed Israel of Old, who is the Rock of our Age, the stay of the Generation
of the Righteous in this Day, that upon which we have our sure standing, so
that we cannot easily be moved. Though the Winds do blow, and the Waters swell
and toss, and the unestablished be driven to and fro, and so afflicted in their
Spirits, yet this Rock abides for a Habitation and Being of Safety unto all
them, that keep firm thereunto, and so do abide near in their Spirit unto the
holy Power thereof, they find the living Spring of that Grace from the same in
their Souls, that the World cannot take away, whose Treasure the Thief cannot
steal, nor the Moth waste; for its Heavenly, and kept by a Heavenly Hand. And
such who mind this, will be ready to offer up their Earthly Substance, and also
themselves into his Hand and Will, out of which no Man is able to pluck. And
surely, in this Day there is no true Rest nor Satisfaction to the Souls or
Spirits of Friends, but as they get hither in the Faith with their Hearts and
Spirits: And when we are here spiritually, oh this holy Shield, how does it
defend! Oh the holy Rock, how do we sit under the shadow of it! Oh the holy
Joy, that the Dwellers upon this do feel in their Spirits, though the Tempest
be great! Oh the God of Heaven keep us all in the holy sense of this, that our
Spirits may be born up from sinking under our Exercises in the Trial; that so
we may all glorify him in our Day.

Dearly Beloved, you tender, suffering Children, whose Hearts are tender of
God's Glory, and therefore are willing to give up your selves and your all for
his Name's sake, that you may be of that number (who following the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and not loving your Lives unto Death) that may stand
with him upon Mount Sion: My Heart and Soul is knit unto you, and you are near
me, and in the unity of the ancient Life, I feeling Love abundantly to flow
unto you, you have had a proof of the sincerity of my Love of old unto you: And
truly, you that stand in your innocent Testimony, faithfully do engage my Heart
still more and more in Love unto you. Oh the tender meltings of my Spirit in
the sweetness of the Love of God, in which I reach you, and rejoice with you in
your Joy, which all the Wrath of Man cannot put a stop unto. I know, your
Hearts are at ease, and your Spirits free, and the Weights and Burdens from off
you who are freely given up to suffer, though in these Bonds outwardly: But
there can be no such spiritual Portion received by any that shrink from their
Testimony in this Day of Trial. For the Word is true for ever, They that suffer
with him, shall reign with him: He the Captain was made perfect through
Sufferings, he must be followed by all that come in the fullness, to partake
with him of his Glory. And such who draw back, and would find a place of Safety
for themselves to escape their Sufferings for their Testimony, though they
should fly to the uttermost parts of the Earth, the Lord's hand will find them
out, and there will not only be a holding back of the Portion, but a spiritual
Pain will overtake, where the Heart is tender; and because thereof, uneasy
will every ones place be unto their Spirits.

And therefore, my dear Friends, keep in the Faith and Word that Iustifies, and
then will you reign in the Seed that is heir for ever; wherein you will
Overcome, and Inherit, and be Conquerors, and so Triumph with the Lamb that
must have the Victory, before whose Feet the Crowns of all the Mighty must be
laid down; unto whom the Kings of the Earth, and all Flesh must bow; in him we
trust, his Heavenly Kingdom we wait for, and pray for the coming of, that even
such as are our Enemies, by the power thereof may be Converted unto God, and so
have an Inheritance with us in that Kingdom, that has no End. That so Mankind
might rest together in that Hope, that makes not ashamed; where the Love of God
might be shed abroad in all Hearts by his Spirit. Thus God is filling the
Hearts of his Children with good Will toward all: The Lord keep us therein for
ever!

Dear Friends, by this know, that I am well, and am now come to have a share
with you of the Sufferings, that attend for the Gospel's sake. I have been
three Weeks a Prisoner here in the Marshalsee of Dublin. So in the true
Fellowship of the Gospel am a Partaker with you both of the Sufferings and
Consolation that attend us for the Testimony thereof. I remain

From the Marshals in the City of Dublin, the 25 th of the 6 th Month, 1683.
Your Brother, I. B.

Dublin, the 19th of the 6th Month, 1685.
Dear J. Banck,
UNTO thee with thy Fellow Prisoners, who suffer for the blessed Testimony of
that precious Truth, in which we have believed, does the real and tender
Affection, and Love of my Heart and Soul flow forth at this time; and in the
sweetness and peaceableness of that which is our Life, do I dearly salute you,
and in the unity thereof tenderly greet you all, whose Hearts are kept up in
that, and under the holy conduct of it, for which you suffer: In this have we
our unity, which in it self lives and reigns over all, and shall reign in its
own pure Dominion and Dignity, even the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
Principalities and Thrones, and Dominions must be subject. It is for the
Testimony of him, you know, that you suffer, to wit, the Testimony of Jesus,
which you have received from him by his Spirit, and thereby have it sealed in
your Hearts. Though many do not understand the weight and certainty of your
Testimony, for which you suffer, and therefore may look lightly upon it; yet
you, who are enjoyers of the Power, and so have received the Spirit of Jesus,
which is the Spirit of Prophesy, and so his Testimony therein you feel the
Weight of it, and know the Certainty of the Testimony for which you suffer; and
so in your Sufferings have your Peace and Justification. And therefore, my
dearly Beloved in the Lord, see that you all hold that fast in all your Hearts
in the inward, rich Possession of it, for which you suffer, that you may feel
your Reward with you, and your Comforter in you to bear up your Spirits over
all your Sufferings; and so you will have a Satisfaction in your selves; that
whatever others say, or may think of your Sufferings, and the reason thereof,
you know within your selves, that it is for the Truth, and its Testimony, that
you suffer, and for the keeping of your Consciences clear in the sight of God.
And so in the hidden Man of the Heart, you rest in quietness, in that hidden
Life which you receive from Christ; and here is your Peace and Comfort, which
no Man can take from you; no, nor Man knows of it, but such as are in
Fellowship with you, who live in, and love the same Testimony. And therefore
those, that know not your Reward, your Crown, nor your Peace, cannot reach to
take it a way; and that is our Joy, that we have a Crown and Inheritance, that
is out of their sight, and so out of their reach.

Oh therefore let all take heed, that through carelessness or looseness of
Spirit, or any other thing you be not beguiled or betrayed from that, to the
losing of it, while you are suffering for it! You know, my Friends, it is
possible; such things have been even in our Age, that while some have been
suffering for the Truth, they have been betrayed from the Truth, and the
Innocence and Simplicity of it in their Hearts; and so have lost the Truth,
even that for which they were called to suffer. For you know, it is an inward
thing, and must be held in the inward unity of the Mind in a spiritual
Fellowship; and if there be not a care, even while we are in one thing doing
for the Truth in the outward, in the inward we may lose it, and our
Justification by it; and then whither shall we go for our Peace and Recompense?
The God of my Life give you all Wisdom and Fear, and fill you with holy
Reverence, that you may still stand in awe before him, and be watchful over
your spiritual Path, and the Feet of your Souls and Minds, that you may
invisibly tread in the invisible way of Peace and Righteousness.

And Dear Friends, live in Peace and Love together amongst your selves, and in
a holy, solid Life before all Men, keeping out of the Spirit of the World in
all things; that as it is upon a Religious Account that you suffer, you may
appear in all other things to be Religious Men, or otherwise you know, the
Truth cannot be honored by your suffering. For if Men, that suffer for or upon
the account of Religion, appear not to be Religious Men, this overthrows the
Glory and Beauty of their Religion, and brings it into Dis-esteem amongst Men:
And therefore did Christ command, that our Light should shine before Men, by
their seeing of our good Works, etc. And Dear Friends, have a care of provoking
one another unto any thing that is Evil; but endeavor to stir up and provoke
one another unto Love and good Works; that you may build up one another
therein, and so help to bear one another Burden, and fulfill the Law of
Christ, that you may all be kept up together in the Justification and Peace.
And so Dear Friends, my Heart's Love being unto you, I send these few lines as
a Testimony thereof, by which you may know, you are in my remembrance in the
Love of God, and my Heart has an honorable Esteem of your Testimony, and your
Sufferings in Righteousness for the same. I desire to be remembered to Friends
in the Country, both below Carlisle, and above, and Friends in the City; to Io.
Carlisle and Family, with the rest: My Wife's dear Love is to you all: My Love
is with you. Farewell!

From your Friend, I. B.

Dublin the 12 th of the 8 th Month, 1685.
Dear Friends,
IN the universal Spirit of Life and Truth, and of Righteousness and Peace does
the tender Affection and pure Love of my Heart flow forth and reach unto you
all, who are true Lovers of the Power and the Holiness of the same, wherein
alone it is, that we bear the Image of him whose Name is Holiness, and his
Nature and Being is Purity; so that in that only we do draw and may draw near
unto him, and have Fellowship with him, and enjoy his Presence, who is our God,
our Life and Salvation. And therefore in the Unity of that, whereby we have
been quickened, and through which we Live unto him that has quickened us, do I
exhort and beseech you all, to mind with Reverence his secret and sweet
Visitations by his Holy Power upon your Spirits in your Hearts; that you feel
that to appear there, and so through the brightness of its appearing to destroy
him, whose coming is after the Working of Satan with all Power, etc. and with
all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them that Perish: And not only to
appear and destroy him and his Works, but also to abide with you, and dwell in
you, and so make you his dewlling place. And then you being Watchful, shall not
Watch in vain, because the Lord then will be your keeper; and then, as one said
of old, He keeping the City, the Watchman watches not in vain. Thus you may
see it fulfilled in your own Hearts unto your own Souls, and so have Comfort
and Confidence with Holy David, and with him Live above the fear of Evil
(though you might walk through the Shadow of Death, as he said) because of the
Lord's being with you. And therefore, Friends, see that you all be mindful of
him in his Appearing by his Power and Spirit of Grace in your Hearts, and let
him have Room there, and not to be straightened, or thronged up or oppressed, for
he delights to dwell alone there, and have the whole Heart to himself, and at
his own disposing, that he may Fill it with that which he takes Pleasure in,
and in which he only may be Glorified and Honored. And therefore does he
require the Heart, saying. My Son, give me thy Heart: And Christ Commands, That
we should Love him with all our Hearts, etc. So as I said, let him have room in
your Hearts, and take heed, that with this World, the Spirit of it, Nature of
it, and Love to the things therein, your Hearts be not filled, and so taken up,
that there be not room for him, whose coming is with such Glory and Fullness,
that he fitls all that are rightly poor and empty, with that Fullness, Richness
and Glory, that there can be no want to them, that have him for their Portion
and Inheritance; and so keep single in their Hearts before him. But where the
Heart is filled with Delight in, or desire after other things out of the
Covenant of God (which is out of his Favor) there the Lord will not have
delight to Dwell, there is not room; nay, he will not have delight to appear
there, because it will be his Grief and an Oppression unto him. Was it not so
of old, when he took up his Complaint against both Judah and Israel? As you may
see, Amos 2. how the Lord pleads with them, and threatens them, what he would
bring upon them for their Sins, that he reckons up against them; and withal to
aggravate their Crimes (as he might justly do) he also reckons up, and tells
them, what he had done for them, how he had destroyed the Amorites for their
sakes, brought them out of the Land of Egypt, led them in the Wilderness, given
them the Land of the Amorites to Possess, raised of their Sons to be Prophets,
and their young Men to be Nazarites: But, says he unto them, Ye gave my
Nazarites Wine to Drink, and commanded my Prophets, saying, Prophesy not;
behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves,
says he. Hence it may be understood, that when he has been at work, and has
done good by his glorious Power, who works wonderfully for them (and now in
them also) that believe in his Power; if there be a going from him, and a
letting in of other things into the Heart, where he should Rule and have his
Dwelling in Man, and so with Man, it becomes a Grief and an Oppression unto
him, and so a Provocation, that he will not always bear it, nor spare Man,
though he is longsuffering, as may be seen very fully in that Prophesy of Amos,
and more at large through the Scripture, which was written for our Learning,
that we might be warned, and thereby be stirred up unto that diligence, care
and watchfulness, which may tend to our preservation.

And now considering these things that were of old, and observing, how that in
our Age the Lord has made known his wonted goodness unto us, even that which
does far exceed the outward Privileges of outward Israel; for that which he
blesses us withal, is a Possession and Enjoyment of a degree of his own Life,
who is the Creator, by which he Created all things, which is more than the
Enjoyment of the Creature; the Loss of which was the great penalty laid upon
Adam, if he broke the Command; which he having lost, is again restored unto us
through Christ Jesus, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, which we having
received, do thereby live unto God, and therein serve him.

And so Dear Friends, the thing that is chiefly in my mind unto you in the
reach of the Heavenly Bowels, is, To entreat and beseech you all, To be tender
in your Hearts, and careful over your Spirits, that you may not let in, nor
join with any thing, that will bring Grief or Oppression upon your Life, or
lead you into the Transgression of the Law thereof. Mind the Exhortation of the
Apostle, Grieve not the Spirit, by which you are Sealed, etc. And so as you are
careful, watchful and wise to take heed unto the Holy Conduct and Blessed
Leadings and Direction of this Spirit and the Law thereof, your Souls will
dwell in Peace, and your Feet will tread in a safe Path, even the Path of
Peace, and your Steps will not Slide; but you will witness what David said of
old, to be true, The Righteous shall inherit the Land, and dwell therein
forever; for says he, The mouth of the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and his
Tongue talks of Judgment. The Law of his God is in his Heart, none of his steps
shall slide. So here you see, what it is that keeps from Sliding, the Law of
God, which is in the Heart; this preserved David, for it was as a Lanthorn to
his Feet, and a Light unto his Paths.

Oh! my Dear Friends, you may be happy; yea, we may all be happy, if we be as
careful as we ought, to walk by this Rule. Oh! the Sweetness, Peace and Glory,
that he fills the Hearts of all his People with, that take heed unto his Law:
the Spirit is not grieved, the Life of the Soul is not Oppressed, the Soul,
Life or Spirit of Man is at ease, and so in the glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God, and so in that state, where it can Sing unto the Lord, and Praise him. And
therefore all of you mind your Dwelling, and inward Liberty, and Spiritual
Freedom from all the Corruptions of the World, and of the Flesh, both inwardly
in your selves, and all Temptations from without, that you may reign in the
Dominion of the Seed Christ Jesus for ever, and so with him be Coheirs of that
Heavenly Inheritance and Possession, which he has Purchased for you.

And so in the Unity of that Life, which reigns over all, do I very dearly
Salute you all, who Love the Truth; and in that do I desire, that the God of
Life may bear up your Spirits by his Power, over and a top of all that would
Defile or Oppress; that you may be preserved to remain the Sons and Daughters
of God without Rebuke in and among this Crooked and Perverse Generation,
amongst whom do you Shine as Lights, to the Glory of him who has called you
out of Darkness into his Mavelous Light; who over all is worthy of Glory and
Honor and Dominion, World without End. From

Your Friend and Brother in the Truth, I. B.

Dublin, the 23 d of the 11 th Month, 1685.
Dear R. R.
IN the Love and Unity of the Blessed Truth, which lives and abides for Ever,
do I very dearly Salute thee and thy Wife; and therein is my Heart's desire for
you unto the Lord, that by his blessed Hand and Power, you may be born up and
supported under all Exercises, that may attend, and in your minds Preserved
with an invisible Eye unto the Lord, taking notice of his Orderings, as it is
his Hand, that brings to pass what he sees Good; and then in his Fear and Love
there will be a Reverent Submitting unto his Will without Murmuring or Repining
at what the Lord does. Though Nature in the True and Natural Affection (which
good Men and Women cannot be without) may be broken and greatly bowed down; yet
as long as the mind is preserved from Murmuring at what the Lord does, it will
be well, there will be a Heart Capable of giving him his due, as it was with
Job.

Dear R. I must needs say, my Heart is concerned for you, both upon thy own
Account, having heard of thy great Weakness there, and Affliction thou have
been under, and also because of the Loss of thy Dear and Tender Daughter, who
in your Absence is taken away both from you and us. But what shall I say? It is
so, and the Lord has done it; and it is not safe to Dispute the Case with him,
or say, Why has he done so? But tenderly submit unto his Will, and bless him
that gives and takes away, as he sees good. However, this I think I may say to
thee and thy Wife with safety, you need not sorrow, as such who have no Hope,
because of the ground God has given for a sure Hope of her Eternal Well-being,
which is the Mark we are all Pressing toward; and they are happy that do
obtain it. For I was with her that same day that she Dyed in the Afternoon, and
had a serious, weighty season with her. She sent for me, and told me, as soon
as I came to her, That now she was satisfied she must Die; and her Heart was
wholly set after her Assurance of Peace with the Lord; and her desires to us,
to wit, her Husband and me, was, That the Doctor might not trouble her or
meddle with her, for she was not willing to be molested or hindered from a quiet
Departure. For her Heart was set after a peaceable Departure out of this World;
as was evident from her words several times. And she was very sensible, and did
speak to me with a good understanding; and seemed to be concerned for many (as
she said) that came to Meetings in Dublin, who did not mind their Conditions,
or the stay of their minds, which she feared, would scarcely be Saved. My
Heart, I must needs say, was greatly affected with her Exercise and Concern,
and was Comforted in the Sense of that living Presence, that was with us at
that Season. And when we had spent some time together, and were Refreshed, and
I to go away, she did most solemnly take her Leave of me in great Affection,
and signified, how kind she took my Visit; withal seriously saying, Farewell
dear John, If I never see thee more: And so I came away. In a few Hours after
she was struck with Death.

In the Evening my Wife and I went again to see her, then we found her very
Ill, but lay quiet, under the Extremity of her Pain. We, with several other
Friends sat by and waited on her, until she Departed, which was about the 11th
Hour at Night. She went away in quietness, as I found before was her Desire.
And we sitting and standing quietly by her, our Hearts were broken; and I felt
a Glorious Melting Power, which tendered my Spirit, and a Brightness and Light
that did shine; and it was sweetly in my Heart, when she was Departed, She is
not gone into Darkness, but is in the Light. The sense whereof was great
Satisfaction to me, because I know the Glory is there, in the Light for ever.
And now poor Lamb, it is her Gain, though your and our Loss. For considering
her years, she was a Modest and Good Example; and as she said to me at that
Season, She was never inclined to Vanity. And I perceived, her care was
sometimes greatly for you, fearing your Exercise would be Great. Well, I must
needs consider, that the Loss of such a Dear Child cannot but come very near
Tender Parents; yet you may be comforted in a satisfaction of her Well-being,
and so rest; and even say with David, We may go to her, but she cannot come to
us. And so Comfort your Hearts in the Lord, and so rest in his Will.

And Dear R. this may find thee something better in Health, than we have of
late heard; however, I am sure my Heart truly desires, that it may be so: And
if the Lord give strength, I should be glad to see thee here. For methinks, all
this while thou have been absent, thy place seems to be empty; I cannot look
upon it, that thou should be from amongst us. But if the Lord give strength,
thou should be here, bearing and having thy share with us: For I look upon
thee as one of us, and so methinks would not have thee delay, as the way opens.
My Wife's very dear Love is to thee and thy Wife; and our Love is dearly to
Ellin Callow, and Friends there. For further account of things, I may leave to
other hands: We are all quiet and peaceable here. So with my true and endeared
Love unto thee, I conclude and remain

Thy Friend J. B.
The above is a Copy of a Letter Writ by John Burnyeat to Roger Roberts
concerning the Death of his Daughter Ann, late wife to Amos Srettel, who
Departed this Life the 8 th of the 11 th Month, 1685, about the 11 th Hour at
Night.



For the Priests in CARLISLE, and their Followers.
YE which stand up to teach the People, behold your Flock which ye teach, and
see what is brought forth among them, such Fruits, as were never brought forth
among them that were taught of God, nor by any that he sent. But the small
Effect your Teaching does bring forth for God, does evidence to your faces,
that ye are not sent by him, but run, and the Lord does not send you, therefore
does the People profit nothing by you, but the Fruits of Unrighteousness do
still remain among them, and they are not turned to God, and out of their Sins
by all your Teaching. For Persecution is found in some, and Pride, and
Drunkenness, and Mocking, and Scorning, and Reproaching of them that fear God,
does appear among them that follow you. Oh consider of it, you that take in
Hand to Teach these People, did ever any of the Ministers of Christ own such
for Christians? Consider of it, was Persecution found among the Saints? Or did
they Imprison any? Show one Example in the Scriptures for it, if there be any.
Or did the Apostles own them for Christians: that did persecute? Consider of
these things, Were not they Enemies to the Truth, that did persecute and
imprison? And was it not the Saints, that the Persecution rose against? And did
not the Apostles suffer Persecution? And were not they Enemies to Christ that
persecuted them? And are not they Enemies to Christ that persecute now? Oh!
that you would but consider of it, and see what Generation ye are of, and what
Fruits ye bear! and whether ye and your Followers bear the Fruits of the
Ministers of Christ and the Saints, or ye bear the Fruits of the false
Prophets, and of the rude Multitude and persecuting Generation, that persecuted
the Righteous: For from the beginning the Righteous were persecuted even from
Abel; but we never read, that the Righteous did persecute any, but were always
Sufferers. So it is evident, that they that persecute and imprison, are shut
out of the Life of them that gave forth the Scripture, and are found in their
steps, which were Enemies to the Truth, and did persecute them that lived in
the Life of it. And so ye, that take in hand to Teach the People of this Town,
look upon your Flock, and see, what Fruits are brought forth by some of them.
Yet for all this your Teaching of them, you have not brought them to so much
Moderation and Love, as was in Felix, who commanded a Centurion to keep Paul,
and to let him have Liberty, and that he should forbid none of his Acquaintance
to Minister or to come to him. But we find not so much Moderation nor Love
among you, who say, ye are Christians; for we are kept in Prison, and our
Friends are hindered to come to us. Oh be ashamed of your Flock, ye Teachers,
that for all your teaching, ye have not brought them so far into Moderation and
Love, as they were, who persecuted the Apostles and Saints; and so they must
needs be far short of being true Christians. But you are bad Examples to them
herein; for many of you, who are Teachers, do cause the Innocent to be cast
into Prison, and persecuted; and so do manifest your selves by your Fruits, not
to be in the same Life, the Apostles were in, who always suffered, and never
did persecute any. So consider well, ye Teachers, of this, that your Flock is
not a Flock of Sheep and Lambs, but rather the Nature of Wolves does appear
among them, whose Mouths are open against the innocent, who live in the Nature
of the Lamb. Are ye not therefore of those, who run, and the Lord never sent
you? Who do not profit the People at all, who from time to time stand up to
teach them, and yet they remain in their old Nature, not changed from their
former Conversation. Oh cease! Seeing no Fruit is brought forth to God by all
your labor. Is it not for the love of Money that you Teach? And do ye not seek
after the Fleece more than the Flock? And do ye not go from one place to
another for Rewards? Let that of God in your Consciences answer. Is not this
it, which blinds your Eyes, that ye do not see what Generation ye are of, when
you read the Scripture? Which testifies, who they were that persecuted, and who
they were that suffered Persecution then, in the Apostles days. Search the
Scriptures, and see whether the Persecutors, or they that were persecuted, were
the Saints of God in those Days? And whether the way be not the same now in
these our Days, yea or nay?

From a Lover of your Souls, who is a Sufferer in outward Bonds in the Common
Goal in Carlisle, for the Truth's sake, J. B.

The INNOCENCE OF THE Christian Quakers MANIFESTED;
The Truth of their Principles and Doctrine Cleared and Defended, from the loud
(but false) Clamours, base Insinuations, and wicked Slanders of James Barry.
Published for the general Satisfaction and Benefit of all, who simply desire
to know and embrace the TRUTH.
He that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander, is a
Fool, Prove. 10. 18. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not
spoke to them, yet they Prophesied, Ier. 23. 21. Therefore Night shall be unto
you, that ye shall not have a Vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye
shall not divine; and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the Day
shall be dark over them, Mic. 3. 6. Prove all things; hold fast that which is
good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
SEveral Papers having past between some of us, the People called Quakers of
the City of Dublin, and one James Barry of the same (who calls himself an
Independent Minister,) occasioned by his often abusing, and frequent reflecting
upon us and our Principles, as Erroneous, in his public Preaching, and
sometimes in private Discourse; and an account thereof coming to diverse of us,
by several Persons, some notice we took of his said Reflections, and
accordingly sent to him by way of Admonishment, but did not pursue it; not
looking upon it so very material for us to concern our selves with him, only
returning his false Aspersions upon himself, he being reputed a Man so addicted
to Rail against diverse sorts of People, at last were necessitated, by the many
Informations brought us, of his continuing his abusive Reflections upon us, and
many desiring to see and hear us together, that they might be satisfied,
whether it was so as he had said, or no; and accordingly sent to him, and
desired him to give us a public Meeting, and there to make good his
Accusations, or otherwise to acknowledge the wrong he had done us therein. But
in answer to our so just and reasonable a Demand, he sent a scurrilous Paper,
wherein he both greatly abused us, and the Evidence we had quoted to him, as
also several of our Friends, and their Writings in general terms, though to this
day he has not produced to us one Sentence out of all their Books, that he
does charge to be erroneous; yet had the confidence to bid us call in all such
Books, and let them be burned by the Common Crier, and deny the Authors of
them; and withal denying, he had so said, as we were informed. We thereupon
further examined our Evidence, who still affirmed, what he had declared, as
aforesaid, was truth: And we also having the substance of the matter in two
chief points, viz. That we denied the Resurrection, and Salvation by the Coming
of Christ, witnessed by another of his Hearers, who declared, he had heard him
so charge us; to which we returned him an Answer, giving him an account, how
that we had examined the said Evidence again, and that he stood to his said
Information; and also how that another Person testified as beforementioned,
with several Certificates from other Persons of other Abuses and wicked
Accusations he had cast out against us. We therefore did renew our Demand unto
him, viz. To give us a Meeting, and then appear to make good his said Charges
(if he could) against us, and that we would then also appear to vindicate our
Principles, as laid down either by us or our Friends, whom he had so abused,
whose names he had inserted in his first Paper.

After a long time he sent us another Paper, wherein he tells us, that by our
method he perceives, we are not like to appear in public to discourse
Principles, etc. and in a boasting way tells us, that we will not vouchsafe him
the least ground imaginable, on which to bottom a hope, that we and he shall
come to grapple in a public Contest, and so proceeds still in the denial of
some of the matter in charge already proved, not failing to renew his
Reflections upon us, and our Principles.

Now when we had received this boasting Paper of his, by which one might think,
that he on his part should not fail to grapple in public, we returned him
Answer (seeing he denied some part of the Charge as laid down) and made him
this offer as a moderate expedient, to give him a Meeting, and that the
Witnesses and he might come face to face, and that they might have liberty
before the People to declare their matter of Evidence, which they had to offer,
and we to lay down our Reasons, why we were dissatisfied, and then he to say
what he could to clear himself: and when all had said, what they had to say to
the opening of the matter, we would quietly leave it to the Consciences of the
People to judge, and believe, as they should find the Justice of the Case in
their own understandings: and this being done, we offered to proceed to
discourse with him about those three Principles, viz. The Resurrection,
Justification, and Perfection in Sanctification, as to Degrees attainable; and
further, about particular Election and Reprobation of Persons: and also offered
to dispute with him Principle for Principle, so long as might tend to
Edification, etc.

And for this end we demanded a Meeting, and desired an orderly and peaceable
Auditory of sober People, that gravely in the fear of God we might go through
those things in our Discourse to our Satisfaction and their Edification, etc.
And further offered our largest Meeting house for an Accommodation to the
Meeting, if he pleased; or otherwise we would submit to go to any other
convenient place of his appointing: and left it to him, to make it as public
as he thought good, etc.

Some time after he received this, he sent us another scurrilous Paper filled
up with Reflections, not only upon us, but also upon the People that might have
been at the Meeting, which he could not possibly know who, nor of what sort; he
might have brought all his own Hearers, if he would, we put no limitation, but
as above, an orderly, peaceable Auditory of sober People. But instead of coming
to Grapple with us in public (as he terms it) which one might have thought by
his boasting there was to be no doubt of, he flies quite off from that, and
tells us of Printing to the view of the World what we have to offer, etc. And
in the beginning of his Paper tells us, The expedient propounded in our last
Paper is altogether vain and impertinent, etc. and says, It rather bespeaks us
Children not past our Nonage in those things, etc. and further says, That our
offering such an expedient for an Accommodation, etc. He looks on it to be a
part of that Subtlety of which the mystery of Quakerism is made up and
constituted, in that we do so readily contrive, and under color of seeming
Zeal for Truth, propose such Mediums, as we doubt not will in the end, or
event, make for the advantage of our Cause and Interest, could we, by our
pretty Serpentine acts, as easily charm James Barry into a compliance with our
Proposals, as our Semi-proselites into a belief, that (because of our
forwardness and seeming earnestness to appear for our dark and rotten Cause)
the People termed Quarkers are, beyond all dispute, the only holy and pure
People, whom God has blessed, etc. Thus far James Barry.

Now let all sober unprejudiced Readers observe and consider, whether our
Expedient that we offered, and the Mediums we proposed, be such as he would
here suggest and insinuate? and whether there appears such subtle Contrivance
and partial Intentions in our method for the advantage of our Cause and
Interest, that in the end, or event, if our Proposals had been complied with,
beyond all Dispute the Judgment must be given on our side, that we were the
only holy and pure People whom God had blessed? Now our Offer was, as before
related; and if our Proposals had been complied with, he might have brought
whom he pleased; we excluded none that he would bring, nor put any limitation,
otherwise than desiring an orderly and peaceable Auditory of sober People: so
that it is evident, we had no Contrivance (nor could) in that method we desired,
to have only such Persons, as would give the Cause on our side, right or wrong,
as he would wickedly insinuate. But it is plain, for all his boasting and
railing Rabshekah like, he has been contriving, how to find out a crafty shift
to cover himself in his Retreat, not being willing to appear to our faces in
public, lest he should be publicly manifested and reproved for his
unchristian Railing against us, and abusing and belying of us and our
Principles behind our backs. But this is not all, that has this tendency in
his Paper; but he renews it over again, to persuade People to believe, That the
Quakers had made such a choice of Moderators, as would give it on their side,
let it be Nonsense or Heresy, or what it will; For, says he, you will not
leave the Decision to men that are the same in Judgment with me, etc. and in
Answer he proceeds to give Judgment upon the Meeting that was proposed, to whom
he says, he will not leave it, (counting them the Moderators which the Quakers
chose,) and thus represents the people, calling them a dark, faithless and
ignorant Rabble, whose Nature (says he) is the very Recipient of spiritual
darkness, and who will on that account suck and drink in Whimsies and the
poison of Error, as the Fish drinks Waters; with those kind of Moderators,
(says he) which the Quakers choose to decide Controversy in Matters of Faith,
Nonsense and Heresy will be the best Divinity, Noise and Clamor set off with
the paint and varnish of Multitude of Words and Texts of Scriptures, neither
understood, nor rightly applied, will be the most convincing Arguments to prove
a Victory. By all this the Reader may see, that he would persuade the People,
that the Quakers had made a choice of what sort of People they would have, and
that they were such a People, whose Nature is the very Recipient of Spiritual
Darkness, etc. And with whom Nonsense and Heresy would be the best Divinity,
etc. Let all sober unbiassed People judge in this Case, whether he does not
greatly wrong us, yea or nay? for you may see he is left free to bring whom he
would: What! could he find none but such to bring with him, to hear and judge?
Secondly, You see what sort of People we desire, as in our Paper signified; and
we also affirm, that it was the desire of our Hearts, to have sober,
Conscientious, Religious People, that would have their understandings exercised
according to a good Conscience, that they might discern Right from the Wrong,
and receive every thing accordingly. And so he goes on further with a Lie from
his Pen; and says, Certainly, should James Barry consent to the Quakers in
this Matter, he believes, the Quakers themselves, as well as others, would
laugh at him. This is but a silly shift to endeavor to get off with, and he a
Believer of a Lie; for we are more serious in our Resolutions, and intend
better things in our Desires, than in the obtaining of them to Laugh at it. And
we do believe, that if James Barry had given us a Meeting, as desired, and had
given no more occasion, nor worse than his Answering our desire in that, no
sober People would have Laughed at him, nor have made Rimes of him neither; for
all he says, When he does so, he will not be displeased with Quakers, and
others, if they do make Rimes of him for his folly in this thing. But the Wise
in Heart may see the end of all these Evasions and Shuffles and impertinent
Excuses, as well as his wicked Abuses, and ungodly Reflections and false
Accusations, which he endeavors to cast upon us; and so to the Understandings
and Consciences of such we leave it, let them judge between us in this Matter.

But among all these he has yet another Proposal, which it may be he accounts a
chief one, offered in a former Paper, and that is, that we agree upon Judicious
Persons to be present at our Discourse, who may be in the capacity of
Moderators, to judge indifferently, who is in the Right, and who is in the
Wrong. I can hear nothing of that, but willing you are (says he) to leave the
Dispute to be determined by the Conscience or Reason of every one, that shall
hear. We suppose, that in this Proposal he accounts himself above a Child,
because he judges our Expedient we propounded, altogether Vain and Impertinent;
which rather bespeaks us Children not past our Nonage in those things we
pretend to know: However we would have him produce his Example for his riper
Age, he thinks himself grown into; and seeing he judges ours Vain and
Impertinent, let him prove his Proposal in this Case, to have been the Practice
of the Ancient Gospel Ministers and Primitive Christians, and thereby he may
Convince us of our Childhood. For when he Discoursed with our Friends, that we
sent, to whom we left it to conclude with him about time and place for a
Dispute; speaking about the Moderators, he said to them, He looked upon it
Improper, that those Moderators, which should be chosen, should be either of
his People, or our People; and gave this Reason for it, that then the
Difference would still be the same: So it is evident, that the Moderators must
have been of a different Faith and Principle from us both. Now how this would
consist with True Christianity, and with a right contending for the Faith
delivered to the Saints according to Iude's advice, let it seriously be
considered. For us to give up our Faith and Testimony, and to be concluded,
whether it is Right or Wrong, by Men not of the same Faith, we thought very
improper, and that which no True Christian can do.

We do understand, the Apostles and Primitive Christians were concerned in
Disputes, and did contend for the Faith, and were to give an answer to every
man that asked a Reason of the Hope that was in them, with Meekness and Fear, 1
Pet. 3. 15. But where it was thus referred to chosen men agreed upon, not of
their Faith, to judge who was in the right and who was in the wrong, is not to
be proved from their Example, tho he proposes, that the sacred Scripture shall
be the standard of Examination, and trying every matter by. We find in Acts 6.
9. and Acts 9. 29. that Stephen and the Apostle Paul were concerned to dispute
with such men of malice and bitterness, as James Barry appears to be; but finds
no such chosen Men to refer their Testimony, or the Difference between them,
and their Opposers unto: We also find in Acts 17. 17. Paul disputed in the
Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout Persons, and in the Market daily
with them that met with him: but nothing is said of such Moderators to be in
such a capacity to judge, as James Barry proposes; and in Acts 19. 8. how Paul
went into the Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three Months,
disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God; and in the
9th Verse, that he disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus, but nothing of
James Barry's Method of Moderators. Therefore we leave it to James Barry, to
bring forth his Example from the Standard he has chosen, for examining and
trying every matter by; for if he do not, though he says, we bespeak our
selves Children, he will appear to be in a worse condition, not yet come to be
a Child, and so not so far as the Childhood of the true Birth, without which
none can enter into the Kingdom of God. But he says, Willing we are to leave
the Dispute to be determined by the Conscience or Reason of every one that
shall hear: We do say, as touching those things which the Witnesses charge him
with, seeing he denies some part of it, when he, and we and the Witnesses have
said, what each has to say, we will quietly leave it to the Consciences of the
People, etc. and then proceed to Discourse of the three Principles
aforementioned: and when we Dispute, and are persuading the things concerning
the Kingdom of God, as Paul did, as before showed, whether it be not most
proper to leave or commend our Testimony to the Consciences of the Hearers in
the sight of God, let Wise Men judge. For the Apostles, as they were concerned
in the Ministry, and in handling of the Word of God, did by the Manifestation
of the Truth commend themselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God,
as you may see, 2 Corinthians. 4. 1, 2. And you may see, what he further says in
Chap. 5. 11. how he said, they were manifest to God, and did trust also, they
were made manifest in the Consciences of them at Corinth; and this is the
furthest we ever intended, thus to leave it to the Consciences of People, and
let them receive or reject, as they will answer it to God. And this is evident
from the Scriptures, to be the Method of the true Ministers, and such as were
concerned to dispute or persuade things concerning the Kingdom of God; but not
to give up our Testimony in matters of Faith so to be determined by any chosen
or not chosen, whether it is right or wrong, and so to hold or deny
accordingly, as to our selves and our own Faith; that we find no Example for,
from the true Christians. For Paul says, They were made manifest to God, (and
there he stood) and did trust, they were made manifest in their Consciences; he
also says, 2 Corinthians. 2. 15, 16. they were unto God a sweet Savor of Christ
in them that are Saved, and in them that Perish; but to the one the Savor of
Life unto Life, and to the other the Savor of Death unto Death. So that you
may see, they did not give their Faith away, as it was to God; but commended
their Testimony to every Man's Conscience, and left them to answer it to God,
as they received or rejected. So that we do not find in the holy Scriptures
James Barry's method of choosing Men not of the same Faith and Principle, to be
in a capacity to judge, who is in the right and who is in the wrong, and so to
end the Dispute by their Determination. We have been the more large in
answering this, because it is looked upon by him and some of his Hearers, to be
so wise and necessary a Proposal, that ours, in comparison to it, is accounted
by them altogether vain and impertinent.

And to other Qualifications proposed by him, we answered thus in ours to his
first Paper, That we look upon it, to be all our Duty to keep in the Fear and
Wisdom of God, that we may be preserved out of all Clamours, Janglings, and
unhandsom or unchristian Railings, or Reflections on both sides, (which were
also his own Terms, having thus assented to him therein.) We further said,
Being thus preserved, then to stand in our Christian Liberty, to endeavor that
which may tend to the Honor and Glory of God. There is one passage more in his
Paper, we are not willing to omit the observation of, before we proceed
further; where he says, Blessed they are, I confess, more than the generality
of their Neighbors; but says he, It is with that kind of blessedness, which
is the Portion of God's Enemies; and so cites Psalm 17. 14. and Psalm 73. 12.
where it is said; From Men which are thine Hand, O Lord; from Men of the World,
which have their Portion in this Life; Behold, these are the ungodly, who
prosper in the World, they increase in Riches. And then James Barry says, I
doubt not, but that this is one of the most powerful Engines, by which the art
of Quakerism has been propagated in the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Now let all sober People observe, how he applies these Scriptures, and how
like it is to the rest of his envious doings; for first he confesses, that we
are blessed in having Worldly Riches; so then it is well, that what we have,
comes as a Blessing, and is not wickedly got. O but (says he) it is with that
kind of Blessedness, which is the Portion of God's Enemies.

Now we would have him make out, how he knows it to be so; Are all that prosper
in the World, and increase in Riches, God's Enemies? Surely nay; Abraham, Job,
David and Solomon, when his Heart was enlarged in the Wisdom of God, and many
other Faithful Men were Rich, and yet not Enemies to God. Paul in his Epistle
to Timothy did not find fault with their being Rich; but desired, such might be
warned not to trust in them, but to be Rich in good works. And Christ said, It
is more blessed to give, than to receive, Acts 20. 35. Therefore it would be no
unhappiness in James Barry, to have Riches, that he might rather give and be
helpful to the Poor, than to be burthensom, and make his Ministry chargeable to
his Flock; for we suppose, he is subject to seek and desire it, as well as
other Men: as is evident from his receiving several sums of Money upon pretense
of going into America, which when he had got, failed in performance.

Oh but he doubts not, but this is one of the most powerful Engines, by which
the art of Quakerism has been propagated, etc. but what reason he has thus to
believe, he does not give: But we may easily believe, it is because he is full
of Envy and Bitterness toward us, or else he might see cause to doubt of it.
But in short, we say, that true Christianity, which he calls Quakerism, has
not been propagated by this Engine, but by the Power of God, which upheld his
People. That it could not be the increase of Worldly Riches that propagated it,
will plainly appear, seriously considering the cruel and grievous Sufferings of
our Friends from the very first, that it pleased God to call and raise them up
to bear a faithful Testimony to his Name and Truth. Surely, if they had sought
the Riches, Ease and Glory of the World, they would not have chosen
Afflictions, by cheerfully giving their Back to the Smiter, and not
withholding their Goods from the Spoiler. Many to the losing of all, not
having a Bed left to lie upon, nor Cattle to Till their Ground, nor Corn for
Bread or Seed, nor Tools to work withal: Also Whipping, Stocking, Stoning,
Imprisonment they have been treated with. For many years, not so few as a
Thousand Prisoners at once; until Released by the present King, scarce a Prison
in England, but has been filled with them; besides many Premunired, their
Estates seized, and they kept Prisoners, some for twenty years, others during
Life, many hundreds dying Prisoners.

All this in Old England. Yet James Barry's Brethren in New England exceeded As
at large may be seen in George Bishop's two Books, entitled, New England
judged.
these Cruelties against our Friends there; not only Stockt, but Whipped so
unmercifully their Flesh like Jelly, and in that condition drove them many
Miles into the Wilderness among the Indians and wild Beasts.

Yea, Tender Women have they tied to a Cart, stripped to the Wast, and whipped
through several Towns, ten Stripes a piece in each on their naked Backs, and
then unmercifully left them in Frost and Snow; also cut off Ears, burnt in the
Hand, Banished on pain of Death, and at last put four of our Friends to Death by
the hands of the Common Hangman, on no other pretense, but merely for being
Quakers; in which Cruelty they continued, until stopped by an Order from the late
King.

In Plymouth-Patent they made a Law, to take all the Quakers Cattle from them,
except one, and in the Execution left the worst. Thus our Friends were fully
tried there; but the Lord, who called them not only to Believe, but also to
Suffer, upheld them by his Power, so that they cheerfully underwent all those
Hardships, rather than violate their Faith, or make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience. Now all seriously considering their Faithfulness toward their God,
their Patience in Sufferings, their Peaceableness toward the several
Governments they have lived under, their Honesty and Charity toward their
Neighbors, will plainly demonstrate, James Barry's Charge cannot be true, viz.
the getting of Riches is one of the most powerful Engines to propagate the Art
of Quakerism, as he scornfully calls our Holy Religion; which we affirm to be
no other than Worshipping God in his own Spirit and Truth: and does also
evidence, James Barry's application of the aforesaid Scriptures to be wicked
and false, and not as David intended, who sets them forth in the 73 d Psalm, as
you may see; They set their Mouth against Heaven, etc. saying, how does God
know, is their knowledge in the most high?

After all this abusing of us, and these shuffling Evasions, to avoid giving us
a public Meeting, he comes off thus; Seeing therefore, that by coming
together, the matter in Dispute is not like to be determined, it remains
therefore, that what you have to offer in Vindication of your Selves and
Principles, etc. be in Print exposed to the view of the World by you. But let
all consider, why we do not come together to endeavor the Determination of the
Matters in dispute; and they may see it is, because he will not appear in
public, though he has boasted as before, and now puts us to Print in
Vindication of our Selves, and the three Principles before mentioned. But
wherefore shall we Print in Defense, seeing he has not in all his Papers laid
down one Argument, no^ brought one Scripture to confute any of the three, as
laid down either by us, or by our Friends whom he abuses; nor yet as they are
laid down by himself: and besides, the same Friends of ours that he names, and
diverse others, have writ in Vindication of two of the said Principles. So that
whosoever desires to read the Vindication of them, may see it in Samuel
Fisher's Rusticus ad Academicos, never yet answered; and in George Whitehead's,
and William Penn's, (in answer to diverse Books, and Thomas Hicks's lying
Dialogues; where he, like James Barry, forges many Lies against us) entitled,
The Christian Quaker, etc. remaining unanswered either by him, or any else that
we ever heard of.

And as for the third Principle, we never before him heard any judge Perfection
in Sanctification as to degrees, attainable in this Life, an Erroneous
Principle; and therefore it does not so much concern us to vindicate in Print,
that which so often is done already, and he to make no offer to confute them;
however he after his former manner, as may be seen in his last Paper, can make
a great threatening boast, saying; At the back of your Vindication James Barry
will send forth in Print his Arguments, to prove the Quakers grand Heretics in
these Points, etc. And why would not James Barry give us a Meeting to prove us
such, according to his former Boasting? Might not that have been convenient
first, or otherwise in writing to have given us some Arguments, that we might
have had something to have vindicated our Selves against, that wise Men might
have seen a little into the ground of our Difference? But it is to be
questioned, whether he has any Arguments against them, that are fit to be
brought forth before wise Men; and therefore his greatest Policy is to keep
them hid, and so please Fools with his boasting of them. But, to do him
Justice, we must confess, he has given us cause to appear some way to
vindicate our selves and our Principles, according to his demand; and since he
himself proposes Printing as the Method, now we think it not amiss to do
accordingly, believing, he cannot reasonably find fault with that which he
himself seems to advise unto.

In his first Paper, he calls us Persons, who delight in brangling, and
stirring up the Spirit of Animosity and Prejudice, and Men of as little Charity
and Religion, as those we receive our idle Stories from; whether this be not
more his guilt, than ours, we shall leave to the Lord to judge, and also to Men
of understanding, who have the knowledge of both our Practices. In his second
Paper he charges our Principles to be dark and uncertain, but lays down no
Arguments against them. In his last, before recited, you see, how he charges
Quakerism, as he terms it, to be made up and constituted of Subtlety, and
judges us to be in serpentine acts, and our Cause dark and rotten; and likewise
you may see, what an Imputation of being God's Enemies he endeavors to fasten
upon us in his Application of those two Scriptures, viz. Psalm. 17. 14. and 73.
12. and in the conclusion of the same Paper giving his Reason, why he sent all
his without date, tells us, He did it willingly, having seriously considered,
that a dateless Answer was at any time good enough for foolish and impertinent
Stories, and nonsensical Whimsies.

So that though he lays down no Arguments to confute our Principles; yet you
may see, who are unbiassed and without prejudice, what confidence he has to
pass sentence upon us, and our Blessings, to be that kind of Blessedness which
is the portion of God's Enemies, and that is a sad portion. Let him be as full
of Envy as he can, to answer it, he need desire no worse for us; the Lord
forgive the thoughts of his Heart, and the words of his Mouth, and bring him to
Repentance, if he see good: for from these doings of his it appears, he is in
the gall of Bitterness, and wants Charity, which is the perfecting Virtue. He
spares not to judge both us and our Principles, as the worst of Men and
Principles, which if he speaks truth of us, then we are so indeed; but he has
that yet to prove: and therefore he had been wiser, if he had first proved us
such, and then given his Judgment upon us; but alas! his Malice and Envy would
not suffer him to stay for that, lest he should be prevented for want of proof.
You see, how he judges us to delight in brangling, and stirring up the spirit
of Animosity and Prejudice, which is the work of evil Men, and our Principles
dark and uncertain, and therefore not of God, who is Light and unchangeable;
and that our Religion is made up and constituted of Subtlety, then not of
Simplicity; and our Acts Serpentine, that proceed from the Wicked one, and not
from Christ, that bruiseth the Serpent's head; and our Cause dark and rotten;
then it is not in the Everlasting Light. All this being once proved by him,
then he makes good his Application; we are Enemies indeed to God and Christ:
But all this we do deny, and leave at his Door to prove if he can; and until
then we lay it upon him, as a wicked Sentence and Judgment. But this is not
all, though this were enough, if true, to make the Quakers and their Principles
hated of God and good Men.

But in his Preaching, and other Discourse, as well as in his said Papers, he
has not spared to Rail, Abuse and pass Judgment upon us, as appears by several
Witnesses, one whereof John Smith
affirmed, that he heard him in his public Preaching declare, That the Quakers
were the Spawn of the Jesuits, and that the Jesuits were the Spawn of the
Devil, which he himself has since owned to two of our Friends, who spoke to
him about it.

Now this false and wicked Accusation we utterly deny, and therefore turn it
upon himself to prove the same; we having born our Testimony against them, as
we do against him, and all others who stand up against the glorious appearance
of Truth, as it has pleased God to manifest it in this Day: and therefore do
utterly deny to be of their Offspring; yet do desire, that in his next he
would make out, how they are the Spawn of the Devil, and we their Off spring in
that Line? So let all People consider the desperate boldness, harshness and
hardness of this Man's Heart and Spirit; you see, how in his unwholsom Words he
places us in the Devil's Line and Off spring, and so near as his Grandchildren;
what worse can he make of us, or in what state that is more dreadful can he
place us? Sure in his Judgment we are far separated from God: Doubtless he
accounts us of the reprobate number, that God never had Mercy for, since he
believes there are such.

It is also evidenced unto us, that he joined the Quakers and Muggletonians
together, and Witness Thomas Smith.
said, that we did take upon us to know the Dimensions of God, viz. To know his
length, breadth, bigness, form and likeness; which is altogether false: for we
utterly deny such Erroneous Principles, and have born our Testimony against
Muggleton.

It is also evidenced unto us by two Witnesses, that James Barry in his
Preaching did affirm, John Kelson, Thomas Cole.
that the Quakers were a bewitching, and blaspheming, erroneous People,
cheating God of his Right; and that they did compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselite; and when they had done, made him twofold a Child of the Devil more
than before. Thus it appears, that he still endeavors to incense People
against us, as that we are from the Devil, and are working for him, to turn and
beget to him, and not to God. Those, with many more such like unchristian
Reflections and Abuses against us and our Principles, are brought to us, and
testified to have proceeded from his Mouth; and therefore we offered, as
before, that we desired a public Meeting before the People, that the Witnesses
and he might come face to face, and that the People might hear both sides with
their Witnesses, and when all was heard, that we would leave it as before
proposed. And this we thought might be a good opportunity for him to clear
himself, if innocent; but it is like, he knowing in his Conscience his guilt,
made him fly from so reasonable an offer, and shuffle as he has done, that he
might escape coming to the Trial, left he should be further manifested.

Now as to those three Principles James Barry promised to send forth his
Arguments in Print, to prove the Quakers grand Heretics in, they were in our
Answer (to one of his said Papers) sent him, laid down, and expressed according
to the following Words, viz.

To the first we affirm, That we own the Resurrection, and do believe, that the
Righteous shall rise and ascend into Glory, and be glorified in Heaven with an
Eternal Reward, and that the Wicked also shall rise and come to Judgment, and
be turned into Hell to receive an Eternal Punishment. But that the same fleshly
Body which must undergo Death and Corruption, shall rise and enter into Heaven,
we leave for thee to prove, and make good from the Scriptures of Truth; being
our selves satisfied in believing what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37.
when he answers the Fools Question, saying, That which thou sowest, is not
quickened, except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body
that shall be, etc. and further says, verse 44. It is sown a Natural Body, it
is raised a Spiritual Body, etc. And in the same Chap. says further, verse 50.
Now this I say, Brethren, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption.

Thus we laid it down, and looking upon James Barry's Asserting, That it must
be the Fleshly Body, which must Die, and see Corruption, (for these are his
words) we did believe, he contradicted the Apostle in so saying, and also
Christ himself, who said, that the Children of the Resurrection were equal unto
the Angels, etc. Luke 20. 36. And therefore did we offer to Dispute with him in
the Vindication of our Faith, as to this Principle.

The second Error that he charged upon us, was, That the Quakers deny, that
Men are Justified and Saved by the alone Righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed
without the Concurrence of inherent Righteousness. And in another Paper
Condemns us of Error, for Believing, that the Active and Passive Righteousness
of Jesus Christ is not the only Righteousness (as imputed to us by God, without
any mixture of Righteousness inherent in us) by the which Sinners must be
Justified and eternally Saved. We Answered.

That we do own Righteousness to be Imputed of God, and God's Imputation
thereof to be a Blessing and Happiness unto Man; but do not believe, that
Sinners shall be Justified and Saved by the Imputation only of the Active and
Passive Righteousness of Christ without us, without any Righteousness wrought
in us by the Spirit of Grace, which comes by Jesus Christ.

Let all People (that are of understanding Hearts) seriously consider this,
which he calls an Error, and charges upon the Quakers for such an Error, as
that he will prove us grand Heretics herein, etc. for allowing any mixture of
Righteousness inherent in us, that is, cleaving to, or abiding in. One might
think, he had never read the Scriptures, thus to exclude the work of Grace in
the Heart. Did not the Apostle say, Ephesians. 2. 5. By Grace ye are Saved, and verse.
8. again, By Grace ye are Saved, through Faith, not of your Selves; it is the
Gift of God. And was not this Grace a Spiritual Gift? And was it not to be in
their Hearts? Did not the Apostle say, Let the Word of God dwell richly in you?
And were they not to sing with Grace in the Heart? Col. 3. 16. And was not
Christ in them the Hope of Glory? Chap. 1. 27. And did not Christ say, John 3.
3. Except a Man be Born again (or from above) he cannot see the Kingdom of God?
And verse. 5. Except a Man be Born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: For that which is Born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, as v. 6. From all which it is
evident, that none can enter the Kingdom of God, without this Regeneration, and
being Born again. And how can this New Birth be, without the work of the Spirit
of Christ in the Heart? And how can this work of Regeneration be wrought, and
no Inherent Righteousness? Or, how can it be, that a Man may be Born of the
Spirit, or from above, and have no Righteousness abiding in him? And without
this work of Regeneration and New Birth, you see Christ says, he cannot enter
the Kingdom of Heaven. This being rightly understood, let James Barry tell us,
what manner of Justification and Salvation that is, which he means, that is
without any mixture of Righteousness wrought in a Man, by the Spirit of Grace,
or abiding in him; for he says, By the alone Righteousness active and passive
of Christ, imputed without any mixture of Righteousness inherent, must Sinners
be justified and eternally saved. But it is evident from Christ's Words, that
by this eternal Salvation of James Barry's, a Man cannot enter the Kingdom of
God, for they are not prepared for it. Behold, Christ says, John 15. I am the
Vine, ye are the Branches; abide in me, and I in you: And verse 5. He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much Fruit: Without me ye
can do nothing.

Now can it be possible, that any should be in Christ, and Christ in them, and
yet no Righteousness Inherent (that is, sticking to, or abiding in them;) and
yet they, as Branches bearing Fruit, and if they do not bear Fruit, they are to
be taken away; then not Saved and Justified, if they be taken away; and if they
bear Fruit, Christ is in them, and they in him: Then, if it be so,
Righteousness is Inherent, both by sticking to, and abiding in. So let James
Barry make out, how any can be in Christ, and Christ in them, and no
Righteousness Inherent: Or otherwise, how any can be Fruitful, and consequently
Justified and Saved, and Christ not in them, and they in him; seeing Christ
says, it cannot be: And verse 6. You may see the end of all, that abide not in
Christ, As withered Branches cut off, they are gathered for the Fire. So that
they that abide not in Christ, bear no Fruit, and are neither Justified nor
Saved, agreeing with the very Parable Christ speaks, Matthew. 9. 17. Neither do
Men put New Wine into Old Bottles, else the Bottles break, and the Wine runs
out, and the Bottles perish, etc. Which plainly demonstrates, there must be an
inward work of renewing; for it is not the Old, that must enter: Therefore the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: And
in 1 Cor. 5. 7. The Apostle exhorts them, to purge out the old Leaven, that
they might be a new Lump, etc. and in Gal. 6. 15. The Apostle having spoken
before of the effects of the Cross of Christ, tells them, That in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing; but a new Creature.
So that we may see, the Apostle (who believed his Master's Doctrine) pressed to
have it answered, by witnessing the Old Man put off, which was corrupt
according to the deceitful Lusts, and to be renewed in the Spirit of their
minds, etc. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23. And in Col. 3. 9, 10. There you may see, that the
Apostle tells them, they had put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and had put on
the New, which was renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him, who had Created
him; and was not this new Man Christ, or at least the bringings forth of his
Power in them? for the Apostle says, Romans 13. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. and Col. 2. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk ye in him. And Col. 3. 11. Having spoken of them that had put on
the New Man, as before; says, Where there is neither Jew nor Greek, etc. But
Christ is all, and in all. As the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He was made of
God unto them Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

So here was the true Imputation, or gift of God, thus given or made theirs,
and so imputed; and so they did witness his Power to Work in them; as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 3. and 20. And in the same Chapter you may see, how he
desired with bowed Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would grant them according to the Riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the Inward Man; and listewise in his Epistle to Titus 3.
5. Having spoken of the Love of God to Mankind, Not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he Saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost: So here still the Apostle has
regard to the Doctrine of Christ, and Maintains Regeneration through the
Renewings of the Holy Ghost; so they were Washed thereby, and Born thereof. To
this agrees another Testimony of his, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Having told them, that the
Unrighteous shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God; and having reckoned up to
them the wickedness, that the Gentile were given to; says, And such were some
of you, but ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

And what says James Barry, was not Righteousness here wrought in them? was
there none Inherent, when this work of Sanctification and Washing was wrought
by the Spirit? or were they Saved and Justified while they were in those gross
Evils beforementioned? If so, let us know, what manner of Salvation it was;
for the Apostle says, None shall Inherit the Kingdom of God; and the same
Apostle says, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; for it is God, that works in you both to Will and to Do of his
good Pleasure.

Now it is evident, that though they Preached Remission of Sins past, in the
Name of Jesus, to those that did Believe, and so through Faith their Sins came
to be Blotted out; yet without this Washing of Regeneration, and work of the
Spirit to Renew them, that they might be Born again, as Christ had said, they
could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore you may see how the
Christians witnessed the New Birth, and how the Apostles labored for it; yet
this neither was by them then, nor is by us now accounted Man's work alone: But
was the work of Christ in them by his Spirit. And that was the reason, why the
Apostle came under such a Travel, as in Gal. 4. 19. where he says, My little
Children, of whom I Travel in Birth again, until Christ be Formed in you. Here
the Apostle was concerned, lest they should be lost, and he had bestowed upon
them Labor in Vain, as verse 11. seeing they were going out into the
Observations, which were unprofitable; and therefore in Chap. 5. 16. says
this, I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the
Flesh. So you may see it was the Spirit the Saints were to walk in, and thereby
was the overcoming of the Flesh, with its Lusts. As the Apostle in Romans 8. does
at large Testify; and tells us plainly, verse 9. That if any Man has not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And verse 14. says, As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. But James Barry with some of his
Hearers denied Revelation, and accounted it an Error in us to own it; and
therefore it cannot be expected, that they should walk in it, who deny it, or
that they should be Adopted by it, or Sealed by it. And therefore let James
Barry in his Answer make out, how they came to be Christians, or Children of
God, and whether they are Christ's, and how they came to be so, and whether
they own Regeneration necessary to Salvation, Yea or nay: And whether this
Eternal Salvation he says Sinners are Saved by, without any Mixture of
Inherent Righteousness, do fit Man for the Kingdom of God, Yea or nay: And
whether any Man can reap Benefit by the Active and Passive Righteousness of
Christ without, except he have a True Faith; and whether any Man can have a
True Faith without the Word of Faith; and whether this Word of Faith be not in
the Heart, etc.? Yea or nay: And whether true Faith be not an Effect of this
Word in the Heart, Yea or nay; according to Romans 10. And this is not the speech
of the Law, but of the Righteousness of Faith, as in verse 6th. and 7th, Thou
need not say, who shall ascend into Heaven to fetch Christ down, or who shall
descend into the Deep to bring him again from the Dead, etc. verse 8th, The
Word is nigh in the Heart and Mouth: This is the Word of Faith, which we
Preach, and is this Word there in the Heart? And does it beget Faith in Christ,
and concerning his Righteousness, and yet no Righteousness within? For James
Barry will have no mixture; it must be a Faith without Righteousness, or else a
Justification and Salvation without Faith. So let him send forth his Arguments
to prove us grand Heretics according to his Promise, and then it may be seen,
what we have further to say in the Vindication of our Principles; which if he
do not, let it rest upon him as such a one, and let Error and Heresy lie at
his Door.

The next Error that he charge upon us, as he lays it down in his own Terms,
is, That we do own Perfection in Sanctification as to degrees in this Life.

Answer. We having said so much before, tending to prove this no Error, in our
so owning of it, need now say little more; especially, seeing we never heard it
accounted an Error before, till now by him, and do question, whether any will
be now of his mind. The Apostle, as is showed before, said to the Saints, They
were Washed, and they were Sanctified: And again, he speaks of their being
Saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost; and Jude
(verse 1.) writes unto such as were Sanctified by God the Father, and Preserved
in Jesus Christ. Was this Washing and Sanctification, which was by God the
Father, and by his Spirit, and in the Name of Jesus Christ, altogether without
Perfection, that it is by James Barry accounted an Error, to hold Perfection
of Sanctification in any degree? What! are the Works of God and his Spirit in
Christ so Imperfect, that they admit of no degree of Perfection in them? Then
how should the Saints Perfect Holiness in the fear of God, according to the
Exhortation given by the Apostle? 2 Cor. 7. 1. We look upon it, thus to charge
God in the Work of his Spirit in Christ, to be little less than Blasphemy.
David says in Psalm. 18. 30. As for God his way is Perfect: And in verse 32. It
is God that girdeth me with Strength, and makes my way Perfect. And Moses
says, I will Publish the Name of the Lord, Ascribe ye Greatness unto our God;
he is a Rock, his Work is Perfect, for all his ways are Judgment, etc. Deuteronomy.
32. 3, 4. These bear a better and truer Testimony for God, his Ways and Works,
than James Barry, who will admit of no degree of Perfection in Sanctification;
which we always held to be the Work of God and his Spirit in Christ wrought for
the Saints, and in the Saints: As the Prophet also Testifies, Isa. 26. 12.
Lord, thou will Ordain Peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our Works
in us.

To Vindicate these our Principles, or any thing Writ in Vindication of them by
our Friends, which he has Abused, viz. George Fox, George Whithead, William
Pen and Edward Buroughs; we offered to give him a Meeting, and with him to
Dispute fairly, that it might be Manifest, whether his or ours did most agree
and concur with the Testimony of holy Scriptures.

We offered further then, to Dispute with him about the Doctrine of Particular
Election and Reprobation of Persons, or of Christ's not Dying for ALL Men; and
told him, we were desirous to be Informed, what Gospel of glad Tidings
Ministers of such a Faith and Principle had to Preach to them that Christ Died
not for, which might tend to their Benefit unto Salvation; or whether they
never press such to Believe as a Duty Incumbent, nor ever offer Salvation unto
them in the Name of Christ, if they do believe? This we said we did look upon
to be a material Principle, and ought to be cleared up, because it concerns so
great a part of Mankind. And James Barry's Messenger, that he sent with his
Papers, said, That James Barry would lay down his Life in Vindication of this
Principle: Therefore we expect he should Inform us, what Gospel he has to
Preach to them Christ. Died not for, and what object of Faith he has to lay
down for them to Believe in; for Faith must have an Object: Or whether they do
not press it, as a Duty in general upon all to Believe? And then let us know
their Method of Distinction, who Preach not the Gospel to every one; for sure,
there can be no Gospel of glad Tidings to those Christ Died not for: And we
know it is the common Opinion of such, that they that Christ Died not for, are
the greater Number; and if this Doctrine of theirs be true, how can the Message
of the Angel be true? Luke 2. 10. And the Angel said unto them, fear not; for
behold, I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto ALL People.
And in the same Chapter you may see, what Simeon said, For mine Eyes have seen
thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the Face of ALL People. Here he
Witnesses to the general Offer of God unto ALL. And the Apostle, Romans 5. 18.
says, That as by the Offense of ONE, Judgment came upon ALL Men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of ONE, the free Gift came upon ALL
Men unto Justification of Life. And in Psalm. 68. 18. David, speaking of Christ,
says, Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led Captivity Captive, thou
have received Gifts for Men; yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God
might dwell amongst them. And to this agrees the Parable of the Sower, whose
Seed fell some on the Highway, some on the Thorny, some on the Stony, and some
on the good Ground: And also the Parable of the Talents, Matt. 25. 15. where it
is said, He gave to every one according to their several Abilities; but ALL did
not improve, as Paul says, Romans 10. They have not all Obeyed, though they had
Heard: and in 1 Timothy 2. 6. you see what he says of the Mediator, Who gave
himself a Ransom for ALL Men, to be Testified in due time. 2 Cor. 5. 14. For
the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one Died for
ALL, then were ALL Dead; and was not their Judgment right in this? Heb. 2. 9.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels for the suffering
of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God should
taste Death for EVERY Man. So you see, that by the Grace of God he should taste
Death for EVERY Man; and yet James Barry and such, by their ungracious
Limitations, would have it to be but for a few; and so he goes to contradict
the Scripture, and so is witnessed against, by that which he said should be the
Standard to try every thing by; And therefore is not true according to the
Standard. And in the 1 st Epistle of John 2. 2. you may see what he says of
Christ and his Death; And he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the whole World: So not for theirs only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World. And 2 Pet. 3. 9. There the Apostle tells
us of the Long-suffering of God to usward, not willing that ANY should Perish,
but that ALL should come to Repentance. And the Prophet Ezekiel, being of the
same mind, declares fully in the 18 th chap. That the Lord has no pleasure in
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would Repent and Return. Many
Scriptures might be laid down to witness against this unrighteous Principle of
limiting God in the universality of his Love to Mankind; for the rejecting of
which, and slighting the offers of Free Grace, which has appeared to all Men,
according to Titus 2. 11. Man brings destruction upon himself.

But James Barry's Messenger that he sent, which we suppose may be an esteemed
Member of his Church, did charge it to be Blasphemy for any to say, That Man
could do contrary to the Will of God; and when it was offered to be proved in
an hundred places of Scripture and more, where the Will of God was manifest,
and that Men did contrary to it; for if it were not so, we should not have Sin
committed; for in the Scripture all sorts of Sin are forbidden: After this was
offered, he still affirmed it. And further discoursing of what benefit the
Reprobate could have by the coming of Christ, he said, the Devil had a benefit
by it; but being much desired to show wherein, he could make nothing out.

James Barry makes a Boast of his Hearers, most of them being in a state of
Grace; but if they be not founded upon better Principles than these, they are
far from being in a state of Grace and Happiness. Therefore in Charity we
desire, they may look to their standing, and not to be settled upon such unsound
Principles, as James Barry the Independent Minister (as he calls himself)
labors to settle them in; which is opposite to God's Free Grace, which brings
Salvation.

James Barry also, with some of his Hearers, did account it an Error in the
Quakers to own Immediate Revelation; and said, they did disown it. Now seeing
it is so, that the immediate Spirit of Christ, and its Immediate Revelation is
denied by him; we demand of him, how he came to be a Minister, and whence he
has his Ability, and that Knowledge of God he pretends to have, and from
whom he has received his Gospel that he Preaches? Its evident enough, not
from Christ; for indeed it is not like his, nor him, who would have gathered
the Children of Jerusalem, as a Hen gathers her Chickens, and they would not;
therefore were they rejected, because they would not be gathered. The Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 3. 6. They were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit; and verse 5. says, Their sufficiency was of
God; and Gal. 1. 11, 12. the Gospel which Paul Preached, It was not after Man;
for he neither received it of Man, neither was taught it; but by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 3. he declares, That he was made a Minister according to
the gift of the Grace of God given unto him by the effectual working of his
Power; and Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any Man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God; if any Man Minister, let him do it as of the ability which God
gives, that God in all things may be glorified, etc. Now how is this Ability
received from God, if not by his Spirit? and therefore he gave different Gifts
of the Spirit for the work of the Ministry, and by that they were opened and
enlarged, and made able. But James Barry denying this, from whom has he his
Call? and whence has he his Gospel and Ability? If he says from God; We
desire to know, how he received it, being not by the Spirit, he having denied
that; and if it be not by the Spirit, it cannot be from God: For what a Man
receives of Spiritual Benefit, it must be by the Spirit, either immediately, or
mediately by its working through an Instrument. Therefore let him make out, how
he comes by his Call, Ability and that Necessity he pretends to be upon him?
for the Divine Spirit being denied, it must be from Man, or else from his own
corrupt Heart, for Self-interest; which is most probable, that he might get
Gain and live upon the People: For it is evident, his Necessity is not the same
that was upon the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 16. He owns not his way of receiving it,
nor does follow his Example in Preaching it.

And to his Hearers this Advice we give: Consider well your State, and whether
you profit under his Ministry or no: For of old, they that ran, and the Lord
did not send them, did not profit the People; for he denying Revelation by
which the Father and the Son is savingly known, no other Knowledge is come to
without it, but by Hearsay, which is not that Knowledge Christ speaks of,
which is Life Eternal. And for your satisfaction, read the following
Scriptures, Mat. 11. 27. Christ says, Neither knows any Man the Father, but
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. So Christ is positive,
that no Man knows God but by his Revelation, Mat. 16. 17. Christ says, it was
the Father that Revealed him unto Peter; and Gal. 1. 15, 16. There you may see
the Father Revealed his Son in Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Apostle speaking of the
great things God had prepared for them that love him, says, God has Revealed
them unto us by his Spirit; and in Ephesians. 1. 17. you may see, how the Apostle
prayed for the Saints, That God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Glory, would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of the Son; and 1 Cor. 14. 30. he says, If any thing be Revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his Peace. Here you may see, that from
the Testimony of the Holy Scripture (which your Minister said, should be the
Standard to try every thing by) in the true Church, Revelation was expected,
and to be given way to in the Church; and by the Apostle was prayed for, that
God would give the Spirit and Revelation unto the Church; for he knew they
could not Worship, Pray, Preach, nor Sing aright without it. And what! Is this
accounted an Error now by your Minister or you? Where is your Standard? Will
you not come to the Scriptures, nor to the Spirit neither? Where is your Bottom
and Foundation that you Build upon? What Is your Root that bears you? You have
got a foolish Builder, he will not follow the Example of Paul, a wise
Master Builder, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Paul said, He would pray with the Spirit, etc.
and sing with the Spirit, etc. Ephesians. 5. 18. There the Apostle exhorts them, To
be filled with the Spirit; and Rom 8. 26. he says, They knew not, what to pray
for as they ought, but the Spirit helped their Infirmities, etc. And Christ in
the 4 th of John says. That God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must
Worship him in Spirit and Truth; and such does the Father seek to Worship him.
Now let your Minister clear these things up to you; how in your Church or
Families either, he and you denying Revelation, can Worship aright, Preach,
Pray or Sing aright? and by what you have Ability, and know what to Pray for,
without the Spirits help? What! are you so strong of your selves, in your
Self-Ability, that you do not need that which the Apostles, and all true
Christians sought the help of, and could not do without? Nay, it was that, by
which they knew what to Pray for, and therefore they waited for its Assistance:
And Paul said, he would Pray with it. You may make long Prayers, like the
Pharisees, but what will it avail, it being done without that, in which the
Saints had access to God? So here your Praying and Worship, and Separation or
Gathering being without the Spirit, what can it be, but from self, and in self?
And so like them spoken of in Jude 19. These be they, who separate themselves,
sensual, not having the Spirit. And we desire you to read the 8th Chapter to
the Romans, and consider, what you are to walk after, as Christians, and to be
led by, and to live after; and with what you are to mortify the Flesh, or the
deeds of the Flesh, if you own a Mortification needful to Salvation; and
whether you can be Christ's, and not have his Spirit? and whether you can be
the Sons of God, and not be led by his Spirit? And whether you are Children but
by Adoption? And if by Adoption, whether this Adoption is not by the Spirit?
And whether it was not the Spirit it self, that bore witness with the Saints
Spirits, that they were the Children of God? As verse the 16. And then consider
what your Evidence is, or whether ye have any or no? You considering these
things weightily, will certainly find your selves at a loss, while ye are
denying the Spirits discovery or Revelation, whatever James Barry may tell you
of your being in a State of Grace.

And therefore ought all People to be turned unto the Spirit and Light of
Christ Jesus in their Hearts; and if your Minister do not direct and turn you
thereunto, he is no Minister of Christ, nor will ever bring you to Christ your
Savior, and then, how can you be saved? And if he turn you to the Light and
Spirit of Christ, then he must own the Revelation thereof in the Church, or
else he denies Christ in his Offices to teach his People, who is both King,
Priest and Prophet in his Church; and if he turn People to the Light, then he
must not Preach against it; but if this be not a part of his Message, that God
is Light, and Christ is spiritually the Light of the World, and so a part of
his work to turn to this Light, he is no Minister of Christ. And for your
Satisfaction read these Scriptures: Paul, a true Minister, Acts 26. 18.
speaking of God's sending him to the Gentiles, said, It was to open their blind
Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to
God. And 1 John 1. 5. he said, their Message which they had heard of him, and
declared, was, That God is Light: So then they that turn People to the Light,
turn them to God and Christ, as is further evident from Christ's own Words,
Ioh. 8. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the
World, he that follows me, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life. And John the Baptist's Testimony concerning him (who was the
Eternal Word, by whom all things were made) was, That he was the true Light,
which lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. And Christ
commanded to believe in the Light, John 12. 36. saying, While ye have the
Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be Children of the Light, etc. So
People are both to be turned to the Light, and to believe in the Light, and to
walk in it; or else whatever be professed, People can be but Children of
Darkness, and such as know not, whither they go. And in Isa 42. 6. and Isa. 49.
6. you may see, how God promised, that he would give Christ for a Light, etc.
so that they that deny and slight the Light, deny Christ, God's Light and
Salvation. And Ephesians. 5. 13. the Apostle says, That all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest, is
Light. So that you may see, what need People have to mind the Light, or else
they must be ignorant of their States, and also of the Glory of God; for in the
Light is the Knowledge of God's Glory received, as may be seen in 2 Cor. 4. 6.
and also you may see where this Light is to shine; For God who commanded Light
to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ.

Much might be said in the Vindication of this Testimony for the true Light,
wherewith Christ has lighted every Man; but this may suffice to all that will
believe the Scriptures, and accordingly turn their Minds to the true Light of
Christ, that he may give them a right understanding to know him that is True,
according to 1 John 5. 20. seeing James Barry in his last Paper seems to accuse
us, as if we would bring Texts of Scripture neither understood, nor rightly
applied; therefore when he sends forth his Answer upon the back of our
Vindication (according to his promise) let him give his Applications upon the
forecited Scriptures, which are quoted for the Proof of our Principles, and as
an Evidence against his: and so let him prove us grand Heretics, as he said he
would; or otherwise let him leave off his boasting, and cease from belying and
abusing of us, as formerly he has done.

Written in Vindication of the Truth, our selves, and the rest of our Traduced
Friends.

Dublin, the 20th of the first Month, 168^. John Burnyeat, Amos Strettell.
POSTSCRIPT.
JAmes Barry's Answer to two Letters (sent him by Anthony Sharp) which by way
of Postscript was in his last Paper to us in the following Words, viz.

I do acknowledge my self indebted to your Scribe, viz. Anthony Sharp, in two
most exquisite and polite Letters, the which I hope to answer, when I have
little else to do: So begging his Worships Patience may bear a little longer
with my slowness in this Business, I bid him Farewell. J. B.

For Answer. Anthony Sharp being abused and belied in particular, as well as we
and our Principles in general; when James Barry finds leisure to answer his
Letters, we shall leave Anthony Sharp to reply, who doubtless therein will
further manifest both him and his folly, without either such delays, or using
such vain and scornful flouts, improper to have come from the Pen of a
Christian, much less a pretended Minister.

Memorandum. If any be desirous to see the several Papers, that have past
betwixt James Barry and Us, the Originals may be seen with Amos Strettell, at
the Band and Hood in Back-Lane, and true Copies thereof with Thomas Ashton, at
the Three Kidds and Gloves in Cavan-Street, Dublin.



THE Holy TRUTH AND ITS Professors Defended:

In an Answer to a LETTER writ by Lawrence Potts, Priest of Staplestown near
Catherlough, unto Robert Lackey a Parishioner, and formerly Hearer of the said
Priest; Occasioned by his forsaking his Ministry, and embracing the blessed
Truth herein vindicated.

By John Burnyeat, and John Watson.

Take Counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the Word, and it
shall not stand: for God is with us. For the Lord spoke thus to me with a
strong Hand, and instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of this
People, saying; Say ye not, A Confederacy to all them, to whom this People
shall say, A Confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify
the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread,
Isa. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
ANother Letter coming to our Hands subscribed J. T. the tendency thereof being
to beget a dislike in R. L. (to whom it was Writ) to the Principles of Truth,
as professed by us the truly Reformed Christians, called Quakers; and to
prevent the writing of more such, occasioned our making thus public the
following Answer to Priest Potts' s Letter; and the rather, understanding the
said J. T. saw it, and takes no notice thereof in his, although it Answers the
substance thereof, excepting in these following particulars.

1. His accounting it an Error in us, Not to Swear.

Ans. We in short say, we have Christ's Command for not Swearing, Matt. 5. 3,
4. Swear not at all; And seconded by the Apostle, James 5. 12. which we believe
ought to be observed by all Christians.

2. He charges us with Denying the Trinity as he terms it.

Ans. We do really own the Three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One, John 5. 7. And we also own
the Three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, the Water and the Blood, and
these Three agree in One, as verse 8. and so we do and always did believe,
according to the Holy Scriptures.

3. He charges us with Denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God.

Ans. We believe the Scriptures to be what they call themselves, a Testimony or
Declaration, as in Luke 1. 1. John 5. 39. But Christ we own and believe to be
the Word of God, according to John 1. and Rev. 19. 13. So we own the Word of
the Lord, that came unto the Prophets, saying, as in Ezekiel. 7. 1. and in diverse
other places; and we own and believe the Sayings of the Word, as recorded in
the Holy Scriptures. So the Word, that came unto the Prophets, was the Sayer,
or that which spoke unto them; and the Scriptures are the Words or Sayings,
which the Word (or Spirit of Christ) spoke unto (and through) the Prophets; as
is evident from the Testimony of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

Dublin the 12th of the 9th Month, 1688. J. B. J. W.

The Holy Truth and its Professors Defended, etc.
Lawrence Potts,
WE having met with a Paper of thine, and finding our selves, and others of the
People called Quakers concerned therein, with our Christian Religion and Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, which we are called to bear witness unto, and contend
for, were not willing to let it pass without taking notice of thy false Charges
upon Us and our Religion; together with thy weak Vindication of thy self, with
the rest of the Clergy of your Church, in those things which thou have yet to
prove. And we find our selves the more concerned, because of thy Challenge in
thy Paper, where thou say; It dos become your Teachers, to make this plainly
appear to you and me, from whom they have drawn you; and therefore if they can
make it out, I again challenge it of them and you.

By the way we would have thee take notice of this, that Robert Lacky in his
Letter to thee does acquaint thee, that it was the Light or Grace of God, that
let him see the Evil or Defects in himself and others, and so merely the Love
of God, that prevailed in his Heart; so that it was not Man, that drew him from
thee and thy Teachings, but the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Shepherd, whom the
Father promised, that by his Spirit of Light and Grace did draw him, and so
fulfilled the Promise of the Father in Ezekiel. 34. 10. where he says, He would
deliver his Flock from the mouth of such as fed themselves, that they might not
be Meat for them, etc.

In the first place we observe, thou blamest him for saying, If he or any
other, through the Light of God's Grace in the Heart, do see Defects in
themselves or others, that profess that Religion, wherein they were bred, he
does not understand, how he incurs Damnation by forsaking it, etc. And so in
thy Answer blamest him for confounding Religion (as thou say) with the
Carriage of its Professors, etc.

Answer. It Is true, there may be wicked Men Professors of a most holy and pure
Religion; and therefore for some particulars being of an evil carriage, to
condemn a Religion, is not proper. But when a Man finds and understands, that
in the Exercise of his Religion he receives not power against Sin and
Temptation in himself, nor yet sees the effect of such a power in others (it
may be, not in the very Teachers) but that is lived in, which answers not the
Law of God, nor the Life of a true Christian; and yet here is no dis-membring
of such, or excluding them from their Church Fellowship; This may justly give
ground to suspect a Defect in that Religion. And therefore it may be
warrantable for a Man under these Observations, both concerning himself and
others, to enquire and seek after a Religion, wherein Power may be enjoyed from
Christ to overcome Sin, and withstand Temptation. And we do believe, thou thy
self art not ignorant, how that not only many of the People of your Church are
of a loose Conversation, but diverse of your Clergy also; and yet they suffered
to abide in their Places and Offices, without either being excluded or
silenced; though the Apostle exhorts, To withdraw from every Brother, that
walks disorderly. And again, 1 Cor. 5. 11. He writes unto the Church, not to
keep company with any called a Brother, that was a Fornicator, or Covetous, or
an Idolater, or Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner; such thou may see
were to be denied Fellowship in the Church. But we have often observed, how
that in your Church there have been and still are both Swearers, Liars,
Drunkards, and Men given to other profaneness; and yet little zeal appearing to
Excommunicate or exclude them. But when any for Conscience sake could not pay
the Priest his Wages, though it were but some small matter, oftentimes such a
one should soon be prosecuted and Excommunicated; so that by your practices
(whatever you may profess in words) you are more zealous for your Gain and
Interest, than for excluding Evil, and promoting Righteousness in your Church;
and so like them the Apostle speaks of, who minded earthly things, whose end
(he said) was Destruction, Phil. 3. 19. Now such practices are no marks of the
Church of Christ; but of a false Church, where there is want of zeal for
Righteousness: Whereby it is manifest, that you are not in the undefiled
Christian Religion, which keeps from the Spots of the World, and leads into
Fellowship with the Father and his Son. And therefore there was no such Danger
(as thou insinuatest in thy Letter) in his leaving of your Church, of incurring
the Damnation of his Soul, or choosing an unsafer way to Heaven, in coming to
that Religion he has chosen.

Next, we observe, thou seem to take an advantage at his saying, It is the
Light of God's Grace, that let him see the evil of his own Heart that he lived
in, and the evil of others also; and so would strain these words, the evil of
others, particularly to the seeing of the hidden Evils of their Hearts in
secret, as he saw his own; whereas it is not to be questioned, but that he
intended the Evil, that others brought forth into Words or Actions. Though when
he speaks of himself, he names his Heart, saying, My own Heart; yet thou
unfairly make a great deal ado about it, to bring him under blame, as if he
assumed God's Prerogative, and plainly contradicted the Apostle Paul in the 14
th chap. of the Romans; but that thou have no just reason for these thy
endeavors, wise Men may easily comprehend: However it is certain, that through
the Light of God's Grace in the Heart, Men may come to see the defects in
themselves, and also in others, without assuming God's Prerogative. And as to
thy saying, It Is a Term often used by the Quakers, but not rightly understood
by them. Thy Charge is false; The Quakers understand it, and thou can not
make out the contrary, though it is easy for thee and others to accuse: But
that we leave upon thee to prove and make out. But as for his seeing the
wickedness of his own Heart, it is not to be questioned; and also to see the
Vanity and Wickedness of others, is not difficult. For it is apparent enough,
that Men that are in the Society of the People of your Religion, may see, what
is brought forth daily, that is not agreeable to Christianity both in Words and
Actions. And seeing this, and that which Christ lays down, being granted, that
out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks; and a good Man out of the
good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth good things, and an evil Man out of
the evil Treasure brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12. 35. Then according to
this Rule of Christ's, by what Men bring forth in their Conversations, the
Heart may be judged. And though the Lord search the Heart, and try the Reins,
and to know Secrets is his Prerogative; yet what is thus manifested (according
to the Rule of Christ) is no presumption to believe or give judgment in.

And as to the Apostles Words, Romans 14. Thou make an impertinent Application
of them, in bringing them as a Testimony in this concern against him; for the
case in which they were not to judge one another, was in point of Faith, or
their growth or liberty therein; the Weakness of the Faith of a weak Brother
was to be born with in that straitness that was upon some, as in respect to
Meats, and the observing of Days, which others were grown over, that were not
to be judged, but in point of Faith were to be left to their own liberty; and
in that case, says he, Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats, for
God has received him; and he that did eat, was not to despise him that did not
eat.

So thou may see, that the Apostle had a regard to their Growth in the
Faith, and so would have all walk accordingly in Wisdom, with care not to hurt
one another: But what is this to People of a loose Life, whose Words and
Actions are contrary to the Law of God, and so sinful? May we bear no Testimony
against such? Was it not the Practice of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles
to Reprove such, and give Testimony against them, and yet not contradict Paul
in this case? How ignorant thou show thy self to be of the Scriptures!

But mark thy Judgment, and where it will fall: Have not (these many years)
your Church and Ministry been concerned in Persecuting such as could not for
Conscience sake, and in the liberty of their Faith, Observe Days, and other
things, which you required? And when they could not conform to you, they have
not only been judged by you, but sorely abused, and cast into Prison, put in
the Stocks, and their Goods spoild: Thus have many suffered only for matters of
Faith and Conscience toward God. And so herein it is evident, that your
established Church thou speak of, is highly Guilty of the Fact, thou
chargest to be plainly contrary to the Apostle in that forecited Scripture in
Romans and so is judging another Man's Servant in that, wherein he ought to be
left to his own Master, and presumest to meddle with Christ's Prerogative; so
you are under thy own Condemnation, being guilty of that which thou would
condemn in others: And this to be your practice, can be proved by many
Witnesses, that have suffered upon this account by your Church, both in England
and Ireland. From what is before said it is evident, that for a Man to say, That
he sees the evil of his own Heart by the Light and Grace of God, and the evil
of other Men, which were conversant with him in his loose Conversation, does
not bring him under the Censure of the Apostle, as thou ignorantly do imply:
Therefore thou may take it home to thy self, and thy Brethren, as a just
Judgment upon you for the reasons aforementioned.

Thou further say, That perhaps we will object, that Christ in Matthew. 7, 16.
says, Ye shall know them by their Fruits, etc. To which thou Answerest, He does
so; but tellest us, It has relation to false Prophets, and withal would
insinuate, as if the Teaching Quakers (as thou call them) were such. But
that they are such, is a false Insinuation, which thou can never be able to
prove. And by Fruits thou tellest us, that both there and in other places is
meant the Doctrine of those false Prophets or Teachers, that being the proper
Fruits of such men, and not their particular Actions.

Answer. That Christ's words here have a relation to false Prophets, we grant
it; and that they are to be known by their Fruits, we also acknowledge: But that
the Fruits there meant are only their Doctrines, and not their particular
Actions, as thou affirmest, we do deny. And that it is not so, as thou say,
does plainly appear from the words of Christ in many parts of the same Chapter.
For first he says, They shall come in Sheeps-Cloathing, but inwardly they are
ravening Wolves, (so not in the Sheep's Life.) And what is the Sheep's-
Clothing? Is it not the Words of the true Phrophets, Apostles and Servants of
God? As appears by the Testimony of the Lord's Servants, as may be seen in
Ierem. 23. 30. Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my
Words every one from his Neighbor. And the Apostle speaking of Deceivers, Romans
16. 18. says, That by good words and fair speeches they deceive the Hearts of
the simple. So that it is evident, these false Prophets and Deceivers had good
words; for God said, they had Stolen his Words from their Neighbors, etc. and
they had fair Speeches, but were inwardly Ravening, from whence evil Fruits
were brought forth. But that by Fruits there is not meant their Doctrine, as
thou say, Observe further what Christ says in that Chapter; Do men gather
Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Even so every good Tree brings forth
good Fruit: But a corrupt Tree brings forth evil Fruit, etc. Wherefore by
their Fruits ye shall know them, ver. 20. And in the following verses it is
most clear, that by Fruits he means their Deeds and particular Actions; for his
words are, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven;
(so the Fruits here meant are Doings, not sayings.) Many will say to me in that
day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, etc. and then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity: Here
the Working of Iniquity was the cause of their exclusion from him. And further,
speaking of the Wise and Foolish Builders, he says; He that hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise Man, etc. And
every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish Man, etc. So that all along it does appear, that the
Particular Actions are the Fruits, whereby Christ declares they may be known,
and accordingly may be judged; though

Thou say, Many Heretics, men who have embraced vile Doctrines (as thou
affirmest the Quakers do) have been of good Lives.

First, As to thy affirming, That the Quakers do embrace vile Doctrines, that
is false; and we turn it back upon thee as a wicked slander, and challenge thee
to bring them forth, that we may know, what they are that thou accounts so, and
whether they be ours or not. In the next place, where do thou read in all the
Scriptures of Men, that held vile Doctrines, that were of Good Lives?

The next matter thou take in hand to defend in thy Paper, is, Your Tithes,
your great Delilah. For it is evident, that it is your Tithes and other
Revenues, that is the very cause, for which the most of you did become
Ministers; otherwise we are persuaded, we had not had One of an Hundred in
those Offices at this day of you. For it is the Trade, as it is made by you,
whereby you get your Rich Gain, that is chiefly in the Eye of those concerned
in the preferring of Youth into the Schools; and we think, it is as much in the
eye of the Ministers, in their coming out of the Schools, and going into the
Nations to be Teachers, as your practice does manifest. So that Christ and his
Gospel is the least of your concern in the ground of your design, whatever may
be pretended. For in all things Men's ways and Actions are a more sure Evidence
to Demonstrate, what they are, than their Words; therefore Christ says, by
their Fruits ye shall know them: So that we do not wonder to find thee so
concerned to plead Worldly Gain. But to come to the matter, thy business is, To
prove Tithes of Divine Institution now under the Gospel Dispensation (which if
thou do, then we will confess, it is no defect in your Religion) Thou say,
It will be no hard matter to do; but thou have not done it: And if it be so
easy to do, thou should have done it, to have convinced him that scruples
its Lawfulness. However it may be supposed, thou have brought thy chief Proof,
in quoting Christ's Words in Matthew. 23. 23. and Luke 11. 42. Where he speaks of
the Pharisees paying Tithes of Mint, Anise, Cummin, etc. and tells them, These
things ye ought to have done. And then thou say, Nothing can be plainer to
them, that are not desirous to wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction:
So by thy own Words this is thy chief proof, being (as thou say) nothing can
be plainer. But as plain as thou would make the simple believe it is, all
that are wise do clearly see, that this has no relation to the
Gospel Dispensation, but to the first Covenant and Priesthood. And says the
Apostle, Hebrews 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a change also of the Law. And in the 8th chap. thou may see, how
he proves the Lawchanged, and gives the Reason for the Lord's giving a New
Covenant or Testament, and making the first Old. So it is plain, the Priesthood
that received Tithes, and the Law that made them of Divine Right to the
Priesthood, are both changed, and both a New Law or Covenant and Priesthood set
up and established by the Oath and Promise of God, which are the two immutable
things, by which God shows the Immutability of his Counsel abundantly unto the
Heirs of Promise, for the strengthening of their Consolation through Christ,
that is made an High Priest for ever, as thou may read, Heb. 6.

Now thy work is, To prove Tithes of Divine Institution in the New Covenant,
and then to prove and show the Priesthood, that is to Receive them; for thou
may see, both the Law, that gave them, and the Priesthood, that received
them, are changed. And though Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees, they ought
to have done it; that was according to the Law of the First Covenant, which was
not then dis-annulled, Christ not being offered up, but he himself under it:
for it is said, He was made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the
Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. and so he taught People to observe it; as when he had
cleansed the Leper, in Matthew. 8. he bid him show himself to the Priest, and
offer the Gift, that Moses commanded for a Testimony unto them; and so while
under the Law, he was for observing the Law: But now that being ended in him,
his Law is to be observed, and what he has ordained, we are to be subject to.
But before we speak to that, we are willing, to take a little observation of
the difference between your Priesthood, that now takes Tithes, and God's
Priesthood, that received Tithes by his Law in his first Covenant. First,
Levi's Line, that was to receive Tithes of Israel, had not their Inheritance of
Land among their Brethren, this the Lord ordered to be their Inheritance, to
wit, Tithes and Offerings, which they were to have from the rest of the Tribes;
as thou may see in Numb. 18. And likewise when they had received the Tithes,
which was all the Inheritance they had among the Children of Israel, they were
not to have it only to themselves; but the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the
Widow were to have a share with them; they were to be relieved out of the
Tithes by the same Law, that there might be no Beggars; and the Owner himself
was also to partake of them, as thou may see in Deuteronomy. chapter 14. and chapter 26. So
it is evident, you far exceed them as to Self-advantage; you have all to your
selves, your Ministry is far more chargeable, than the Priests under the Law;
neither Poor nor Owner must have a share with you, nor the Payers of the Tithes
eased from the burden of the Poor, for all that you get.

Pray thee, tell us, how your Tithes come to be of Divine Right? Thou say, It
is not hard to prove, when demanded. We Demand it, and also Deny it; do thou
Prove it, if thou can: We are sure, if this Law were in force, that gave it
to Levi, you in the using of it walk far beside the Law, and so still are under
Condemnation. Oh! is it not a shame, that Men, that pretend to be Ministers of
Christ, and can tell the People (as thou do in thine) of forsaking all for
Christ, and yet in your practices do neither walk answerable to the Freedom and
Ease of the Gospel, nor Justice and Equity of the Law of the first Covenant?
And therefore we advise thee to lay down thy Religious Plea for these Wages of
thine; for we can account them no better than Balaam's Wages of
Unrighteousness, which he loved, but durst not take, spoken of 2 Pet. 2. 15.
For it does appear, there were such in the Apostles days, that forsook the
right way, and followed Balaam' s Error; and certainly, we are not without
such now in our days.

But now let us consider, what Christ has Ordained, who is the Lawgiver under
the New Covenant. Thou say, Though Paul does not mention Tithes and Offerings,
yet he speaks, what is equivalent to them. We desire to know, what thou
intendest by Equivalent? Do thou mean of an equal Value and Institution with
them? We grant what Paul says, to be just and reasonable, and according to the
Gospel, that it was no great thing, where they had Sown Spirituals, to Reap of
their Carnal things: And thou see, Paul puts it upon an If, and says, If we
have sown Spiritual things; he claims no power to it else: But this will not
serve you, you cannot abide within the Gospel-Ordination and Bounds, no more
than you do the Law, about your Tithes, but you will reap Carnals, where you
sow no Spirituals. Thou may see also the Apostle speaks of feeding a Flock,
and planting a Vineyard, and eating the Milk and Fruit; but still it is the Milk
and Fruit of the Flock and Vineyard, that they had Fed and Planted, and not
other Men's. But this will not serve you, let the Nations bear Witness; you will
reap, whether you sow or not; you will eat, whether you feed and plant or not;
you will have it by force, like Eli's Sons, if you cannot get it otherwise. And
thou bringst the Apostle's Words, Even so has the Lord ordained, that they who
Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; and then queriest, does Paul say,
the Lord has ordained? And will you say, the Lord has not ordained? Is not this
to give the Apostle a flat lie?

We answer, Nay, we will not say, nor never did, that they which Preach the
Gospel, may not live of the Gospel, according to Christ's Ordination; but then
it must be according to his Ordination, and not according to Man's Will and
Invention, to answer his own covetous Inclination. And we also grant what the
Apostle says, Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that
teaches in all good things; but still he must be a Teacher, and it is from
them that he teaches, that he must expect it: But this will not please you,
but you will have from them that were never taught by you, as thousands in
Ireland may bear witness. So thou may see here, how impertinently thou
would apply the Scriptures to them that have no right to them, upon that
account thou bringst them; but they will not serve thy turn. And where is the
Wrester of the Scriptures to their own Destruction, that thou speak of? Thou
have need to see, if thou can clear thy self of it.

Thou go on, and say, Thou can tell, what we will say to these and such
like Texts; you will, I warrant you, (say thou) say, that Tithes are not
mentioned, etc. But thou may see, thou wast under a mistake, and it was a
vain confidence in thee to say so: We have something else to say, as before.
But you will allow sure, that they enjoin a Maintenance, etc. thou say; We
will allow that: But then let it be, what the Lord has ordained, and we are
content. And now let us observe, what that is. In Matthew. 10. when Christ sent
forth his Twelve Disciples to Preach and Heal the sick, he said, Freely you
have received, freely give; and the Allowance he ordained for them, when he
sent them out without Money or Gold, was; That they might Eat such things, as
were set before them; for, says he, the Workman is worthy of his Meat. And in
Luke 10. when he sent out his Seventy, he gave them the like Command, and told
them, They might stay in that House, into which they had entered, eating and
drinking such things as they did give; for, says he, the Labourer is worthy of
his Hire: and in the 8 th verse he says, Into whatsoever City ye enter, and
they receive you, eat such things as are set before you. So here it was such,
as did receive them, that they were to abide with; and it was such things, as
they did give, and set before them, that they were to eat: so it was the free
Act of such as did receive them, that they were to live upon, and be supplied
by. Here is no liberty to Compel; but the Power of the Gospel was to open their
Hearts, to minister freely of their Carnals, as they received freely of the
Spirituals from them; and this agrees with what the Apostle says in all those
places before mentioned: so that it is evident, he had regard, unto what the
Lord and ordained. But this will not serve your Turn; you cannot be content
with what Christ ordains, and the Apostle approves of, 1 Timothy 5. 18. Thou shall
not muzzle the Ox, that treads out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of
his Reward. The question may be by some asked, what this Reward is? the Apostle
clears it up in the 6 th chapter 8 th v. having in the former verse told Timothy,
That we brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out; and having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content: Here was the
Counsel of an Apostle to a Bishop; for it is said, he was Bishop of the Church
at Ephesus.

Now things being well weighed according to the Scripture, where is the Divine
Right either for Tithes, or the other great Revenues, you Clergymen Compel the
Nations to pay you? It is not from Christ's Command, nor the Apostles, nor from
any of their Examples, neither Apostles, Bishops, Pastors nor Teachers: You are
without Warrant from the Scripture; you have neither Precept nor Precedent for
your Practices, either as in respect to your great Revenues, that you seek
after and enjoy, nor your manner of forcing People to pay you. All we see in
Christ's Ordination, that was to be done to them, that would not receive them
and relieve them, was, they were to shake off the Dust of their Feet, as a
Witness against them: And then Christ shows the danger of their rejecting; but
refers it to the day of Judgment. But this will not serve you, though ye
pretend to be spiritual Men, yet it plainly appears you are for your carnal
Ends; you cannot trust your selves under Christ's Care to live of the Gospel,
and what that freely produces in the Hearts of the People, as Christ's
Ministers did. And you may see what they answered, when he questioned them, as
in Luke 22. 35. And he said unto them, when I sent you without Purse and Scrip,
and Shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they answered, Nothing. So here is Faith
and Obedience, and the Effects also of the Faith and Obedience of Christ's
Ministers set before us for an Example: But it is evident, you do no more love
to follow the Example of the Primitive Ministers, than you love to submit, to
what Christ has ordained; as appears by the great bustle thou make, and the
many shuffling Arguments thou usest, to invalidate the good Example of the
Apostle in that godly Care that was upon him, that he might not make the Gospel
chargeable; which is no more than the real duty of every true Minister of
Christ, although you make it not your concern, as is evident from your
practices. And what if the Apostle had Power, and asserted his Power? Thou
see, what Power he asserts in these Words; Have we not power to eat and to
drink? and again, Have we not power to forbear working, etc? as in 1 Cor. 9. So
thou may still see, that he pretended to no power above his Master's
Commission, who said, They might Eat such things, as were set before them: The
Labourer was worthy of his Meat. So still this makes nothing for thee and thy
Brethren; his Power you will not be content with, no more than his Example; for
then you know, you must not live in Pride, Highth, Fullness and Idleness, as ye
do. And so being his Power will not answer your Ends, you fly from his Power,
which was the Gospel, which they that Preached it, were to live by, to Man's
Power and Law for your Maintenance; and by that, Force and Compel People to pay
you, for whom you do no Work, and to whom you cannot say, as he did, 1 Cor. 9.
1. Are not you my Work in the Lord? But alas! how many Thousands do you Compel
in Ireland to pay you, that are not your Work in this sense he speaks of? You
have no concern in their Conversion, if they be Converted; but whether they be
or not, you matter not, you will have your Revenue from among them.

But thou tellest him, He does not consider, that the Gospel of Christ was but
in its Infancy; Paul was but then planting it, endeavoring to make it the
established Religion of the Nations, as now it is.

Answer. That Paul was planting it, we grant; but that the Religion which he
endeavored to establish, is now the Established Religion of the Nations, we
deny. For, first, there is no such Unity Nationally in Religion, as he
endeavored to establish; as in 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that there
be no Division among you; that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
Mind, and in the same Judgment. Secondly, They are not established in Holiness,
and that Perfection, which he labored to establish and present them in; as
Col. 1. 28. Warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we
may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. And likewise in Ephesians. 4. we
read, that he gave Ministers, and Gifts for the Ministry, for the perfecting of
the Saints, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ, etc. till they all come
in the Unity of the Faith to a perfect Man, etc. And 2 Corinthians. chap. 7. verse
1. His Labor was, To bring them to perfect Holiness in the Fear of God. This
is the Religion Paul and others endeavored to Establish in the Nations, and to
Establish People in; and for this end Peter exhorts the Believers To be holy in
all manner of Conversation, that as he, which had called them, was holy, so
they might be holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Here is that, which they labored to make the
Established Religion of the Nations, viz. Unity, Perfection and Holiness in all
manner of Conversation. Thou affirmest, That now it is made, as he (to wit,
Paul) endeavored to make it. If this were true, then the Nations would be
gathered into Righteousness and Holiness, Unity and Peace, Love and Good will:
But alas! there appears no such Fruits of the true Religion amongst the
generality of the People of the Nations; which does demonstrate, that there is
no such Establishment of it, as thou have asserted, whatever may be professed
in words.

We take notice, how much thou art offended at his telling thee, That the
Ministers wrought with their Hands, and take occasion at the Word Ministers,
as if he had said, All labored, and then affirmest, it is very false: whereas
he only says Ministers in the plural Number (not All,) which is proved true by
the Scripture and thy own Confession, who grantest, That Paul and his
Fellow-travelling Apostles did labor with their Hands: And then when thou have
Asserted it to be false, thou challengest him, to show another Apostle, besides
them in the New Testament, that wrought: For, say thou, They for sook their
Boats, their Nets, their Trades for his sake and the Gospel; and the New
Testament does not inform us, that they ever returned to these Trades again for
a Livelihood.

Answ. We read John 23. that Peter, above three years after he was called by
Christ, with several other Disciples, after they had so forsaken their Boats,
etc. went a Fishing, and that Peter then had his Fisher's Coat, [not a long
Gown, as those called Ministers now wear,] and we do not believe, they went for
Pleasure, but to get Fish. From whence we may groundedly conclude, that they
used that Employ for a Livelihood at times, when they were not immediately
employed in Preaching the Gospel: And we challenge thee, to prove the contrary,
if thou can.

Concerning thy querying for a Command for keeping the First Day of the Week,
or calling it the Lord's Day; We say, we Meet together on the First Day of the
Week, (for to Meet is our Duty) and also upon other Days; and for this Practice
we have both Command and Example. The Saints were commanded not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together, Heb. 10. 25. and we account every day is the
Lord's; and He that regards a Day, ought to regard it to the Lord: and he
that regards not the Day to the Lord, he does not regard it, Romans 14. 6. But
what Scripture have ye for all such Days as you observe, which are called such
and such Saints Days?

Thou say, Thou have been the longer on this particular, because thou
find, it galls us most.

Answ. When thou have read our Answer, (which by reason of thine being so long,
has caused ours to be so too,) thou may consider of it, and of thy
impertinency in quoting the Scriptures to prove your Practice, which being well
observed, does witness against you; and then we doubt not, but it will prove
that which will gall thee and thy Brethren, who are so found in such Covetous
practices, as the Scriptures plentifully testify against. And for a further
Testimony against your Practices, read these following Scriptures, of which for
brevity's sake, having been so long already, we shall forbear to write the
Words, they that can, may read them in the Bible, Isa. 59. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ier.
5. 30, 31. Ezekiel. 13. 19. Ezekiel. 34. chapter Mich. 3. 5, 11. Ioh. 10. 12. Tit. 1. 10,
11. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 16. Iud. 11, 12, 13.

In the next place, thou undertakest to inform him of some Defects in that
Religion he had chosen: and first, thou say, Our Teachers have no lawful Call
to Preach the Gospel, and quotest the Apostle's saying, Romans 10. 15. How shall
they Preach, except they be sent? That is, say thou, how can they Preach the
true Doctrine of Christ, unless they be sent by him, or by those Apostles of
Christ, who received immediate Commissions from him, etc.

Answ. We grant, what the Apostle says, How can they Preach, except they be
sent, etc? But that our Teachers are not so sent, thou neither undertakest to
prove by Argument, nor Scripture; although thou have the confidence to affirm,
that they have no lawful Call, or Commission to Preach the Gospel: which we
turn back upon thee, as a false Accusation; and demand of thee to prove and
make it appear to be true, if thou can. For we do believe, that none can be
true Ministers, but such as are sent by Christ, and have their Call and
Commission from him, and also receive the Gospel which they Preach, and their
Ability from him: For the Scripture is plain, that the Gospel Ministers were
sent by him, and received the Gospel they Preached, and Ability to Preach it
from him, and not from Men; as in Gal. 1. 11, 12. And in 2 Cor. 3. 6. the
Apostle says, They were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; and in the foregoing verse he says, Our sufficiency
is of God: And Ephesians. 3. 7. he declares, That he was made a Minister according
to the Gift of the Grace of God, given unto him by the effectual working of his
Power: And Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any Man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God; if any Man Minister, let him do it as of the Ability, which God
gives, that God in all things may be glorified, etc.

And so from him, we say, we have received our Call by his Eternal Spirit, and
do wait upon him to receive our Ability daily, that what we do, may be by the
Gift of the Grace of God given unto us; that God in all things may be
Glorified. And if this be not according to the Scripture, and the way of God,
do thou in thy next show, what is? And prove your way of being bred up at
Schools, and Learning your Tongues, and taking your Degrees there, and
observing your Ceremonies in your Ordination, and coming forth according to
your Traditions; and then looking for a Benefice the greatest you can get; and
then settling in a Parish for so much a Year, until you can hear of a Place with
a greater Benefice; and then remove for Greater Gain and Preferment. And while
you stay in a Parish, take such Lordship upon you, that none of your Church or
Hearers may have Liberty to Speak or Preach, but such as are so Ordained, as
you are? Clear these things in thy next to be according to Scripture, if thou
can. In the mean while we charge this Method and these doings not to be
according to the Rule of the Gospel, or Example of the Primitive Ministers.
That this is your Practice, we believe thou can not deny: But in the true
Church this Order and Liberty was Ordained by the Apostle, as in 1 Cor. 14. 30,
31, 32. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace; for you may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, that all
may be comforted: and the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.
But this Liberty, which the Apostle Ordained, you do not admit of, no more than
you do of other things, which were the practice of the true Church, and
Christ's Ministers; but instead thereof are gone into things, which are of
Man's Ordaining and setting up: And therefore Robert Lacky, and all in whom God
has opened an understanding to see you a right, have reason enough to forsake
you and your Church. And as for those Scriptures thou quotest, to prove a
successive Power to send others: They make nothing for your method of
Ordination at all; for Matthew. 28. he said, He would be with them, etc. does not
say, They should send others. In Acts 1. the Apostles desired one in the place
of Judas to be numbered with them, and he was chosen by Lot: So here was the
Lord's Lot. And in Acts 14. 23. it is said, They Ordained Elders in every
Church. Now how these Scriptures do prove a true Succession to your Call and
Ordination, let all that are wise in heart, judge.

Secondly, Thou say, We have no Sacraments administered in our Religion,
neither that of Baptism, whereby People are admitted into the Christian Church,
nor that of the Lord's Supper, by which they are strengthened and preserved in
it.

Ans. First, We demand, whence thou have this Term Sacraments, and what is the
proper Signification of it? We are sure, thou have it not from Scripture. And
Secondly, We put it upon thee to prove, whence you have your Authority for that
which thou call Baptism, by which, thou say, People are admitted into the
Christian Church, viz. Sprinkling Infants? We deny, that you have any Authority
from Scripture, either by Command or Example for it: For we never read in all
the Scriptures of either Baptising or Sprinkling Infants: There is no such
thing in that Scripture by thee quoted. Therefore thou art in a great mistake,
in charging this to be a defect in the Quaker's Religion, not to have such a
Practice, which is an unwarrantable human Invention. And it is a great Defect
in your Religion, to persuade people, that when you have Sprinkled a little
Water on the Head or Face of a Child, and signed it with the sign of the Cross,
it is thereby admitted into the Christian Church, and call it Baptism, when it
is but Sprinkling; and therefore a Defect throughout. But thy Charge upon the
Quakers Religion, that we deny that of Baptism, by which People are admitted
into the Christian Church, we affirm to be false. For we own that Baptism,
according to what the Apostle says 1 Cor. 12, 13. For by one Spirit are we all
Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, etc. This we own to be
Christ's Baptism: And we also own John's Ministration of Water to have been
God's Ordinance in its day: But yours we leave for thee to prove, from whence
you had it?

Secondly. Thou say, Nor that of the Lord's Supper, by which they are
strengthened and preserved in it.

Ans. Let all that are wise in Heart, consider, whether that which thou call
a Sacrament, which you take, has such a great effect in it, as to strengthen
and preserve in the Christian Church, which is Christ's Church? For the
Protestants do account it no more than a Sign of an inward Spiritual Grace. But
we are satisfied concerning what Christ did, as in that Scripture thou quotest,
Luke 22. For he had regard to the fulfilling of the Law, and his time drawing
near, that he was to be Sacrificed (and so the true Passover, as Paul says, 1
Cor. 5. 7. For even Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us) had a desire to
eat the Figurative Passover with his Disciples, before he suffered; as thou
may see Luke 22. and in eating the Passover he took the Cup, and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, and bid them divide it among themselves; and likewise took
Bread, and brake it, and gave it to them. And after Supper again he took the
Cup, and gave them. And thou may see, what he said both of the Bread and the
Cup; the One was his Body, which was given for us, the other was the Cup of the
New Testament in his Blood, which was shed for us: Which words import, that his
Body, which is broken for us, is the substance of that Unleavened, Typical
Bread; and his Blood, which was shed, is the substance of that Cup. Not that
the Bread and Wine was his Body and Blood, for that was but Typical; though
some do ignorantly imagine, that he meant the outward Bread and Wine was his
real Body and Blood: As the Jews thought, he had meant the Temple made with
hands, when he spoke of the Temple of his Body. For we read, that when the
Passover was instituted, they were to have a Lamb without blemish, and
unleavened Bread, and the Door-Posts were to be sprinkled with the Blood of the
Lamb; which Passover was certainly a Type of Christ the immaculate Lamb, whose
Body is the true Bread, that nourishes the Soul to Life eternal; and his Blood
sprinkles the Conscience from dead works to serve the Living God. This is that
we have an eye to, that which was broken for us, and shed for us; and we think,
by thy Writing thou art not of the Papists mind for the Real Presence: And if
not, then consider, what that Bread and Drink was, that was broken and shed for
us, which he spoke of, though he was then eating the Passover with his
Disciples; and then come on and see, what the Apostle says to the Mystery of
it, which was that which he preferred in the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 10.
there he tells them of the Fathers, viz. the Church in the Wilderness, and
says, They did all eat of the same spiritual Meat, and did all Drink of the
same spiritual Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ. So here thou may see, the Meat was Spiritual, and
the Drink was Spiritual, and the Rock was Spiritual, that they drank of, and
that was Christ. So the Apostle, speaking to Wise Men, bids them judge, what he
says; as in ver. 15. and in ver. 16. says he, The Cup of Blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And ver. 17. For we being
many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread.
The Judgment of this thou see the Apostle referred to Wise Men; and we know,
Wise Men will Judge, that it is this Spiritual Meat and Drink, that strengthens
and preserves in the Church of Christ, whatever thou may say to the
contrary. And so thou wrongest the Quakers, in saying, That we have not the
Lora's Supper administered in our Religion; for we greatly delight in the Lord's
Supper, to eat and drink that which strengthens and preserves us in the Church
of Christ. And for your Practice, that you use in your Church, we demand your
Example for it, and whence it did arise? For thou may see, that Christ in
the Figure did eat the Passover with his Disciples according to the Law, and
gave them the Cup both before and after Supper, as a foresaid.

Thou pretendest, Thou have other notorious defects in our Religion, but
forbearest to bring them forth; only one, thou say, thou can not omit,
which is so great a one, that it renders the generality of the Quakers almost
no Christians at all: And thou say, Most of us are guilty, and that is a
defect in the very badg and mark of a Christian Disciple, which, say thou,
is Love and Charity; and so quotest Christ's words, John 13. 35. By this shall
all Men know, that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

Ans. Thou do in this, as thou have done in other things before, charge us to
be Guilty, but do not bring one Proof or Argument to prove the Guilt upon us
from matter of fact, unless thy saying, It is so, be either Proof or Argument;
which no wise Man will understand to be so. Thou say, Perhaps, we have
charity among our selves, we love one the other, who are of our Persuasion.
However that is well so far, it answers this Text of Scripture, which thou have
quoted; we wish, we might say in truth so much for all of your Persuasion. But
thou go on to show, how we should love Enemies, etc. and tellest us what
John says, That God is Love. and the more a Man has of Love, the nearer he
does approach to the Nature of God; and so tellest us, what Paul says of
Charity, etc. But what does all this toward the proving us to be defective in
this great badg and mark of a Christian Disciple? That this is both your and
our Duty, we grant; but thou do not show matter of Fact, wherein we are
Guilty. It is an easy matter to accuse and charge; but Wise Men will consider,
how they can make good the Accusation, before they charge. But since thou have
provoked thereunto, let us take an observation of the Works of your Church and
Ministry, and see, how you have born this badg and mark of a Disciple of
Christ? or whether we can find any Defects in her or not, that we may see,
whether there is any reason to forsake her, or not? For many years past the
Fruits of your Church and Ministers have been such, that we think, it will be
hard for any to say, they are the badg and marks of Christian Disciples, (for
thou speak in thy Letter of the Protestant Religion, as it is professed in the
Church of England and Ireland) and so it is of that Church, we now have Reason
to take an observation. Let it be considered; from whence has all that great
Persecution for many years proceeded, whereby so Many Families have been
ruined, many thousands Imprisoned, their Goods taken away, not leaving some so
much as a Bed to lie upon, Cattle to Till the Ground, nor Corn for Bread and
Seed, nor Tools to work withal; Whipping, Stocking, Stoning, and grievously
Abusing: so that many thereby have lost their Lives; and merely, because they
could not come to your Worship for Conscience sake, or for Meeting together to
Worship God according to their Faith. And in these Persecutions the Ministers
have often had a hand themselves, in sending forth wicked Informers, and
sometimes appearing in their own Persons. Besides the great Sufferings, wherein
many have suffered for the Ministers Wages and Hire, which has not been a
little: This in England. Yet we have not escaped in Ireland, but have often
been Imprisoned for Meeting together to Worship the Living God, as we have also
been for the Ministers Wages. Now these not being the acts and deeds of former
Ages, but of our present Age, and of a People yet Living, we need not say much
to make it out, it being still as Wounds Bleeding, which may be seen. Therefore
come to the Application, and see, where the Imputation of this great Defect,
which thou could not omit, will fall? If thou can prove these doings of
yours to be the effects of Love and Charity, then thou clearest your Church
from this great Defect; and if so, may be, it may be a true Church. But sure,
they manifest quite the contrary, and were never the marks of a True, but of a
False-Church; as may be seen from the days of Cain downwards. So that there is
no want of Reasons, why R. L. and others may turn from your Church, and so in
turning from you to the Truth, which the Quakers are Witnesses of, is not
unsafe, but a safe way to Heaven, notwithstanding all that thou have said to
the contrary in Reflection upon us and our Religion, as also upon him, as if he
had forsaken you, and changed his Religion out of Covetousness; for which thou
neither do nor can give any grounded Reason: And therefore having said so
much already, we need not say much more to these matters.

When he Answered thee, and told thee, It was the Love of God manifested in his
Heart, etc. and not Covetousness, neither Humors, Passions, nor Prejudice,
etc. For all he tells thee so, yet thou still assertest, That it plainly
appears to be out of Covetousness; and say, In this, as in other things he
shakes hands with the Papists, and not merely for Conscience sake. So here, as
in other things thou do charge and accuse without proving what thou say,
as if thou knew his Heart and Conscience better than himself. What do thou
think, who is now judging another man's Servant? And who is now Assuming God's
Prerogative? And when he tells thee, It was the Love of God manifested, Thou
tellest him, It seems to Thee, that God had withdrawn his Love from him, in
suffering him to forsake so rational and pure a Religion, as the Establishedone
is, for a Persuasion, that has either little or no Reason or Purity in it.

Ans. As for your Established Religion, what Reason and Purity is in it, or the
contrary, we have in some measure before showed; and all that will but observe
your Religion, and the Effects of it, may easily see, that this is but a vain
boast in thee, to set forth your Religion for such a rational and pure one. And
for thy saying, That which he has chosen, has little either of Reason or
Purity in it: It is but thy Say so; thou do not undertake to prove or make it
out at all. So that if People will believe, what thou say, it must be so,
because Thou say it, and not from anything thou make appear to manifest,
what thou say to be true.

Thou go on still after the same rate, and when he says, He felt nothing of
incurring the Displeasure of the Lord; but on the contrary had more Peace in
his own Conscience, than when under thy Teaching: Thou tellest him of What Paul
says of some, whom God had given up to a Reprobate mind; and so would
persuade him, that this is his state; and when he speaks of Enjoying Peace
more, than when under thy Doctrine, thou say; The reason is plain enough,
while under thy Doctrine his Conscience was under a tenderness, it was sore
with sin, etc.

Ans. Truly we believe, there was Reason for it to be sore with Sin; but he
might stay long there, before it would be saved from Sin, and so healed from
that soreness; for that you never come to, by your own confession. For all your
days you are complaining, that there is No Health in you; so you are like to be
sore with Sin: But all that see their Infirmity, and what Physicians of no
value you are, had need to look out for a better Religion, and better Ministers
or Physicians to their Souls. So that its still evident, he had Reason to
forsake yours, and look out for a Religion, that had more Power and Virtue in
it to deliver from Sin, and heal the Wounds it had made. But it is not to be
questioned, that if he had stayed with thee, and lived in his vain
Conversation, that would have been better born with by thee, than his owning of
that which leads to a Reformation: and so like them of Old, that while People
put into their Mouths, they cried Peace; but when they did not, then prepared
War against them.

Thou tellest him of Going into the Quakers old way of uncharitable Censuring,
because he says, Many of the Protestants in England and Ireland prosess Christ
in Words, but in Works deny him.

Answ. This is evident from their doings, as is before proved; so that it is no
hard matter to make that Charge good against them. Do thou clear them, if thou
can.

When he says, As far as he understands, our Principles and Practice are
according to Christ's Institution, which he doubts not but we will make good
upon occasion; Thou, in answer, say, Thou know our Practice well enough:
Which if true, and if so bad, as thou endeavourest to make People believe of
us, why have thou brought none of them to make good thy Charges against us? And
as for our Principles, thou say, Thou never heard'st, we had any. Then thou
must needs be ignorant of our Way and Religion: And therefore in thy speaking
evil of it, thou speak evil of things thou understandest not; and so art of
that Generation spoken of 2 Pet. 2. 12. And as for our Faith and Principles,
they have been published to the World both by Words and Writing, they have not
been hid in a corner; so that any that had a mind to concern themselves against
us, and yet (as wise Men) would not judge without an understanding, (lest like
thee, they should speak evil of the things they did not understand) might
easily be informed, what our Principles are. However, we are a People that
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and that the Father sent him into the World
to lay down his Life a Ransom for all Men; that whosoever believes in him,
shall not perish, but have Eternal Life: That he was Crucified without the
Gates of Jerusalem, and so became a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World: And that after he had suffered, and was buried, God the Father Raised
him again by his Eternal Spirit, after which he showed himself unto many
Witnesses, and then Ascended into Heaven, and is Glorified with the Father with
that Glory he had with him, before the World was made And we further believe,
that he is the Light of the World, and that he ought to be followed, according
to his own words, John 8. 12. and That he lights every Man that comes into
the World, according to John 1. 9. and that this Light, wherewith he lights
every Man, all ought to believe in, that they may be Children of the Light,
according to John 12. 36. And so we believe in his spiritual Appearance
according to his Promise, who said, He would pray the Father, and he should
send them another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, according to John 14.
16, 17. and this was his own Spirit, for he is the Truth; and of this the
Saints were Witnesses, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are
Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba
Father. And thus was Christ in the Saints the Hope of Glory, according to Col.
1. 7. And thus believing and witnessing the Truth of the Scripture, we wait
upon God for his Spirit, that we may worship him therein according to the
Institution of his Son Christ Jesus, as in John 4. 23, 24. and that we may pray
with the Spirit, and sing with it, according to 1 Cor. 14. 15. For the Apostle
exhorted the Saints, To be filled mith the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. and the Saints
were to Pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. So our Faith stands in the Power of
God, which is that the Apostle labored, that the Saints Faith might stand in;
as thou may see 1 Corinthians. 2. 5. believing, that there shall be a
Resurrection both of the just and unjust, they that have done good, unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
Damnation, according to John 5. 29.

Here we have given thee some account in short of our Faith, Principles and
Practice, and proved them to be according to the Scripture, whereby thou may
see, if Prejudice and Self-Interest do not blind thine Eye, that Robert Lacky
in turning from thy Teaching to Christ the true Light and his Teaching
(according to God's Promise under the New Covenant, who said, They shall be all
taught of the Lord, which according to our Principle we direct People to wait
for) it is no unsafe way to Heaven, nor (as thou falsely accusest us) a pursuing
such ways, as are directly contrary to holy Scripture, which thou (in some
measure) promisest, thou will make appear; but have it yet to do.

Thou say, Because thou art fully satisfied, we cannot make this out,
therefore thou will show him, how he has incurred not only the Displeasure of
God for the present, but the Damnation of his Soul hereafter (unless he repent
and return) by this his departure from the Religion he was bred in.

Ans. Thou may see, thy Satisfaction is without ground, as also thy
confident presumption in thy passing such a Sentence upon him concerning his
present and Eternal Estate: And surely, thy Judgment herein is groundless, rash
and vain; as all may see, who have any true Christian understanding and
discerning, and do but observe, what is brought forth under your Teaching in
your Religion. For we understand no Reason, thou assignest for thy Judgment,
but His leaving of your Religion, which we have before proved, he had good
reason so to do: And therefore neither he, nor any other need be afraid of thy
Threatening upon this account, because from what is before written, it is clear,
that there are great Defects in the Principles and Exercise of the Religion he
was bred in (if he was bred in yours) and so not according to Christ's
Institution, as may be seen, if compared with the Scripture; and that there are
no such Defects in the Religion he now embraces, but proved in the Principles
and Exercise of it to be of Christ's Institution according to the Scripture.
And herein thy Challenge we have answered, and endeavored to make it appear
both to thee and him, according to thy demand: But if thou hate to be
Informed, it shall lie at thy own door, and thou shall answer for it thy self.
So it is plain, he may have changed out of a Principle of Conscience and pure
Love to God and his Soul, and not out of Interest, Humor, Passion or
Prejudice, as thou seem to accuse him.

And as for thy Assuring him upon thy Word, that it is not for any temporal
advantage, that thou seek to reduce him, but only in love to his Soul, as
thou have to all Men's, as thou say.

Ans. We think, he has no reason to believe, that thou and the rest of your
Clergy have such a Love to the Souls of all Men, as to be the only Reason of
your coming amongst them to be their Teachers; for your Practice (which is a
surer evidence than your Words) speaks the quite contrary, in that you do leave
any People, where you are, to go to another place for an Augmentation and
higher Preferment: So that it is evident, it is not the good of People's Souls,
nor the Glory of God, that chiefly moves you in this concern, whatever may be
pretended to. And so to the Consciences and Understandings of Wise Men, we
refer these things to be considered of, with our Hearts desire to God for you
all, that he would open your Understandings, and let you see the Error of you
Ways, and bring you to a Reformation, that the People you may lead in Error no
longer. We conclude and remain Desirers of the Good of all Men.

Dated the 13th of the 4th Month, 1688. John Burnyeat, John Watson.


An Addition of two Epistles of John Burnyeat's to Friends in Long Island and
Barbados, which came to Hand, since the Printing of the former.
Long Island, the 23d of the 5th Month, 1666. Dearly Beloved,
WHO are called to be Saints, and to believe in the only Begotten of God the
Father, which he has raised to be the Horn of Salvation in the House of his
Servant David, to rule over the Redeemed in Israel for ever; unto you are my
Bowels opened in pure, unfeigned Love, and in the plentiful flowing of the same
at this time does my Soul dearly salute you all, who keep faithful unto the
Beloved, and live in the power of his Salvation over all the fallen Spirits,
which are in the World, which brings into bondage: With you my Soul has Unity
in the Life, which was before Transgression and the Fall was, and in that, My
Friends, are you written in my heart, and often in my remembrance, even when my
Supplication is poured forth unto the Lord in the behalf of his People, that
you in that place among the rest of his heavenly Flock and Sheep of his own
Pasture, may be safely kept by the right hand of his power from the Devourer,
and from the deceitful Snares of the Enemy, which are laid as Traps by the
cunning flight of Satan to ensnare the Simple, and betray the Innocent from the
simplicity of the Gospel, which ye have received in Christ Jesus our Lord; in
which as ye have believed, ye have found Salvation, and Peace and Rest unto
your Immortal Souls. I even as a Brother, and one that entirely loves you with
that unfeigned love, which thinks no evil, do at this time beseech you all in
the fear of God to see, that ye Walk Circumspectly, answerable unto the Gospel
of Christ Jesus, in which ye have believed; that ye may adorn the same in your
Lives and Conversations, as Children of the Light and of the Day, bringing
forth the Fruits of the Spirit in Righteousness and true Holiness, and not the
Fruits of the Flesh in the night and in the darkness, in which they walk, who
follow not the Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore, My Friends, stand fast in your Liberty, in which Christ Jesus
has made you free; and be not entangled with the Yoke of Bondage, but mind
purely the operation of the Eternal Spirit and invisible power of the
everlasting God, which he has made manifest and revealed in your hearts, by
which you have in measure known Liberty from the Bondage of Corruption (the
corruptible Bond) and have tasted of the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God,
in which your Souls have found pleasure. I say, Friends, mind all its lively
Operation in your hearts, and wait upon it with diligence, that your hearts may
be kept clear, and the eye of your Understandings single, that you may purely
distinguish and put a difference between the precious and the vile, between
that in which the Lord is to be Worshipped, and that in which there is no
Acceptance with God: And so will you come more and more to know, how to choose
the good, and refuse the evil. And Friends, in the freedom of God's Spirit, and
in his fear I warn you all, Take heed of a fleshly Liberty beyond or above the
pure fear, which keeps the heart clean; for that will let in Pollutions, and
bring the Just into Bondage, and your Souls into death again, where there will
be a want of the pure presence of God to refresh them, although the Boaster may
boast of liberty, and promise it as they did in the Apostles days, who
themselves were the Servants of Corruption. And so, My Dear Friends, whom my
Soul loves with the heavenly love, that seeks the good of all, you who have
tasted of the love of God and of the power of the World which is to come, and
of the power of that life, which is without end, Keep Constant in the Faith,
unto the Beloved of your Soul, and gad not abroad to change your way, like her,
whose Feet abides not in her house, but runs out after other Lovers, and so
lose the first Love: For this the Lord reproved the Church in the days of the
entrance of the Apostasy, when they begun to decline from the purity of the
Gospel. And therefore as ye have received that which is unchangeable, live in
it, that your Souls may never die from the sense of God's Love, and the feeling
of his virtuous presence; that in the joy and peace, that is unspeakable and
full of glory, you may abide, and for ever live; where your Souls may be
refreshed from day unto day, and from time unto time, through the multiplying
of his numberless Mercies, by which he nourishes all them that fear him, and
wait upon him. And so will you all keep lively and virtuous in a growing and
flourishing Condition, fruitful, bringing forth fruit to his praise, who has
called you. And as you keep unto the power of God (which is the Cross unto that
part, which would be out) and dwell in it, your mind will be settled, and stayed
and kept clear, and the understanding open, whereby you may behold the Glory of
God and be kept in Covenant with him; and so feed upon his Mercies with all his
Lambs and Children, and lie down in the fold of Rest and Safety with the Sheep
of his pasture in Covenant with him for evermore: In which I remain

Your Friend and Brother, J. B.

For Friends in the Barbados, New England, Virginia and Maryland, the
Signification of my purest Love unto you all, amongst whom I have traveled in
those parts.
Friends,
IN the eternal Truth and Power of the Lord God dwell, and keep your
Habitations in that which changes not; in the power of an endless life, where
there is no shadow of turning. All you that have known the Lord, and have been
sensible of the Word of his Eternal Power in your hearts, by which you have
been quickened unto him, so that with the rest of his beloved ones you have been
made Partakers of that heavenly treasure of Life and Virtue, which is in him,
and through his Son is manifested unto us, by whom Life and Immortality is
brought to Light; unto you all without respect of Persons does the Love of my
Soul reach, and the Salutation of my Life at this time, having you fresh in my
Rememberance. In the Bowels of true Love is my Heart opened, and my Spirit
drawn forth in this word of Exhortation unto you all who have tasted, that the
Lord is gracious; That you all take heed of turning from the Grace of God into
Wantonness, Laciviousness or any vanity whatsoever, by which your Hearts may be
defiled: But that ye all watch unto the Truth, and wait upon the preserving
power of the Lord God, that ye may reign in the dominion of the same over all
the evil Lusts of the Flesh, which would arise in your hearts to war against
the Spirit of Holiness, and so would hinder your Sanctification. This of a
truth, Friends, you ought to take heed unto, even the Spirit of Holiness and
Power of the Lord our God, which in this latter Age he has largely manifested
for to sanctify his People; that so your hearts may be kept clean and
preserved (according to Christ's Command) out of the surfeiting with the Cares
of this Life, and from being overcome with and drowned in the Pleasures and
Vanities of this World, that you may never lose the excellency and glory of
these heavenly things, which God the Father in the bountifulness of his loving
kindness has been pleased to manifest, with which all the glory of this
present World is not to be compared. And so, my Dear Friends, you that feel the
Lord and his goodness in your hearts, Walk Circumspectly as before him, with
Reverence and Godly Fear in the holy Awe, that you may not provoke him at any
time, nor grieve his holy Spirit, by which you are Sealed; but with tenderness
of heart and pureness of mind wait upon him at all times: So will your Peace
spring up as a River, and your Righteousness be multiplied, as the Waves of the
Sea; and so over all the choking Cares of this Life, and drowning Pleasures of
this present vain World you will be preserved, to have a being in the power of
that life, which is without end: In which as there is a dwelling faithfully,
you will all grow and increase in the dominion over all hurtful Lusts, that war
against the Soul in your own particulars. And also there will be a growing over
all hurtful Spirits, that have entered since the beginning, whose Life is in the
Fall, and not in the pure Redemption, nor in the redeeming Power, that brings
out of the Fall. And so to the Lord God, Friends, be ye all faithful in your
places, that you may be a blessing in your Generation in those Countries and
Places, where ye dwell; that the Nations may be seasoned, that your savory life
may sweeten the People. And Friends, have an eye to the Glory of God, and the
Honor of his Truth in all your undertakings; I even command you in his fear,
it being upon me by his Spirit, that the Lord's name may not be blasphemed
among the Heathen through your unfaithfulness. For truly, my love being great
toward you, I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, and therefore am
constrained to use great plainness, as having a sense of your state. And
therefore be ye provoked unto Love and to good Works in a faithful obedience,
and serving of the power, for its in that, that all accepted. And lay aside all
Wrath, and Clamor, and evil Speaking with all bitterness; and receive with
meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your Souls: And in the power
of that dwell, and it will divide aright between the Precious and the Vile, and
so will cut off all that is not of God, not regarding what may be professed,
where the living virtue is wanting. This pure, living Word is your Preserver,
that keep faithful in it, and will keep you from all deceiveableness and lying
Spirits, which are not of the Father, but of the World, and from the God of the
same in the dark power, beguiling the unstable Soul through his lying Signs and
Wonders in the power of darkness, without living virtue: And this Word, which
you have received, will live in your hearts, and minister daily of its own
virtue into your Souls for their refreshment, if you keep faithful unto the
same. But if the Thorny Cares of this life, and the choking Pleasures of this
vain World take root and place in your hearts, then the freshness is lost, the
issue of living virtue is stopped; the ministering word and power is withdrawn;
the Fountain again is sealed up, and the dry Winds and the scorching heat comes
and dries up, and causes to wither the green Blade, before the Corn comes to
perfection: So that the harvest and time of gathering never comes. Therefore, O
my Friends, be faithful unto the Lord, and be not drawn aside from the
stedfastness of the Gospel neither on the one hand, nor on the other; but step
in the straight path of Life, Peace and Salvation, which the Lord has prepared
for your feet, that the Weak may be strengthened and the Lame recovered, and
none turned out of the way. For truly, there is much upon you, I feel it in
this matter, even you that feel the Lord in any measure, that you all be
vigilant and diligent in your places, that you may be a strength unto the Weak.
And therefore am I moved once more to warn you now, you even you that know the
Lord, To take heed unto the power of the Lord God in your hearts, and with that
keep down the earthly, worldly Spirit, that so you live over it in the Spirit
and Power of the Lord, may draw more unto you; or else I feel it, you will not
only be guilty of your own Blood, but the Blood of others also, which stumble
at your unfaithfulness, who have been called and accounted as the first Fruits
unto God, and unto the Lamb in those parts of the World in this blessed day of
the Lord, in which he has appeared and gathered by his power, and also does
preserve and nourish by the virtue of the same, all that he has gathered,
whose trust and confidence is in him. And so, My Friends, this may give you to
understand, that I am safely arrived in England, and am perfectly well every
way: And Friends here are generally well, Meetings very large, and the Truth in
good esteem among many People, who are not yet of us: And great openness in all
places, where I have been, in the hearts of all People, and great desires to
hear the Truth, for it is of good Report. This from Me, who remain

Your Friend and Brother, J. B.

The END.

