A FREE BUT Modest Censure On the late Controversial WRITINGS and DEBATES Of
The Lord Bishop of Worcester and Mr. Lock: Mr. Edwards and Mr. Lock: The
Honble Charles Boil, Esquire; and Dr. Bently. Together with Brief Remarks on
Monsieur Le Clerc's ARS CRITICA.

By F. B. M. A. of Cambridg.

LONDON; Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, School.

A free, but modest Censure on some late Debates, etc.
IT is an odd Humor in some men to cry down all Books that look toward
Polemicks, and they imagine they sufficiently disparage this period of Time we
are cast into by saying, it is an Age of Controversies. If they dip into an
Author, and find he is upon the Dispute, they presently lay him aside, and will
have no more to do with him, because he is a wrangler, and has fastened on an
Adversary to debate the case with him. It may be observed, that these who
pretend to be such peaceable Souls, are generally of the number of the
indifferent, and question whether there be Truth on either side, or on any
side: But those who believe there is, and think (as with reason they do) that
Truth is worth the contending for, have an other apprehension of those Writings
that are Controversial, and know them to be of great use in the World. And
therefore we find that some of the best Writers that were extant in all Ages,
have entered these Lists, and have thought it absolutely necessary to appear as
Champions in defense of an assaulted Verity. The main Disputes of late have
been about those Points which have reference to the Trinity, but I will pass by
the professed Socinians, whose Writings and Discourses have been examined and
sifted by some of the Learnedest men of our Church, as the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of Worcester, Gloucester, Sarum, the Dean of St. Paul's,
Dr. Wallis, Dr. Edwards, Dr. Williams, Mr. Edwards, and others. All which have
performed their parts extremely well, but with some difference and variety; and
there have been infinite descants on their several Attempts, which are now
almost worn off and forgotten; and I will not call those Disputes back again,
and renew the battle. My design is to offer a few Remarks upon some other
Controversies that have been started of late, wherein one or two of the
forementioned Combatants are engaged, as well as other fresh ones, who have
more lately appeared on the Stage, and have invited a great number of
Spectators to observe them.

The first is an ingenious Gentleman, who, tho he has not professedly listed
himself into the Socinian Camp, seems at least to be a friend and well-willer
to that Cause, and is again befriended and well esteemed by that party* and
some think is set on work by those that favor them. He has had the fortune to
light on two shrewd Adversaries, the one a Reverend and Learned Prelat, the
other a worthy and Learned Priest of the Church of England, both known by their
Writings on diverse Subjects. The first took occasion in the close of his
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, to reflect on some Passages in the
Essay of Human Understanding, as some ways prejudicial to the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and other Mysteries of the Christian Faith; and accordingly these
Passages had been made use of (as his Lordship of Worcester observed) by
another Writer, to confront and oppose those Sacred Mysteries; for that zealous
opposer of Mysteries (setting up with the other Gentleman upon the same Stock,
and being Joint-partners in the same Principles) contends that we cannot be
certain of the Truth of any thing, unless we have clear and distinct
perceptions of it, and therefore where these are wanting, there is no
Certainty; for all certainty of Knowledge depends upon Reason, and Reason
depends on clear Ideas, which are inconsistent with Mysteries. It is the
managing and applying of this Notion of clear and distinct Ideas, so as to make
them the sole foundation of Knowledge, Reason, and Certainty, that the foresaid
excellent Prelat has been pleased to examine and disprove in the 10 th Chapter
of the Vindication of the Trinity. And afterward in his Answers to Mr. Lock's
Letters, this Opinion of Mr Lock (for Mr. T. took it from him) is narrowly
serch'd into, accurately discussed, and fully baffled by his Lordship who has
proved that clearness of Ideas is not the only basis of Reason and (the
consequence of that) Certainty, but that it is possible to be certain of the
truth and reality of a thing without clear and distinct Ideas of it: and some
other Principles and Assertions of Mr. Lock, concerning the Ideas of things,
are showed to be very precarious and groundless, and the mere Creatures of his
own Fancy. This the Reader will find performed with great solidity and depth of
Mind, together with the mixture of diverse fine Thoughts and Conceptions
concerning other matters bordering on that Subject, with great variety of
reading: And this more particularly I have observed, and I see others agree
with me in it, that the Reverend Bishop has all along proved that Mr. Lock
contradicts himself, and apparently thwarts his own Notions, which is as ill a
thing as can be said of any Writer.

But that whereby his Lordship has most obliged the World is, his accurate
anatomizing of this Gentleman; for his Lordship is one that dives into Men as
well as Books. Accordingly he has given us this double Character of him, that
he is a great Sceptick, and that he has an inclination to overthrow some of
the chiefest* Articles of the Christian Faith. This is a high Charge, but that
Learned Pen proves it to a tittle, showing out of several plain and direct
Passages in Mr. Lock's Book of Human Understanding, that he takes away all
certainty of Knowledge, that (as he confesses himself) he has no Idea of a Man,
and that he industriously labors to make it out, that there is no certainty
that we are Men. Essay of Human Understanding, Book 3. Chap. 6. Book 4. Chap.
7. His Lordship goes on further to show out of his Letters, that from his
Notion of Ideas he cannot possibly prove a God. And truly if the Idea of a man
was boggled at by him, it was to be expected that he would advance further, and
scruple the Idea of a Deity. Moreover the Bishop makes it evident that Mr. Lock
is inclined to hold no other Principle in man than Matter; and then if there be
any Idea of a God, we know what it must be, for he that is for a Corporeal
Soul, will (with Mr. Hobbes) maintain the Notion of a Corporeal Deity. The same
Learned Pen acquaints us, from his foresaid Letters to him, that he denies the
Identity of the same Body at the Resurrection with that which died: He makes it
appear from the same Papers, that he questions the two Natures in Christ, and
that he disbelieves the Trinity, and Incarnation; and in another place (yea in
diverse) he shows that he denies the certainty of all Faith; and yet all along
talks of the certainty of Ideas. Thus this Learned and Judicious Father has
laid that Writer open, and has let the World see, that the more that Author
handles his Pen, the farther proofs he gives of the ill disposition of his
Mind, and the uncouth Notions that harbor there.

It is observable, that the Bishop shows how this Gentleman has introduced new
Terms to unsettle the knowledge of things, and amuse the Minds of the unwary,
and how he pleases himself with paradoxical Conceits. To which I will add what
I have lately observed my self out of his Essay of Human Understanding. That he
has a great mind to scepticize, and to maintain Paradoxes, we may perceive by
what he says of the Will: Whether man's Will be free or no, is an unreasonable
and unintelligible question; for Liberty belongs not to the Will* it is no
attribute or modification of it. So he, Book 2. Chap. 21. Again, in the same
place he tells us, that in respect of Willing a man is not free, Liberty
consisting in a Power to act, or not to act, which, in regard of Volition, a
man has not. Some that have read this, think he may go with that Petition he
talks of in another place, Pray give me a little Sense. Afterward in the same
Book and Chapter he concludes thus, This then is evident, a man is not at
liberty to Will or not to Will any thing in his Power that he once considers
of. Now from these and several other things that occur in his Writings, we may
gather, that my Lord Bishop of Worcester had reason to set him forth to the
world as a Sceptick, and to charge him with laying such foundations as tend to
the overthrow of the Mysteries of our Faith. Answ. to Mr. Lock's 2 d Letter.
This is the true Portraiture of that Author, which is abundantly made good in
his Lordships excellent Observations on the Essay of Human Understanding, and
on the Letters of the same Writer; whence he has been pleased to communicate
to the World the true apprehensions we ought to have of him. This is the best
and shortest way of dealing with him, and it is a proof of his Episcopal
Integrity and Sincerity.

But what says the Essayer, and the writer of Letters to this? Why, he charges
the Bishop with unaccurate Thoughts, and unaccountable ways of speaking, and
vulgar and popular Discourse. Letter 1. p. 153. And in other Places he will not
allow him to understand the Connection of words, or true English, p. 155, 156.
and the Contents of most of his Vindication and Answers he pronounces
unintelligible, incomprehensible, difficult, impossible, confounding. And yet
all along he lards his pages with seeming Compliments and Commendations of his
Lordship, with feigned Submissions, and doing of Homage. This double strain is
usual with him, which makes him inconsistent with himself: and in his last
Edition of his Essay he retracts some things which he had inserted into the
former, Book 2. Chap. 21. He makes bold, he says in his 23 d Chapter, to
propose an extravagant Conjecture, and soon after he begs the Readers Pardon
for his wild fancy, and so much for that, he says. In another place (Book 4.
Chapter 4.) to the Question, What are Changlings? His studied answer is, They are
Changlings. Query, Whether this be not the same with Condign Punishment is
Condign Punishment. The like profound way of writing the Bishop takes notice of
in his Letters, telling us, that instead of a sober and steady Reply to his
Allegations, he spends above fifty Pages in renewing and enlarging a Complaint
wholly concerning himself. Answer to Mr. L's 2 d Letter. And the rest is spent
(as he objects to him) in misrepresentations of things, in groundless
exceptions, in wearisom repetitions out of his own Writings, and sometimes in
loose and poor Jargon; a goodly Instance whereof we have in his Dialogue (from
p. 117, to p. 161. Letter 2.) between him and a certain Gentleman, tho in
reality it is a Conference between Mr. Lock and himself, unless you will add
Cousheda, or some other of his Drills to bear him Company. This it is to write
out of a man's own Thoughts (as we know who says of himself) this it is to be
ambitious to multiply the pages of a Book, and to study to make it bulky: this
it is to be a grave and solemn Trifler. Hence he lets the Bishop know, that he
will go on with the Controversy still, and not let it fall, because he is not
satisfied with what his Lordship has said (and some are of opinion that he is
resolved never to be) and that he will fill the World with Replications,
Rejoinders, Surrejoinders.

But let that be as he pleases, it is sufficient that we have showed the
invalidity of what he has writ already. I confess I was inclined to Mr. Lock's
side, before I read and well perused the Bishops remarks upon him. He has
gained a Name by dissenting from others in the Subjects he discoursed of,
wherefore I looked upon him as a man of free Thoughts, and conceived he meant
no ill in that liberty which he took, but acted only as a man of good Parts,
and ingenious freedom would do. But his Lordship's judicious Animadversions on
his Letters, and other Writings, have given me another Idea of him. And I can
entirely depend upon his Lordship's judgment, because I see it is founded on
most natural and rational Collections, made from what Mr. Lock has expressly
asserted, and often repeated. So that I am a Proselyte by his Lordship's
Writings, and I am the more so, because I see his Antagonist has not been able
to return any tolerable Answer to what has been said. Some had thought that
Mr. Edwards had been too severe with this Gentleman, and represented him in
false colors; but now the discovery which the Bishop has made justifies Mr.
Edwards's Proceedings: and all men of consideration and due thoughts conclude,
that Mr. Edwards had just occasion (tho we knew it not so well as he did) to
alarm the World with the apprehensions of the danger of Mr. Lock's Writings.

We come then in the next place to consider these two noted Writers, and to
make some Remarks on their respective Undertakings. And first I will begin with
Mr. Lock, for tho I did not give him the priority in the Title Page, he shall
have it now. Thinking is the great excellency and prerogative of our Human
Nature; and there are none that ever arrived to true and solid Apprehensions of
things, without the exercising this noble Faculty, and that with great
seriousness and application. But it is possible that a Person may be very
Thoughtful, and yet not attain to any considerable Notions of what is true,
because his Thoughts are tinctured with ill Principles and Designs, and
conducted and managed all along by Caprice, and Prejudice, and Opiniatrity. We
have an example of this in the Author who is now under our hands; it cannot be
denied that he has showed himself a Thinking man in his Essay of Human
Understanding (of which I spoke before) and in his later writings concerning
the Reasonableness of Christianity (as he calls it) and his Vindication of
them, of which I am now to speak. These latter sufficiently discover him to be
one of a musing Head, and a thoughtful Brain; but at the same time they testify
him to be either a great Stranger to the Christian Religion, or else a great
Corrupter of it; and truly it is this latter which he chooses to be known and
signalized by, as appears from his stiff Defense of this Assertion, that of all
the Articles and Points of the Christian Religion, there is but one that is
necessary to be believed, to constitute us true Christians, and that is this,
Jesus is the Messiah. And as for the Apostolical Epistles, it is not there, he
says, that we are to learn what are the fundamental Articles of Faith. One
would scarcely think, that a man never so thoughtful and musing, could light on
such a Notion as this; much less would it enter into a man's Thoughts, that he
should with so much zeal and earnestness persist in the Conceit. To evade the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and our Savior's Satisfaction (both which I find he
has been urged by Mr. Edwards to own, but he begs his Pardon, he will not
submit to any such acknowledgment) and to render the other great Fundamentals
of Christianity supernumerary, and useless to give men the denomination of
Christians, and so to cashier Christianity it self, he has unhappily placed in
the room of all these, the belief of that one single Article before mentioned.
And herein he runs counter to the positive determinations of the Holy and
Inspired Writings, and the suffrages of all the wise, intelligent, and godly
Christians in all Ages since the foundation of that Holy Institution, as well
as the persuasion of all that have a true sense of the nature of Christianity
at this day: This is a thing which his Fellow-Collegian will condemn him for,
who delivers it among his other Maxims, that a man of a sound and well-weigh'd
judgment is afraid always of standing by himself in a new Opinion. Mr. Charles
Boil against Dr. Bently, p. 226. And he tells him further, p. 237. that
Confidence and Paradoxes are not the true way to a lasting Reputation. The
first point of Modesty and Sense, is never to contradict the whole World
needlessly; and the next to that, to be sure never to do it without very good
Grounds. And Mr. Lock cannot avoid the imputation of a Pedant, according to
this noble Gentleman; for it is another of his learned Maxims* That an itch of
contradicting great Men, or established Opinions upon very slight grounds, is
an instance of Pedantry, p. 97. And in the same place this Honorable Writer
makes it another mark of a Pedant, that he relies on his own performances, and
spins Volumes (as one says he has the gift of it) barely out of his own
Thoughts. Tho this must be granted that he can make bold with another spinners
Thoughts, and impose upon the World with borrowed Cobwebs, for Mr. Edwards and
others have showed, that the one Article was borrowed from Mr. Hobbs's Citizen
and Leviathan. Nor indeed is this the only thing wherein he jumps with Mr.
Hobbs, as in the Materiality of Human Souls. Letter to the Bishop of Worcester,
p. 68.

These things have purchased him a great disesteem among all men of staid
Minds, all that retain a regard to sober Philosophy and Orthodox Divinity: as
on the contrary Mr. Edwards's observation is true, that Persons of loose
Principles, Scepticks, and Deists, applaud his undertakings, and are his humble
admirers. I find that Mr. Edwards in his Thoughts concerning the Causes and
Occasions of Atheism, was the first that attacked him, briefly laying open the
weakness, folly, and absurdity, as also the extreme danger of asserting the
necessity but of one Article of Faith, in order to the making a man a
Christian. He treated Mr. Lock very kindly and civilly, bestowing upon him the
Epithets of Learned, Ingenious, Thoughtful, Ripe-witted, etc. But this fair
usage, joined with strength of Argument, had no other effect on him than this,
that it produced a slender Vindication of himself; wherein this was the only
thing made out to the Reader, that he was resolved to adhere to his own
Sentiments: Whereupon Mr. Edwards thought fit in a larger Discourse
[Socinianism Vnmask'd] to handle the former Subject, where he condescended to
Mr. Lock's Demands, and proved, that there are several other Articles to be
explicitly believed, in order to the making us Members of Christ, besides that
one, Jesus is the Messiah. This he has evinced, by instancing in diverse
particular Doctrines, and showing, that we cannot possibly be Christians
without the belief of them: and (as I am told) he had the Thanks of some the
most eminent men in our Church, for his great pains and faithfulness in
asserting and vindicating the most substantial Doctrines of our Holy Religion,
when they were struck at so boldly by men of corrupt Designs.

When Mr. Lock found himself thus foiled, instead of acting according to his
own Confession, I know not any thing, says he, more disingenuous, than not
publicly to own a Conviction one has received concerning any thing erroneous
in what one has printed, (Letter to the Bishop of Worcester) he writ a Preface
and Book (if Ink and Paper make a Book) of above 500 pages, to tell the World
that he was angry with Mr. Edwards, and highly displeased with his plain and
impartial dealing with him, and not treating him according to his fond
expectations. Every one observed that he started little needless pedantick
Questions, and foolishly demanded an Answer to them, with a mixture of childish
Complaints, and wilful mistakes; and according to the enquiry I have made into
those Papers, I find he was so hardy as not only to fall upon Mr. Edwards's
Person, but his Office, and he rudely vilified the whole Function. It is true,
it is the opinion of some upon this occasion, that Mr. Edwards might have been
even with him by bare Contempt, for this is the justest return to such an
Adversary; but I find Mr. Edwards was pleased to take another course, because,
I suppose, he had a mind to discover this Writer yet further to the World, and
likewise to take off his little Objections which he had filled so great a
Volume with, and especially to vindicate the honor of those Learned Bodies
which Mr. Lock had aspersed and vilified. I have discoursed several upon this
Subject, but I never met with any that blamed Mr. Edwards's way of dealing with
this Gentleman, unless such as were sworn favorers of him, or were troubled
with qualms of Skepticism and indifferency in Religion, or did not understand
the liberty a man may lawfully take in chastizing an Antagonist, or lastly
excepting two or three Hawkers who have felt the mischief of some bodies Books
lying on their Hands, since the Bishop and Mr. Edwards examined them: All
others unanimously concur in this, that Mr. Lock has been dealt with
according to his Genius and Merits. A good sensible Gentleman was one day
expressing his dislike of some things in Mr. Edwards's last Effort on Mr.
Lock, which reflected, he said, on his Studies, his way of Living, and the
Post he is in. Whereupon I turned him to some Passages in Mr. Lock's Book,
which expressly reflected on Mr. Edwards's Degree, his Station in the Church,
his Office as a Clergyman and a Preacher, and on the Universities and Clergy
themselves; which when this Gentleman had read and considered, he made me this
Return, I see there is reason to hear both sides, whereas hitherto I have
attended but to one, Mr. L's Friends being so clamorous and urgent. I verily
think, if there be any Offense, it is on his side; for a man may innocently
reflect on the private concerns of an Adversary, when there is just occasion
given; but it is unsufferable to jest and play with Sacred Things, and to flout
at those Employments and Offices which have the stamp of Religion upon them:
which puts me in mind, said this Gentleman, of what I was told a very sober
Writer, in one of his Occasional Papers, objected to Mr. Lock, viz. his
disrespectful language to Priests, that is, all Ministers and Clergymen.

I confess, I could have wished, continued that Gentleman, that when Mr.
Edwards was excepting (and that justly) against some things in Mr. Lock's
Treatise of Education, he would have taken notice of what is useful and
commendable in it, viz. his common places of Temperance, of Company, of
Familiarity, of Affectation, of Rewards and Punishments, of Self-denial,
Fool-hardiness, Fortitude and Courage, with Observations, Hints, Cautions,
Counsels concerning the humors of Children, and the manners of Men. These Mr.
Edwards might have taken notice of, I say, and owned their usefulness in some
measure; and thereby have showed, that he despised not what was any ways good
and commendable in his Adversary: But so might Mr. Lock, it may be said, have
acknowledged the convictive arguings in Mr. Edwards's Writings, and the other
accomplishments of his Pen, which have made his Books acceptable among
Foreigners, as well as those at home. But one thing I must needs say I wonder
Mr. Edwards did not reflect upon, when he was handling that Book of Education,
viz. Mr. Lock's forgetfulness of Christianity. It being his work and design in
those Papers to inform and instruct Youth, if he had been pleased to remind
them that there is such a thing as Christianity in the World, he might have
done service to the Age, especially when he knows there is a Generation of
People who have no regard to the revealed Truths of Religion, but on the
contrary, disown them. What! nothing but Ethick and Oeconomick Strictures, and
such like Documents? Is not his young Master (for so he calls him) baptized?
Does he address himself to him as to a Pagan, Turk, or Jew? He should for once
at least have made mention of the Christian Religion, and the blessed
Institutor of it, and taken occasion to commend that excellent Dispensation:
One little sprinkle at least would have done well, especially in an Age where
Deism is so rampant. But truly, added this Gentleman, it is well he did not
touch upon Christianity, as the matter stands, for he might have done more harm
than good, as we learn from his Book, which he styles the Reasonableness of
Christianity. Thus he.

But to return to Mr. Edwards, and his sharp way of treating Mr. Lock, tho to
charge Persons with what they are not guilty of, be Reviling and Reproaching
them; yet to deal freely with them, and to tell them their own (especially when
others decline it) is an act of Justice and Honesty. A frank speaking or
writing here is very Innocent, and sometimes Necessary, tho in other cases some
use it unlawfully; but this using it so does not make the thing it self
unlawful. Honest men may wear and use Swords, tho Highway-men do so too; and
the former may use them against these latter when there is occasion: Sharpness
of style, and a seasonable Raillery are not forbidden us* and generally there
are none that utterly condemn these, but those that are afraid of them, and
deserve them. When we cannot reason some men out of their evil Opinions and
Practices, we may try to laugh them out of them. When I perused Mr. Edwards's
last Reflections on Mr. Lock, I called to mind that of the excellent Justin,
(...), i. e. It is not at all incongruous to make our selves merry with the
surly humor of those men who pretend to surpass others in Understanding.
(Just. Martyr. ad Zen. Epist.) This was the judgment of a serious Philosopher
and Christian, and one that laid down his Life for Christianity. We may as
lawfully deride a stubborn Adversary, as argue with him: And this we shall find
to be the practice of the most wise and grave upon occasion, as is to be seen
in several of the Writings of the Ancients, who were otherwise very austere. It
is well known, that most of the Learned and Religious Apologists for
Christianity, against the Jews and Gentiles, were very pleasant and diverting
in their Writings, and used a Sarcastick Style, and spared not their
Adversaries. The like we see in the Examples of some of the Learnedest and most
Judicious of our own Nation, as the Lord Bacon, Bishop Mountague, and others
that writ against Mr. Seldom; Dr. More, the Author of the Friendly Debates, Dr.
Grove, Dr. Stillingfleet in his Conferences between a Romish Priest, etc. some
of the London-Divines in their printed Reflections on Jesuits and other Papists
in the late Reign, Dr. Burnet upon Mr. Warren, Dr. South on the Dean of St.
Paul's, and the Dean and others upon him; Dr. Williams and other late Writers
against the English Unitarians. These all thought Reflecting was no Sin; and
some others perhaps are flat, grave and reserved, because they cannot be
otherwise.

It is not unknown to the World, that the Person I am now speaking of, can
write as solidly as any man, and the best proof of it is, that he has done so:
but if he pleases to follow such great Examples as I have named, and to relax
his Pen, who can censure him for it? Nay, who will not justify him? For who are
more fit to be treated with Contempt, than those that treat Religion and the
most substantial Articles of it in that manner? I don't see then how it can
give offense to men of impartial Thoughts, to give a Writer such treatment as
he merited. Wherefore we expect with some impatience Mr. Edwards's farther
Remarks on Mr. Lock's 2 d Vindication, and that set of Animadversions on some
other parts of his Education, which he partly promised in his last Book, page
91. There is a sort of men, I perceive, would have had Mr. Edwards touched Mr.
Lock with more tenderness; and so they would have all Writers be very sweet
upon their Opponents, and show themselves as mild and gentle as cade Lambs: tho
they wield their Pens against the stiffest Patrons of Error, they must
compliment and flatter them, they must show themselves very fond of them, and
address themselves to them with great respects and honor, or at least they
must not dare to provoke and exasperate them, tho it be by the innocent freedom
of urging Truth. This faint sort of Penning may be observed especially in one
known Writer of late, and if there were more such, the Mischief of that
sneaking Humor would be unspeakable. But I perceive Mr. Edwards's fault is,
that he is none of those hum-drumming Authors; and thence it is that he is
disgusted by those of that kidney, and has the honor to bear the same
imputation that was causelessly thrown upon my Lord Bishop of Worcester, in one
of the late Socinian Pamphlets, that he was a passionate and angry Writer, and
not fit to write Controversies.

But the truth of the matter, with respect to the Gentleman Mr. Edwards has to
do with, is this, that he began to be very daring, and with disdain to trample
upon Universities, public Schools, Clergymen, etc. as well as upon the most
sacred and venerable Articles of our Christian Faith, and the very Epistles of
the inspired Apostles; which occasioned Mr. Edwards to appear against him with
some severity and indignation, and to be plain and home with him, and to be a
little upon the (...) with him. He thought good to treat him roundly and
smartly, and to intersperse here and there some nipping Sarcasms. And now we
see and are convinced, that this was the best way of dealing with him; for this
sort of Medicaments has cured his Pen of the Diarrhaea, at least as to this
present Cause for a time. As we owe it likewise to this plainness and freedom
that the late Socinian Writers were took down so soon. By the pointed dint of
Mr. Edwards's Arguments in his Socinian Creed, and by the free and smart Lashes
he distributed among those Gentlemen, this great Service was done to the
Church. And I am persuaded, and so are others, that he will never hear from
them again, especially now their great Pan is dead, who used to hand their
Papers to the Press, and to pay for them. It is the general opinion, that if
Mr. Lock had not run the Gantlet, we should not have been quiet for him;
whence we see there was a necessity of using this severe Discipline toward
him. It was as requisite as sober and close arguing, of which he had abundance
in Mr. Edwards's several Writings. Here was no unfair dealing then, Mr. Edwards
did nothing that was ungenteel, or argued him to be a stranger to good Manners,
no more than the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury of Middlesex, who thought fit to
give Mr. Locke's Book a place in their Presentiments. To conclude, it is a
vulgar Saying (tho borrowed from an eminent Pen) that Writers of Controversies
should use soft Words and hard Arguments: But tho the Bishop of Worcester has
followed this exactly in his Controversies with Mr. Lock, yet neither Mr.
Lock nor Mr. Edwards have tied themselves to this Rule, for Mr. Lock in his
Debates with the Bishop has soft Words and soft Arguments; and in his last
Debates with Mr. Edwards he has some very hard words, tho his Arguments be
very soft. But of Mr. Edwards it is generally said, his Arguments are hard as
well as his Words.

Leaving Mr. Lock and his Antagonists, we proceed to Champions of another
nature and kind. And the next pair is of the Critical Classis: the Honorable
Charles Boil Esquire; having published the Epistles of Phalaris, etc. Dr. Bentley
not long after put out his Dissertations upon them, wherein he makes some
Reflections on the Editors, but chiefly on the performance it self. I don't
think he had any ill design, but he shows himself a true thorough-paced
Critic, that is, one that flies at all, censures and condemns all as he sees
occasion, and spares neither persons nor things, for else he would not be a
right Critic. It is a hard matter to decide the Controversy between Persons of
this Study, for there is a great deal of subtilty and double-dealing in the
ordinary managing of the Critics Office; and it is an easy matter for a
well-read man to thrust his Notions on the belief of the world, and to gain a
very good reception, tho they have little solidity at the bottom. I will not
undertake to interpose here, for he only is to be Umpire that fully understands
both sides. But I hope I may be permitted to report what every unbiased man
says that has insight into that sort of Learning, namely, that the Doctor's
Criticism is very brave and noble; and if it be not exactly adjusted to Truth,
yet it is very probable.

Then comes Mr. Boil, and shows himself a great Critic, and a witty one: He
has amassed a great deal of Reading together, excellently criticized for his
own turn; but when all is done, his Quotations do not reach the Business.
However, this must be said, he has taken a great deal of pains, or some body
for him has so, for this is that which the* Doctor has more than hinted, that
Mr. Boil was not the Author of that Work; yea, that there was a Club of
Critics to finish it; that it was patched up of several pieces, and by several
hands. Cuckow-like they had translated their own brood, and laid it in this
Gentleman's Nest. But to be free with the Learned Doctor, tho most men think
this to be true, yet unless he had had good ground for it, he should have been
silent, especially when he dealt with a Person of Honor, and one that had been
lately reading not only Rosscommon, but an antienter Poet, -- Quae non fecimus
ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco --.
Therefore truly I think the Learned Doctor should have tacitly owned him to
be the Author of that undertaking, till he could evince the contrary, and the
rather because that Gentleman publicly set his Name to it, and told the World
it was his. But let us see how this incensed young Critic handles the Doctor,
and truly he does this roughly enough; for first he reflects on his Morals, and
accuses him of false dealing, lying, cheating, denying his own words -- p. 5,
6, 7, 8. and he produces other men's words and hands against him. The decision
of all which wholly depends on the integrity of the Witnesses, and on the fair
and sincere interpreting of what passed on both sides; and therefore I shall
wave this, and proceed to that which we may more easily judge of. Only all that
I will say at present is this, that from what an honest Gentleman beyond sea,
Monsieur Grevius, is ready to attest to the World, we shall be able to guess
what weight there is in the rest of the Stories and Relations. Mr. Boil (to
let us know, at his first setting up to write, that he intends not to be
sparing in his Reflections) grates on the Doctor's breeding, Pref. tells him of
his dependence on -- p. 12. upbraids him with want of Humanity, ibid. Objects
to him ill breeding, p. 22. ill-manners, ibid. He lets the Doctor know that he
acts not like a Scholar or a Christian, p. 24. or one in Holy Orders, ibid. He
charges him with want of Modesty, p. 28. with affectation of Pedantry, p. 34.
defect of sagacity and sincerity, p. 67. he says he is a man of no meaning and
design, p. 68. one that has no relish or taste of the proprieties of any of
those Languages he has pretended to judge of or write in, p. 72. he jeers at
his Employment of Library Keeper, p. 91, 100. he lays to his charge disabliging
rude qualities, p. 111. misrepresenting of Authors to serve a turn, 117. laughs
at him for quibble and witticism, 133, 134, tells him he is fast asleep, and
yet talks wildly, 137. he means he talks in his Sleep. He commonly arraigns him
as a Filcher and a Plagiary, he calls him a weeder of Writers, 216. and (to let
us see he improves in his Style) he honors him with the Epithets of Ass and
Dunce, 220. And in one single page he lays it on thick, telling him he is false
and disingenuous in his dealings, fierce and vindictive -- lofty and insulting
-- scurrilous, clownish, p. 222. and every where he represents him as a Fool, a
weak Creature, as a man neither of Understanding nor Integrity.

Here is the charge, which is either true or false; if the former, then Mr.
Boil is the only discerning man in the World (which no body I think believes,
no not himself) for no body but he will or can say all these things of the
Doctor. If the latter, then some body begins the Prize betimes for the
Whetstone, and few can boast they have the better of him: But I will not be so
rude as to impeach him of falsity, tho the thing he says be not true; for
perhaps it may seem true to him, and then if he delivered only his Opinion, he
does not falsify. As to Mr. Boyle's style, it is very reflecting and
sarcastick; and if any man thinks otherwise, he deserves to taste of it. But
such as it is, if Dr. Bentley had deserved it at his hands, it had not been
culpable: For it is not the severity of Language that renders it blameable, but
the ill design and end that make it so. An ingenious Gentleman was pleased to
say, There is not so much Truth spoken any where as at Billinsgate, (Blount's
Life of Apollonius Tyanaeus, written by Philostrat.) because others are
mealy-mouthed, and loath to speak out, but they tell one another faults plainly
and roundly, tho with unsufferable indecency of words, and with implacable
Passion, and to very unchristian ends and purposes, and (by that Gentleman's
leave) with want of Truth very frequently. I will not then insist upon the bare
mode of Language, used by this noble Writer, but fairly and impartially scan
the decency and fitness of it, as it relates to the Person whom he has to do
with, and as it may be thought to become himself.

1. Some think this noble Gentleman has transgressed his own Laws and Rules
about Pedantry, and whilst he charges the Doctor with that fault, is guilty of
it himself, in those scraps of Poetry which he claps into the front, and into
the body of his Book, in his affected Quotations of others besides Rosscommon;
in his indigested Rhapsodies out of Greek Authors, in his forced and strained
Criticisms, in his slighting the best and most authentic Authority, in his
formal dictating every where, in his prescribing of Maxims and Rules to the
World, in his pack of Advices and good Counsels, when there was no need of
them. Such trumpery as this is found in the most slender sort of Writers, and
such as this Gentleman calls Pedants. This is some men's sense concerning his
Examination of Dr. Bently's Dissertations.

2. Others think that the ill-breeding he objects to the Doctor is his own
blemish, for they apprehend it savours not overmuch of Gentility and good
Manners, to disparage the breeding of a Person of ingenuous Education, and
brought up in Societies and Families where that quality is not wanting, and who
taught it unto others. And there are those who imagine, that Doctor of
Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, the Kings Library keeper, (not
to mention his Promotion and Dignity in the Church) almost amount to as great a
noise as the Title of Esquire.

3. Some think (and who can help their thinking?) that Mr. Boil offends
against his own Rules, about ill-breeding and Pedantism, when he mentions Dr.
Bently's dependence on a great Man, as if that Relation were a dishonor to
him, for be sure he does not mention it for his Honor. One would think that
for the sake of that eminent Person, that Reflection might have been spared.
But some are of Opinion, that this is a kind of revenging of Mr. L.'s Cause,
which they would not do directly on the Bishop, for writing against him, and
therefore chose this oblique way: But I can say nothing as to that. No man
believes there is any great overplus of breeding (for that is the word our
Author furnishes us with) in insisting on Dr. Bentley's being the
Library Keeper at St. James's. He did rather call for some Deference as he was
the King's Servant there. Wherefore he that turns this into a Reflection, seems
not to understand the breeding of the Court. But however, as the Doctor was in
Holy Orders, he was to have had some respect paid to him; but even this is
mentioned to his disparagement, which carries little of the air and genius of a
Gentleman: which is an Argument to persuade me that some body else besides the
Honorable Mr. Boil had a hand in this work. In short, whoever he was, he
gives the Doctor no quarter, he teazes and worries him most unmercifully. Mr.
Wotton hardly escapes, for this Author flies at him and his Treatise of Ancient
and Modern Learning, and more than once reminds him, that he has purged his
Book of several ill Passages in this second Edition* p. 97. letting us know
that the former had several ill Passages in it: and he charges this Gentleman
likewise with ill manners, p. 22. and it is a kindness that he there stopped.

4. The aggravation of all is this, That the greatest part of all this Raillery
is only for a little Criticism. Who would think that such a small matter should
exasperate Persons to that height, and warm their Bloods to that degree? It was
otherwise with the late Combatants we spoke of, their difference was in points
of an high nature, where indifferency would have been a fault. Mr. Edwards had
reason to appear with some warmth, when the grand matters of our Religion lay
at stake, such as concerned the very life and soul of Christianity. Not to
mention that Mr. Edwards had treated Mr. Lock in a moderate and civil style;
and that on the other side Mr. Lock had not only rudely treated him, but
others of the same Function and Office, so that he had made it not only a
personal but a public Quarrel, which gave some warmth to Mr. Edwards's Pen.

Lastly, Those undue Menaces and Threatenings, which are scattered up and down
by the Examinator, induce me to incline toward Dr. Bentley's Opinion, that Mr.
Boil was not the entire Composer of those Papers: For tho too many that bear
the name of Gentlemen, are for touching the Hilt presently if a harsh word be
given, yet the noble and religious Education of the Boyles allows of no such
thing. The angry Criticiser, who ever he is, gives plain hints of a severer
Method to be used. In three or four places the Doctor is given to understand
that if he provokes this Writer, he shall feel the force of a sharper
Instrument than a Quill: for Gentlemen, he says, use to revenge their Quarrels
in another way than with their Pens. This is one of the most boisterous
Critics that ever I met with; he is for hectoring his Brother Critic into
silence or compliance. This is a new way of writing, with Sword or Bagonet in
hand. This is done certainly to warn our Clergy for the future that they write
not against one sort of men, lest they be whipped through the Lungs for their
pains. As for the Learned Doctor, you must think he fares the worse for his
free Discourses and Sermons against the Deists and Atheists, when at the
Boylean Lecture he smote them under the fifth Rib, and therefore it is no wonder
that he is threatened to be served so himself. Truly I reckon the Doctor to be
in an unsafe case as to his person: and he is in as dangerous a one as to his
Books, for I will not secure them from an University Decree, (for some of the
same hands are at work now that procured the Dean of S. P. that favor) no nor
from a warmer Doom, such as that about the year 1684. But I leave the Doctor to
tell his own Story and his Fears; only before I leave off, I will add the
Reflection of the Town on one or two of the foregoing Adventurers and others,
viz. into what different postures they cast themselves, and appear on the
Stage. Dr. South combats a Brother-Church-man, say they; Mr. Edwards is
pleasant upon a Lay-Gentleman; Mr. Boil (as it were to be even with him)
rallies upon a Reverend Clergyman; and one too well known to be named, plays
upon both Ranks. Hence some fanciful Brains imagine that these Changes are thus
purposely rung by the Press: but this is a groundless Conceit, and needs no
refuting.

Having spoken with this freedom concerning our Domestic Critics, let me add
something concerning a Foreign one, the Ingenious and Learned Author of Ars
Critica. He had made himself known before by several of his learned Writings;
but we must look upon this as his Masterpiece, not so much for the
superexcellency of the thing it self, as for the subtle contriving and
designing of it, viz. that it should propagate Socinianism in a new method.
Others have in a downright way promoted the Cause, by positive handling and
determining the particular Doctrines, and by excepting and arguing against the
contrary Opinions. But here comes a Gentleman that takes another course, and
undertakes to make Proselytes by Critical Art. For the Missionary Fathers have
not more ways and arts of gaining Converts in China, and the other Pagan
Countries they resort to, than these men have of winning over people to
Vnitarianism. It is true, Criticism has been their chief Province, they have
applied themselves to the study of Grammar, and have made some proficiency in
it; but they have miserably abused this sort of Learning, by making it serve
their own turns: For which this Author is as eminent as any, but he has gone
to work in away different from the rest; for whereas others plainly and
directly asserted the Socinian Opinions, by commenting upon the Books of the
New Testament, here is another way taken by this Writer in this his last Book.
One would think he intended only to set down the Laws and Rules of Criticism,
with respect to Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Authors; but the main drift of his
undertaking is to establish the Doctrines of Socinus. It is in an oblique and
collateral manner that he chooses to be a Patron of that Cause. His Artifice is
to shape his Critic into a Socinian. This (which I hope may be of some good
use to the Reader) I will make good by going through the several parts of his
Book, and showing that the various Topics of Criticism which he makes use of,
are strained to this purpose, namely, to the defense of the Socinian Points.

Part 1. Chap. 1. Sect. 3. treating on the Head of common Opinions, he drags in
this, Among the Jews it was thought that Sacrifices were the chief part of
Divine Worship; therefore in the New Testament all the Offices of Religion are
expressed by the name of Sacrifices. And so the Death of Christ is called there
a Sacrifice, because it was the chief part of that Religion, and had some
things in it resembling Sacrifices. And then hints, that it was only a
metaphorical and improper Sacrifice. For the sake of the Doctrine which rejects
Christ's Satisfaction, this was brought in here under this Head, tho it is
plain it has no reference to it.

Part 2. Sect. 1. Chap. 3. what he has about the names Elohim, (...), Deus,
God, has a collateral aspect to the Doctrine of the Unitarians, who hold that
the Name of God is and may be applied to Christ; and yet it does not follow
thence that he is truly and properly God: For, says he, tho the supreme Numen
be called Elohim, yet neither that nor any of the other words denote God as he
is the most perfect Nature, but only as he is (...), to be worshipped. This is
to let us know, that tho our Savior may be the Object of Divine Worship, yet
he is not God, because he has not the most perfect Nature, that is, the Nature
of the one Supreme God, as they style it. And this is the thing he aims at in
what follows in that Chapter, where he alleges some of the ancient Christian
Writers, who make use of the word (...), God, as it signifies some worthy and
honorable Being (as Angels, or Magistrates) not the only true God that is to
be worshipped. But it is easily seen that this is nothing to his purpose, only
he shows his good will to the Cause.

Chap. 4. This Writer shows his favor of that Doctrine which is known to be
espoused by his party, when he will not let those words, Genesis 2. 17. Thou shall
surely die, be interpreted thus, thou shall be mortal, or be in the state of
mortality; of which no other reason can be given than this, that he was willing
(to use his own words) to accommodate this threatening to his own Opinion.

In the same Chapter he shows his good will to the Racovian Divinity, when he
interprets Jer. 31. 33. of the Memory only. I will put my Law into their inward
parts, and write it in their Hearts; that is, says he, I will take care that
the Israelites shall retain the Law in their Memories, and shall not want a
Monitor to put them in mind of it. This is the whole emphasis of the words. And
to confirm this, he quotes the next words as a proof of what he says, They
shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, etc. but we find nothing of proof
in them, there is not the least intimation that the foregoing words are to be
meant of bare remembrance. But this is the slender fare which we must expect,
when this learned Writer pretends to make the greatest Provision, and to
satisfy the Readers appetite: Nor can it be otherwise when a man of his Parts
and Reading truckles to a Cause, and submits himself to be led by false
Notions, and (to uphold them) wrests the Holy Scripture, as he does here, under
a cloak of Criticism. Any unprejudiced man may be convinced, that the
forementioned words are the Covenant or Promise of Grace and Salvation by the
Messiah. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant, ver. 31. and those days are the days of the Gospel, as appears from
the occasion of citing and applying the foresaid Text, in Heb. 8. 8. That
Covenant is in a more signal manner fulfilled under the Evangelical
Dispensation, the Divine Law is put into the inner parts of the Faithful, and
written on their Hearts; that is, by virtue of the Holy Spirit their
Understandings are so enlightened, and their Wills and Consciences so
effectually wrought upon, that they are enabled to observe that Law. This is
the privilege of the Evangelical Covenant: but our Author was not to comply
with this, because it is repugnant to the Doctrine of those men he adheres to,
who explode all special Grace and Assistance of the Spirit, and solve all by
Moral Swasion. It is no wonder then, that in obeisance to those Doctors, he
makes writing the Law in the Heart, and inner parts, to be no more than bare
remembering of it. Thus you have his Interpretation, and you have the true
ground and occasion of it. He proceeds to try whether he can by Quotations out
of Gentile Writers prove, that writing in the Mind or Heart is of the same
signification with Remembrance; but some of his Instances which he alleges,
come not up to what he quotes them for, and if they did, the Sacred and Pagan
style are not to be paralleled always, as he himself expressly acknowledges
among his Critical Observations: And as for the Citation out of Josephus,
Antiq. 1. 4. c. 8. The writing of the Laws on their Minds, and the preserving
them in their Memories, seem to be two distinct things. The truth is (so far as
I can judge) this Learned Gentleman shapes his Criticism according to the
Doctrines he has embraced, and that is the ground of his mistaking here and in
other places.

This may be perceived in his Critical Notes in this same Chapter, about
opening the Eyes, where the design was to fetch in Acts 26. 18. To open their
Eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light; and then from his premised
Critical Glosses, to insinuate that there is no Emphasis, no Energy, as he
says, in those words. So he continues that there is nothing Emphatical in the
Apostles words concerning Lydia, Acts 16. 14. The Lord opened her Heart. Her
Conversion was not by any special Power and Efficacy, only (as he strangely
expresses it) It was by divine* Providence, whatever machins God made use of at
last, that Lydia gave an attentive Ear to Paul. He tells us that the wonderful
change that was wrought in this Female by the preaching of the Gospel was the
work of Providence, by which all other things come to pass in the World. And it
was a Mechanical Operation, for that he must mean by his Machins; it was an
external work, void of an inward efficacious and energetical Principle. This is
his way of describing Lydia's Conversion to the Christian Faith, only to serve
his Hypothesis about Grace and Conversion: This was the reason why our Critic
would have us take no notice of any Emphasis in those foregoing Phrases, no not
in the writings of the Bible.

Chap. 5. He approaches nearer to his designed business; he so orders his way
of Criticizing, that he must take notice of ambiguous words, and words of
different significations, and then he brings in (...) the price of Redemption,
(...) to redeem, and (...) redemption, and represents these as ambiguous and
doubtful terms, and hard to be understood when they are applied to Christ's
Redemption. And here he perplexes the matter, and renders it difficult and
obscure, and unsettles* and confounds the belief of the weak. It is observable
he undertakes afterward to reckon up all the significations of the word Spirit
in the Old and New Testament (as well as in other Writers) but he cannot find
one place where it signifies the third Person in the Trinity. He acknowledges
indeed that there is mention of the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, but it
is only as much as God in general, or a Divine Power, or some invisible force,
not any distinct Person in the Trinity. It is true, he says, The Christian
Divines, both Ancient and Modern, fitted or accommodated several of those
places to the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the Trinity, and so do the
Divines at this day; but he is not pleased to say, that either in the Old or in
the New Testament, the word Spirit does occur in this sense. No, that was not
to be expected, for his method of Criticism was to be guided by his
prepossessions concerning the doctrine of the Trinity, or rather his denial of
that Doctrine. His whole Catalogue of Places, in Writers that mention the word
Spirit, seems to be inserted into this Chapter, on purpose to patronize that
mistaken Notion, that the Scriptures mention not the Spirit as a distinct
Person in the Deity: For this cause the diverse senses of the word Spirit were
hooked in under this Chapter, which treats of ambiguous words.

In the next he considers the larger and the narrower acceptions of the words
Justice or Righteousness, Charity, Faith, but all along seems to be upon
design, and forces his Critical Observations into some subservienty to the
Principles and Practices he has a kindness for.

In the 7 th Chapter he lays down this Rule, viz. That proper words must not be
confounded with improper ones, and then tells us, that the contrary practice is
a common fault; and accordingly the Apostle offends, he says, in this kind,
when he speaks thus to the Galatians, Chap. 4. 8. When ye knew not God, ye did
service unto them who by nature are no Gods. Which words are haled in here to
prove, that St. Paul was a confused and improper Speaker, and to take occasion
to discourse of that expression, (...), a God by Nature, that hereby the
Divinity of Christ might receive a shock. If you ask him what a God by Nature
is, he answers, One that is not a God by Institution and Opinion. And yet such
was our Savior, say the Socinian Masters, he is a God by divine Institution,
Appointment, and Order; this is all the Divinity they allow him.

Chap. 8. His Criticism is again a hackney to his private Belief and Opinion;
and thence he brings in Grace among the Obscure words that are to be found in
Theological Writers; and he professes he cannot make any sense of it, as it is
used by St. Augustine, and other Divines since his time. Why, because it is not
according to the Unitarian Scheme of Divinity, and therefore there can be no
sense in the word or thing. It is not then strange that he ridicules that
Doctrine, and exposes it to contempt and scorn, making use to that purpose of a
certain Jesuit's Dialogue, which he very solemnly quotes. And in the same place
the Pious and Learned Father St. Augustine is despised and vilified as a popular
Speaker, and unskilled in the Critic Art, because he vouches the Doctrine of
Grace. The best Language Monsieur Le Clerc can give it is, that it is he knows
not what; which tho spoken in a jeering and scoffing way, is, some fear, the
truest thing he has said in this Chapter, or any other.

Chap. 9. He pretends to propound some words which have no signification at
all, but are commonly used among the Philosophic Fry, and not only among them,
but Divine; for these (he is pleased to say) no less than they, love to speak
concerning those things which they understand and not. Our Lay-Critick is very
smart upon the Gown. These Divines, and these Priests (as they are otherwise
called) are, I perceive, very offensive to some of late, and no wonder, when
they talk Nonsense, and do not understand themselves what they say, as this
Gentleman complains. And if any man ask of them an interpretation of many of
the words they use, they reply presently, that their Discourse is about a thing
that is incomprehensible; and therefore Human Reason must not pass judgment on
things of this nature, as it does upon others. Thus our witty Critic, who (as
his Brethren) by the Incomprehensible thing mean the Trinity, and other
Doctrines that have relation to it, which are Names of Nothing according to
this Writer, nay, (as he displays it in great Characters) they are NOTHING, as
if his putting any thing into Capital Letters would annihilate it.

Chap. 12. His interpretation of the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith
to Faith, Romans 1. 17. is wholly of the Racovian strain.

Chap. 14. He disparages the Divinity of Christ, by telling us, that the
Divinity which inhabited in him, is called (...) by the Evangelist in a
Platonic way; and that Platonic way he asserts to be far different from the
mind of some Christians, who hold Christ to be truly God. Afterward he has as
little ground for what he so positively affirms, that all Christians at this
day dissent much from the determination of the Nicene Council.

Chap. 15. He again falls soul upon St. Augustine (that celebrated Father of the
Christian Church) and all those that agree with him in the Doctrine of Grace,
the reason of which I have assigned before.

Chap. 16. On the same Principle that his Friends go upon (that all things are
clear and plain in Christianity, and that there are no Mysteries in it) he
upbraids the ancient Christian Writers, with their mystical and obscure
Orations and Discourses. He unhappily joins with Porphyrius, the most
implacable Adversary of the Christians and Christianity it self (tho very
Learned, he says) in this very thing, and uses his words against the Christian
Doctors, who interpreted the Holy Scriptures in the Primitive times.

Part 2. Chap. 5. Who would think he could have handsomely brought Synods, and
the Representative Church, under this Chapter of Abstracts and Concretes? And
yet it must be done, because it was to be brought in some where for the Synod
of Nice's sake, where there were so many Representatives of the Church at that
time, who asserted and vindicated the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

Chap. 8. Having in other places spoken so contemptuously of some of the
greatest Points of Religion, it is not to be supposed that he has very
reverent Thoughts of GOD himself* and accordingly he has this strange Passage,
As often as the word GOD occurs in any Writer, we must know it is always the
name of a Notion, which, according to the Wit or Wisdom of the Writer, contains
in it more or fewer Attributes.

Part 3. In several Chapters together he shows himself a true Gritick, in his
enquiries about the causes of those Faults which have crept into old Writers,
only here and there he has a brief touch which serves to remind us of his
inclination. But in the 14 th Chapter, which is concerning the Faults that are
to be attributed to Impostors, he plainly shows his Biass in these following
particulars. He reckons Romans 5. 14. among the adulterated Texts, Death reigned
from Adam unto Moses, even on those who sinned not after the similitude of Adam
's Transgression: but any one that knows the Opinions of Socinus's Friends,
cannot but see why not is looked upon as an Interpolation. He numbers Romans 9.
5. God blessed for ever, among the vitiated places, observing that the word God
is not in some Copies. Next he instances in 1 Timothy 3. 16. God was manifest in
the Flesh, and remains us that the word God is omitted in many Greek Exemplars.
Then he takes notice that those words in 1 John 5. 7. There are three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one, are not to be found in the old Greek Copies, but are foisted in by fraud:
but yet, as he says afterward, Chap. 16. They are contended for, and
maintained by Divines that have not skill in Critics, or who look for that in
Books which they wish for, not for what is in them. Among the places that have
been altered and corrupted by Impostors, the 4th ver. of the Epistle of St.
Jude is reckoned by him; because the only Lord God is meant of our Savior,
therefore he adheres to those who say God is a word inserted here by fraud.
Thus all these Allegations confirm us in that opinion, which this Author is not
unwilling we should have of him, namely, that he is a great admirer of
Socinus's Doctrines, and is ambitious of propagating them; and this he does
under the mask of Criticizing.

He concludes all with his judgment on the Character of a Writer; and we might
do so too, and be as severe upon him as he is upon Curtius, whom he makes a
very sorry Writer. But as for himself, and his Treatise of the Critical Art, he
gives us high Characters of both in several of his Pages, but chiefly in his
Dedicatory Epistle to his Teuto, where he assures us, that he does not swell
with Pedagogick Pride, nor is he loaded with a farrage of jejune Learning, but
uses his Judgment and Memory, and is modest, etc. I am as ready as himself to
heap praises on his Head, and to applaud his neat Style, his great Reading, his
vast Industry, his excellent Remarks on the different undertakings of Authors,
his variety of Critical Notions, by which he has very much obliged the World.
But then (that I neither may be a partial Critic*) I must needs say, he has
disobliged it much more by his straining of Criticism, to support a Cause which
he has unfortunately adopted. And here to make an end, I will observe these
three things.

1. There is nothing New in this Writer which respects that Cause: He has not
cultivated the Argument at all, no not where every one might have expected it.
For who would have thought that so industrious a Critic, and so hearty a
well-willer to Vnitarianism, would not have attempted at least to return an
Answer to the excellent Arguments used by Bishop Pearson and Bishop
Stillingfleet to disprove the Allegations of the Socinians, about the
adulterating and depraving of some of those Texts which he has produced? This
would have been a seasonable work, and especially because it properly
appertains to the Province of Critics, and because it appears from his
Writings, that he is not unacquainted with the Works of those eminent Men, and
reads them in their own Language. And yet notwithstanding all this, he makes no
effort that ways, nor does he so much as take notice that those excellent
Authors have replied to the Objections and Scruples of the Socinian Writers
about those Texts. Whence* we may infer, that what those Learned Anti-Socinians
have suggested, is unanswerable, and that one of the smartest Critics of our
days has nothing to say to it.

2. We might observe how mischievous and dangerous such Writings as these,
which not only this Author but others of the same Persuasion have lately filled
the World with, may prove to Mankind. We ought to think of this betimes, and to
show our resentment of it, lest otherwise we contribute by our insensibleness
to that Evil which we see is approaching. Any man that is not prepossessed, may
discern the Contrivance which is carrying on at this day, namely, to instill the
notions of Socinianism into the Youth of this Age: and accordingly it is
observable, that the Foreign and English Unitarians have industriously applied
themselves to this rank of Persons, that is, to those that are coming up in the
World. We see that their address is very frequent and close to young Gentlemen,
that by sowing these early Seeds in them, there may be a hopeful Crop expected
afterward: so that tho these Seeds-men may not prevail so far upon this
present Generation as they desire, yet there may be some fruit of their labors
in the future one. This Learned Monsieur is a Tutor to the younger Heads, a
Director to them in their Studies, and dedicates his Critics to one of them,
and intimates the hopes of the good success of his Documents. And truly it is
to be mentioned with infinite regret, that these Instructors have their Teuto's
every where, and are very busily at work with them: so among our selves, we
have some that promote Principles of a like nature with those, and are employed
in the Education of the youth of this Nation. As much as to tell us, that if
they cannot sufficiently proselyte the men of this Age, they will make sure of
those of the next; if they cannot succeed at present, they will gain Posterity.

3. I have one thing more to observe, and that is this, how harmful a Project
it is of our Critic, to publish Dr. Hammond's Annotations on the New
Testament, and at the same time to mix his own additional Notes with them. This
is a politic way to promote the Cause, and especially in England, where the
Works of that Learned and Pious Annotator are in so great esteem: When his
Criticisms and Interpretations are blended with the Socinian ones, how easily
will they be both imbibed together? I thought fit to caution my Countrymen
about this Hazard, that they may not be betrayed into Error, even the worst of
Errors, whilst they are intent upon studying the Truth. This is all I have to
say at present concerning this French Author, whose Wit and Parts, and acquired
Accomplishments are not of the lowest degree, and whose Critical Genius, if it
had been set right, would have been extremely serviceable to Religion,
especially the Christian. But it is his unhappiness to have taken the wrong
Path, and if he goes on after this rate he has begun, he will criticize a
great part of our Religion out of doors.

I had some Thoughts of proceeding to other Authors, some of our own Country,
as Dr. Whitby and Mr. Norris, who have duell'd one another about the Love of
the Creature: I was thinking to examine the Philosophic Champions, as L. P. or
the Oxford-Essays, and Mr. H. and one or two pair more of the Strugglers of
this Age: but these may perhaps be the diversion of another Paper, and it may
be will give less Offense; for your Critics are very touchy People; and it is
very invidious to go a Socinian-hunting, as one or two lately have found it.

And lastly, I am fully sensible what a difficult and arduous work I have been
about, no less than adjusting the Debates between Cambridg and Oxford, between
the St. John's men on one side, and the men of Christ-Church on the other.

THE END.

