PRINTED By His Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON Preached before the KING At WHITEHALL, ON CHRISTMAS DAY, 1696.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVII.

THE BISHOP of SALISBURY's Sermon before the KING, ON CHRISTMAS DAY. 1696.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
GAL. IV. VER. 4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a Woman.


THE Mysteries of God's Providence, are of all others the most Amazing. A small
Measure of true Reason, with good Degrees of Humility and Modesty, will easily
bring one over to Submit to Matters of Doctrine, relating to the Divine
Essence, if it appears that they are expressly Revealed, though the forming
Distinct Apprehensions of them be above our Faculties, which God knows are Weak
and Short-sighted; but it is a more obvious, as well as a more pressing
Difficulty, that arises from the Methods of God's Governing the World. There is
no great matter in that which is drawn from the Varieties and seeming
Partialities of Providence: The Prosperity of Bad Men, and the Afflictions of
the Just, have often such visible tendencies in this Life, and are followed
with such a just Distribution of Rewards and Punishments in another State, that
this is no formidable Objection.

But that the world should be, as it were, abandoned, so great a part of it
being, as it were, delivered up in Bulk to Ignorance, Idolatry, Immorality, and
Magic; so small a part of it being enlightened, and of that so very small a
part being either guided or bettered by that Light, carries in it a Train of
Difficulties, which we can never hope to see through, till welcome at that
Light to which we cannot now approach. Why the world was let run into so much
Corruption for about 4000 Years, before the Son of God was sent forth into it;
Why this Light has not Shined into all the Corners of the world ever since; And
that which is the most Amazing of all, is, Why do those who enjoy it value it
so little, and are so little reformed by it, are indeed Mysteries that we
cannot see through.

Yet though we cannot quite comprehend them, we have some hints given us to
show us, that there was a certain Conduct, and by Consequence a wise Direction
in this great Transaction. A time was prefixed for it, long before it happened;
and the Accomplishment did punctually Answer the Predictions.

I shall name only Two of the most Remarkable.

About 1800 Years before it, Jacob when dying had foretold, That the Scepter
should not Genesis 49. 10.
depart from Judah, till Shiloh should come, by whom the Gentiles were to be
called to the Knowledge of God. The Importance of which was, That the Tribe of
Judah should continue to be God's People, under their peculiar Laws and
Government, till the Messiah should come, to whom the Gentiles were to be
gathered. The other Tribes were for the greater part so lost, that scarce any
Remnant of them was left: But the Tribe of Judah still remained a visible Body
of Men, Governed by their peculiar Laws, till the time of our Savior's coming
into the world. Herod had been made their King by the Roman Senate, and was
afterward Confirmed by Augustus; they were thereby brought under Subjection,
though Herod Governed them indeed according to Mose's Law. Augustus ordered a
Taxing of all the Empire, of the Tributary or Subjected Provinces, as well as
of that which was incorporated into the Empire: And this happened precisely at
the time of our Savior's Birth. Soon after that, Judea was made a Province;
their Current Money was only the Roman Coin; Pontius Pilate the Roman
Procurator Condemned our Savior; and by that time, according to the
Prediction, the Gentiles were called to the Knowledge of God (through this
Shiloh the Messiah,) the Jewish Nation was Destroyed, their Temple burnt down,
their City razed down to the ground, and they scattered to the Four Winds of
Heaven; but far the greater part adhering firmly to their Religion, still owned
the Prophecies, which we hope are to have at last a Glorious effect upon them
for their final Conversion. Here is one Character of the Time, and we see the
fullness of it was come.

Another is yet more express, given out about 500 Years before the
Accomplishment; It was revealed to Daniel, That within Sixty nine Weeks Dan. 9.
25.
after the going forth of the Commandment to build and restore Jerusalem,
Messiah the Prince should come, and be cut off. That by Weeks are meant so many
Sevens of Years, is confessed by the Jews; and can easily be proved to have
been a common form of designing such a Period of time among them. The
commandment to build Jerusalem, was Neh. 2. 5, 6. Ezra. 1. 2. Ezra 6. 8.
given in the 20th. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus; the Edict given out before
by Cyrus, and confirmed by Darius, being only for the building the Temple, and
for the worshipping of God in it. Sixty nine Weeks of Years are just 483: Now
we have the certain Characters of those times left, by which we are sure, That
from the 20th. year of Artaxerxes to the 19th. of Tiberius, in which our
Savior suffered, there were just so many years, neither more nor less,
according to the Calculation of Years that we know the Caldeans then reckoned
by, of 360 Days to a Year, which they divided into Twelve Months, assigning
Thirty Days to every Month; which we see by Jeremiah was likewise the measure
that the Jews counted by; and of such Years only can that Prophecy of Daniel's
be understood.

Here are two evident Characters that the Fullness of the time was come; that a
time was prefixed to this great Transaction long before, and that it happened
punctually according to it.

We do likewise find in the state of the Gentile world a great Conjuncture of
favorable Circumstances previous to its Appearance: The Roman Empire was as
calm at this time as it was great: The World was conquered, and after a course
of many years Wars Janus Temple was shut. It was a Constitution made up of
Justice and Morality; but was under a Religion that was then so strangely
corrupted, that the Tempers as well as Laws of that Nation did very much
dispose them to an aversion to that Religion, or rather to that mixture of all
Religions, which the wiser and better sort among themselves could not but
despise and abhor: By consequence this prepared them to receive a Religion that
not only agreed to all their Notions of Morality, but that tended to improve
and exalt them all.

Thus we who cannot know why this was the time marked for the Appearance of the
Son of God, yet do certainly know that it was precisely marked out, and was as
exactly fulfilled; and from that we have reason to acknowledge and adore that
Wisdom in it, which we cannot yet discover.

I go next to the Great Article of the Christian Religion mentioned in the
Text, That the Messiah who was sent forth, was the Son of God. The Jews
understood these two designations to be so inseparable, that they had no other
Controversy at first with the Apostles and the first Converts, but about this,
Whether Jesus was the Messiah, or not? But supposing him to be the Messiah,
they never questioned his being the Son of God; nor did they object to the
Christians their giving him Divine Adoration. We have the Martyrdom of St.
Stephen the most punctually related of any of all the Passages that happened in
the first beginnings of Christianity: The Jews heard and saw all that past; St.
Stephen died calling upon the Lord Jesus to receive his spirit, and praying to
him not to lay that sin to the charge of his Murderers. If the Jews had not
then believed that the Messiah was to be truly God, and that as such he was to
be invocated, they must after this have reproached the Christians with
Idolatry; with making a Man God, and with the worshipping him as such. This
they did not do; which shows that then they owned that the Messiah was to be
truly God.

This was yet more instructing to the Christians, who could not but observe
that St. Stephen ended his life in Acts of Invocation of Christ, to the same
effect with those in which Christ himself had called on his Heavenly Father,
when he gave up the Ghost: Into thy hands I commit my spirit, being of the same
importance with that of St. Stephen's, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: As,
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do, being the same Act in effect
with this, Lord, lay not this to their charge. If Christ was not truly God, and
to be worshipped as such, it is not possible to excuse this from a very high
degree of Idolatry.

I love not in such an Audience to dwell long on Points of Speculation: Yet
since this is the Capital Article of the Christian Religion, and since it is
one of the great Infelicities of the Age we live in, that as many have been
carried to question the Truth of the whole of it, so not a few have with a
particular Eagerness attacked this Fundamental Point of it; I hope the Day, as
well as the Time we are in, will justify the insisting a little more upon it.

It is certain, that if we confess that the New Testament was a Book writ by
Divine Inspiration (which those who deny this Doctrine, profess they do
acknowledge), we must also confess, that Divine Honors are through the whole
of it ascribed to Jesus Christ: From this, Common sense seems to infer, That
either he was truly God, by such a Real Union with the Eternal Word, who is
God, as makes both Natures one Person in him; the nearest resemblance to which
is the Union of our Souls and Bodies, out of which very different Natures
arises one Man, or one Person: Or if this is not true, it will follow, That the
Christian Religion, one of whose main Ends was to banish Idolatry out of the
world, did really only change the Object of this Idolatry, and draw men from
worshipping the Deities of the several Nations, to worship one who according to
those men's Doctrine was only a Creature, and yet was to be worshipped with the
same Honor which is due to the Eternal God; which were indeed a Strain in
Idolatry beyond that of most Heathen Nations. But to make this Matter yet
plainer: All the Sects among Christians that have rejected our Savior's
Divinity, who yet acknowledge that Divine Honor is due to him, may be reduced
to these Two; Either such as hold him to have been some Excellent Created
Being, made before the world, and employed by God in Making and Governing the
world, and so Dignified with Divine Honor. These were the Arians of Old, who
under many high words, seem to have meant no more but to acknowledge that he
was some Created Mind, such as the Jews and we all apprehend Angels to be;
Superior indeed, in rank and order, to any other of them; but no Idea can be
formed of a Created Mind, how perfect soever, but what is of the nature of
Angels.

Now St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, begins it with the rejecting this
conceit; and he pursues that in the Two First Chapters, in expressions, that
considering the Simplicity of Style in which the New Testament is writ, are as
full as can be imagined. They are of the nature of Negative words, which are
always to be severely understood. They are likewise set in the terms of
opposition, and so must be strictly expounded: The bare repeating them will
make this yet more more sensible. It is said of Christ, That he was the
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person. Being
made so much Heb. 1. 3.
better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtained a more excellent
name than they. Whatsoever Dignity they have, it is a free donation, whereas
Christ has his by Inheritance. To which ver. 4.
of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten
thee. But when he brings ver. 6, 7.
in the first-begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God
worship him; an opposition as express as it is full. These words are in the
Book of Psalms; but they are also in the Conclusion Ps. 97. 7.
of the last Song of Moses, according to the Septuagint Translation, though not
in the Hebrew: Deuteronomy. 32. 43.
Rejoice, O ye Heavens, and let all the Angels of God Worship him. This being
then the Translation that was in use among the Jews, when St. Paul writ, it is
most probable that he had regard to it, there being no part of the Law, that
the Jews think is more full of Mystery and Prophecy than that Song. The Angels
being thus called on to Worship the Messiah, is a very strict Expression of
another nature in him, Superior to theirs, and to which they are subject. That
is farther prosecuted: Of Angels, this is said, He makes his Angels Spirits
(that is, Winds, which Heb. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
imports the quickness of their Motion), and his Ministers a flaming fire (a
Figure importing their subtle force). In opposition to which, this follows; But
unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. -- And, Thou,
Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens
are the works of thiue hands* -- they shall be changed, but thou art the same,
and thy years shall not fail. The Creation of the Heavens and the Earth, and
Eternity, being in these words plainly affirmed of the Messiah, which could not
be said without Blasphemy, if he was not truly God. This is carried yet
further: To which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit thou at my right hand,
ver. 13, 14.
until I make thine enemies thy footstool; in opposition to which, it is said
further of Angels, Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation. This is more expressly prosecuted in
the next Chapter, where this is made a part of the difference between the
Mosaical and the Christian Dispensation, That Heb. 2. 2, 3, 4.
the former was spoken by Angels; whereas this was first begun to be spoken by
the Lord. For unto Angels God has not put in subjection the world to come (a
Phrase importing in the Jewish Style, the Dispensation of the Messiah); whereas
the Messiah, ver. 5. 7.
though made a little lower than the Angels, was crowned with glory and honor,
and set over the whole Creation. In the Conclusion of that Chapter, there is an
Expression that makes all this yet more evident; For verily he took not on him
the nature of Angels, ver. 16.
but he took on him the seed of Abraham; which fully shows that the nature in
him, which he had before his Incarnation, was not the nature of Angels.

The Second Supposition on which those who deny his Divinity, do yet pretend to
assert the High Dignity to which he is raised, is the Sublimity of that
Ministry and Dispensation that was committed to him; in conclusion of which,
and as a reward of his patient Sufferings, he was raised up, and exalted to
Divine Honor. This Artemon of old, and the Socinians of late, have advanced:
But, as by a Spirit of Prophecy, St. Paul does in the next place destroy this
conceit in that way, which of all others, was the best suited to the Notions of
the Jews. He sets Christ in opposition to Moses, not only in a priority of
rank, and precedence, but in a Superiority of Nature. He Prefaces this with a
charge to us, to consider the High Priest and Apostle of our Profession: Heb.
3. 7.
To which he adds, That both Moses and he were faithful, but with this
distinction; That ver. 2.
this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as he who
has built the House has more Honor than the House. He adds to this; That he
who has built all things, is God. But the opposition follows; Moses was
faithful in all his House ver. 5, 6.
as a Servant; but Christ as a Son over his own House. Words that are as clear
as they are full.

To make this yet more sensible, it is to be considered, That the Degree of
Moses's Inspiration, is set by God himself above any other Prophecy, in these
Words: If there be a Prophet among Numb. 13. 6.
you, I will make my self known to him in a vision, and will speak to him in a
dream. My Servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my House, with him
will I speak mouth to mouth (or face to face, as one man speaks to another)
even apparently, and not in dark Speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall
he behold: Or, to put this in Modern Expressions, he shall see God in a true
and complete Idea. Thus Moses was above all other Prophets. The peculiar
Excellencies of the Pe al pe, face to face, is well known to all who have any
acquaintance with Jewish Notions. Now after all this, Christ is not only
preferred to Moses, but is put in such an opposition to him as is that of a Son
to a Servant. These are plain and simple Authorities, that need only a little
Reflection, but no Commentary, to make us apprehend the force and evidence that
is in them. God be thanked, that by his good Providence, and the care of all
the Churches, we have this Book brought down to us, in its first genuine and
uncorrupted State, in which the Inspired Penmen delivered it to the World. It
was the interest of the Enemies of this Doctrine, to endeavor to corrupt it.
They understood that, and followed it; for which we have an undeniable
Testimony Recorded to us by a Writer who was too favorable to them to be
declined as partial against them. It was Eusebius, who in his Eus. Hist. l. 5.
c. 28.
History cites a passage from a Writer in the beginning of the 3d Century,
believed to be Gaius Presbyter of Rome, who tells us that Artemon's Disciples
had endeavored to corrupt the New Testament, but in such a manner, that as
they could show no Ancient Copies to justify their Corruptions, so they did not
agree among themselves; and these Corruptions were, as he says, very strange
and enormous ones. So notwithstanding all the Cry that they do now raise of the
Corruption of the Text, we see who they were that begun it; but that the Church
was watchful in preserving this sacred Depositum, and did early detect this
Impious piece of Fraud, and stopped it in its first beginnings.

If any shall ask, How can these things be? It must be Answered, We cannot
tell: We can form no distinct apprehensions concerning them. This is Wisdom
indeed, in a Mystery: It is Wisdom, because it comes from God; but it is in a
mystery, because we cannot attain unto it. Can we apprehend Eternity, or God's
being every where? and that in one single act he sees all things past, present,
and to come? Can we form any distinct thought concerning Creation? How Beings
arise out of nothing, in consequence to the Will of an Infinite Mind, who said
of all things, Let them be, and they were? Or can we so much as apprehend how
Matter thus Created, shall move at the Act and Will of its Eternal Creator? Can
Matter know that Will to obey it? Or can an Intellectual Act give Motion to
insensible Matter? Can we apprehend the propagation of Plants, much less of
Animals? And as to that which of all other things we perceive the most
sensibly, Can we apprehend how Soul and Body dwell together? How Thought and
Motion, how distant soever in their Natures, have that Union with, and
Influence upon one another? How a Motion of Matter can throw an inexpressible
Agony into a Mind; and how a Mind can command so many regular and unaccountable
Motions of Matter, as we perceive in Memory, Imagination, and Speech; are
difficulties that confound us. These are such plain and home convictions of the
defectiveness of our Faculties, which can much more easily apprehend
difficulties, than resolve them, that it can be no just Objection to any part
of the Divine Revelation, that it contains matters out of which great
difficulties do arise, and that we are not able to give our selves any account
of them. Our apprehensions are not only finite, but very much bounded; we see
but a very little way; and therefore we ought not to plead our want of
capacity, in opposition to any thing that appears to be plainly revealed to us
in Scriptures. When such things occur to us, we ought to take the Shield of
Faith; maintaining our selves with this, That the God of Truth, who cannot Lie,
has revealed such things to us; and when we are sure of that, we are at the
same time as sure that it must be true, because it comes from him: And by this
we may beat back all the fiery Darts of the Devil; all those Objections that
arise out of a mixture of Pride and Weakness; for our Faculties are as weak, as
our Arrogance and Self-conceit is high. This is so important a part of the
Christian Religion, that it deserves well to be insisted on, and to be made
out, as much as the nature of the thing, or rather as much as our Nature is
capable of.

The next thing to be considered, is the ends for which the Son of God was sent
forth into the World. They were certainly great, since such extraordinary
Methods were taken to promote them: When it was introduced with so many
particular and distinct Predictions; when all was supported with such a series
of Miracles, done not only by our Savior himself, but by those who were sent
in his name: The propagation it self, considering the Instruments made use of,
and the opposition it met with from all hands, being one of the greatest of all
Miracles. Now since it is unsuitable to Infinite Wisdom, to employ
extraordinary Methods for the attaining of some ordinary Ends, it is very just
to conclude, That the Ends must be great, when the Means used in order to them
were such. They were indeed the greatest that the humane nature was capable of:
All the Principles of Natural Religion, together with the Tradition concerning
the first beginnings of the World, were so corrupted, or so intermixed with
Fables, that it was necessary to restore these by a Mighty Authority. That
which we call strictly Religion, was turned wholly to Idolatry and Magic,
Charm, or Superstition. It was therefore necessary to raise up just and great
Ideas of God, which the Philosophers had attempted, but faintly and with small
success. Barbarity and Vice had so overrun the World, that the plainest Ideas
of Virtue were either quite lost, or rendered very doubtful. Under such a
Corruption of Religion, it was no wonder if Atheism made a great progress,
since few can be much concerned to support a Religion that is visibly made up
of Fraud; and that may make men the worse, but cannot make them the better for
adhering to it; and such was the Heathenish Religion. Judaism it self, though
sound in its own nature, as well as Divine in its Original, yet was but low,
and was become much more so by the increase of the Ceremonial part by
Tradition, which still as it increases too much, does sink the Moral and best
part of Religion. It being then necessary to free the Jews from their Bondage
(which is the occasion upon which these words are in this place made use of by
St. Paul) as well as to deliver the Gentiles out of their darkness, which was
become black and thick as the shadow of death; God sent his Son to give the
World true and high Notions of God and his Attributes; of his Justice and
Goodness more particularly; to open a way of Worship that should be plain and
simple; suitable to the Ideas of God, and to our Faculties: And to set such
Rules to men's inward Thoughts and Tempers, as well as to their Lives and
Actions, as should rectify Human Nature, and render mutual Society both safe
and happy. For this end he delivered his Doctrine to his Hearers, and lived it
as well as he spoke it. If an Angel from Heaven had pronounced it, as the Law
was given on Mount Sinai, it could not have had so sensible an effect, as when
the Person who delivered it set such a Pattern as gave more distinct Ideas
concerning his end in it. In it he expressed what a sort of Holiness he came to
promote: Not the Affectations of a pompous Exterior, but the real purity of
genuine Virtue; of Truth and Goodness; of Modesty, Humility, and Charity. Here
was one great end for which the Son of God was sent forth: A great one it was;
to raise and reform men's Natures; to give us Noble Thoughts and Excellent
Rules, as well as a clear Pattern, that can neither fail nor misguide us.

A Second end of his Coming, was to open such a Method of reconciling Sinners
to God, as should both render them capable of the Mercies of God, and yet give
them great Impressions both of the Guilt of Sin, and of the Justice as well as
the Goodness of God. No offer of pardon at all, must have made men desperate;
as too Easy a one, must have made them bold in Sinning. The offer of a pardon
was necessary to be begun with, but it must be made in such a manner, that it
might not encourage men to live on in Sin, at the same time that it gave them
the hopes of Mercy. The Ideas of the guilt and odiousness of Sin were to be
kept up in a Religion whose chief design was to reform and purify Mankind, at
the same time that a general offer of a pardon was to be proclaimed to the
World. Therefore this Messiah, who was to procure that offer to be made, was to
become a Sacrifice himself in our name and stead, he was to bear our Sins, and
so to take them away: He was not to be brought by Priests, to be offered up on
an Altar, as the Heathens did with their Piacular Victims; much less was he to
Slay himself, according to some Stories that the Heathens had. Every thing in
him was to be innocent, as well as great; such as became both the Majesty of
God, and the Purity as well as the Dignity of his Person. He was therefore
fallen upon by an enraged multitude, who to satisfy their own brutal fury,
first treated him most barbarously, and then put him ignominiously to death;
all which he who could have saved himself by Miracle, if not by other ways, not
only bore patiently, but with an entire submission to the Will of God, and an
unconquerable Charity toward even those his Persecutors.

This was only the outside, and the visible part of his Sufferings; but with
these he endured an inexpressible Agony in his mind, both before and during his
being on the Cross, of which we who understand only the Agonies of guilt, of
pain, or of passion, can form no distinct Idea. All this he offered himself to
bear; he was not surprised in it; he foresaw it coming, and longed for it. It
is by this, and on the account of it, that Sinners are encouraged to come to
God, and to claim their pardon. In this they find great Characters, setting
forth both the Guilt of Sin, and the Holiness, the Justice, as well as the
Goodness of God. By such a Ransom it appears, how hateful a thing Sin is, since
God has thought fit to offer the pardon of it, in so solemn and so severe a
manner. By this the Doctrine of the Messiah has this most effectual
recommendation accompanying it, that he showed he loved us, in instances beyond
imagination, as well as expression.

A Third design upon which God sent forth his Son, was to bring men to awaken
much within themselves, the Ideas of God in the seriousest and tenderest
manner, by frequent Meditation, and earnest Prayer: To which he added the most
encouraging of all Promises, That God will not only hear, but answer our
Prayers; and more especially that he will give his holy Spirit to every one
that asks it. Our Faculties are not only under a great depression, but a vast
disorder: Appetite and Passion do soon fire us, and are not easily resisted; we
may have some good Minutes, but we have many more weak and bad ones: We do
plainly perceive that without some inward assistance to cure and rectify our
Nature, we cannot go through with the business of Religion. Our Savior has
assured us of this; and he has made the condition of our attaining it, to be
that which is both in it self easy, for nothing can be easier than to have a
thing for the asking, and is the properest Method possible, to keep alive in us
great and powerful impressions of God; which are the Seeds and Principles that
must reform our Natures, and mould them unto the likeness of God.

Before the Son of God was sent forth, there were some general Ideas of God's
hearing and answering of Prayer, and of his furnishing his Worshippers with an
inward aid. But it was our Savior only, who made it a part of the Covenant
that he came to establish between God and man, That a Divine Power should be
conveyed into the Faculties of all such as should earnestly pray to him, by
which they should be enabled to pay him that sincere Obedience, of which he is
pleased graciously to accept; and in consideration of which, he does through
the Merits and Intercession of Christ, pardon all our other errors and defects.
This is now to us, a foederal promise; we may depend upon it, and with all
humble confidence claim to it.

The Fourth great design of God's, in sending forth his Son, was, That he might
give the World the most powerful of all motives, to work either on their hopes,
or fears, by offering them both a full assurance, and a particular description
of a Future State. Some notices of this were still in the World; but they were
both doubtful and dark: The greatest Assertors of it among the Greeks and
Latins, did it but faintly: They proposed it, rather as an opinion that was
highly probable, and fit to be believed, than as that which was certainly true.
The hints given of it in the Old Testament, are very general, and may be made
capable of other senses: By it the Jews might be inclined to believe not only
another State, but the Resurrection of the Body; but the account they contain
of it, is very defective. Our Savior brought it to Light; he not only affirmed
it in many expressions, that were so full and so plain, that it is not possible
to doubt any longer about it, without rejecting his Authority: He gave a very
express proof of the possibility of the Resurrection, by his own rising from
the dead: He went further, and assured us, that we should then be made like
unto Angels: That our Bodies should shine as the Sun; that we should be for
ever with God, inheriting that Kingdom which was prepared for us; previous to
this, he told us, That we shall hear his voice, by the power of which we shall
be raised out of our Graves, and be judged according to all that we have done
in this Life; and that the micked shall go into everlasting punishment, and the
righteous into life eternal.

This being then so evidently delivered, and so fully described by him, we have
in it given to us exceeding great and precious promises, with the greatest
encouragement possible, to undertake that course of Holiness, which he has set
before us, in consideration of the glory which, with it, he has also set
before us. We are assured by him, that if we go through Life in an imitation of
his Example, and an Obedience of his Laws, as well, as in a submission to those
Sufferings by which he may think fit to exercise our Faith and Patience, we
shall at last escape out of this evil World, and from these Vile Bodies: We
shall arise above the depressions of Sense and Imagination, and the disorders
of Appetite and Passion. We shall drop our Bodies with all the necessities and
weaknesses that hang about them; and shall arise into a state of pure and clear
light; into a state of purity and perfection; into the fellowship of Angels and
Saints, and be brought to see and enjoy God to all Eternity; And that too, with
all the fullness of comprehension, as well as of joy, that our Faculties in
their utmost enlargement and elevation are capable of.

These are the hopes that the Son of God has given us. I will not turn the
prospect, and give the black face of that dismal Eternity, which he has at the
same time denounced against the impenitent. The joy of this Day agrees not so
well with that, as withthe other more lovely and more animating prospect; which
we ought to carry ever in our Thoughts, that so we may lay hold on that eternal
life, which he who cannot lie has thus set before us.

These are the great ends for which God sent forth his Son: They are all worthy
of God, as they are the greatest that the Human Nature is capable of. But what
are we the better for all this, if we come not under the influences of it, if
we are only brought to have chaster thoughts of the Divinity, a decenter way of
Worship, with correcter Expressions, and more reasonable Opinions, but come not
under the vital Energy of it? If neither our hearts nor our lives are made the
better for it, we do very little consider or pursue the ends for which the Son
of God was sent into the World. Can we imagine that all this was designed for
no higher end, than to bring men under some forms, and to bind them to some
opinions? This amounts to little, and must needs give but a mean Idea of a
Religion, that with how much pomp soever it might be introduced, seems now to
have very little effect on the great numbers of those who profess it. This
alone disposes the World more to doubt of it, than all that profane minds can
draw from any part of it, as a prejudice against it: Then shall these be the
most effectually confuted, when the World shall see many instances of such true
Christians, over whose Thoughts and Actions this Religion bears sway. Human
Nature is too universally corrupted, to expect great numbers of such; but a
happy mixture of some of these among the Crowds of those who are called
Christians, but are the reproaches of their Profession, would give another air
of Authority to all that we can say in behalf of our Faith; If we could at the
same time appeal to such who are the living Apologies for Religion.

This ought to be the noble Ambition of those, whom God has eminently
distinguished from the rest of Mankind, and exalted above them: To be patterns
to others to follow, is an honor far beyond the Authority of Commanding them:
The Examples of those in great posts, will be both followed and observed in
that which is good, as well as in that which is bad. Happy they who live so as
to convince the World of the power that Religion has over them; and that give
such an Essay of the beauty as well as the purity of true Holiness, as disposes
the rest of Mankind to love it as well as to follow it.

Let us all then consider for what ends God sent his Son into the World; that
we may comply with them, and correspond to them. Let us fill our minds with
great thoughts of God, with just ones of our selves, and with the generous
Principles of Virtue, even in its most Heroical instances. Let us study the
Doctrine of Christ, that we may be enlightened by it, and have it in all its
branches distinctly before our thoughts, and in our memories; that so we may
ever know how to conduct our selves by it: And let the pattern of our Savior's
holy Life and Deportment, be ever as a Picture before us, that we may always
study and copy after it. Let the Meditations of what he suffered for us, and
for our Sins, be ever tender upon our minds; to humble us when we reflect on
our Sins; to give us deep horror for what is past, and great cantion for the
future: That so we may learn to value those Souls that were to be purchased at
such a price, as well as these Sins that were to be expiated by such a
Sacrifice. Let us not sink under the sense of our frailty, since we have great
assistances at hand, such as will strengthen us against all difficulties, and
will enable us to resist all temptations, and in the end to be more than
Conquerors. All this is offered to us through him, in whom, as the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily; so out of that fullness we shall all receive grace
proportioned to our occasions, to our necessities, and to those services in
which we are to be employed.

Finally, Let us with joy look beyond Life and Mortality, and all the fading
glories of this World: Those scenes that change so often, and so suddenly. Let
us look beyond Sense, and Matter, and all that train of Vanity and Vexation
that accompanies them, unto those Regions above, where dwells Light and Love,
and Life for evermore. Let us look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, whom God sent forth into the World, to seek and save lost Sinners, of
whom we ought to reckon our selves among the Chief. To whom with the Father and
the H. Ghost, be all Honor and Glory both now and evermore.

FINIS.

