PRINTED, By Her Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On the 29 th. of May, 1694.
BEING The Anniversary of KING CHARLES II. his Birth and Restoration.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

THE Bishop of SARUM'S Sermon Before THE QUEEN, ON The 29 th. of May, 1694.

A SERMON Preached Before the QUEEN.
PSALM CV. 5. Remember his Mavelous Works that he has done his Wonders, and
the Judgments of his Mouth.
THE chief design of the Anniversaries, as well as of the Rituals instituted by
Moses, was to oblige the Jewish Nation frequently to reflect upon the wonderful
Characters of Gods love and care of them, and the Signal Miracles wrought for
their Preservation and Deliverance. Upon the returns of those Days, and upon
the performance of many Rites, which had no clear signification in themselves,
it was natural for the younger, and the more ignorant among them, to ask what
the meaning of those things was? And then the Fathers and Masters of Families
made them long and particular Recitals of their Deliverance out of Egypt, on
the days of their Paschal Festivity, of their Station at Mount Sinai; and the
Promulgation of the Law, at their Pentecost; and of their march through the
Wilderness, on the Feast of Tabernacles; and with the Commemoration of those
Signal Transactions, they were to mix Reflections on their Religion and Laws,
their Obligations to adhere to the one, and to conform themselves to the other.

This was the provision that God made for keeping that People always in mind of
his Goodness to them, and of their Duty to him, besides the Weekly returns of
their Sabbaths, and the Monthly returns of their New Mons. Those Festivities
were of Seven or Eight days a piece: And all the People of the Land assembled
then at Jerusalem, and spent that time in Discoursing over those Memorable
Transactions.

The Rituals of their Worship at the Temple on these days, were likewise suited
to the ends of those Institutions, and several of David's Psalms were probably
intended, as Hymns to be Sung at those times for heightning the Solemnities of
the Feast, and for infusing those matters deeper, both into the Memories and
the Affections of the People. In the daily Worship of the Jews, they made use
only of a small number of the Psalms, the greatest part of them being composed
upon some of the eminent turns of David's own Life: But others relate to remoter
and more general Matters. This and the following Psalms, seem to have been
penned for the Passover: This carries on the Thread of Gods Providence
toward their Fathers, till they came out of Egypt: The next begins at the
Wonders wrought in the Red Sea, to which he adds a lively Recital of their
Ingratitude, Disobedience, and frequent Murmurings: The one Psalm tending as
much to humble that Nation, with a Representation of the Sins of their Fore
fathers, as the other exalted them with Reflections on Gods care and love to
their Ancestors, that had appeared in such Surprising-Instances. Both these
Psalms are introduced and ended with such elevating Expressions, that could not
but very much affect the Israelites, as often as they repeated them, or heard
them Sung in the Temple.

In the words of my Text, we have, in short, the chief Duty of those and all
other Festivities: They tend to raise our Minds toward God, to acknowledge and
adore his Providence, Remember his Mavelous Works that he has done* his
Wonders: Some have thought that one of these words belongs to the Miracles that
were wrought for that People, and that the other belongs to those Happy
Providence that had watched over them, and conducted them; but there may
perhaps be too much nicety in this, for as both the Words seem to relate to
Miracles, the History here related to being one continued Scene of Miracles, so
it is an ordinary piece of Beauty in Poetry, especially when it is designed for
Music, to express the same thing by different words; and therefore I shall not
strain these too nicely: But while they remembered the Miracles that God had
wrought, in order to the bringing them out of Egypt, they were not to forget
the Judgments of his Mouth or Face, that is, the Laws which were delivered on
Mount Sinai; first to Moses Face to Face, and to the whole Nation in that
Majestic appearance, which rested on the top of the Mountain, and in that
dreadful Promulgation, which did not only terrify the Israelites, but Moses
himself, who though more accustomed to Divine Manifestations did Fear and
Tremble exceedingly. Judgments being one of those words that are used
promiscuously with Laws, Statutes, and Commandments, as appears through the
whole 129 Psalm.

These words thus opened, do plainly lead us to consider the right end, and
true use of Anniversaries, which is to have the Impressions of Gods governing
the World infixed deeply upon us; by considering the more eminent steps of his
Providence, that from thence we may be brought under a deeper Sense of our
Obligations and Duty to him. The repassing frequently in our minds, the
Blessings that have descended either upon that Church and Nation to which we
belong, and in whose prosperity every individual has a share; or more
particularly upon our selves, is a Duty of Religion which is sounded upon the
common Principles of Gratitude and Justice. If the favors that we receive from
one another, ought to be frequently thought on by us, to beget in us due
acknowledgments, and to oblige us to suitable returns, then by a higher Parity
of Reason, we ought to raise our minds to a very frequent revolving of those
great and unvaluable Blessings, that have in so distinguished a manner, been now
for many years the happy Lot of this Church and Nation. An^ as every Man will
find in the Series of his own small concerns, much matter of Reflection and
Praise, when he considers that watchful Providence that has hovered over him,
that has by an indiscernable conduct, carried him by many Dangers, which he
seemed to be courting, and into which he had precipitated himself, if that good
Hand had not diverted the danger from him, or him from it: Often dangers being
past before we were so much as aware of them. The good things that we receive,
come to us often very unexpectedly, by unpromising means, and by a Conjuncture
that we had neither laid, nor so much as ever looked for: In short, every Man,
who does attentively and gratefully observe the Methods of Providence toward
him, will be soon able to furnish himself with much matter of Meditation here:
But I am now upon a more general Subject, of considering the Reflections that
we ought to make on those Blessings, that come down upon greater Bodies in
common; which Anniversaries are designed to perpetrate.

Here is an exercise of Religion which is beyond no man's compass of thought or
capacity. A little memory to lay things together, and a small measure of
judgment to observe the visible causes and consequences of them, will serve
turn here; some may descend to more particulars than others, and may reason
more exactly; but every man is capable of thought enough upon this head, to
beget in him a sense of the power and wisdom, the justice and goodness of God,
in the Government of the World. A man needs no great stock of knowledge, nor
much fineness of thought to go far here; and as this sort of exercise is within
every man's reach, so it has not in it that irksomness that hangs often upon
other duties, such as public or private worship, the sorrowings of repentance,
or earnestness in prayer: this goes more with the grain, there is no pain but a
very considerable pleasure in it. All History, especially what is secret and
instructing, is pleasant, but most of all are such Remarks from History as
represent the Church and Kingdom to which we belong as the special Subjects of
a favorable Providence. Partiality and self-love may carry us too far on this
head, and make us construe things too advantageously of our own side, and
stretch them too much; imagining perhaps, that to be the indication of a more
particular care, which was only the effect of a general Providence: but even
this bias upon us, to carry our Observations further then things will bear,
makes it out, that such Meditations are exercises that give much more pleasure
than pain. Sometimes I confess a black prospect and a gloomy face of things,
may be on the other hand as unreasonably aggravated by men of melancholy
tempers: yet even in that case, the remembering past deliverances gives livelier
and more promising hopes, so that this may be well reckoned the easiest and
pleasantest exercise of Religion, nor is there any one more useful: nothing
shows the folly of Man, and the wisdom of God more eminently, then when we set
them together: nothing shows the corruptions of the Human Nature, and mercies
of the Divine more conspicuously, nothing mitigates the sharpness of our
afflictions, nor tempers our mind in prosperity so much as our depending upon
Providence and ascribing the good things that happen to its influence, and not
claiming too great a share in them to our selves; nothing tempers the mind so
equally in every turn and sta^^ of life, as the Belief of God's go^erning the
World, and the turning our thoughts frequently to serious reflections upon it.

I will not enter here upon that deep, but mysterious, and often abused
Argument of Providence. I suppose you do all believe it; for indeed if you
believe it not, you believe nothing in Religion, to any purpose: without this,
our Prayers and Praises would come within a very small compass: our faith and
hope would be much narrower; and our love to God would be much blunted, if we
brought our selves once to think, that all things go in a chain, that there are
no special directions in the conduct of this World; but that Chance or Fate
dispense every thing; either with inexorable sullenness or in a tumultuary
levity; We must in consequence to such persuasions let our selves loose from
all the restraints and all the seriousness of Religion: but instead of these,
how ungrateful soever they may be to undisciplined minds, we should have
nothing to balance, to fix or to govern us, but should be tossed from wave to
wave. We should either have the black Cloud of hard fate hang over us, or be in
the constant fears of the next bad chance, which might in a minute throw down
all that former good ones had built up. A man that does not believe a
Providence has no support from a better prospect in his ill circumstances, nor
are his good ones secured to him by any hope of their continuance: whereas he
who believes that all things are directed by infinite wisdom and goodness,
receives the good things that fall to him with a particular tenderness; because
they seem to be the indications of the love of his heavenly Father toward him;
and he expects that they shall be continued to him, as long as it is fit that
he should hold them, that is, as long as they are real blessing to him; and he
desires to keep them no longer, and on no other terms: he does not sink under
calamities; he considers them as medicinal things sent to reform him or to try
his virtues, and to make some public Essay of the force and firmness of his
faith and patience.

To all this, that demonstrates how much a happier thing it is for Mankind to
be under the belief of Providence then otherwise, I will only add one
consideration that wise men have observed in many different Ages and Climates
of the World; and which they have thought no small confirmation of this great
Article of Religion; that at some times a strange Spirit seems to run through
whole Nations an^ Communities, which can hardly be either resisted or
repressed. A great Impetus and Fermentation works powerfully for a while, and
then goes off, without any visible cause that appears, either for its beginning
or for its ending. The same occasions that produced such a temper at one time,
will not have the same effect at another; an irresistible courage does
sometimes rise in great Bodies, as unaccountably as it falls. The servour with
which the Reformation began was not more extraordinary, than the flatness under
which it has fallen in this Age, and the extraordinary heat and giddiness that
spread it self over these Nations in the beginning of the wars, was not more
amazing than the calm conclusion in which they ended at last, which is the
blessing that we do now commemorate, and on which I do now enter.

But as the Jews did at the Paschal Solemnity carry back the recapitulation of
their deliverance out of Egypt, to God's first calling Abraham out of the Land
of the Caldeans, so that we may make fuller and clearer reflections on the
blessings of God to this Church and Nation, in the protection and prosperity of
the Royal Family, and that in the same view, we may observe those extraordinary
steps of Providence, that have appeared both toward the Crown and the
Reformation, and at once, both consider his Wonders, and the Judgments of his
Mouth, suffer me to begin my Recital of some more Signal Providence, as high
as the first beginnings of the Reformation.

Before that time, our Princes were but half Kings, a Foreign Power ruled over
the Consciences of their People: The Immunities of Places and Persons were
great checks to their Authority. The best part of the Soil, and much of the
Wealth and Treasure of the Kingdom, were at the disposal of a Body that claimed
to be Independent on the Crown; and were subject to a severe Master, at whose
Mercy our Kings Reigned, and governed their Subjects; and were frequently put
into great Convulsions, when they seemed to break in upon an Authority that
pretended to be Sacred, and on that score justified its being so tender of all
its Usurpations. A High-spirited King arose, who together with his People, were
resolved to bear no longer with that Diminution of the Security and Dignity of
this Imperial Crown: The Importance of that Word, as it is used in our Laws,
having no Relation to our Constitution at home, as some have vainly imagined,
it signifying only, that this was a complete Government within it self, having
no dependence on any Foreign Authority whatsoever. That King though often
threatened with Invasion and Rebellion, and though he had drawn upon himself the
Fury and Revenges of a vast multitude of Implacable Wasps, whom he had stirred
out of their Nests, yet escaped all dangers, and carried on his designs as far
as his Principles could go: He removed the Rubbish, and so made way for that
which he could not have promo^ed himself, being still deeply tinctured with his
first Impressions and Engagements. It was much for one Man, to do so much as he
did: He restored the Crown to a great part of its Luster, as well as its
Authority, and recovered that which was weakly parted with, in a course of many
dark and Superstitious Ages. Before him our Princes were to make their
Applications elsewhere, and to take their measures from thence, how their own
People were to be governed: but now the Government is entire, all is done at
home, no Vassalage is to be paid to a Tyranny, which was as cruel in its
Administration, as it was unjust in its pretentions; and had in a more
particular manner oppressed this Kingdom, Triumphing too Imperiously over the
easiness of our Princes, and the Superstition of their Subjects.

As the first part of that great Work was so far advanced by a King, whom
nature had fitted for a performance that required a Man of no ordinary Genius:
So a young Prince succeeded, who had every thing in him that was Great and
Promising, far beyond his years. In his Reign our Reformation was perfected,
but while some went into that good design upon True and Noble Principles, there
was a mixed multitude that came in for a share of the Spoil, and were a
Reproach to that which they seemed to promote: One bad Man in particular, who
at his Death professed that he had all the while adhered to his old
persuasions, even when he seemed to act most differently from them. The good
Men of that time, did look for a terrible Catastraphe: They did not think that
God would suffer his House to be built up by such defiled Hands, or bless such
a corrupted Scene, with the continuance of so good a King, the Josias of this
Church. All was quickly laid in the Dust, and turned not only into Rubbish but
to Ashes, and a severe storm was set over this Church; but when it was like to
have spread it self over the rest of Europe, and that the two Crowns being
under the Ministry of two Cardinals, both designing to extirpate the
Reformation, were coming into a Peace, that so they might be at leisure for
such bloody work at home; it pleased God to deliver this Church, to raise up
again that light which seemed almost quite extinguished, and to bless us with
that ever renowned Queen, who did not only restore and repair what had been
ruined at Home; but became the Support and Strength of all Abroad. They found
not only Sanctuary among us, but carried from us both Force and Treasure, to
preserve and secure themselves. Things looked often so cloudy, whilst the
greatest power, and the vastest Treasure of Europe, was engaged with an
unrelenting fury on the other side, that for about twenty years together, the
wise Ministry of that Reign were every year looking for a fatal Revolution: At
last God by blasting all their designs, both open and secret, and chiefly the
last and greatest Attempt of the boasted Invincible Armada, did secure that
Queen, and Establish this Church; and by her Protection and Influence, several
Foreign Churches were also Formed and Established, and the Correspondence we
maintained with those beyond Sea, made us the safer, and the more united at
home. The Crown was fortified with Alliances and Dependencies abroad, the
Nation was spread by many Colonies into remote parts. Trade flourished, and
Wealth from all parts flowed in upon us: The blessings both of Heaven and Earth
meeting together in that Celebrated Reign. What was wanting to Complete the
Happiness of this Nation was brought about in the next, in which the whole
Island was brought under the same Head: And the Northern parts which had been
formerly Scenes of War and Desolation, uncultivated and ill peopled, became the
quiet Seats of Tillage and Industry; so that Nature, that seemed to have laid
this Island, and designed it for one Monarchy, was now answered by this happy
Union. And the many Disorders in Ireland, forced the Reduction of that Kingdom
to Civility and Industry, to the same Laws and Language, and for the greater
part to be of the same Stock and Race with our selves.

These are some of the more signal felicities, which have happened to us, and
to the Crown that protects and governs us, since that happy light first visited
us: And the Land had rest fourscore years: Judges 3. 30.
The longest period that we find marked in the old Testament, of the quiet of
the people of Israel. Nor can we easily assign the like period in any History,
of such an entire and long continued peace: for in all that time, tho we had
Wars abroad, they never broke in upon us, to disturb us at home. The short and
soon suppressed Insurrection of some Earls in the North, scarce being to be
reckoned as an interruption of our quiet. But while God protected us from our
Enemies, yet when we had corrupted our ways before him, he delivered us up to
our selves, to be plagued by our own Follies, and they proved severe
punishments. I will not open that black and dismal Scene: I will not suffer any
thing that looks like anger or satyr, to darken the cheerfulness of this day,
or to sour those thoughts that should be now softened to joy; but a joy in God,
decent and modest, and suitable to the occasion.

I will not repeat History or Gazettes: I will only lay before you some
reflections that are not the less important, because how obvious soever they
may be, yet they are not so generally commented on, as they well deserve to be.
Our Confusion lasted long, and the Scenes shifted so often, that at last men
found no known Constitution, no Precedent either at home or abroad, that could
fit us: so that Assemblies of a new nature were formed, in which men gave scope
to their imagination; to invent a Scheme of Government that could secure us:
Bu^ all in vain, the Ancient Landmarks stood still in all men's eyes, and
thoughts, and the Nation grew so weary of its tossings, and so wise after so
many practices, that had been made upon it, as to return to its first Basis,
and to its immemoral Constitution: The Confusions of that time will still be
preserved in our History, as the best and most demonstrative Arguments, to
recommend our Constitution to us: since we see that nothing could bring the
Nation to Quiet and Order, till it settled again on its old Foundation, and
returned to that frame under which it had subsisted, and flourished for many
Ages; and without which it could not be supported a few years, even tho a
resolute and victorious Army, that was deeply engaged both by Principle and
Interest, endeavored to fix it upon another bottom. The Tide turned, and how
strangely soever men's Passions and Humors wrought against it, yet nothing
could withstand the united desires of the whole Nation, that called aloud for
bringing back the King. This no doubt has been, and will still be a powerful
Curb to restrain the violence of some men's tempers; and to make all to
consider, how hard it is even by Force and with Success, to work a Nation off
from its ancient and known Government, to new Models and airey Speculations.

The great and free range that Enthusiam then had, the multiplicity as well as
the extravagance of the Sects that sprung up among us, in those day of
Confusion and Violence, the wild Notions as well as the ungoverned practices of
the several parties, their mutual animosities, and the gross hypocrisy that
run too visibly through the greatest numbers of them, did contribute not a
little to bring the Nation back to love Decency and Order in sacred matters:
and many, who perhaps formerly disliked our public Establishment, having
exceptions that seemed plausible to some particulars in it, came afterward to
see how mischievous it was to bring men once off from rule and order, and to
give such scope to humor and fancy: and so, they grew more in love with
settled methods, and have adhered more firmly to them: and thus we may conclude
that the Essay, which was made then to new model both Church and State, how
fatal soever it proved to those who were run down in the struggle, yet has
since that time, had this good effect, to establish both, upon a firmer
foundation in the hearts of the people.

Two things were also very eminently remarkable in the whole course of our
disorders, the one was, that the very Party which of all others was the most
concerned to new cast the Nation into the old model, and to set up that
Government, on how bad a title soever, which was that only, that our Law could
acknowledge, since they of all others needed a pardon most to cover them from
Sacred and Royal Blood, besides many other lesser crimes, which lay upon them,
they had also divided among themselves the spoils of the Crown, and of the
Church, to which they could have no title founded in Law, without an authority,
with which our Constitution did agree: for so sacred is our frame, that the
very shadow of it, has a great operation in Law, and had they agreed to have
set up their Idol King, this would have gone so far* both to have indemnified
their persons, and to have secured their Estates, that even the happy
Restoration that followed, could not easily have set that matter right: both
the Crown and the Church had been put to wrestle with great difficulties; all
which was happily prevented, by the unmanagable stiffness of those, who of all
others were the most concerned to have promoted it: and thus without any
considerable difficulty, every thing did easily fall into its old Channel
again: and when it was too late, those who proved the Instruments of their own
Ruin, saw their Errer: but could not then rectify it: they expiated their
crimes with their own Blood, and so the Land was purged: and what had been
unjustly acquired, was most justly restored back to the true owners again.

But the most eminent character of God's merciful Providence toward these
Nations, in the blessing of this day, was the manner of it. It made our
miseries both the less sensible to us, and the less out of our power to
overcome, that Strangers got no footing among us, all the while: and that the
depressed side, was not cast on demanding assistance from those who might in
conclusion have proved cruel friends, and the worst of Enemies. All Europe was
so deeply engaged in a long and cruel War, that it was not in the power of our
neighbors to take advantage either from the feebleness that our distractions
threw us into, or from the necessities of the weak and unfortunate side, and so
to come in for a share of the spoil, which is commonly all, that Auxiliary
forces design on such occasions. While the Nation was left to its self, and all
was in its own hands, as well as its Substance and Stock was kept entire, it
was in their own power to return again to their old Foundations. The time in
which this happned, was also Critical, for it was when our destemper was at its
height: when an Enthusiastical and Cruel Spirit was in the Ascendant, which
probably if it had not then been effectually mastred, had burst forth into very
dismal extravagancies. Enthusiasm armed with power, being like a Sword in a mad
man's hand: but as our distractions at home were in their heighest Fermentation,
the state of affairs abroad changed so considerably, by the Peace that was made
between the two Crowns, that then it was highly probable, Foreigners might have
thrust themselves into our affairs: and that both out of Political and
Religious considerations. It appears to have been the settled opinion of a
great Cardinal, and a Chief Minister at that time, that when the War was quite
ended, both Crowns should have concurred to the reestabliment of the Royal
family; tho from those remnants of his, it also appears that he neither meant
well to the King nor to the Nation in it. However it is most likely, that upon
the lessening of the Forces on both sides, that followed upon the Peace, the
late King might have received such a powerful assistance of men of fortune,
that he might have invaded, or rather come into his Kingdom with a foreign
force. If he had succeeded in it, as he would have been under great obligations
to those who had assisted him, so he would have been much in their power, and
might have come under the odious name of a Conqueror, which might have rendered
his Government both severe and hateful; and must have ended, either in the
total subversion of Public Liberty, or in new and dreadful Convulsions, which
must have endangered the whole, and exposed us to be a prey to some violent
Invader.

It was therefore no inconsiderable part of the deliverance of this day, that
it was brought about in such a manner, that the King owed it entirely under
God, to the duty and affections of his own Subjects, without any others
pretending to have the least share in it; so that the whole frame of our
Constitution reverted to its former state, and nothing was put, or left out of
joint. The late King had no reason to depart from our Constitution with
relation to his People; because they had so cheerfully returned to it with
relation to the Crown: and of all others he had the least ob^igation on him, to
his next neighbors, tho they were likewise his most immediate Kimed; and that
the chief occasion of our miseries, came from Councils that were inspired from
thence.

As this blessing was procured to us immediately, by a management at home, so
the calm and the unanimity, with which it was brought about, had such a stamp
of the goodness and mercy of Providence in it, as is perhaps without example in
History. Those who know the transactions of that time, cannot reflect without
amazement, on the unaccountable change of the dispositions of the Nation
toward the Royal Family, that happened from the year 1640, to the year 1660.
And all this was brought about by a turn over the whole Nation. Arguments or
Speculations seldom have such effects. If the greater part had brought in the
less, the event had been still great and amazing, but it was all over wonderful
when the whole changed so entirely, that the few who were engaged by their
Interests and Fears, as well as by their Notions, to oppose it, were brought
under such a consternation, broken into such divisions, which the Ambition and
Heat of some, and the the Mistrust and Jealousy of others had sowed among
them, that none of those men of might found their hands, but seemed to be cast
into a dead sleep. So great an Army, so long trained, so well Disciplined, and
so often Victorious, might have raised such an opposition as could not have been
easily resisted, if at all. It had appeared in the year 1648, what feeble
things popular and tumultuary Insurrections were, when in almost all the
quarters of England the people rise and desired to be rid of the Army, to have
that Blessed King, set at Liberty, and on his Throne, and to have the Nation
again settled: but so little Concert and Union, so little Method and Order,
appeared in all those motions, that they only served to promote that which they
were afraid of: the Army was flushed with Victory and Success, and carried
every thing before it: Which brought on the black and fatal 30 th of January.
But now when the time was come, in which God was to restrain their force, as he
does the Seas, hither shall thou come and no further: here shall thy proud
waves he stopped: when God arose to judgment, the earth feared and was still.

It appeared by the violence in which a small number of them studied to
overturn this happy change after it was wrought, what greater numbers of them,
if united might have done to have hindered it. So that the giddiness with which
they were struck, and their want of Council and Spirit, upon so great an
occasion, was a greater indication of an overruling Providence, than if they
with the rest of the Nation, had really changed their minds, and gone into the
Stream. They both meant to oppose it, and might have done it to a great degree;
had not God taken from them at once, both Head, Heart, and Hand: and thus when
we observe all the Methods of the Providence of God, in bringing this about, we
must adore the Wisdom, but most particularly the Goodness of them, both toward
the Royal Family and toward the whole Nation.

From what confusions were we then freed, and what a Scene of Blood and Misery
had this Nation probably been, if the turn had not been so entire as it was:
And how little soever, many may either apprehend or value the blessing of a
legal Government, tempered between the extremes of lawless Tyranny on the one
hand, and of wild and Enthusiastical Frensies, on the other, yet they must
conclude that in this respect we were restored at that time to a Government
that is much the happiest of any now in the World, and is so particularly
fitted for us, that nothing else could make us either safe or happy.

But all the blessings of that time did not terminate in that day, or in the
Restoration of the Royal Family at that time: what was done then, made way to
what we enjoy at present: Without that we could not have expected the happiness
we do now live under, and look for. I will not reflect on the Gloom that has
come between: the unhappy things which have come since: but whatever we have
been, or whatever we were like to have been, we do now see a better prospect,
not only the Crowns flourshing at home, but the Laws and Liberties of the
people happily revived; not only our Religion secured, and our Church
protected, but that from us other Churches are in hope to receive Protection
and Strength, and the rest of Europe a just balance, and a quiet security:
that now England is not only recovering the interest and share that naturally
belongs to her, but is at present the great Instrument of giving all Europe a
happy escape from a vast danger, that had threatened it all over.

In this Audience, I shall not enlarge further on this Subject. I need say the
less, because we do all feel and hope so much from it. The Subject indeed
speaks so much, that I may be well allowed to say the less. This is the
completing of that happy change, which is now to be reflected on, with so much
the more joy, because we have reason to hope that we are near, very near, all
that a Nation can wish for, to make it both Great and Happy, Prosperous and
Safe.

But as we have thus let our thoughts run out upon the wonderful works, that
God on this day did for us, so we ought not to forget the Judgments of his
mouth, his Laws and his Gospel: that are the much greatest of all his blessing,
that render all other things to be blessings indeed to us; they being chiefly
intended to secure this to us, and to engage us to improve it to the best
purposes. For as the Psalm ends, all Gods mercies to the Jewish Nation, were
given them, on this design that they might observe his Statutes, and keep his
Laws; so what answers to this among us, but is indeed a great many sizes beyond
it, is the purity of the Christian Religion, which we have now enjoyed above an
Age and a half, with advantages beyond any Church under Heaven, and in a course
of temporal blessings beyond any that we ever knew since we were a people:
England is more increased at home and abroad, in the Soil cultivated at home,
and in the Colonies sent abroad, in the numbers of the people, in Force and
Shipping, in Wealth at home, and Trade all the World over, and in the resinings
of solid Learning, or useful Arts, in this period, since the Reformation, than
for ought appears to us, it ever was before, since we were a Nation: and it now
possesses all this under a Civil Government, that is the wonder as well as the
envy of the World: for while other Nations have either foolishly thrown up and
abandoned their Liberties, or have been forcibly deprived of them, and see no
remedy; we have ours not only preserved, but secured by fresh explanations and
provisions: All this put together ought to make us consider the great value of
that unspeakable blessing which God is so signally recommending to us, by those
happy Providence which accompany it.

If we could examine it in it self, without those blessed consequences, we
should see cause enough to value it highly, or if we could compare our own
condition with either the Heathen Nations that are utter strangers to it, or
those degenerated Christians that have corrupted it, so as to be but little
better than Heathenism it self, then we might be able to form a truer judgment
of that happiness, which we enjoy in it. I confess, as the far greater part use
it, there is no great account to be had of it: if it is only a set of Notions,
how true soever they may be, and a circle of some forms, in which we go always
round, without making any progress, then tho our Religion may be less
burdensome and imposing than some others, yet after all, it can be no great
matter it self: but if this Gospel, and these Laws of God are means intended by
him for the greatest ends, fitted for them, and capable of procuring them to
us, if they by their own efficiency are capable of making us not only happy in
another world, but even happy in this life, happy in our selves, and happy in
another, if they tend to make a Nation great in general, and every individual
of it, both great in himself, and great in his usefulness to mankind, then we
may justly Glory in our Religion and in those judgments of his mouth, with
which God has blessed us: and whatever advantages the Jews had reason to
reckon themselves under, by their Laws, beyond the Nations round about them,
these will appear to belong much more eminently to us, when we compare our
selves with the corrupted state of Christianity, that prevails in so many
Kingdoms not far from us.

The Jews were by the Laws of Moses, delivered from all that Idolatry and
Magic, those superstitious and barbarous rites that had overrun Heathenism:
from the cruelty of offering up humane Sacrifices, nay, and their own Children
too, to those false Gods, whom they served: They worshipped the host of Heaven,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, high Hills, great Stones, ancient Oaks, the founders of
Nations, and inventers of Arts: they had Images and Statues to resemble the
Divinity, and believed, that a company of extravagant rites, had in them, by
the Charms they used with them, strange and sublime virtues. Those Deities they
appeased with a variety of oblations, which they believed were acceptable to
them: these were managed with much Pomp, and at a vast charge: an exactness in
them they thought pleased the Deity, as much as a failure therein provoked it:
and they had a variety of Gods for several Countries and Professions; a special
Deity belonged to every occasion: How happy then might the Jews reckon
themselves, who saw through all those vain imaginations, and knew that there
was but one only God, the supreme Lord of all things; a pure mind, and
therefore capable of no bodily representation, and so sublime a Being, that
what Sacrifices* and Rites soever he appointed, yet admitted of no humane
Sacrifices, and had limited his appointments within such bounds, that all
Superstition was cut off. Now if these Characters of the Heathenish and Jewish
Religion are applied to the present State of Christendom, it will appear that
we have the same reason to value our Religion, that the Jews had to value
theirs.

There is a Communion of Christians, whose Churches are full of Corporeal
representations, of that which they adore: those Statues have all such
Ornaments about them, and such adorations paid them as the Heathens were
accustomed to: Many created beings have all the acts of worship, such as
Prayers, Praises, Incence burnt, bodily adoration, Churches built, Sacraments
used for their honor; and even that Sacrament which is no less than the
immediate object of the highest degrees of worship among them. Thus if ever
there was, or if there can be Idolatry in the world, they are guilty of it. All
those pretended virtues, that by their benedictions they give out, that they
put on holy water, Agnus Dei's, with all the train of those consecrated things,
with which they entertain the credulity and the misled Devotion of their
People, is either Imposture, or Charm. In the cost of these, and of the other
invented parts of worship, particularly their Processions, another rite of
heathenism, there is no measure put to the Pomp and Magnificence with which
they study to adorn them. It is true they have no humane Sacrifices in the
strictest sense: but no Religion ever taught the shedding so much human blood,
nor made that so main a piece of Religion, of such merit, so certainly and so
highly rewarded, as they have done: of which both the last and the present Age
have received too sensible and too demonstrative a conviction. What reason then
have we to value our Religion, which has so entirely freed us from such
excesses and corruptions: since Idolatry does vitiate Religion in its Source
and Fountain: it debasing the Idea of God, and bringing us to fancy him to be
something like our selves. We own him to be a pure mind; that can be
represented by no bodily figure: We worship him in a sp^ritual manner: in acts
and forms suitable to his nature. We worship him only, and pay no adorations to
Angels or Saints: nor have we invented any parts of worship, besides those of
his own appointment: We teach and practice Charity to Enemies* even to those
who hate us, and who we kn^w would persecute us, if it were in their power.

Another Consideration, on which the Jews had just reason to value their
Religion, was because it was fixed and stated, in the Books of Moses: no
additions could b^ made to it, unless God had sent a Prophet on a special
Commission, with particular Credentials: their Priests had not, as the
Heathens, Books in their hands, that were kept as secrets, which the people
might not see, and which they might vouch for any additions, with which they
loaded them, as often as it served their ends. A written Law which every man
might read as well as the Priests, was a vast security against fraud and
Impositions. Upon the same account, we have just reason to set a high value
upon our Religion, since it can be neither more nor less than what is contained
in the Scriptures; we have no Article in reserve, for which, as often as we
please Tradition may be vouched: We have no infallible tribunal, to coin new
Articles, or impose new Doctrines upon the pain of Anathemas and Extirpation:
How great that Tyranny is and how unbounded is easily enough imagined; when a
man must believe a blank, and the Church has the filling up that blank: and
when the more implicit and blind men are in their Faith, they are thereby
esteemed the truer Sons of the Church, which will have none enquire into what
she dictates. nor dispute her commands: Whereas in ours, the Officers of the
Church are only considered as men appointed to minister in holy things, to
serve and instruct the people, in the things of God, without being the Masters
of their Faith and Conscience, we pretend to no other authority: and leave to
the people entire, all the liberties of humane nature.

A 3 d. Consideration that did very particularly recommend the Mosaical
Religion to the Jews, was its purity: the justice and probity, the freedom
from luxury, simplicity of Life, the restraint of appetite and passion, and the
modesty of deportment, that it enjoined: these were great and noble Characters
of a Religion that came from God, and that tended to make men in a good degree
to resemble him: for tho that was an imperfect Religion, yet the Law of the
Lord was pure, and his commandments were clean. But all this in a much higher
degree concurs to recommend to us, the Religion that by the blessing of God is
received among us. We own the Gospel in the same simplicity in which Christ and
his Apostles delivered it: we teach that men must deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live soberly, righteously and godly, and that without holiness no
man shall see the Lord: we offer no other conditions, or means of salvation,
but Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience: we oblige all persons to the highest
degrees of purity, and warn them to avoid every sin, the wages of which is
death. In a word, the main part of our Doctrine is, to convince the world of
the indispensible necessity of an universal holiness, which must first possess
a man's thoughts, and rectify his intentions, and then run through his whole
life, and govern all his Actions. We flatter no men with hopes of the
after-game of a Purgatory, and a redemption out of it by Masses: we make no sin
to be slight or venial, nor do we teach that any duty is only a council of
perfection; much less do we flatter Pride and Vanity by the Doctrines of
Supererrogation: we do not pretend to supersede the obligation of loving God,
or of being truly contrite for sin; nor do we teach any methods of supplying
imperfect acts of Contrition, by the Sacraments, as if acts of sorrow, which of
their own nature could not be accepted of God, could be supplied by the
Sacraments, and so become the means of justifying those who are still in the
habits of sin: we pretend to no other power of Absolution but the absolving
from the censures of the Church, and the declaring men absolved according to
the truth of their Repentance.

Thus it appears, that we have much juster grounds for setting a high value on
the purity of the Christian Religion, among us, than the Jews had for esteeming
their Law far beyond the Idolatry of the Heathens. If these are the most
valuable things, as indeed what can be valuable, if they are not, then how
particular a reason have we, to rejoice in them, now when we have so fair and
likely a prospect of their being settled and secured to us, of their being no
more undermined among us, by the practices of disguised Enemies, by the
engaging us into animosities, and by subdividing us into parties, and so
weakening us by our own follies, that we may become an easier prey to our
Enemies: and while all these things grow to be safer and firmer at home, by the
Protection that the Crown gives to those who profess the same faith abroad.
While we at home, are feeling the tender hand of such a nursing Father and such
a nursing Mother, and while those abroad, are not hoping to feel, but actually
feeling, the happy effects of their Favor and Protection; then it is that we
may with peculiar accents of joy, commemorate the blessing of this day.

When our almost withered Roses begin to look fresh, and to open again, while
the Lillies grow pale and fade: When England begins not only to recover the
figure it once made, but puts on a new luster, and has an interest in Europe
beyond what former times can boast; while our Church checks the pride of her,
that has so long made the earth drunk with her Sorceries, and while she
animates those other bodies that were either in their last Agonies, or very
near them; then we have just reason, according to the words with which this
Psalm begins, to say, O give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make
known his deeds among the people: sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him, talk ye
of all his wondrous works: Glory ye in his holy name, and let the heart of them
rejoice that seek the Lord.

Let us conclude all with our most earnest praises to God for those who do now
fill the Throne, with so peculiar a grace. May they live and prosper: ^ay their
Reign be long and Glorious, that we may still have more and more reason to
remember the mavelous works that God has wrought for us, by their means: his
wonders in them, and the judgments of his mouth, secured to us by them. May we
live so worthy of them, that we may long, long enjoy them, with all the
accessions of Plenty and Peace. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Published by the Lord Bishop of Sarum.

A Discourse of the Pastoral Care. 8o.

A Lent Sermon before the Queen, March 11th 1693/4;. On 1 Cor. 1. 16.

Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum. I. Concerning
the Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death of Christ. III.
The Infallibility and authority of the Church. IV. Obligations to continue in
the Communion of the Church. 8o.


