The Bishop of SARUM's SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Right Honorable the Lady
BROOK.

Imprimatur,

Feb. 21. 1690/1, Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

A SERMON PREACHED at the FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANNE, Lady-Dowager
BROOK.

Who was Buried at Breamor, the 19th day of February, 1690/1.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

PROVE. xxxi. 30, 31. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a Woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the
gates.


THE General Lamentations which the sad Occasion of this present Assembly has
raised over this whole Country, as in a common Calamity, where every one bears
a share, because so many do feel it, have so far prevented me in all that can
be said to the praise of her, whose Remains are now to be laid up in the belief
of the Resurrection of the Just, at which time they are to be restored to her
again, that I am very sensible it is not necessary to say any thing concerning
her, for the raising among you the esteem that is due to her Memory, which is,
and must be long very dear to you all. But as there is some disadvantage in
speaking what is proper on this Subject, before those who knew her well, and so
will think that I am as reserved in commending her, as she her self was in
hiding her own Worth, and in concealing those Works which do now praise her;
yet on the other hand I speak with the more assurance, because it is in the
Country where she spent so many of her years. I should be afraid to say all
that I have resolved on, if it were in the Audience of such as had been
Strangers to the Course of her Life: It is a nice and tender thing to praise,
especially in this Vicious and corrupted Age, in which so many are concerned to
keep themselves in Countenance, and to decry a Virtue that must needs make
their Vices show more foul and odious; and who cannot bear what is due to
others, because they know that it does not belong to themselves. And it must be
confessed, that excessive Commendations on these Occasions, in compliance with
Custom, and the tenderness that seems then decent, where Flattery is thought
more excusable, because the Person commended does not receive it; these, I say,
have given but too much reason to disregard what is said in discourses of this
kind, in which it passes for a sort of rudeness not to exceed, and for an
unkindness to the Friends of the Dead, not to praise out of measure. But I am
less in pain to enlarge upon this Subject, when I have so many Vouchers before
me, and when I am to speak of things that have been so long the Observation of
all these parts. I will use as little art in Speaking, as She did in Living;
and will study to dress up a Memorial for her, with such a decent Simplicity,
as she used in the dressing her Person, which as she did in haste, so I will be
as short as may be. I will for some time interrupt my speaking of her, and
consider the Text I have read to you, that so I may return with the more
advantage to prosecute what I have now begun.

This Chapter is a Poetical Composure; it is an Accrostick in the Hebrew,
according to the Custom of that time, for the help of the Memory. Every Verse,
from the 10th to the end, begins with a new Letter of the Alphabet in their
order. It is to little purpose to examine, whether the King, called Lemuel, to
whom it is addressed, be Solomon under a disguised designation, or not; and
whether it was a Poem made by his Mother, directing him how to choose a Wife,
and giving him a full Character of the Excellencies of a good one, suitable to
the Simplicy of those Ages and Places, in which Women of the highest Rank, and
even Queens themselves, managed their own Domestic Concerns; or if it was a
Composition of Solomon's, setting forth, with many enlargements of Poesy, the
Advices that his Mother had given him; or if he only brings in the Person of
his Mother, to make his Poetry look more Natural. It is to very little purpose
to enquire into all this, and not possible to determine any part of it: Certain
it is, that we have here a very noble and Elegant Description, of a faithful
and affectionate, a discreet and an industrious Wife; who as she applied her
chief care to the concerns of her Husband and Children, so neglected not any of
her Houshold-Affairs; she rise early, and sat up late; wrought with her own
hands, and looked to the ways of her Household; she took care that her whole
Family should be well employed; she was an honor as well as a help to her
Husband: Her whole behavior was both prudent and obliging; She opened her
mouth with wisdom, not to evil speaking, nor idle talking; and in her tongue
was the law of kindness; an exact, but engaging decency.

All this is concluded with a short song, in which her Husband and Children
should celebrate her Praises, which, as it is probable, was to be sung among
them by turns, according to the way of the Eastern Music: The first might
begin, Many daughters have done virtuously; and to this another might answer,
But thou excellest them all: Then one might sing, Favor is deceitful; another,
Beauty is vain: And both together, But the woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised. Then one might sing, Give her, and another answer, of the
fruit of her hands; and then both together, and Let her own works praise her in
the gates. There is a plain Intimation given of the custom that was among the
Jews to sing this Song by turns, on two of their great Solemnities in the Misna
Treat of ^^sts, c. 4. n. ^.
.

By Favor, is to be meant all that is insinuating in a Woman's Humor, Manner,
and Conversation, by which a Husband may be charmed: This is often deceitful,
and under it a great deal of Disloyalty and Treachery is both hid and managed;
these Arts being so many Practices upon the easy Husband, to deceive and blind
him, to impose any thing upon him, and to obtain every thing from him.
Therefore, tho a lively Air, a graceful Behavior, a soft Manner, a
Pleasantness of Humor, and an entertaining Conversation, are very valuable
Qualities, and have Powerful Charms in them, yet all this may be deceitful;
much baseness and falsehood may be under them; so that this singly cannot make a
good Character.

Beauty is vain; this which strikes the eye, as the other does the Imagination,
is yet slighter, it is often false, especially in the East where beauty is as
often the work of Art, as of Nature, and it had been well if that practice had
remained in the East still, and had not come into these Western parts; but
suppose the Beauty to be both true and exact, it is vain in many other
respects: It does not always lodge a pure Soul, which does often contract the
more deformity, because it dwells within a beautiful Figure, that but too often
feeds pride, and is set off with Vanity, which both draws admiration and
delights in it: it does insensibly dissolve the mind into voluptuousness, and
in the end entangle it into many snares, and expose it to much Sin. It is Vain
in another respect, it is subject to many accidents which may blast it, and if
it escapes these, yet it must yield at last and fade with Age, if by the
precipitated wastings of Nature and other disorders, it does not fall sooner.
These words run thus in the Hebrew, Favor, Falsehood, Beauty, Vanity, and
perhaps every one of these was to be sung by turns as the answer to the other.

These are the two things by which that Sex is chiefly recommended to those who
make slight and hasty Judgments, and that do often perceive their error when it
is too late to correct it: but that upon which a true one can only be formed,
lies in the words that follow -- But the woman that fears the Lord, she shall
be praised. The fear of a discovery, and of shame; the fear of a Husband, and
the apprehensions of his displeasure, are but feeble principles: they may
restrain one at some times, and from some temptations, but it is only the fear
of God that subdues the heart, that shoots its influence into the secretest
springs of our actions, that overcomes the strongest inclinations, even in
their first and invisible motions: this sets a Law, not only to one's actions,
but to his very thoughts: The conduct of the outward part of life, when that is
contradicted by the wishes and desires which are allowed a free range within,
is but a constraint, and the acting of a part which is not natural; and nothing
that is an affected force upon Nature can be either easy or lasting. Nature
will be always at some time or other too hard for Rule and Form. And even a
Firm Resolution will soon grow heavy and will at last be forgotten, if there
are not principles formed within, that give it a root, and afford it
nourishment: therefore Virtue can have no settled basis nor foundation, unless
its bottom be the true fear of God, a secret sense of a supreme and perfect
mind, that sees all we do, and that will judge us at last according to all that
we have done. When this is lodged in the most retired corners of our Hearts;
when the sense of it returns often upon us, to acquit or to condemn us; when we
measure our selves and all our actions by our conformity to this Eternal Being;
when we reckon it our supreme and only happiness, to become like unto it, and
accepted of it; when no exercises become more delighting to us, than our
Meditating of its Perfections, and of all the discoveries that it has made of
it self; and when upon these Contemplations the mind grows to love and adore
that Being, and to prostrate it self often before it, and dedicate it self
entirely to serve and please it in all things, Then Virtue has a true fastening
within, to which it cleaves, and which will support and strengthen it: And
indeed Virtue, and the Fear of God do so mutually maintain one another, that
these who are equally Enemies to both, know that the rooting out the one, will
soon draw the other after it. The Profane Tribe of Libertines does chiefly
hate Religion, because Virtue does ever accompany it; they find it often in
their way, and wish there were as little of it in the World, as they feel in
their own Breasts: but it were too barefaced a thing to endeavor to strike
both at Virtue and Religion at once. There is a sound in Virtue that carries
Majesty with it, and commands the esteem of the whole World, so such as hate
it, know that they must take care not to discover that too soon, lest they
should draw a general Indignation upon themselves. But Religion they think may
be more safely struck at; the diversities about it, the scandals given by many
that have pretended to it, the Invisible objects to which it relates; the
distance we live at from the Ages in which the Miracles that confirmed it were
wrought, and the many Impostures that have been put upon weak and credulous
Multitudes, do all afford some plausible appearances, which set off with
Boldness and Scorn, and served up with Mirth and Gaiety, have been fatally
successful in Poisoning weak minds that cannot lay many things together, and
cannot distinguish between Truth and the Varnish of it. But while these do thus
undermine Religion, they seem to be mightily in love with Virtue, and pretend
that it has had great force on Minds upon whom Religion had none at all; and
that it may maintain its power very well in the Souls of Men, tho they were not
overawed with secret Terrors. Whereas in truth, they only hate Religion for
the sake of that Virtue, which it commands and secures: and they could well
look on, and let Religion bear full sway in the world, if it consisted only in
some dark Speculations, and outward Performances, and contented with these,
left men at liberty to do what they pleased; they know, and all the World has
observed it too often, That as soon as the Impressions of Religion are defaced,
the strength of Virtue is gone: for why should Men restrain their Inclinations,
bridle their Passions, and deny themselves any pleasures or advantages, if
there is no sovereign Mind over us, to whom Obedience is due, who will reckon
with us, and reward or punish us eternally according as we lead that course of
life here, which he has assigned us as our passage to Eternity. If there is
nothing in Virtue, but decency, interest, or humor, as these are all weak
Principles, not able to bear much weight on them; so when both pleasure and
advantage are in the other Scale, they will certainly downweigh them. Hence it
is, that all those who go off from a Religious Education, and from the
Principles and Practices that must support it, do soon forsake all the
strictness of Virtue. The fear of God is that Principle alone that can sanctify
and perfect our Nature; the having our Minds full of high and sublime thoughts
of that Supreme Being that made and governs the World, together with a just
sense of his Authority over us, of our obligation to obey all his Laws, and to
conform our very thoughts to his Nature and Will, and the framing our whole
Lives, and the laying out our whole time, so as we may be ever accepted of by
him, is the just and true notion of the fear of God. If any imagine that it
consists only in the having some terrible thoughts of God, and of Sin, the
performing some duties to God as a homage that will please him, and the looking
over past Sins with some sad thoughts; and when that is done, if men return to
them, and continue in them, and are only now and then a little troubled when
they reflect on them, which is all the Notion that the greatest part, even of
those who pass in the World for Religious, entertain of it, it is no wonder
that great advantages are taken to decry Religion it self, when this is
believed to be all the effect and power that it has. But the true fear of God
is a much deeper Principle, and has a more noble effect on all the powers of
the Soul; it charms as well as reforms them, and elevates as well as it
fortifies them; it follows a man to his Retirements, and there if at any time
it humbles him, it does quickly raise him up again: it gives him solid joys,
when he perceives that he carries God's Image upon him, and is reconciled to
him; it follows him through the whole business, and even through the diversions
of Life: It governs his Mind, and guides his Actions, and though the sound of
the Word Fear carries terror in it, yet how severe soever the operation of it
must be upon some occasions, it generally gives it such a noble sense of the
goodness, as well as of the greatness of God, that it becomes a Fear of
Reverence tempered with Love, and not a Dread full of Guilt that strikes
Horror. Those good Minds that give up themselves to the Conduct of this Fear,
and come under its Discipline, feel both a Strength in it to govern them, and a
Calm in it to settle them. If they do truly fear God, it exalts them above all
base and dispiriting Fears; So that they fear nothing else; all the Accidents
of Life and Death it self can give no Terror, where this has once had its true
Effect. For a Man that fears God, and feels himself to be so governed by this
Fear, that he has all Reason to conclude he is in his Favor, and under his
Protection, is thereby raised far above all other Depressions; nothing can
disturb him but his apprehensions of having offended that Goodness which he
fears: and sometimes a great Tenderness of Mind, joined with a deep Sense of
Duty, will raise sad Reflections in those who have the justest Cause of
rejoicing always in God. But such cloudy Thoughts, though they may at sometimes
disquiet them a little, yet have a good Effect on them; they oblige them to
great watchfulness, and beget in them a particular application to their Duty:
and that very Anxiety which was the Effect of their Tenderness, and that raised
some melancholy distrust in them concerning their own Condition, shows plainly
how deep a Root this Fear has in them, when such apprehensions prove so painful.

These are the happy Souls that rise above the World, and all its vain Hopes
and Fears, and settle their Minds on God, whom they fear and serve with their
whole Hearts. A Woman that fears the Lord, has in her Constitution and Method
of Life, some advantages that help her forward to this Disposition of Mind; and
she has at the same time other things that balance this in her. The
Affections of that Sex are more tender, they are less hardy and bold; they are
under a greater Regularity of Form; Decency and Modesty are great Defenses:
They are not so much exposed to the Temptations that are in the World; they
live at home, and do not range abroad; their Children, especially those of
their own Sex, give them a constant Entertainment, and do commonly carry away
much of their Hearts and Time; so that they are out of that loose Ramble, which
is the great Corruption of Mankind. But to balance all this, their Education
is not so studied, nor so labored, that thereby great Notions, and strong
Reasonings may be formed in them, which give a Foundation to Knowledge and
Religion; all which is more commonly laid in the Youth of our Sex. The
Affections of Women are laid deep in their Natures, so that the common
Afflictions of Life, especially of a Married State, from the Loss of Children,
or of their Husbands, go farther into their Minds, and sink, and shake them
more violently; to which the Decencies of their Griefs, that do, as it were,
stake them down to it, contribute not a little; which do not allow them the
Diversions to which Custom gives Men a freer and earlier admittance. These are
the Advantages and Disadvantages that they have, with Relation to a Religious
Course of Life. Upon the whole Matter, it must be acknowledged, from the
Observation of all Ages, that this Sex has produced the Eminentest, the most
Exact, and unblemished, the most Charitable and Bountiful, and the most Serious
and Devout Fearers and Servers of God, that the World has yet had, and that
Religion has never shined brighter than in their whole Deportment. And
therefore such Women, especially if they happen to be in an Age in which
Libertinism and Impiety has not only corrupted our Sex, but has even broke
through the Modesty of theirs, and almost made a Rape upon it; and in which all
the Exactness of Virtue, and the Strictness of a Regular Life, has been laughed
at, and despised, as the Stiffness of Form. I say, in such an Age as ours,
Women of Rank and Birth, of Quality and Fortune, that in spite of a Torrent of
Vice, that had got Credit by Great Examples, and had lost the Sense of Shame by
the Multitude of those that went into it, will still own and practice Religion
and Virtue in the strictest and exactest manner ought to be celebrated with
just Praises: And if the Example is set by them in such a manner, as not to
frighten any from Religion, by the mixture of morose Sourness, or by the
affectation of singular or superstitious Practices: If it, on the contrary, is
showed in Instances that must needs recommend Religion by the excellent Effects
it has, and by the soft and gentle manner with which it is managed, then the
Memory of such a Woman ought to be precious, it ought to be honored with such
deserved Commendations, as are one part, though it be indeed one of the
smallest, of the Rewards that are due unto Virtue. When this is so done, that
it is visible Flattery has no share in it, that it cannot corrupt the Person
that is praised, into Vanity or Haughtiness of Mind, and when the chief Intent
of such Praises is to set forth to the World a fresh Instance of the Power of
Religion, and of its happy Influence upon whole Neighbourhoods, for the
encouragement and instruction of such as choose to follow good Patterns, then
such Commendations as they, are a piece of Natural Equity and Justice; So they
may give occasion to a Noble Emulation, and may offer a more familiar and
sensible Direction than can be given in Rules or Precepts. I need not add to
all this, That no Custom has been more ancient, nor more universal among all
Civilized Nations than the setting forth the Praises of the Dead at their
Funerals: But indeed these have been generally given out so lavishly, and often
so unjustly, that all Discourses of this kind appear with great Prejudices
against them, and therefore they ought to be severely weighed.

The following Words in my Text give such measures, that if these be observed,
all Errors and Excesses will be prevented. -- Give her the Fruit of her own
Hands; That is, let her not be praised by a pompous setting forth of those
things that were not her own, such as her Birth and Fortune, which are only the
Distinctions of Divine Providence, by which Persons of Noble Minds are set in a
higher Sphere, and are made capable of giving a more conspicuous Example, and
of being a more general and public Good to Mankind. Therefore the showing what
were the real Instances, and the good Effects of her Religion, is the most
proper way of praising her: and the less Pomp of Eloquence, or Art of
Disposition and Expression, that accompanies such a Description, it comes the
nearer the Rules that are here given -- Let her own Works praise her in the
Gates. Among the Jews, their Courts of Judicature, and other Solemn Assemblies,
were at their Gates: It being judged much safer for a City, that the chief
place of Concourse should rather be at and about its Gates, than in its Heart
and Center: So that by Gates we are to understand the gathering of the People;
and there it was that her Works were to praise her, every one having somewhat
to say, that had either fallen under his own Observation, or that had come to
his Knowledge: There was no need of an Orator to recite them, of a Poet to adorn
them, or of Hired Mourners to sing them out in doleful Tunes, which were the
Methods of those Times: All these might well be spared, when the Universal
Sense of the Town, and the Groans of the Neighborhood agreed in the same
Character, and that a General Lamentation followed a Common Loss. This is a
Panegyric that can never be suspected; for no Man misdoubts those Tears that
fall upon a real Loss. When the Widows came to mourn over Dorcas, who had been
full of good Works, Acts 9. 39.
and Alms-Deeds, and showed the Coats and Garments, which she had not only
given them' but had made for them while she was with them: Here was a more
powerful Strain of Rhetoric than the most studied Composures.

The reciting the Names, the Virtues and the Sufferings of the Primitive
Christians and Martyrs, was in the First Ages of Christianity a great part even
of the Office of the Communion it self; and the striking the Names of any out
of those Registers and Memorials, was reckoned to be one of the severest Acts
of the Discipline of the Church. It is true, the Abuses that were ushered in by
this, do well excuse us, though in this particular we do not conform our selves
to so ancient a Custom; yet when singular Instances come in our way, as we
ought to rejoice to see that Religion has not yet lost its force, but can even
in this degenerate Age, give Noble Instances of the Power it has, and of the
Effects that follow it, so we ought to set it out in its True and Natural
Colors. We are not indeed to follow the Steps of a Church, that as she is made
up of Lies, so lies more impudently in nothing than in dressing up the Legends,
and setting forth the Excellencies of those who have contributed to her
enriching, or to her Exaltation, and that does plainly show no regard either to
what is true, or to what is so much as likely in the Lives, or rather the
Fables that are given out of her Saints: In which it is visible, that no Care
is had to tell things truly as they were, but as they think they ought to have
been done; and that is managed in such a manner, as may most powerfully work on
the Credulity or Superstition of the Age in which they write: They varying the
Performances of their Saints according to the Taste of the several Ages in
which they happen to write; and by these means they serve their Ends of
deceiving the World by this Exchange of Sophisticated Ware, for the wealth and
advantages that it brings to them. But we have not so learned Christ, we know
no other Arts but the plain Simplicity of the Gospel; we dare not lie for God,
and much less for the best Person upon Earth.

And now I am brought back to the Subject with which I began. If we have here
before us the earthly Tabernacle of a Woman that feared the Lord, then it is
just and reasonable for us to praise Her; but in the praising Her, I shall
strictly observe the Direction of my Text, I will only give her those
Commendations that are due to Her, that are the Fruit of her Hands, and will
set before you some of Her Works, and leave them to praise Her by an Eloquence,
that will have more Force and Beauty in it, than can be possibly put in Words.
I will say nothing but that which I have good reason to believe to be true: for
though I had not the honor of so particular a Knowledge of Her, as to be able
to form out of it an entire Character, yet what I saw in Her, showed so sincere
and so profound a Piety, so severe and scrupulous a Virtue, so pure a
Conscience, and such an exact Conduct, that from thence I have good reason to
believe other Particulars, which I have received from those who have been long
the nearest Witnesses to the whole Course of Her Life.

This I must say, and you all know it to be true, that both in the Neighboring
City, which is the chief Part of my Care, and in this whole Country, She has
had this Character, to have been the greatest Example, and the Instrument of
the most Good, of any Person that has been in these Parts within the Memory of
Man.

I will not lessen what I am to say concerning Her, by any account of Her
Birth, of the Nobleness of her own Family, or of that into which She married,
nor of the Greatness of the Fortune that descended to Her; if I should speak of
these, I should not give her the Fruit of her own Hands; only it is no small
part of a Character, that such things can neither swell a Mind to Pride, nor
dissolve it into Vanity or Sensuality: Her descending to the concerns of the
meanest Persons; Her going so often about to the poorest Houses, where Her
Charity or Assistance was necessary; Her constant care of the Sick; Her
supplying them so plentifully with Medicines from that vast Store that She
provided for them; Her sending often for Physicians and Surgeons to them; Her
frequent handling and dressing their Sores Herself, when Surgeons could not be
had, which as She never affected to do, so She never declined it where it was
necessary; Her kneeling so often down, and treating Ulcers which were so
loathsome, that no Charity less than Hers, could have endured so odious a
Sight; Her not being afraid even of contagious Diseases, except that of the
small Pox, in which Her care of Her Children obliged her to more Caution: All
these Particulars of which I appeal to you that are before me, how many
Instances you have seen and known, do fully show that Her Rank and Fortune were
only considered by Herself as so many Engagements upon Her, to be rich in good
Works, and to be clothed with Humility.

But to give you her Character in that which according to my Text gives a just
Title to praise, She feared the Lord greatly, she had so deep a sense of
Religion, that she spent a great part of her time both in studying the Holy
Scriptures, which she had laid well up in her Memory, and in reading Books both
of Devotion and of Instruction in Matters of Religion, which she did carefully:
those who have attended on her many Years, have assured me, that she would not
lose quite that time which was set off for her Dressing, and which the far
greatest part make to be a studied and lengthened Vanity, but she used then,
either to read herself, or employ another to do it, that so her Mind might have
some share of that Time, and that it might not go all to her Person. She made
Extracts out of many Books, but in shorthand, since they were only intended
for her own or her Childrens use; she also used her shorthand in taking the
edifying Parts of Sermons, which she went over in private afterward with her
Children; she was frequent and constant in secret Prayer, which had been, as
she owned to me, the chief Joy and Support of her Life; in that it was that she
found Strength to bear the loss of Six Sons, one after another, all she ever
had, and a dear Husband that was more than all: who was so dear to her, that
with this single Consideration she quieted her Mind, after the loss of one Son
which happened soon after her Lord had recovered of a great Sickness, that she
could not complain of any thing which God did to her after he had granted her
so great a Blessing. She was a Religious Observer of the Lord's Day, but
without Superstition or Affectation; she never failed in a Course of many Years
while in Health, to lay hold of every opportunity of receiving the Sacrament,
and was always retired a day or two before it, and did rise ever very early on
Communion-days, that she might be for a considerable time retired before she
went to Church: She observed the daily Returns of religious Performances in her
Family in a most regular manner, the Prayers of the Church being never
discontinued, nor so much as put off. She was constant in the Communion of our
Church, and had so hearty an affection to it, that when she saw the danger of
our being overrun with Popery, she expressed her sense of it in the tenderest
manner, and told her Children that she had much rather go with them to a Stake,
than see them defile themselves with the Idolatry of the Mass; yet her Zeal for
her Religion did not transport her to any uncharitable Excesses, and therefore
she had a due regard to Virtue and Goodness wheresoever she saw it. But though
all about her saw how much Religion possessed her Thoughts, yet she showed it
as little as was possible, except where the Obligations of a Mother, or of a
Mistress of a Family required it. She took care to have all her Family know and
fear God, such as could not read, she allowed them both Time and Books, and
other necessary Helps for it, and she furnished all about her, not only those
of her Household, but of the Country quite round her, with such Books as might
instruct and direct them; and as her Modesty made that she would not assume to
herself to be a Reprover of those that were not under her Authority, so the way
she took, where she saw any occasion for it, was to send them such Books, in
which they might find the Reproofs that they needed. When she reproved her
Servants, those who have been twenty Years about her, have assured me she never
did it in words of Reproach or Anger, but in the way that she believed was the
most proper to have a good effect on them. She said, she was naturally
passionate; but she came to be early under the Power of Religion, and broke
herself so entirely from it, that those who have known her the longest, do
affirm they never saw her at any one time under the Power of it: She was more
particularly gentle to those who were immediately about her, so that neither
her Grief for those great Afflictions, with which it pleased God to visit her,
nor the sharp Pains, nor lingering Disease of which she died, ever drew an
indecent Expression from her.

Her Religion as it gave her much Joy, so it gave her some Trouble, while by an
exactness that carried her into too scrupulous a Jealousy of her self; she was
too apt to censure her own Defects and Coldnesses. She chose a proper Guide, to
whom she gave frequently an account of the various Scenes of Thoughts that
passed The Lord ^^^^^p of Worcester.
in her Mind; her choice of one of my Reverend Brethren showed how well she
could judge of a Person fit for such a Confidence, and she had found, as she
told me, great Benefit and Comfort in his Conduct. Her Soul was so wholly
dedicated to God, that she seemed to have no other concern upon her, but how to
know and to do her Duty upon all Occasions; and it made even the Burden of her
Sickness a redoubled Affliction to her, because it depressed her Spirits, so
that she could not raise them up to God, with that Cheerfulness and Joy that
she had felt on other Occasions; and that she did not fly toward Death with so
entire a willingness, as had often formerly inflamed her Thoughts: she thought
that even the desire of seeing the last part of her Care settled and entered into
the World, was a concern below that Elevation of Soul with which a Christian
ought to entertain the Approaches of Death.

With all this deep Sense of Religion she had no sort of Affectation,
Singularity, Censoriousness, or Sourness of Temper; she had all the decent
cheerfulness about her that became her, tho always governed with a stayed
Gravity, she affected nothing that made any extraordinary show, so that in all
indifferent things she lived like those of her Rank. She never placed Religion
in little and assumed Severities, but studied in the whole Course of her Life,
to practice that pure Religion and undefiled with God and the Father, which is
to visit the Widows and the Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep her
self unspotted from the World. She was free from that Spirit of Censoriousness,
to which even good People are too prone; perhaps through the sharpness of their
Zeal against Sin: but when the occasions of observing the Evil that was in the
World came in her way, she made the right use of them in proper Reflections on
them, to those who were under her Care. She loved the Privacies of the
Country, much more than the Diversions and Disorders of the Town: She loved to
be at quiet, and to be either improving her own Mind, or to be doing good to
others: She had attained to a great understanding in the matters of Religion,
and the Scriptures; and was not only conversant in the practical, but even in
the speculative parts of it. So much study as she used, with so true a Judgment
as she had, carried her a great way: next to that she studied Physic most; as
that by which she found she had the greatest opportunities of doing the most
good; and in this she set no bounds to her Care and Labor, and to the expense
it drew with it: and in her later Years the extent of her Charity and the Zeal
and Tenderness of it grew upon her very sensibly; She had observed one constant
Practice, upon any special Blessing that she received from God, to make a
particular Largess of Charity, besides her ordinary Givings: but this of late
increased to great Sums, that walked round the Jayls of London, as well as
amongst the miserable in these Parts; besides that Riches of her Liberality
with which she relieved the French and Irish Protestants: So that she seemed to
be making haste to do all the good that was possible for her, as if she had had
a secret Intimation that there was but a small Portion of time now before her.
A slow Decay came to seize on her, while she was yet a great way from Old Age,
being but Fifty when she died. She quickly apprehended that it would make an
end of her, and so she set her self diligently to prepare for it.

I must add one part of her Character, which I think so bright a one, that I am
not afraid to rank it among those I have already mentioned: She had so great a
sense of the Goodness of God to the Nation in the late happy Revolution, that
she said her Nunc dimittis with the more Joy, because she had seen that
Salvation which God has wrought for us: She paid one Tax to the Government,
with so hearty a Zeal, in offering up many earnest Prayers to God for its
Establishment, that if many made so many Free Will Offerings of that kind as
she did, we might hope for a better account of all the other Taxes; and a
speedy end put to them all: and as she had so true an Affection to this
Government her self, so she declared an unalterable Resolution of not bestowing
that dear part of her Care, which she did not live to finish, to any but such
as she believed were Faithful and Zealous to it.

But now the Melancholy part is yet before me, I unwillingly go to it, but as
the Discourse leads me, so I may well speak of it, since it was such as agreed
with all that had gone before: she felt the Decays of Nature come so fast on
her, that she prepared her self to meet her God: She had quite overcome all
that unwillingness which so just a desire, as was formerly intimated, had
raised in her: She rejoiced in the Will of God, and expressed so much
satisfaction and cheerfulness even in her Looks, that it plainly appeared all
was calm within: She was no more depressed with uneasy Reflections on her self,
but had the Joy of a good Conscience, and the Assurance of the Love and
Goodness of God through Jesus Christ, to so high a degree, that she felt not
now those unjust Censures with which she alone had sometimes punished her self:
For she was the only Person, that, as far as I have been informed, ever thought
hardly of herself. Since I could never hear that she had an Enemy, or that ever
a considerable Injury was done her by any Person; her prudent, grave and
unmedling Temper kept her out of the way of making Enemies, and to this was
joined a special Blessing of God, that preserved her from unjust Malice: Thus
for mere want of occasion I could not learn how her Charity would have wrought
toward an Enemy that had injured her in any sort: She continued during the
Course of her Sickness, not only to have the Prayers of the Church said by her,
but was very often, indeed almost constantly, observed to be raising up her
Soul to God: She had resolved to fit her self for her last Passage, with the
great Viaticum of Christians, but Nature sunk all at once, and so fast that she
could only communicate inwardly; yet though she could not end her Life with
that most solemn Act of Church Communion, She desired that Character of dying
in the Churches Peace, that is given in Absolution, which she received with
much devout Joy: At last she broke Prison, and left a feeble and exhausted
Body, and is now entered into the Joy of her Lord, into that Rest to which she
was so long aspiring, and of which she had felt so many ravishing Fore-tastes
in her way to it. There she is now, in the Fellowship of Angels, and in the
Presence of God, where she will remain, till the restitution of all things,
that this her now forsaken Body shall be changed and be made meet for her to
return to it, and to dwell in it for ever.

And for her Memory, let her own Works praise her, and make her Name to be as
Ointment poured forth. May all in these Parts, that have either observed her
Deportment, or felt the effects of her Charity, honor her, or rather Religion
that made her to be what she truly was, even a public Blessing to the whole
Country. Look through all the Companies of the gay Libertines, and see what
you can find among them all compared to that which Religion wrought in her, and
then acknowledge that This is the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the
World. May all that hear of her, rise up and call her Blessed; and by a noble
Emulation, study to imitate the Virtues that shined so fair in her: May the
great Family that is to succeed to her Seat, so far follow her steps, that they
may dry up the Tears which do now flow so plentifully for her loss: May her
noble Children answer the honor of being hers, and the Obligations that lie on
them by the Example that they saw in her, and the Education that they received
from her: And may he whom she loved and esteemed so highly, carry still with
him so tender a sense of all the excellent Things that he observed and admired
in her, that according to her last Words to him, Though they are now parted,
since it was the Will of God that it must be so, yet they may meet again never
to be separated, but to live eternally happy in that Fullness of Joy, and in
those Pleasures which are for evermore: And in conclusion, May the Example she
has set, and the Good she has done, be ever celebrated; may it recommend true
Religion to the World; Mark the Upright, and behold the Perfect, for their
latter End is Peace. To which God in his Mercy bring us all in his good and
appointed Time.

Amen.
FINIS.

