



G. Kneller Eques Pinxit.

R: White Sculpsit.

E^^ies Auth^ris.



The Sacred Theory of the EARTH.



THE THEORY OF THE EARTH: Containing an Account OF THE Original of the Earth,
AND OF ALL THE GENERAL CHANGES Which it has already undergone, OR IS TO
UNDERGO Till the CONSUMMATION of all Things.

THE TWO FIRST BOOKS Concerning The DELVGE, AND Concerning PARADISE.

The Third Edition reviewed by the Author.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

TO THE KING'S MOST Excellent Majesty.
SIR,
NEW found Lands and Countries accrue to the Prince, whose Subject makes the
first Discovery; And having retrieved a World that had been lost, for some
thousands of Years, out of the Memory of Man, and the Records of Time, I
thought it my Duty to lay it at Your Majesty's Feet. 'Twill not enlarge Your
Dominions, it is past and gone; nor dare I say it will enlarge Your Thoughts;
But I hope it may gratify Your Princely curiosity to read the Description of
it, and see the Fate that attended it.

We have still the broken Materials of that first World, and walk upon its
Ruins; while it stood, there was the Seat of Paradise, and the Scenes of the
Golden Age; when it fell, it made the Deluge; And this ^^shapen Earth we now
inhabit, is the Form it was found in when the Waters had retired, and the dry
Land appeared. These things, Sir, I propose and presume to prove in the
following Treatise, which I willingly submit to Your Majesty's Judgment and
Censure: being very well satisfied, that if I had sought a Patron in all the
List of Kings, Your Contemporaries: Or in the Roll of Your Nobles of either
Order: I could not have found a more competent Judge in a Speculatitn of this
Nature. Your Majesty's Sagacity, and happy Genius for Natural History, for
Observations and Remarks upon the Earth, the Heavens, and the Sea, is a better
preparation for Inquiries of this kind, than all the dead Learning of the
Schools.

Sir, This Theory in the full extent of it, is to reach to the last Period of
the Earth, and the End of all things; But this first Volume takes in only so
much as is already past, from the Origin of the Earth* to this present time and
state of Nature. To describe in like manner the Changes and Revolutions of
Nature that are to come, and see thorough all succeeding Ages, will require a
steady and attentive Eye, and a retreat from the noise of the World; Especially
so to connect the parts, and present them all under one view, that we may see,
as in a Mirror, the several faces of Nature, from First to Last, throughout
all the Circle of Successions.

Your Majesty having been pleased to give encouragement to this Translation, I
humbly present it to Your Gracious Acceptance. And it is our Interest, as well
as Duty, in Disquisitions of this Nature, to Address our selves to Your
Majesty, as the Defender of our Philosophic Liberties; against those that
would usurp upon the Fundamental privilege and Birthright of Mankind, The Free
use of Reason. Your Majesty has always appeared the Royal Patron of Learning
and the Sciences: and it is suitable to the Greatness of a Princely Spirit, to
favor and promote whatsoever tends to the enlargement of Humane Knowledge, and
the improvement of Humane Nature. To be Good and Gracious, and a Lover of
Knowledge, are, methinks, two of the most amiable things in this World; And
that Your Majesty may always bear that Character, in present and future Ages,
and after a long and prosperous Reign, enjoy a blessed Immortality, is the
constant Prayer of

Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble and most Obedient Subject, THOMAS BVRNET.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAVING given an account of this whole Work in the first Chapter, and of the
method of either Book, whereof this Volume consists, in their proper places,
there remains not much to be said here to the Reader. This Theory of the Earth
may be called Sacred, because it is not the common Physiology of the Earth, or
of the Bodies that compose it, but respects only the great Turns of Fate, and
the Revolutions of our Natural World: such as are taken notice of in the Sacred
Writings, and are truly the Hinges upon which the Providence of this Earth
moves; or whereby it opens and shuts the several successive Scenes whereof it
is made up. This English Edition is the same in substance with the Latin,
though, I confess, it is not so properly a Translation, as a new Composition
upon the same ground, there being several additional Chapters in it, and
several new-moulded.

As every Science requires a peculiar Genius, so likewise there is a Genius
peculiarly improper for every one; and as to Philosophy, which is the
Contemplation of the works of Nature, and the Providence that governs them,
there is no temper or Genius, in my mind, so improper for it, as that which we
call a mean and narrow Spirit; and which the Greeks call Littleness of Soul.
This is a defect in the first make of some Men's minds, which can scarce ever be
corrected afterward, either by Learning or Age. And as Souls that are made
little and incapacious cannot enlarge their thoughts to take in any great
compass of Times or things; so what is beyond their compass, or above their
reach, they are apt to look upon as Fantastical, or at least would willingly
have it pass for such in the World. Now as there is nothing so great, so large,
so immense, as the works of Nature, and the methods of Providence, men of this
complexion must needs be very unfit for the contemplation of them. Who would
set a purblind Man at the top of the Mast to discover Land? or upon an high
Tower to draw a Landscape of the Country round about? for the same reason,
short-sighted minds are unfit to make Philosophers, whose proper business it is
to discover and describe in comprehensive Theories the Phenomenon of the World,
and the Causes of them.

This original disease of the Mind is seldom cured by Learning which cures many
others; Like a fault in the first Stamina of the Body, it cannot easily be
rectified afterward. It Is a great mistake to think that every sort of Learning
makes a Man a competent Judge of Natural Speculations; We see unhappy examples
to the contrary amongst the Christian Fathers, and particularly in S. Austin,
who was unquestionably a Man of Parts and Learning, but interposing in a
controversy where his Talent did not lie, showed his zeal against the
Antipodes to very ill purpose, though he drew his Reasons partly from
Scripture. And if within a few Years, or in the next Generation, it should
prove as certain and demonstrable, that the Earth is moved, as it is now, that
there are Antipodes; those that have been zealous against it, and engaged the
Scripture in the Controversy, would have the same reason to repent of their
forwardness, that S. Austin would have now, if he was alive. It Is a dangerous
thing to engage the authority of Scripture in disputes about the Natural World,
in opposition to Reason; lest Time, which brings all things to light, should
discover that to be evidently false which we had made Scripture to assert: And
I remember S. Austin in his Exposition upon Genesis, has laid down a rule to
this very purpose, though he had the unhappiness, it seems, not to follow it
always himself. The reason also, which he gives there for his rule, is very
good and substantial: Genesis ad lit. lib. 1. c. 19. Plerumque accidit ut aliquid
de Terra, de Coelo, de caeteris hujus mundi elementis, etc. Cum enim quenquam
Christianorum in ear quam optime norunt, errare deprehenderint, and vanam
sententiam suam ex nostris libris asserere, quo pacto illis libris creditur^
sunt de Resurrectione Mortuorum, and spe vitae aternae regnoque coelorum,
quando de hi^ rebus quas jam experiri vel indubitatis numeris percipere
potuerun^, fallaciter putaverint esse conscriptos?
For, says He, if the Unbelievers or Philosophers shall certainly know us to
be mistaken, and to err in those things that concern the Natural World, and see
that we allege our (Sacred) Books for such vain opinions, how shall they
believe those same Books when they tell them of the RESVRRECTION of the Dead,
and the World to come, if they find them to be fallaciously writ in such things
as lie within their certain Knowledge?

We are not to suppose that any truth concerning the Natural World can be an
Enemy to Religion; for Truth cannot be an Enemy to Truth, God is not divided
against himself; and therefore we ought not upon that account to condemn or
censure what we have not examined or cannot disprove; as those that are of this
narrow Spirit we are speaking of, are very apt to do. Let every thing be tried
and examined in the first place, whether it be True or False; and if it be
found false, it is then to be considered, whether it be such a falsity as is
prejudicial to Religion or no. But for every new Theory that is proposed, to be
alarmed, as if all Religion was falling about our Ears, is to make the World
suspect that we are very ill assured of the foundation it stands upon. Besides,
do not all Men complain, even These as well as others, of the great ignorance
of Mankind? how little we know, and how much is still unknown? and can we ever
know more, unless something new be Discovered? It cannot be old when it comes
first to light, when first invented, and first proposed. If a Prince should
complain of the poorness of his Exchequer, and the scarcity of Money in his
Kingdom, would he be angry with his Merchants, if they brought him home a Cargo
of good Bullion, or a Mass of Gold out of a foreign Country? and give this
reason only for it, He would have no new Silver; neither should any be Current
in his Dominions but what had his own Stamp and Image upon it: How should this
Prince or his People grow rich? To complain of want, and yet refuse all offers
of a supply, looks very sullen, or very fantastical.

I might mention also upon this occasion another Genius and disposition in Men,
which often makes them improper for Philosophical Contemplations; not so much,
it may be, from the narrowness of their Spirit and Understanding, as because
they will not take time to extend them. I mean Men of Wit and Parts, but of
short Thoughts, and little Meditation, and that are apt to distrust every thing
for a Fancy or Fiction that is not the dictate of Sense, or made out
immediately to their Senses. Men of this Humor and Character call such
Theories as these, Philosophic Romances, and think themselves witty in the
expression; They allow them to be pretty amusements of the Mind, but without
Truth or Reality. I am afraid if an Angel should write the Theory of the Earth,
they would pass the same judgment upon it; Where there is variety of Parts in a
due Contexture, with something of surprising aptness in the harmony and
correspondency of them, this they call a Romance; but such Romances must all
Theories of Nature, and of Providence be, and must have every part of that
Character with advantage, if they be well represented. There is in them, as I
may so say, a Plot or Mystery pursued through the whole Work, and certain Grand
Issues or Events upon which the rest depend, or to which they are subordinate;
but these things we do not make or contrive our selves, but find and discover
them, being made already by the Great Author and Governor of the Universe: And
when they are clearly discovered, well digested, and well reasoned in every
part, there is, methinks, more of beauty in such a Theory, at least a more
masculine beauty, than in any Poem or Romance; And that solid truth that is at
the bottom, gives a satisfaction to the Mind, that it can never have from any
Fiction, how artificial soever it be.

To enter no farther upon this matter, it is enough to observe, that when we
make Judgments and Censures upon general presumptions and prejudices, they are
made rather from the temper and model of our own Spirits, than from Reason; and
therefore, if we would neither impose upon our selves, nor others, we must lay
aside that lazy and fallacious method of Censuring by the Lump, and must bring
things close to the test of True or False, to explicit proof and evidence; And
whosoever makes such Objections against an Hypothesis, has a right to be
heard, let his Temper and Genius be what it will. Neither do we intend that any
thing we have said here, should be understood in another sense.

To conclude, This Theory being writ with a sincere intention to justify the
Doctrines of the Universal Deluge, and of a Paradisiacal state, and protect
them from the Cavils of those that are no well-wishers to Sacred History, upon
that account it may reasonably expect fair usage and acceptance with all that
are well-dispos'd; And it will also be, I think, a great satisfaction to them
to see those pieces of most ancient History, which have been chiefly preserved
in Scripture, confirmed anew, and by another Light, that of Nature and
Philosophy; and also freed from those misconceptions or misrepresentations
which made them sit uneasy upon the Spirits even of the best Men, that took
time to think. Lastly, In things purely Speculative, as these are, and no
ingredients of our Faith, it is free to differ from one another in our Opinions
and Sentiments; and so I remember S. Austin has observed upon this very
subject of Paradise; Wherefore as we desire to give no offense our selves, so
neither shall we take any at the difference of Judgment in others; provided
this liberty be mutual, and that we all agree to study Peace, Truth and a good
Life.

CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction; An account of the whole Work, of the extent and
general Order of it. CHAP. II. A general account of Noah's Flood. A computation
what quantity of Water would be necessary for the making of it; That the common
Opinion and Explication of that Flood is not intelligible. CHAP. III. All
Evasions concerning the Flood answered; That there was no Creation of Waters at
the Deluge; and that it was not particular or National, but extended throughout
the whole Earth. A prelude and preparation to the true account and explication
of it. The method of the first Book. CHAP. IV. That the Earth and Mankind had
an Original, and were not from Eternity; Proved against Aristotle. The first
Proposition of our Theory laid down, viz. That the Ante-diluvian Earth was of a
different Form and Construction from the present. This is proved from Divine
Authority, and from the Nature and Form of the Chaos, out of which the Earth
was made. CHAP. V. The Second Proposition is laid down, viz. That the face of
the Earth before the Deluge was smooth, regular and uniform; without Mountains,
and without a Sea. The Chaos out of which the World rise is fully examined, and
all its motions observed, and by what steps it wrought it self into an
habitable World. Some things in Antiquity relating to the first state of the
Earth are interpreted, and some things in the Sacred Writings. The Divine Art
and Geometry in the construction of the first Earth is observed and celebrated.
CHAP. VI. The dissolution of the First Earth: The Deluge ensuing thereupon. And
the form of the present Earth rising from the Ruins of the First. CHAP. VII.
That the Explication we have given of an Universal Deluge is not an IDEA only,
but an account of what really came to pass in the Earth, and the true
explication of Noah's Flood. An examination of Tehom-Rabba, or the Great Abyss,
and that by it the Sea cannot be understood, nor the Subterraneous Waters as
they are at present; What the true Notion and Form of it was, collected from
Moses and other Sacred Writers. Observations on Deucalion's Deluge. CHAP. VIII.
The particular History of Noah's Flood is explained in all the material parts
and circumstances of it, according to the preceding Theory. Any seeming
difficulties removed, and the whole Section concluded with a Discourse how far
the Deluge may be looked upon as the effect of an Ordinary Providence, and how
far of an Extraordinary. CHAP. IX. The Second Part of this Discourse, proving
the same Theory from the Effects and the present Form of the Earth. First, by a
general Scheme of what is most remarkable in this Globe, and then by a more
particular induction; beginning with an account of Subterraneous Cavities and
Subterraneous Waters. CHAP. X. Concerning the Chanel of the Sea, and the
Original of it; The causes of its irregular from and unequal depths: As also of
the Original of Islands, their situation, and other properties. CHAP. XI.
Concerning the Mountains of the Earth, their greatness and irregular Form,
their Situation, Causes and Origin. CHAP. XII. A short review of what has been
already treated of, and in what manner. All methods, whether Philosophical or
Theological, that have been offered by others for the explication of the Form
of the Earth, are examined and refuted. A conjecture concerning the other
Planets, their Natural Form and State compared with ours; Especially concerning
Jupiter and Saturn.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction and Contents of the Second Book. The general state
of the Primaeval Earth, and of Paradise. CHAP. II. The great change of the
World since the Flood from what it was in the first Ages. The Earth under its
present Form could not be Paradisiacal, nor any part of it. CHAP. III. The
Original differences of the Primitive Earth from the present or Post-diluvian.
The three Characters of Paradise and the Golden Age found in the Primitive
Earth. A particular explication of each Character. CHAP. IV. A Digression;
concerning the Natural Causes of Longaevity. That the Machine of an Animal
consists of Springs, and which are the two principal. The Age of the
Ante-diluvians to be computed by Solar, not Lunar Years. CHAP. V. Concerning
the Waters of the Primitive Earth: What the state of the Regions of the Air was
then, and how all Waters proceeded from them. How the Rivers arose, what was
their Course, and how they ended. Several things in Sacred Writ that confirm
this Hydrography of the First Earth, especially the Post-diluvian Origin of the
Rainbow. CHAP. VI. A Recollection and review of what has been said concerning
the Primitive Earth, with a more full Survey of the state of the First World,
Natural and Civil, and the comparison of it with the present World. CHAP. VII.
Concerning the place of Paradise; It cannot be determined from the Theory only,
nor from Scripture only; What the sense of Antiquity was concerning it, as to
the Jews and Heathens, and especially as to the Christian Fathers, That they
generally placed it out of this Continent, in the Southern Hemisphere. CHAP.
VIII. The uses of this Theory for the illustration of Antiquity; The Chaos of
the Ancients explained; The inhabitability of the Torrid Zone; The change of
the Poles of the World; The Doctrine of the Mundane Egg; How America was first
peopled; How Paradise within the Circle of the Moon. CHAP. IX. A general
Objection against this Theory, viz. That if there had been such a Primitive
Earth, as we pretend, the fame of it would have sounded throughout all
Antiquity. The Eastern and Western Learning considered, the most considerable
Records of both are lost; what footsteps remain relating to this subject. The
Jewish and Christian Learning considered, how far lost as to this Argument, and
what Notes or Traditions remain. Lastly, How far the Sacred Writings bear
witness to it. The Pr^vidential conduct of Knowledge in the World. A
Recapitulation and state of the Theory. CHAP. X. Concerning the AUTHOR of
NATURE. CHAP. XI. Concerning Natural Providence. Several misrepresentations of
it, and false methods of Contemplation; Preparatives to the true Method, and a
true representation of the Universe. The Mundane Idea, and the Universal System
of Providence; Several subordinate Systems, That of our Earth and Sublunary
World; The Course and Periods of it; How much of this is already treated of,
and what remains. Conclusion.
THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
BOOK I. Concerning the Deluge, and the Dissolution of the Earth.
CHAP. I. THE INTRODVCTION; An Account of the whole Work; of the Extent and
general Order of it.
SINCE I was first inclined to the Contemplation of Nature, and took pleasure
to trace out the Causes of Effects, and the dependence of one thing upon
another in the visible Creation, I had always, methought, a particular
curiosity to look back into the Sources and ORIGINAL of Things; and to view in
my Mind, so far as I was able, the Beginning and Progress of a RISING WORLD.

And after some Essays of this Nature, and, as I thought, not unsuccessful, I
carried on my enquiries further, to try whether this Rising World, when formed
and finished, would continue always the same; in the same form, structure, and
consistency; or what changes it would successively undergo, by the continued
action of the same Causes that first produced it; And, lastly, what would be
its final Period and Consummation. This whole Series and compass of things
taken together, I called a COURSE OF NATURE, or a SYSTEM OF NATURAL PROVIDENCE;
and thought there was nothing belonging to the External World more fit or more
worthy our study and meditation, nor any thing that would conduce more to
discover the ways of Divine Providence, and to show us the grounds of all true
knowledge concerning Nature. And therefore to clear up the several parts of
this Theory, I was wiling to lay* aside a great many other Speculations, and
all those dry subtleties with which the Schools, and the Books of Philosophers
are usually filled.

But when we speak of a Rising World, and the Contemplation of it, we do not
mean this of the Great Universe; for who can describe the Original of that vast
Frame? But we speak of the Sublundry World, This Earth and its dependencies,
which rose out of a Chaos about six thousand years ago; And seeing it has fallen
to our lot to act upon this Stage, to have our present home and residence here,
its seems most reasonable, and the place designed by Providence, where we
should first employ our thoughts to understand the works of God and Nature. We
have accordingly therefore designed in this Work to give an account of the
Original of the Earth, and of all the great and General Changes that it has
already undergone, or is hence forwards to undergo, till the Consummation of
all Things. For if from those Principles we have here taken, and that Theory we
have begun in these Two First Books, we can deduce with success and clearness
the Origin of the Earth, and those States of it that are already past;
Following the same Thread, and by the conduct of the same Theory, we will pursue
its Fate and History through future Ages, and mark all the great Changes and
Conversions that attend it while Day and Night shall last; that is, so long as
it continues an Earth.

By the States of the Earth that are already past, we understand chiefly
Paradise and the Deluge; Names well known and as little known in their Nature.
By the Future States we und^rstand the Conslagration, and what new Order of
Nature may follow upon that, till the whole Circle of Time and Providence be
completed. As to the first and past States of the Earth, we shall have little
help from the Ancients, or from any of the Philosophers, for the discovery or
description of them; We must often tread unbeaten paths, and make a way where
we do not find one; but it shall be always with a Light in our hand, that we
may see our steps, and that those that follow us may not follow us blindly.
There is no Sect of Philosophers that I know of, that ever gave an account of
the Universal Deluge, or discovered, from the Contemplation of the Earth, that
there had been such a thing already in Nature. It Is true, they often talk of an
alternation of Deluges and Conflagrations in this Earth, but they speak of them
as things to come; at least they give no proof or argument of day that has
already destroyed the World. As to Paradise, it seems to be represented to us
by the Golden Age; whereof the Ancients tell many stories, sometimes very
luxuriant; and sometimes very defective: For they did not so well understand
the difference betwixt the New-made Earth and the Present, as to see what were
the just grounds of the Golden Age, or of Paradise: Though they had many broken
Notions concerning those things, As to the Conslagration in particular, This
has always been reckoned One amongst the Opinions or Dogmata of the Stoics,
That the World was to be destroyed by Fire; and their Books are full of this
Notion; but yet they do not tell us the Causes of the Conflagration, nor what
preparations there are in Nature, or will be, toward that great Change. And we
may generally observe this of the Ancients, that their Learning or Philosophy
consisted more in Conclusions, than in Demonstrations; They had many Truths
among them, whereof they did not know themselves the Premises or the Proofs:
Which is an argument to me, that the knowledge they had, was not a thing of
their own invention, or which they came to by fair Reasoning and observations
upon Nature, but was delivered to them from others by Tradition and Ancient
Fame, sometimes more public, sometimes more secret: These Conclusions they
kept in Mind, and communicated to those of their School, or Sect, or Posterity,
without knowing, for the most part, the just grounds and reasons of them.

It Is the Sacred Writings of Scripture that are the best Monuments of
Antiquity, and to those we are chiefly beholden for the History of the First
Ages, whether Natural History or Civil. It Is true, the Poets, who were the most
Ancient Writers amongst the Greeks, and served them both for Historians,
Divines, and Philosophers, have delivered some things concerning the first Ages
of the World, that have a fair resemblance of Truth, and some affinity with
those accounts that are given of the same things by Sacred Authors, and these
may be of use in due time and place; but yet, lest any thing fabulous should be
mixed with them, as commonly there is, we will never depend wholly upon their
credit, nor assert any thing upon the authority of the Ancients which is not
first proved by Natural Reason, or warranted by Scripture.

It seems to me very reasonable to believe, that besides the Precepts of
Religion, which are the principal subject and design of the Books of Holy
Scripture, there may be providentially conserved in them the memory of things
and times so remote, as could not be retrieved, either by History, or by the
light of Nature; and yet were of great importance to be known, both for their
own excellency, and also to rectify the knowledge of men in other things
consequential to them: Such points may be, Our great Epoch or the Age of the
Earth, The Origination of Mankind, The First and Paradisiacal State, The
destruction of the Old World by an Universal Deluge, The Longevity of its
Inhabitants, The manner of their preservation, and of their Peopling the Second
Earth; and lastly, The Fate and Changes it is to undergo. These I always looked
upon as the Seeds of great knowledge, or heads of Theories fixed on purpose to
give us aim and direction how to pursue the rest that depend upon them. But
these heads, you see, are of a mixed order, and we propose to our selves in this
Work only such as belong to the Natural World; upon which I believe the trains
of Providence are generally laid; And we must first consider how God has
ordered Nature, and then how the Economy of the Intellectual World is adapted
to it; for of these two parts consist the full System of Providence. In the
mean time, what subject can be more worthy the thoughts of any serious person,
than to view and consider the Rise and Fall, and all the Revolutions, not of a
Monarchy or an Empire, of the Grecian or Roman State, but of an entire World.

The obscurity of these things, and their remoteness from common knowledge will
be made an argument by some, why we should not undertake them; And by others,
it may be, the very same thing will be made an argument why we should; for my
part I think There is nothing so secret that shall not be brought to Light,
within the compass of Our World; for we are not to understand that of the whole
Universe, nor of all Eternity, our capacities do not extend so far; But
whatsoever concerns this Sublunary World in the whole extent of its duration,
from the Chaos to the last period, this I believe Providence has made us
capable to understand, and will in its due time make it known. All I say,
betwixt the first Chaos and the last Completion of Time and all things
temporary, This was given to the disquisitions of men; On either hand is
Eternity, before the World and after, which is without our reach: But that
little spot of ground that lies betwixt those two great Oceans, this we are to
cultivate, this we are Masters of, herein we are to exercise our thoughts, to
understand and lay open the Treasures of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness hid in
this part of Nature and of Providence.

As for the difficult or obscurity of an argument, that does but add to the
pleasure of contesting with it, when there are hopes of victory; and success
does more than recompense all the pains. For there is no sort of joy more
greatful to the mind of Man, than that which arises from the invention of
Truth; especially when it is hard to come by. Every Man has a delight suited to
his Genius, and as there is pleasure in the right exercise of any faculty, so
especially in that of Right-reasoning; which is still the greater, by how much
the consequences are more clear, and the chains of them more long: There is no
Chase so pleasant, methinks, as to drive a Thought, by good conduct, from one
end of the World to the other; and never to lose sight of it till it fall into
Eternity, where all things are lost as to our knowledge.

This Theory being chiefly Philosophical, Reason is to be our first Guide; and
where that falls short, or any other just occasion offers it self, we may
receive further light and confirmation from the Sacred Writings. Both these are
to be looked upon as of Divine Original, God is the Author of both; He that made
the Scripture made also our Faculties, and twere a reflection upon the Divine
Veracity, for the one or the other to be false when rightly used. We must
therefore be careful and tender of opposing these to one another, because that
is, in effect, to oppose God to himself. As for Antiquity and the Testimonies
of the Ancients, we only make general reflections upon them, for illustration
rather than proof of what we propose; not thinking it proper for an English
Treatise to multiply citations out of Greek or Latin Authors.

I am very sensible it will be much our interest, That the Reader of this
Theory should be of an ingenuous and unprejudiced Temper; neither does it so
much require Book-learning and Scholarship, as good natural sense to
distinguish True and false, and to discern what is well proved, and what is
not. It often happens that Scholastic Education, like a Trade, does so fix a
Man in a particular way, that he is not fit to judge of any thing that lies out
of that way; and so his Learning becomes a clog to his natural parts, and makes
him more indocile, and more incapable of new thoughts and new improvements,
than those that have only the Talents of Nature. As Masters of exercise had
rather take a Scholar that never learned before, than one that has had a bad
Master; so generally one would rather choose a Reader without art, than one
ill-instructed; with Learning, but opinionative and without judgment; yet it is
not necessary they should want either, and Learning well placed strengthens all
the powers of the Mind. To conclude, just reasoning and a generous love of
Truth, whether with or without Erudition, is that which makes us most competent
Judges what is True; and further than this, in the perusal and examination of
This Work, as to the Author as much Candor as you please, but as to the Theory
we require nothing but attention and impartiality.

CHAP. II. A general account of Noah's Flood; A computation what quantity of
Water would be necessary for the making of it; that the common Opinion and
Explication of that Flood is not intelligible.
IT IS now more than Five Thousand Years since our World was made, and though it
would be a great pleasure to the Mind, to recollect and view at this distance
those first Scenes of Nature: What the face of the Earth was when fresh and
new, and how things differed from the state we now find them in, the
speculation is so remote, that it seems to be hopeless, and beyond the reach of
Humane Wit. We are almost the last Posterity of the First Men, and fallen into
the dying Age of the World; by what footsteds or by what guide, can we trace
back our way to those First Ages, and the first order of things? And yet,
methinks, it is reasonable to believe, that Divine Providence, which sees at
once throughout all the Ages and Orders of the World, should not be willing to
keep Mankind finally and fatally ignorant of that part of Nature and of the
Universe, which is properly their Task and Province to manage and understand.
We are the Inhabitants of the Earth, the Lords and Masters of it; and we are
endowed with Reason and Understanding; does it not then properly belong to us
to examine and unfold the Works of God in this part of the Universe, which is
fallen to our lot, which is our heritage and habitation? And it will be found, it
may be, upon a stricter Enquiry, that in the present form and constitution of
the Earth, there are certain marks and Indications of its first State; with
which if we compare those things that are recorded in Sacred History,
concerning the first Chaos, Paradise, and an Universal Deluge, we may discover,
by the help of those Lights, what the Earth was in its first Original, and what
Changes have since succeeded in it.

And though we shall give a full account of the Origin of the Earth in this
Treatise, yet that which we have proposed particularly for the Title and
Subject of it, is to give an account of the primaeval PARADISE, and of the
Universal DELUGE, Those being the two most important things that are explained
by the Theory we propose. And I must beg leave in treating of these two, to
change the Order, and treat first of the Deluge, and then of Paradise: For
though the State of Paradise does precede that of the Flood in Sacred History,
and in the nature of the thing, yet the explication of both will be more
sensible, and more effectual, if we begin with the Deluge; there being more
Observations and Effects, and those better known to us, that may be referred to
this, than to the other; and the Deluge being once truly explained, we shall
from thence know the Form and Quality of the Ante-diluvian Earth. Let us then
proceed to the explication of that great and fatal Inundation, whose History is
well known; and according to Moses, the best of Historians, in a few words is
this --

Sixteen Hundred and odd years after the Earth was made, and inhabited, it was
over-flow'd, and destroyed in a Deluge of Water. Not a Deluge that was National
only, or overrun some particular Country or Region, as Judea or Greece, or any
other, but it overspread the face of the whole Earth, from Pole to Pole, and
from East to West, and that in such excess, that the Floods over-reacht the
Tops of the highest Mountains; the Rains descending after an unusual manner,
and the fountains of the Great Deep being broke open; so as a general
destruction and devastation was brought upon the Earth, and all things in it,
Mankind and other living Creatures; excepting only Noah and his Family, who by
a special Providence of God was preserved in a certain Ark, or Vessel made like
a Ship, and such kinds of living Creatures as he took in to him. After these
Waters had raged for some time on the Earth, they began to lessen and shrink,
and the great waves and fluctuations of this Deep or Abyss, being quieted by
degrees, the Waters retired into their Channels and Caverns within the Earth;
and the Mountains and Fields began to appear, and the whole habitable Earth in
that form and shape wherein we now see it. Then the World began again, and from
that little Remnant preserved in the Ark, the present race of Mankind, and of
Animals, in the known parts of the Earth, were propagated. Thus perished the
Old World, and the present arose from the ruins and remains of it.

This is a short story of the greatest thing that every yet happened in the
World, the greatest revolution and the greatest change in Nature; and if we
come to reflect seriously upon it, we shall find it extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to give an account of the Waters that composed this Deluge, whence
they came or whither they went. It it had been only the Inundation of a
Country, or of a Province, or of the greatest part of a Continent, some
proportionable causes perhaps might have been found out; but a Deluge
overflowing the whole Earth: the whole Circuit and whole Extent of it: burying
all in Water, even the greatest Mountains: in any known parts of the Universe,
to find Water sufficient for this Effect, as it is generally explained and
understood, I think is impossible. And that we may the better judge of the
whole matter let us first compute how much Water would be requisite for such a
Deluge: or to lay the Earth, considered in its present form, and the highest
Mountains, under Water. Then let us consider whether such a quantity of Water
can be had out of all the stores that we know in Nature: And from these two we
will take our Ground and Rise, and begin to reflect, whether the World has not
been hitherto mistaken in the common opinion and explication of the general
Deluge.

To discover how much Water would be requisite to make this Deluge, we must
first suppose enough to cover the plain surface of the Earth, the Fields and
lower Grounds; then we must heap up so much more upon this, as will reach above
the tops of the highest Mountains; so as drawing a Circle over the tops of the
highest Mountains quite round the Earth, suppose from Pole to Pole, and another
to meet it round the middle of the Earth, all that space or capacity contin'd
within these Circles is to be filled up with Water. This I confess will make a
prodigious mass of Water, and it looks frightfully to the imagination; it is
huge and great, but it is extravagantly so, as a great Monster: It does not look
like the work of God or Nature: However let us compute a little more
particularly how much this will amount to, or how many Oceans of Water would be
necessary to compose this great Ocean rolling in the Air, without bounds or
banks.

If all the Mountains were pared off the Earth, and so the surface of it lay
even, or in an equal convexity every where with the surface of the Sea, from
this surface of the Sea, let us suppose that the height of the Mountains may be
a mile and a half; or that we may not seem at all to favor our own opinion or
calculation, let us take a mile only for the perpendicular height of the
Mountains. Let us on the other side suppose the Sea to cover half the Earth, as
it is generally believed to do; and the common depth of it, taking one place
with another, to be about a quarter of a mile, or 250 paces. I say, taking one
place with another, for though the middle Chanel of the great Ocean be far
deeper, we may observe, that there is commonly a descent or declivity from the
shore to the middle part of the Chanel, so that one comes by degrees into the
depth of it; and those shory parts are generally but some fathoms deep.
Besides, in arms of the Sea, in Straits, and among Islands, there is commonly
no great depth, and some places are plain shallows. So as upon a moderate
computation, one place compared with another, we may take a quarter of a mile,
or about an hundred fathoms, for the common measure of the depth of the Sea, if
we were cast into a Chanel of an equal depth every where. This being supposed,
there would need four Oceans to lie upon this Ocean, to raise it up to the top
of the Mountains, or so high as the Waters of the Deluge rise; then four Oceans
more to lie upon the Land, that the Water there might swell to the same height;
which together make eight Oceans for the proportion of the Water required in
the Deluge.

It Is true, there would not be altogether so much Water required for the Land
as for the Sea, to raise them to an equal height; because Mountains and Hills
would fill up part of that space upon the Land, and so make less Water
requisite. But to compensate this, and confirm our computation, we must
consider in the first place, that we have taken a much less height of the
Mountains than is requisite, if we respect the Mediterraneous Mountains, or
those that are at a great distance from the Sea; For their height above the
surface of the Sea, computing the declivity of the Land all along from the
Mountains to the Seaside (and that there is such a declivity is manifest from
the course and descent of the Rivers) is far greater than the proportion we
have taken: The height of Mountains is usually taken from the foot of them, or
from the next Plain, which if it be far from the Sea, we may reasonably allow
as much for the declension of the Land from that place to the Sea, as for the
immediate height of the Mountain; So, for instance, the Mountains of the Moon
in Africa, whence the Nile flows, and after a long course falls into the
Mediterranean Sea by Egypt, are so much higher than the surface of that Sea,
first, as the Ascent of the Land is from the Sea to the foot of the Mountains,
and then as the height of the Mountains is from the bottom to the top: For both
these are to be computed when you measure the height of a Mountain, or of a
mountainous Land, in respect of the Sea: And the height of Mountains to the Sea
being thus computed, there would be need of six or eight Oceans to raise the
Sea alone as high as the highest Inland Mountains; And this is more than
enough to compensate the less quantity of Water that would be requisite upon
the Land. Besides, we must consider the Regions of the Air upwards to be more
capacious than a Region of the same thickness in or near the Earth, so as if an
Ocean poured upon the surface of the dry Land, supposing it were all smooth,
would rise to the height of half a quarter of a mile every where; the like
quantity of Water poured again at the height of the Mountains, would not have
altogether the same effect, or would not there raise the mass half a quarter of
a mile higher; for the surfaces of a Globe, the farther they are from their
Center, are the greater; and so accordingly the Regions that belong to them.
And, lastly, we must consider that there are some Countries or Valleys very
low, and also many Caverns or Cavities within the Earth, all which in this case
were to be first filled with Water. These things being compared and estimated,
we shall find that notwithstanding the room that Hills and Mountains take up on
the dry Land, there would be at least eight Oceans required, or a quantity of
Water eight times as great as the Ocean, to bring an Universal Deluge upon the
Earth, as that Deluge is ordinarily understood and explained.

The proportion of Water for the Deluge being thus stated, the next thing to be
done, is to enquire where this Water is to be found; if any part of the
Sublunary World will afford us so much: Eight Oceans floating in the Air, make
a great bulk of Water, I do not know what possible Sources to draw it from.
There are the Clouds above, and the Deeps below and in the bowels of the Earth;
and these are all the stores we have for Water; and Moses directs us to no
other for the Causes of the Deluge. The Fountains (he says) of the great
Abyss were broken up, or burst asunder, and the Rain descended for forty days,
the Cataracts or Floodgates of Heaven being opened. And in these two, no doubt,
are contained the causes of the great Deluge, as according to Moses, so also
according to reason and necessity; for our. World affords no other treasures of
Water. Let us therefore consider how much this Rain of Forty Days might amount
to, and how much might flow out of the Abyss, that so we may judge whether
these two in conjunction would make up the Eight Oceans which we want.

As for the Rains, they would not afford us one Ocean, nor half an Ocean, nor
the tenth part of an Ocean, if we may trust to the Observations made by others
concerning the quantity of Water that falls in Rain. Cog. Phys. Mech. p. 221.
Mersennus gives us this account of it. It appears by our Observations, that a
Cubical Vessel of Brass, whereof we made use, is filled an inch and an half in
half an hours time; but because that sucks up nothing of the moisture as the
Earth does, let us take an inch for half an hours Rain; whence it follows, that
in the space of 40 days and nights Rain, the Waters in the Deluge would rise
160 feet, At. 4 feet in 24 hours.
if the Rains were constant and equal to ours, and that it rained at once
throughout the face of the whole Earth. But the Rain of the Deluge, says he,
should have been 90 times greater than this, to cover, for instance, the
Mountains of Armenia, or to reach 15 Cubits above them. So that according to
his computation, the 40 days Rain would supply little more than the hundredth
part of the Water requisite to make the Deluge. It Is true, he makes the height
of the Mountains higher than we do; but, however, if you temper the Calculation
on all sides as much as you please, the water that came by this Rain would be a
very inconsiderable part of what was necessary for a Deluge. If it rained 40
days and 40 nights throughout the face of the whole Earth, in the Northern and
Southern Hemisphere all at once, it might be sufficient to lay all the lower
grounds under water, but it would signify very little as to the overflowing
of the Mountains. Whence another Author upon the same occasion has this
passage. Auct. cat. in Genesis 7. 4.
If the Deluge had been made by Rains only, there would not have needed 40
days, but 40 years Rain to have brought it to pass. And if we should suppose
the whole middle Region condensed into water, it would not at all have been
sufficient for this effect, according to that proportion some make betwixt Air
and Water; for they say, Air turned into Water takes up a hundred times less
room than it did before. The truth is, we may reasonably suppose, that all the
vapors of the middle Region were turned into water in this 40 days and 40
nights Rain, if we admit, that this Rain was throughout the whole Earth at
once, in either Hemisphere, in every Zone, in every Climate, in every Country,
in every Province, in every Field; and yet we see what a small proportion all
this would amount to.

Having done then with these Superior Regions, we are next to examine the
Inferior, and the treasures of water that may be had there. Moses tells us,
that the Fountains of the great Abyss were broke open, or clove asunder, as
the word there used does, imply; and no doubt in this lay the great mystery of
the Deluge, as will appear when it comes to be rightly understood and
explained; but we are here to consider what is generally understood by the
great Abyss, in the common explication of the Deluge; and it is commonly
interpreted either to be the Sea, or Subterraneous waters hid in the bowels of
the Earth: These, they say, broke forth and raised the waters, caused by the
Rain, to such an height, that together they overflowed the highest Mountains.
But whether or how this could be, deserves to be a little examined.

And in the first place; the Sea is not higher than the Land, as some have
formerly imagined; fansying the Sea stood, as it were, upon a heap, higher than
the shore; and at the Deluge a relaxation being made, it overflowed the Land.
But this conceit is so gross, and so much against reason and experience, that
none I think of late have ventured to make use of it. And yet on the other
hand, if the Sea lie in an equal convexity with the Land, or lower generally
than the shore, and much more than the midland, as it is certainly known to do,
what could the Sea contribute to the Deluge? It would keep its Chanel, as it
does now; and take up the same place. And so also the Subterraneous waters
would lie quiet in their Cells? whatsoever Fountains or passages you suppose,
these would not issue out upon the Earth, for water does not ascend, unless by
force. But lets imagine then that force used and applied, and the waters both
of the Sea and Caverns under ground drawn out upon the surface of the Earth, we
shall not be any whit the nearer for this; for if you take these waters out of
their places, those places must be filled again with other waters in the
Deluge; so as this turns to no account upon the whole. If you have two Vessels
to fill, and you empty one to fill the other, you gain nothing by that, there
still remains one Vessel empty, you cannot have these waters both in the Sea
and on the Land, both above ground and under; nor can you suppose the Chanel of
the Sea would stand gaping without water, when all the Earth was overflowed,
and the tops of the Mountains covered. And so for Subterraneous Cavities, if
you suppose the water pumpt out, they would suck it in again when the Earth
came to be laid under water; so that upon the whole, if you thus understand the
Abyss or great Deep, and the breaking open its Fountains in this manner, it
does us no service as to the Deluge, and where we expected the greatest supply,
there we find none at all.

What shall we do then? whither shall we go to find more than seven Oceans of
water that we still want? We have been above and below; we have drained the
whole middle Region, and we have examined the Deeps of the Earth; they must
want for themselves, they say, if they give us any; And, besides, if the Earth
should disgorge all the water that it has in its bowels, it would not amount
to above half an Ocean, which would not at all answer our occasions. Must we
not then conclude, that the common explication of the Deluge makes it
impossible? there being no such quantity of water in Nature as they make
requisite for an universal Deluge. Yet to give them all fair play, having
examined the waters above the Earth or in the Air, the waters upon the Earth,
and the waters under the Earth; let us also consider if there be not waters
above the Heavens, and if those might not be drawn down for the Deluge. Moses
speaks of waters above the firmament, which though it be generally understood
of the middle Region of the Air, yet some have thought those to be waters
placed above the highest Heavens, or Super-celestial waters: and have been
willing to make use of them for a supply, when they could not find materials
enough under the Heavens to make up the great mass of the Deluge. But the
Heavens above, where these waters lay, are either solid, or fluid; if solid, as
Glass or Crystal, how could the waters get through 'em to descend upon the
Earth? If fluid, as the Air or Ether, how could the waters rest upon them? For
Water is heavier than Air or Ether; So that I am afraid those pure Regions
will prove no fit place for that Element, upon any account. But supposing these
waters there, how imaginary soever, and that they were brought down to drown
the World in that vast quantity that would be necessary, what became of them,
when the Deluge ceased; Seven or eight Oceans of water, with the Earth wrapped up
in the middle of them, how did it ever get quit of them? how could they be
disposed of when the Earth was to be dried, and the World renewed? It would be
a hard task to lift them up again among the Spheres, and we have no room for
them here below. The truth is, I mention this opinion of the Heavenly waters,
because I would omit none that had ever been made use of to make good the
common explication of the Deluge; but otherwise, I think, since the System of
the World has been better known, and the Nature of the Heavens, there are none
that would seriously assert these Super-celestial waters, or, at least, make
use of them so extravagantly, as to bring them down hither for causes of the
Deluge.

We have now employed our last and utmost endeavors to find out waters for the
vulgar Deluge, or for the Deluge as commonly understood; and you see with how
little success; we have left no corner unsought, where there was any appearance
or report of water to be found, and yet we have not been able to collect the
eighth part of what was necessary upon a moderate account. May we not then with
assurance conclude, that the World has taken wrong measures hitherto in their
notion and explication of the general Deluge? They make it impossible and
unintelligible upon a double account, both in requiring more water than can be
found, and more than can be disposed of, if it was found: or could any way be
withdrawn from the Earth when the Deluge should cease. For if the Earth was
encompassed with eight Oceans of water heapt one upon another, how these should
retire into any Channels, or be drained off, or the Earth any way disengaged
from them, is not intelligible; and that in so short a time as some months: For
the violence of the Deluge lasted but four or five months, and in as many
months after the Earth was dry and habitable. So as upon the whole enquiry, we
can neither find source nor issue, beginning nor ending, for such an excessive
mass of Waters as the Vulgar Deluge required; neither where to have them, nor
if we had them, how to get quit of them. And I think men cannot do a greater
injury or injustice to Sacred History, than to give such representations of
things recorded there, as make them unintelligible and incredible; And on the
other hand, we cannot deserve better of Religion and Providence, than by giving
such fair accounts of all things proposed by them, or belonging to them, as may
silence the Cavils of Atheists, satisfy the inquisitive, and recommend them to
the belief and acceptance of all reasonable persons.

CHAP. III. All Evasions answered; That there was no new Creation of waters at
the Deluge: And that it was not particular or National, but extended throughout
the whole Earth. A prelude and preparation to the true Account and Explication
of it: The method of the first Book.
THough in the preceding Chapter we may seem to have given a fair trial to the
common opinion concerning the state of the Deluge, and might now proceed to
sentence of condemnation: yet having heard of another plea, which some have
used in its behalf, and another way found out by recourse to the Supreme Power,
to supply all defects, and to make the whole matter intelligible, we will
proceed no further till that be considered; being very willing to examine
whatsoever may be offered, in that or any other way, for resolving that great
difficulty which we have proposed, concerning the quantity of water requisite
for such a Deluge. And to this they say in short, that God Almighty created
waters on purpose to make the Deluge, and then annihilated them again when the
Deluge was to cease; And this, in a few words, is the whole account of the
business. This is to out the knot when we cannot loose it; They show us the
naked arm of Omnipotency; such Arguments as these come like lightning, one does
not know what Armor to put on against them, for they pierce the more, the more
they are resisted: We will not therefore oppose any thing to them that is hard
and stubborn, but by a soft answer deaden their force by degrees.

And I desire to mind those persons in the first place of what S. Austin has
said upon a like occasion, speaking concerning those that disproved the opinion
of waters above the Heavens (which we mentioned before) by natural Reasons. We
are not, says he, to refute those persons, by saying, that according to the
Omnipotence of God, to whom all things are possible, we ought to believe there
are waters there as heavy as we know and feel them here below; for our business
is now to enquire according to his Scripture, how God has constituted the
Nature of things, and not what he could do or work in these things, by a
miracle of Omnipotency. I desire them to apply this to the present argument for
the first answer.

Secondly, let them consider, that Moses has assigned causes of the Deluge;
Forty days Rain, and the disruption of the Abyss; and speaks nothing of a new
creation of water upon that occasion. Those were causes in Nature which
Providence had then disposed for this extraordinary effect, and those the
Divine Historian refers us to, and not to any productions out of nothing.
Besides, Moses makes the Deluge increase by degrees with the Rain, and
accordingly makes it cease by degrees, and that the waters going and returning,
as the waves and great commotions of the Sea use to do, retired leisurely from
the face of the Earth, and settled at length in their Channels. Now this manner
of the beginning or ceasing of the Deluge does not at all agree with the
instantaneous actions of Creation and Annihilation.

Thirdly, 2 Pet. 3. 6.
let them consider, that S. Peter has also assigned Causes of the Deluge;
namely the particular constitution of the Earth and Heavens before the Flood;
by reason whereof, he says, the World that was then, perished in a Deluge of
water. And not by reason of a new creation of water. His words are these, The
Heavens and the Earth were of old, consisting of water, and by water; whereby,
or by reason whereof, the World that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished.

Fourthly, they are to consider, that as we are not rashly to have recourse to
the Divine Omnipotence upon any account, so especially not for new Creations;
and least of all for the creation of new matter. The matter of the Universe was
created many Ages before the Flood, and the Universe being full, if any more
was created, then there must be as much annihilated at the same time to make
room for it; for Bodies cannot penetrate one another dimensions, nor be two or
more within one and the same space. Then on the other hand, when the Deluge
ceased, and these waters were annihilated, so much other matter must be created
again to take up their places: And methinks they make very bold with the Deity,
when they make him do and undo, go forward and backwards by such countermarches
and retractions, as we do not willingly impute to the wisdom of God Almighty.

Lastly, I shall not think my labor lost, if it be but acknowledged, that we
have so far cleared the way in this controversy, as to have brought it to this
issue; That either there must be new waters created on purpose to make a
Deluge, or there could be no Deluge, as it is vulgarly explained; there not
being water sufficient in Nature to make a Deluge of that kind. This, I say, is
a great step, and, I think, will satisfy all parties, at least all that are
considerable; for those that have recourse to a New Creation of waters, are of
two sorts, either such as do it out of laziness and ignorance, or such as do it
out of necessity, seeing they cannot be had otherwise; as for the first, they
are not to be valued or gratified; and as for the second, I shall do a thing
very acceptable to them, if I free them and the argument from that necessity,
and show a way of making the Deluge fairly intelligible, and accountable
without the creation of new waters; which is the design of this Treatise. For
we do not tie this knot with an Intention to puzzle and perplex the Argument
finally with it, but the harder it is tied, we shall feel the pleasure more
sensibly when come to loose it.

It may be when they are beaten from this new Creation of water, they will say
the Element of Air was changed into water, and that was the great storehouse
for the Deluge. Forty days Rain we allow, as Moses does, but if they suppose
any other transelementation, it neither agrees with Moses's Philosophy, nor S.
Peter's; for then the opening of the Abyss was needless, and the form and
constitution of the Antediluvian Heavens and Earth, which S. Peter refers the
Deluge to, bore no part in the work; it might have been made, in that way,
indifferently under any Heavens or Earth. Besides they offend against S.
Austin's rule in this method too; for I look upon it as no less a miracle to
turn Air into Water, than to turn Water into Wine. Air, I say, for Vapors
indeed are but water made volatile, but pure Air is a body of another Species,
and cannot by any compression or condensation, so far as is yet known, be
changed into water. And lastly, if the whole Atmosphere was turned into water,
it is very probable it would make no more than 34 foot or thereabouts; for so
much Air or Vapors as is of the same weight with any certain quantity of
water, it is likely, if it was changed into water, would also be of the same
bulk with it, or not much more: Now according to the doctrine of the
Gravitation of the Atmosphere, it is found that 34 foot of water does
counterbalance a proportionable Cylinder of Air reaching to the top of the
Atmosphere; and consequently, if the whole Atmosphere was converted into water,
it would make no more than eleven or twelve yards water about the Earth; which
the cavities of the Earth would be able in a good measure to suck up, at least
this is very inconsiderable as to our eight Oceans. And if you would change the
higher Regions into water too, what must supply the place of that Air which you
transform into water, and bring down upon the Earth? There would be little left
but Fire and Ether betwixt us and the Moon, and I am afraid it would endanger
to suck down the Moon too after it. In a word, such an explication as this, is
both, purely imaginary, and also very operose, and would affect a great part of
the Universe; and after all, they would be as hard put to it to get rid of this
water, when the Deluge was to cease, as they were at first to procure it.

Having now examined and answered all the pleas, from first to last, for the
vulgar Deluge, or the old way of explaining it, we should proceed immediately
to propose another method, and another ground for an universal Deluge, were it
not that an opinion has been started by some of late, that would in effect
supplant both these methods, old and new, and take away in a great measure the
subject of the question. Some modern Authors observing what straits they have
been put to in all Ages, to find out water enough for Noah's Flood, have
ventured upon an expedient more brisk and bold, than any of the Ancients durst
venture upon: They say, Noah's Flood was not Universal, but a National
Inundation, confined to Iudaea, and those Countries thereabouts; and
consequently, there would not be so much water necessary for the cause of it,
as we have proved to be necessary for an Universal Deluge of that kind. Their
inference is very true, they have avoided that rock, but they run upon another
no less dangerous; to avoid an objection from reason they deny matter of fact,
and such matter of fact as is well attested by History, both Sacred and
profane. I believe the Authors that set up this opinion, were not themselves
satisfied with it: but seeing insuperable difficulties in the old way, they are
the more excusable in choosing, as they thought, of two evils the less.

But the choice methinks, is as bad on this hand, if all things be considered;
Moses represents the Flood of Noah as an overthrow and destruction of the whole
Earth; and who can imagine, that in sixteen or seventeen hundred years time
(taking the lower Chronology) that the Earth had then stood, mankind should be
propagated no further than Iudae, or some neighboring Countries thereabouts.
After the Floo, when the World was renewed again by eight persons, they had
made a far greater progress in Asia, Europe and Africa, within the same space
of years, and yet it is likely they were more fruitful in the first Ages of the
World, than after the Flood; and they lived six, seven, eight, nine hundred
years a piece, getting Sons and Daughters. Which longevity of the first
Inhabitants of the Earth seems to have been providentially designed for the
quicker multiplication and propagation of mankind; and mankind thereby would
become so numerous within sixteen hundred years, that there seems to me to be a
greater difficulty from the multitude of the people that would be before the
Flood, than from the want of people. For if we a^low the first couple at the
end of one hundred years, or of the first Century, to have left ten pair of
Breeders, which is no hard supposition, there would arise from these, in
fifteen hundred years, a greater number than the Earth was capable of; allowing
every pair to multiply in the same decuple proportion the first pair did. But
because this would rise far beyond the capacities of this Earth, let us suppose
them to increase, in the following Centuries, in a quintuple proportion only,
or, if you will, only in a quadruple; and then the Table of the multiplication
of mankind from the Creation to the Flood, would stand thus; Century
1 -- 10 2 -- 40 3 -- 160 4 -- 640 5 -- 2560 6 -- 10240 7 -- 40960 8 -- 163840
9 -- 655360 10 -- 2621440 11 -- 10485760 12 -- 41943040 13 -- 167772160 14 --
671088640 15 -- 2684354560 16 -- 10737418240
This product is too excessive high, if compared with the present number of men
upon the face of the Earth, which I think is commonly estimated to be betwixt
three and four hundred millions; and yet this proportion of their increase
seems to be low enough, if we take one proportion for all the Centuries; for,
in reality, the same measure cannot run equally through all the Ages, but we
have taken this as moderate and reasonable betwixt the highest and the lowest;
but if we had taken only a triple proportion, it would have been sufficient
(all things considered) for purpose. There are several other ways of computing
this number, and some more particular and exact than this is, but which way
soever you try, you shall find the product great enough for the extent of this
Earth; and if you follow the Septuagint Chronology it will still be far higher.
I have met with three or four different Calculations, in several Authors, of
the number of mankind before the Hood, and never met with any yet, but what
exceeded the number of the people that are at present upon the face of the
Earth. So as it seems to me a very groundless and forced conceit to imagine,
that Iudaea only, and some parts about it in Asia, were stored with people when
the Deluge was brought upon the old World. Besides if the Deluge was confined
to those Countries, I do not see but the Borderers might have escaped, shifting
a little into the adjoining places where the Deluge did not reach. But
especially what needed so much a-do to build an Ark to save Noah and his
Family, if he might have saved himself, and them, only by retiring into some
neighboring Country; as Lot and his family saved themselves, by withdrawing
from Sodom when the City was to be destroyed? Had not this been a far easier
thing; and more compendious, than the great Preparations he made of a large
Vessel, with Rooms for the Reception and Accommodation of Beasts and Birds? And
now I mention Birds, why could not they at least have flown into the next dry
Country? they might have pearch'd upon the Trees, and the tops of the Mountains
by the way to have rested themselves if they were weary, for the Waters did not
all of a sudden rise to the Mountains tops.

I cannot but look upon the Deluge as a much more considerable thing than these
Authors would represent it, and as a kind of dissolution of Nature. Moses calls
it a destroying of the Earth, as well as of Mankind, Genesis 6. 13. And the Bow
was set in the Cloud to seal the Covenant, that he would destroy the Earth no
more, Genesis 9. 11. or that there should be no more a Flood to destroy the Earth.
And it is said, verse 13. that the Covenant was made between God and the Earth,
or this frame of Nature, that it should perish no more by Water. And the
Rainbow, which was a Token and pledge of this Covenant, appears not only in
Iudaea, or some other Asiatick Provinces, but to all the Regions of the Earth,
who had an equal share and concern in it. Moses says also the Fountains of the
grear Abyss were burst asunder to make the Deluge, and what means this Abyss
and the bursting of it, if restrained to Iudaea, or some adjacent Countries?
What appearance is there of this Disruption there, more than in other Places?
Furthermore, 2 Epist. c. 5, 6.
S. Peter plainly implies, that the Antediluvian Heavens and Earth perished in
the Deluge; and opposes the present Earth and Heavens to them, as different
and of another constitution: and says, that these shall perish by Fire, as the
other perished by Water. So he compares the Conflagration with the Deluge, as
two general dissolutions of Nature, and one may as well say, that the
Conflagration shall be only National, and but two or three Countries burnt in
that last Fire, as to say that the Deluge was so. I confess that discourse of
S. Peter, concerning the several States of the World, would sufficiently
convince me, if there was nothing else, That the Deluge was not a particular or
National Inundation, but a mundane change, that extended to the whole Earth,
and both to the (lower) Heavens and Earth.

All Antiquity, we know, has spoke of these Mundane Revolutions or Periods,
that the World should be successively destroyed by Water and Fire; and I do not
doubt but that this Deluge of Noah's, which Moses describes, was the first and
leading instance of this kind: and accordingly we see that after this Period,
and after the Flood, the blessing for multiplication, and for replenishing the
Earth with Inhabitants, was as solemnly pronounced by God Almighty, as at the
first Creation of Man, Genesis 9. 1. with Genesis 1. 28. These considerations, I
think, might be sufficient to give us assurance from Divine Writ of the
universality of the Deluge, and yet Moses affords us another argument as
demonstrative as any, when in the History of the Deluge, he says, Genesis 7. 19.
The waters exceedingly prevailed upon the Earth, and all the high Hills that
were under the whole Heavens were covered. All the high Hills, he says, under
the whole Heavens, then quite round the Earth; and if the Mountains were
cover^d quite round the Earth, sure the Plains could not escape. But to argue
with them upon their own grounds; Let us suppose only the Asiatick and Armenian
Mountains covered with these waters, this they cannot deny; then unless there
was a miracle to keep these waters upon heaps, they would flow throughout the
Earth; for these Mountains are high enough to make them fall every way, and
make them join with our Seas that environ the Continent. We cannot imagine
Hills and Mountains of water to have hung about Iudaea, as if they were
congealed, or mass of water to have stood upon the middle of the Earth like one
great drop, or a trembling Jelly, and all the places about it dry and
untouched. All liquid bodies are dissusive; for their parts being in motion
have no tie or connection one with another, but glide and fall off any way, as
gravity and the Air presses them; so the surface of water does always conform
into a Spherical convexity with the rest of the Globe of the Earth, and every
part of it falls as near to the Center as it can; wherefore when these waters
began to rise at first, long before they could swell to the height of the
Mountains, they would diffuse themselves every way, and thereupon all the
Valleys and Plains, and lower parts of the Earth would be filled throughout the
whole Earth, before they could rise to the tops of the Mountains in any part of
it: And the Sea would be all raised to a considerble height before the
Mountains could be covered. For let us suppose, as they do, that this water fell
not throughout the whole Earth, but in some particular Country, and there made
first a great Lake; this Lake when it begun to swell would every way discharge
it self by any descents or declivities of the ground, and these issues and
derivations being once made, and supplied with new waters pushing them
forwards, would continue their course till they arrived at the Sea; just as
other Rivers do, for these would be but so many Rivers rising out of this Lake,
and would not be considerably deeper and higher at the Fountain than in their
progress or at the Sea. We may as well then expect that the Leman-Lake, for
instance, out of which the Rhone runs, should swell to the tops of the Alps on
the one hand, and the Mountains of Switzerland and Burgundy on the other, and
then stop, without overflowing the plainer Countries that lie beyond them; as
to suppose that this Diluvian Lake should rise to the Mountains tops in one
place, and not diffuse it self equally into all Countries about, and upon the
surface of the Sea: in proportion to its height and depth in the place where
it first fell or stood.

Thus much for Sacred History. The universality of the Deluge is also attested
by profane History; for the fame of it is gone through the Earth, and there are
Records or Traditions concerning it, in all parts of this and the newfound
World. The Americans do acknowledge and speak of it in their Continent, Mart.
as Acosta witnesses, and Laet in their Histories of them. Mart.
The Chinese have the Tradition of it, which is the farthest part of our
Continent; and the nearer and Western parts of Asia is acknowledged the proper
seat of it. Not to mention Deucallon's Deluge in the European parts, which
seems to be the same under a disguise: So as you may trace the Deluge quite
round the Globe in profane History; and which is remarkable, every one of these
people have a tale to tell, some one way, some another, concerning the
restoration of mankind; which is an argument that they thought all mankind
destroyed by that Deluge. In the old dispute between the Scythians and the
Egyptians for Antiquity, which Justin mentions, they refer to a former
destruction of the World by Water or Fire, and argue whether Nation first rise
again, and was original to the other. So the Babylonians, Assyrians,
Phoenicians and others, mention the Deluge in their stories. And we cannot
without offering violence to all Records and Authority, Divine and Humane, deny
that there has been an universal Deluge upon the Earth; and if there was an
universal Deluge, no question it was that of Noah's and that which Moses
described, and that which we treat of at present.

These considerations, I think, are abundantly sufficient to silence that
opinion, concerning the limitation and restriction of the Deluge to a
particular Country or Countries. It ought rather to be looked upon as an Evasion
indeed than Opinion, seeing the Authors do not offer any positive argument for
the proof of it, but depend only upon that negative argument, That an universal
Deluge is a thing unintelligible. This stumbling-stone we hope to take away for
the future, and that men shall not be put to that unhappy choice, either to
deny matter of fact well attested, or admit an effect, whereof they cannot see
any possible causes. And so having stated and proposed the whole difficulty,
and tried all ways offered by others, and found them ineffectual, let us now
apply our selves by degrees to unty the knot.

The excessive quantity of water is the great difficulty, and the removal of it
afterward. Those eight Oceans lay heavy upon my thoughts, and I cast about
every way to find an expedient, or to find some way whereby the same effect
might be brought to pass with less Water, and in such a manner, that that Water
might afterward conveniently be discharged. The first thought that came into
my mind upon that occasion, was concerning the form of the Earth, which I
imagined might possibly at that time be different from what it is at present,
and come nearer to plainness and equality in the surface of it, and so might
the more easily be overflowed, and the Deluge performed with less water. This
opinion concerning the plainness of the first Earth, I also found in Antiquity,
mentioned and referred to by several Interpreters in their Commentaries upon
Genesis, either upon occasion of the Deluge, or of that Fountain which is said,
Genesis 2. 6. to have watered the face of the whole Earth: And a late eminent
person, the honor of his profession for Integrity and Learning, in his
discourse concerning the Origination of mankind, has made a like judgment of
the State of the Earth before the Deluge, that the face of it was more smooth
and regular than it is now. But yet upon second thoughts, I easily see that
this alone would not be sufficient to explain the Deluge, nor to give an
account of the present from of the Earth, unequal and Mountainous as it is.
It Is true this would give a great advantage to the waters, and the Rains that
fell for forty days together would have a great power over the Earth, being
plain and smooth; but how would these waters be disposed of when the Deluge
ceased? or how could it ever cease? Besides, what means the disruption of the
great Deep, or the great Abyss, or what answers to it upon this supposition?
This was assuredly of no less consideration than the Rains, nay, I believe, the
Rains were but preparatory in some measure, and that the violence and
consummation of the Deluge depended upon the disruption of the great Abyss.
Therefore I saw it necessary, to my first thought, concerning the smoothness
and plainness of the Ante-diluvian Earth, to add a second, concerning the
disruption and dissolution of it; for as it often happens in Earthquakes, when
the exterior Earth is burst asunder, and a great Flood of waters issues out,
according to the quantity and force of them, an Inundation is made in those
parts, more or less; so I thought, if that Abyss lay under ground and round
the Earth, and we should suppose the Earth in this manner to be broken in
several places at once, and as it were a general dissolution made, we might
suppose that to make a general Deluge, as well as a particular dissolution
often makes a particular. But I will not anticipate here the explication we
intend to give of the universal Deluge in the following Chapters, only by this
previous intimation we may gather some hopes, it may be, that the matter is not
so desperate as the former representation might possibly make us fancy it.

Give me leave to add farther in this place, that it has been observed by
several, from the contemplation of Mountains and Rocks and Precipices, of the
Chanel of the Sea, and of Islands, and of Subterraneous Caverns, that the
surface of the Earth, or the exterior Region which we inhabit, has been
broke, and the parts of it dislocated: And one might instance more particularly
in several parcels of Nature, that retain still the evident marks of fraction
and ruin; and by their present form and posture show, that they have been once
in another state and situation one to another. We shall have occasion hereafter
to give an account of these Phenomenon, from which several have rightly argued
and concluded some general rupture or ruin in the superficial parts of the
Earth. But this ruin, it is true, they have imagined and explained several
ways, some thinking that it was made the third day after the foundation of the
Earth; when they suppose the Chanel of the Sea to have been formed, and
Mountains and Caverns at the same time; by a violent depression of some parts
of the Earth, and an extrusion and elevation of others to make them room.
Others suppose it to have come not all at once, but by degrees, at several
times, and in several Ages, from particular and accidental causes, as the Earth
falling in upon Fires under ground, or water eating away the lower parts, or
Vapors and Exhalations breaking out, and tearing the Earth. It Is true, I am
not of their opinion in either of these Explications; and we shall show at
large hereafter, when we have proposed and stated our own Theory, how
incompetent such causes are to bring the Earth into that form and condition we
now find it in. But in the mean time, we may so far make use of these Opinions
in general, as not to be startled at this Doctrine, concerning the breaking or
dissolution of the exterior Earth; for in all Ages the face of Nature has
provoked men to think of and observe such a thing. And who can do otherwise, to
see the Elements displaced and disordered, as they seem to lie at present; the
heaviest and grossest bodies in the highest places, and the liquid and volatile
kept below; an huge mass of Stone or Rock reared into the Air, and the water
creeping at its feet; whereas this is the more light and active body, and by
the law of Nature should take place of Rocks and Stones? So we see, by the like
disorder, the Air thrown down into Dungeons of the Earth, and the Earth got up
among the Clouds; for there are the tops of the Mountains, and under their
roots in Holes and Caverns the Air is often detained. By what regular action of
Nature can we suppose things first produced in this posture and form? not to
mention how broke and torn the inward substance of the Earth is, which of it
self is an uniform mass, close and compact: but in the condition we see it, it
lies hollow in many places, with great vacuities intercepted betwixt the
portions of it; a thing which we see happens in all ruins more or less,
especially when the parts of the ruins are great and inflexible. Then what can
have more the figure and mien of a ruin, than Crags and Rocks and Cliffs,
whether upon the Sea shore, or upon the sides of Mountains; what can be more
apparently broke, than they are; and those lesser Rocks, or great bulky Stones
that lie often scattered near the feet of the other, whether in the Sea, or
upon the Land, are they not manifest fragments, and pieces of those greater
masses? Besides, the posture of these Rocks, which is often leaning or
recumbent, or prostrate, shows to the eye, that they have had a fall, or some
kind of dislocation from their Natural site. And the same thing may be observed
in the Tracts and Regions of the Earth, which very seldom for ten miles
together have any regular surface or continuity one with another, but lie high
and low, and are variously inclined sometimes one way, sometimes another,
without any rule or order. Whereas I see no reason but the surface of the Land
should be as regular as that of the water, in the first production of it: And
the Strata or beds within lie as even. This I am sure of, that this disposition
of the Elements, and the parts of the Earth, outward and inward, has something
irregular and unnatural in it, and manifestly shows us the marks or footsteps
of some kind of ruin and dissolution; which we shall show you, in its due
place, happened in such a way, that at the same time a general Flood of waters
would necessarily overrun the face of the whole Earth. And by the same fatal
blow, the Earth fell out of that regular form, wherein it was produced at
first, into all these irregularities which we see in its present form and
composition; so that we shall give thereby a double satisfaction to the mind,
both to show it a fair and intelligible account of the general Deluge, how the
waters came upon the Earth, and how they returned into their Channels again, and
left the Earth habitable; and likewise to show it how the Mountains were
brought forth, and the Chanel of the Sea discovered: How all those inequalities
came in the body or face of the Earth, and those empty Vaults and Caverns in
its bowels; which things are no less matter of admiration than the Flood it
self.

But I must beg leave to draw a Curtain before the Work for a while, and to
keep your patience a little in suspense, till materials are prepared, and all
things ready to represent and explain what we have proposed. Yet I hope in the
mean time to entertain the mind with scenes no less pleasing, though of quite
another face and order: for we must now return to the beginning of the World,
and look upon the first rudiments of Nature, and that dark but fruitful womb,
out of which all things sprang, I mean the Chaos: For this is the matter which
we must next work upon, and it will be no unpleasing thing to observe, how that
rude mass will shoot it self into several forms, one after another, till it
comes at length to make an habitable World. The steady hand of Providence,
which keeps all things in weight and measure, being the invisible guide of all
its motions. These motions we must examine from first to last, to find out what
was the form of the Earth, and what was the place or situation of the Ocean, or
the great Abyss, in that first state of Nature: Which two things being
determined, we shall be able to make a certain judgment, what kind of
dissolution that Earth was capable of, and whether from that dissolution an
Universal Deluge would follow, with all the consequences of it.

In the mean time, for the ease and satisfaction of the Reader, we will here
mark the order and distribution of the first Book, which we divide into Three
Sections; whereof the First is these Three Chapters past: in the Second Section
we will show, that the Earth before the Deluge was of a different frame and
form from the present Earth; and particularly of such a form as made it subject
to a dissolution: And to such a dissolution, as did necessarily expose it to an
Universal Deluge. And in this place we shall apply our discourse particularly
to the explication of Noah's Flood, and that under all its conditions, of the
height of the waters, of their universality, of the destruction of the World by
them, and of their retiring afterward from the Earth; and this Section will
consist of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Chapters. In the Third
Section we prove the same dissolution from the effects and consequences of it,
or from the contemplation of the present face of the Earth: And here an account
is given of the Origin of Mountains, of subterraneous Waters and Caverns, of
the great Chanel of the Sea, and of the first production of Islands; and those
things are the Contents of the Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Chapters. Then, in the
last Chapter, we make a general review of the whole Work, and a general review
of Nature; that, by comparing them together, their full agreement and
correspondency may appear. Here several collateral arguments are given for
confirmation of the preceding Theory, and some reflections are made upon the
state of the other Planets compared with the Earth. And lastly, what accounts
soever have been given by others of the present form and irregularities of the
Earth, are examined and showed insufficient. And this seems to be all that is
requisite upon this subject.

CHAP. IV. That the Earth and Mankind had an Original, and were not from
Eternity: Proved against Aristotle. The first proposition of our Theory laid
down, viz. That the Antediluvian Earth was of a different form and construction
from the present. This is proved by Divine Authority, and from the nature and
form of the Chaos, out of which the Earth was made.
WE are now to enquire into the Original of the Earth, and in what form it was
built at first, that we may lay our foundation for the following Theory, deep
and sure. It has been the general opinion and consent of the Learned of all
Nations, that the Earth arose from a Chaos. This is attested by History, both
Sacred and Profane; only Aristotle, whom so great a part of the Christian World
have made their Oracle or Idol, has maintained the Eternity of the Earth, and
the Eternity of Mankind; that the Earth and the World were from Everlasting,
and in that very form they are in now, with Men and Women and all living
Creatures, Trees and Fruit, Metals and Minerals, and whatsoever is of Natural
production. We say all these things arose and had their first existence or
production not six thousand years ago; He says, they have subsisted thus for
ever, through an infinite Series of past Generations, and shall continue as
long, without first or last: And if so, there was neither Chaos, nor any other
beginning to the Earth. This takes away the subject of our discourse, and
therefore we must first remove this stone but of the way, and prove that the
Earth had an Original, and that from a Chaos, before we show how it arose from
a Chaos, and what was the first habitable form that it settled into.

We are assured by Divine Authority, that the Earth and Mankind had a
beginning; Moses says, In the beginning God made the Heavens and the Earth.
Speaking it as of a certain Period or Term from whence he counts the Age of the
World. And the same Moses tells us, that Adam was the first Man, and Eve the
first Woman, from whom sprung the race of Mankind; and this within the compass
of six thousand years. We are also assured from the Prophets, and our Christian
Records, that the world shall have an end, and that by a general Conflagration,
when all Mankind shall be destroyed, with the form and all the furniture of the
Earth. And as this proves the second part of Aristotle's Doctrine to be false
immediately, so does it the first, by a true consequence; for what has an end
had a beginning, what is not immortal, was not Eternal; That which exists by
the strength of its own Nature at first, the same Nature will enable to exist
for ever; and indeed what exists of it self, exists necessarily; and what
exists necessarily, exists eternally.

Having this infallible assurance of the Origin of the Earth and of Mankind,
from Scripture, we proceed to refute the same Doctrine of Aristotle's by
Natural Reason. And we will first consider the form of the Earth, and then
Mankind; and show from plain evidence and observation, neither of them to have
been Eternal. It Is natural to the mind of Man to consider that which is
compound, as having been once more simple; whether that composition be a
mixture of many ingredients, as most Terrestrial Bodies are, or whether it be
Organical; but especially if it be Organical: For a thing that consists of a
multitude of pieces aptly joined, we cannot but conceive to have had those
pieces, at one time or another, put together. 'Twere hard to conceive an
eternal Watch, whose pieces were never separate one from another, nor ever in
any other form than that of a Watch. Or an eternal House, whose materials were
never asunder, but always in the form of an House. And it is as hard to conceive
an Eternal Earth, or an Eternal World: These are made up of more various
substances, more ingredients, and into a far greater composition; and the
living part of the World, Plants and Animals, have much more variety of parts
and multifarious construction, than any House, or any other artificial thing:
So that we are led as much by Nature and necessity to conceive this great
Machine of the World, or of the Earth, to have been once in a state of greater
simplicity than now it is, as to conceive a Watch, an House, or any other
structure, to have been once in its first and simple materials. This I speak
without reference to immediate Creation, for Aristotle did not own any such
thing, and therefore the argument stands good against him, upon those grounds
and notions that he goes, yet I guess what answer would be made by him or his
followers to this argumentation; They would say there is not the same reason
for Natural things, as for Artificial, though equally compounded. Artificial
things could not be from Eternity, because they suppose Man, by whose Art they
were made, pre existent to them; the workman must be before the work, and
whatsoever has any thing before it, is not Eternal. But may not the same thing
be said of Natural things? do not most of them require the action of the Sun,
and the influence of the Heavens for their production, and longer preparations
than any Artificial things do? Some Years or Ages would be necessary for the
concoction and maturation of Metals and Minerals; Stones themselves, at least
some sorts of them, were once liquors or fluid masses; and all Vegetable
productions require the heat of the Sun, to predispose and excite the Earth,
and the Seeds. Nay, according to Aristotle, it is not Man by himself that begets
a Man, but the Sun is his Coadjutor. You see then 'twas as necessary that the
Sun, that great Workman of Nature, should pre-exist to Natural things, produc^d
in or upon the Earth, as that Man should pre-exist to Artificial. So that the
Earth under that form and constitution it now has, could no more be Eternal,
than a Statue or Temple, or any work of Art.

Besides, that form, which the Earth is under at present, is in some sort
preter-natural, like a Statue made and broken again; and so has still the less
appearance or pretense of being Eternal. If the Elements had lain in that order
to one another, as Aristotle has disposed them, and as seems to be their first
disposition; the Earth altogether in a mass in the middle, or toward the
Center; then the Water in a Spherical mass about that; the Air above the Water,
and then a Sphere of Fire, as he fansied, in the highest Circle of the Air: If
they had lain, I say, in this posture, there might have been some pretense that
they had been Eternally so; because that might seem to be their Original
posture, in which Nature had first placed them. But the form and posture we
find them in at present is very different, and according to his Doctrine must
be looked upon as unnatural and violent; and no violent state by his own Maxim,
can be perpetual, or can have been so.

But there is still a more pressing consideration against this Opinion. If this
present state and form of the Earth had been from Eternity, it would have long
ere this destroyed it self, and changed it self: the Mountains sinking by
degrees into the Valleys, and into the Sea, and the Waters rising above the
Earth; which form it would certainly have come into sooner or later, and in it
continued drowned and uninhabitable, for all succeeding Generations. For it is
certain, that the Mountains and higher parts of the Earth grow lesser and
lesser from Age to Age; and that from many causes, sometimes the roots of them
are weakened and eaten by Subterraneous Fires, and sometimes they are torn and
tumbled down by Earthquakes, and fall into those Caverns that are under them;
and though those violent causes are not constant, or universal, yet if the
Earth had stood from Eternity, there is not a Mountain would have escaped this
fate in one Age or other. The course of these exhalations or Fires would have
reached them all sooner or later, if through infinite Ages they had stood
exposed to them. But there are also other causes that consume them insensibly,
and make them sink by degrees; and those are chiefly the Winds, Rains, and
Storms, and heat of the Sun without; and within, the soaking of Water and
Springs, with streams and currents in their veins and crannies. These two sorts
of causes would certainly reduce all the Mountains of the Earth, in tract of
time, to equality; or rather lay them all under Water: For whatsoever moulders
or is washed away from them, is carried down into the lower grounds, and into
the Sea, and nothing is ever brought back again by any circulation: Their
losses are not repaired, nor any proportionable recruits made from any other
parts of Nature. So as the higher parts of the Earth being continually
spending, and the lower continually gaining, they must of necessity at length
come to an equality; and the Waters that lie in the lower parts and in the
Channels, those Channels and Valleys being filled up with Earth, would be thrust
out and rise every where upon the surface of the Earth; Which new post when
they had once seized on, they would never quit it, nor would any thing be able
to dispossess them; for it is their natural place and situation which they
always tend to, and from which there is no progress nor regress in a course of
Nature. So that the Earth would have been, both now, and from innumerable
Generations before this, all under water and uninhabitable; if it had stood
from everlasting, and this form of it had been its first original form.

Nor can he doubt of this argumentation, that considers the coherence of it,
and will allow time enough for the effect. I do not say the Earth would be
reduced to this uninhabitable form in ten thousand years time, though I believe
it would: but take twenty, if you please, take an hundred thousand, take a
million, it is all one, for you may take the one as easily as the other out of
Eternity; and they make both equally against their supposition. Nor is it any
matter how little you suppose the Mountains to decrease, it is but taking more
time, and the same effect still follows. Let them but waste as much as a grain
of Mustardseed every day, or a foot in an Age, this would be more than enough
in ten thousand Ages to consume the tallest Mountain upon Earth. The Air alone,
and the little drops of Rain have defaced the strongest and the proudest
monuments of the Greeks and Romans; and allow them but time enough, and they
will of themselves beat down the Rocks into the Sea, and the Hills into the
Valleys. But if we add to these all those other forementioned causes that work
with more violence, and the weight of the Mountains themselves, which upon any
occasion offered, is ready to sink them lower, we shall shorten the time, and
make the effect more sure.

We need add no more here in particular, Against this Aristotelian Doctrine,
that makes the present form of the Earth to have been from Eternity; for the
truth is, this whole Book is one continued argument against that Opinion;
showing that it has de facto changed its form; both in that we have proved
that it was not capable of an universal Deluge in this form, and consequently
was once under another; and also in that we shall prove at large hereafter
throughout the Third and Fourth Sections, that it has been broken and
dissolved. We might also add one consideration more, that if it had stood
always under this form, it would have been under Fire, if it had not been under
Water; and the Conflagration, which it is to undergo, would have overtaken it
long ere this. For S. Peter says, the Heavens and the Earth that are now, as
opposed to the Ante-diluvian, and considered in their present form and
constitution, are fitted to be consumed by Fire. And whosoever understands the
progress and revolutions of Nature, will see that neither the present form of
the Earth, nor its first form, were permanent and immutable forms, but
transient and temporary by their own frame and constitution; which the Author
of Nature, after certain periods of time, had designed for change and for
destruction.

Thus much for the body of the Earth, that it could not have been from
Eternity, as Aristotle pretended, in the form it has. Now let us consider the
Origination of Mankind; and that we shall find could much less be Eternal than
the other; for whatsoever destroyed the form of the Earth, would also destroy
Mankind; and besid^s, there are many particular marks and arguments, that the
Generations of Men have not been from Everlasting. All History, and all
monuments of Antiquity of what kind soever, are but of a few thousand of years
date; we have still the memory of the golden Age, of the first state of Nature,
and how mortals lived then in innocence and simplicity. The invention of Arts,
even those that are necessary or useful to humane life, has been within the
knowledge of Men: How imperfect was the Geography of the Ancients, how
imperfect their knowledge of the Earth, how imperfect their Navigation? Can we
imagine, if there had been Men from Everlasting, a Sea as now, and all
materials for Shipping as much as we have, that men could have been so
ignorant, both of the Land and of the Sea, as it is manifest they have been till
of late Ages? They had very different fancies concerning the figure of the
Earth. They knew no Land beyond our Continent, and that very imperfectly too;
and the Torrid Zone they thought utterly uninhabitable. We think it strange,
taking that short date of the World, which we give it, that Men should not have
made more progress in the knowledge of these things; But how impossible is it
then, if you suppose them to have been from Everlasting? They had the same wit
and passions that we have, the same motives that we have, can we then imagine,
that neither the ambition of Princes, nor interest or gain in private Persons,
nor curiosity and the desire of Knowledge, nor the glory of discoveries, nor
any other passion or consideration could ever move them in that endless time,
to try their fortunes upon the Sea, and know something more of the World they
inhabited? Though you should suppose them generally stupid, which there is no
reason to do, yet in a course of infinite Generations, there would be some
great Genio's, some extraordinary persons that would attempt things above the
rest. We have done more within the compass of our little World, which we can
but count (as to this) from the general Deluge, than those Eternal Men had done
in their innumerable Ages foregoing.

You will say it may be, they had not the advantages and opportunities for
Navigation as we have, and for discoveries; because the use of the Loadstone,
and the Mariners Needle was not then known. But that is the wonder, that either
that invention, or any other should not be brought to light till the other day,
if the World had stood from Eternity. I say this or any other practical
invention; for such things when they are once found out and known, are not
easily lost again, because they are of daily use. And it is in most other
practical Arts as in Navigation, we generally know their Original and History:
who the Inventors, and by what degrees improved, and how few of them brought to
any perfection till of late Ages. All the Artificial and Mechanical World is,
in a manner, new; and what you may call the Civil World too is in a great
measure so. What relates to Government, and Laws; to Wars and Discipline; we
can trace these things to their Origin, or very near it. The use of Money and
of Coins, nay the use of the very Elements; for they tell us of the first
invention of Fire by Prometh^us, and the employing of Wind or Water to turn the
Mills and grind their Corn was scarce known before the Romans; Plin. l. 7. c.
56.
and that we may think nothing Eternal here, they tell us the Ages and
Genealogies of their very Gods. The measures of Time for the common uses of
life, the dividing it into Hours, with the Instruments for those purposes, are
not of an unknown date: Even the Arts for preparing Food and Clothing,
Medicines and medicaments, Building, Civil and Military, Letters and Writing,
which are the foundations of the World Civil: These, with all their retinue of
lesser Arts and Trades that belong to them, History and Tradition tell us, when
they had their beginning, or were very imperfect; and how many of their
Inventors and Inventresses were deifi'd. The World has not stood so long but
we can still run it up to those Artless Ages, when mortals lived by plain
Nature; when there was but one Trade in the World, one Calling, to look to
their Flocks; and afterward to Till the Ground, when Nature grew less liberal:
And may we not reasonably think this the beginning of Mankind, or very near it?
If Man be a creature both naturally sagacious to find out its own
conveniences, and naturally sociable and inclined to live in a Community, a
little time would make them find out and furnish themselves with what was
necessary in these two kinds, for the conveniences of single life, and the
conveniences of Societies; they would not have lived infinite Ages unprovided
of them. If you say Necessity is the mother of Arts and Inventions, and there
was no necessity before, and therefore these things were so slowly invented.
This is a good answer upon our suppo^tion, that the World began but some Ages
before these were found out, and was abundant with all things at first; and Men
not very numerous, and therefore were not put so much to the use of their wits,
to find out ways for living commodiously. But this is no answer upon their
supposition; for if the World was Eternal and Men too, there were no first
Ages, no new and fresh Earth; Men were never less numerous, nor the Earth more
fruitful; and consequently there was never less necessity at any time than is
now. This also brings to mind another argument against this opinion (viz.) from
the gradual increase of Mankind. It Is certain the World was not so populous one
or two thousand years since, as it is now, seeing it is observed, in particular
Nations, that within the space of two or three hundred years, notwithstanding
all casualties, the number of Men doubles. If then the Earth had stood from
Everlasting, it had been over-stockt long ere this, and would not have been
capable to contain its Inhabitants many Ages and Millions of Ages ago. Whereas
we find the Earth is not yet sufficiently Inhabited, and there is still room
for some Millions. And we must not fly to universal Deluges and Conflagrations
to destroy Mankind* for besides that the Earth was not capable of a Deluge in
this present form, nor would have been in this form after a Conflagration,
Aristotle does not admit of these universal changes, nor any that hold the form
of the Earth to be Eternal. But to return to our Arts and Inventions.

We have spoken of practical Arts and Inventions useful in humane life; then
for Theoretical Learning and Sciences, there is nothing yet finished or
complete in these; and what is known has been chiefly the production of latter
Ages. How little has been discovered till of late, either of our own Bodies,
or of the body of the Earth, and of the functions or motions of nature in
either? What more obvious, one would think, than the Circulation of the Blood?
What can more excite our curiosity than the flowing and ebbing of the Sea? Than
the nature of Metals and Minerals? These are either yet unknown, or were so at
least till this last Age; which seems to me to have made a greater progress
than all Ages before put together, since the beginning of the World. How
unlikely is it then that these Ages were Eternal? That the Eternal Studies of
our Forefathers could not effect so much as a few years have done of late? And
the whole mass of knowledge in this Earth does not seem to be so great, but
that a few Ages more, with two or three happy Genius's in them, may bring to
light all that we are capable to understand in this state of mortality.

To these arguments concerning the novelty of the Earth, and the Origin of
Mankind, I know there are some shuffling excuses made, but they can have little
effect upon those instances we have chosen. And I would ask those Eternalists
one fair question, What mark is there that they could expect or desire of the
novelty of a World, that is not found in this? Or what mark is there of
Eternity that is found in this? If then their opinion be without any positive
argument, and against all appearances in Nature, it may be justly rejected as
unreasonable upon all accounts. It Is not the bold asserting of a thing that
makes it true, or that makes it credible against evidence. If one should assert
that such an one had lived from all Eternity, and I could bring witnesses that
knew him a sucking Child, and others that remembered him a Schoolboy, I think
it would be a fair proof, that the Man was not Eternal. So if there be
evidence, either in Reason or History, that it is not very many Ages since
Nature was in her minority, as appears by all those instances we have given
above; some whereof trace her down to her very infancy: This, I think, may be
taken for a good proof that she is not Eternal. And I do not doubt, but if the
History of the World was writ Philosophically, giving an account of the several
states of Mankind in several Ages, and by what steps or degrees they came from
their first rudeness or simplicity to that order of things, both intellectual
and Civil, which the World is advanced to at present, That alone would be a
full conviction, that the Earth and Mankind had a beginning. As the story of
Rome, how it rise from a mean Original, by what degrees it increased, and how
it changed its form and government till it came to its greatness, does satisfy
us very well, that the Roman Empire was not Eternal.

Thus much concerning the Temporal Original of the Earth. We are now to
consider the manner of it, and to show how it rise from a Chaos. I do not
remember that any of the Ancients that acknowledge the Earth to have had an
Original, did deny that Original to have been from a Chaos. We are assured of
both from the authority of Moses, who says, that in the beginning the Earth
was Tohu Bohu, without form and void; a fluid, dark, confused mass, without
distinction of Elements; made up of all variety of parts, but without Order, or
any determinate Form; which is the true description of a Chaos: And so it is
understood by the general consent of Interpreters, both Hebrew and Christian.
We need not therefore spend any time here to prove, that the Origin of the
Earth was from a Chaos, seeing that is agreed on by all that give it any
Origin. But we will proceed immediately to examine into what form it first rise
when it came out of that Chaos; or what was the primaeval form of the Earth,
that continued till the Deluge, and how the Deluge depended upon it, and upon
its dissolution.

And that we may proceed in this enquiry by such easy steps as any one may
readily follow, we will divide it into Three Propositions, whereof the first is
this in general; That the Form of the Antediluvian Earth, or of the Earth that
rise first from the Chaos, was different from the Form of the present Earth. I
say different in general, without specifying yet what its particular form was,
which shall be expressed in the following Proposition.

This First Proposition we have in effect proved in the Second Chapter: where
we have shown, that if the Earth had been always in this form, it would not
have been capable of a Deluge; seeing that could not have been effected without
such an infinite mass of water as could neither be brought upon the Earth, nor
afterward any way removed from it. But we will not content our selves with
that proof only, but will prove it also from the nature of the Chaos, and the
manifest consequences of it. And because this is a leading Proposition, we
think it not improper to prove it also from Divine Authority, there being a
pregnant passage to this purpose in the writings of S. Peter. Where treating of
this very subject, the Deluge, He manifestly puts a difference between the
Ante-diluvian Earth and the present Earth, as to their form and constitution.
The Discourse is in the Second Epistle of S. Peter, the Third Chapter, where
certain Deists, as they seem to have been, laughed at the Prophecy of the day of
Judgment, and of the Conflagration of the World, using this argument against
it, That since the Fathers fell asleep, all things have continued as they were
from the beginning. All external Nature has continued the same without any
remarkable change or alteration, and why should we believe (say they) there
will be any? What appearance or what foundation is there of such a revolution,
that all Nature will be dissolved, and the Heavens and the Earth consumed with
Fire, as your Prophecies pretend? So from the permanency and immutability of
Nature hitherto, they argued its permanency and immutability for the future. To
this the Apostle answers, that they are willing to forget that the Heavens and
the Earth of old had a particular form and constitution as to Water, by reason
whereof the World that then was, perished by a Deluge. And the Heavens and the
Earth that are now, or since the Deluge, have a particular constitution in
reference to Fire, by reason whereof they are exposed to another sort of
destruction or dissolution, namely by Fire, or by an universal Conflagration.
Chap. 3. ver. 5, 6, 7.
The words of the Apostle are these; For this they are willingly ignorant of,
that by the Word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth, consisting of
Water, and by Water; or (as we render it) standing out of the Water, and in the
Water: whereby the World that then was, being overslow'd with Water, perished.
But the Heavens and the Earth that are now, by the same Word are kept in store,
reserved unto Fire against the day of Judgment. We shall have occasion, it may
be, hereafter to give a full illustration of these words; but at present we
shall only take notice of this in general, that the Apostle here does plainly
intimate some difference that was between the old World and the present World,
in their form and constitution; or betwixt the Ante-diluvian and the present
Earth, by reason of which difference, that was subject to perish by a Deluge,
as this is subject to perish by Conflagration. And as this is the general Air
and Importance of this discourse of he Apostle's, which every one at first
sight would discover; so we may in several particular ways prove from it our
first Proposition, which now we must return to; (viz.) That the form and
constitution of the Ante-diluvian Earth was different from that of the present
Earth. This may be inferred from the Apostle's discourse, first, because he
makes an opposition betwixt these two Earths, or these two natural Worlds; and
that not only in respect of their fate, the one perishing by Water, as the
other will perish by Fire, but also in respect of their different disposition
and constitution leading to this different fate; for otherwise his fifth verse
is superfluous, and his Inference in the sixth ungrounded; you see he premiseth
in the fifth verse as the ground of his discourse, what the constitution of the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth was, and then infers from it in the sixth
verse, that they therefore perished in a Deluge of Water. Now if they had been
the same with ours, there had neither been any ground for making an opposition
betwixt them, nor any ground of making a contrary inference as to their fate.
Besides, in that he implies that the constitution of the Ante-diluvian Earth
was such, as made it subject to a Deluge; he shows that it was different from
the constitution of the present Earth; for the form of that is such, as makes
it rather incapable of a Deluge, as we have shown in the second Chapter. Then
we are to observe further, that when he says (verse 6.) that the first World
perished in a Deluge, or was destroyed by it; this is not to be understood of
the Animate World only, Men and living Creatures, but of the Natural World, and
the frame of it; for he had described it before by the Heavens and the Earth,
which make the Natural World. And the objection of the Atheists, or Deists
rather, which he was to answer, proceeded upon the Natural World. And lastly,
this perishing of the World in a Deluge, is set against, or compared with the
perishing of the World in the Conflagration, when the frame of Nature will be
dissolved. We must therefore, according to the tenor of the Apostle's arguing,
suppose, that the Natural World was destroyed or perished in the Deluge; and
seeing it did not perish as to matter and substance, it must be as to the form,
frame, and composition of it, that it perished; and consequently, the present
Earth is of another form and frame from what it had before the Deluge; which
was the thing to be proved.

Lastly, Let us consider what it is the Apostle tells these Scoffers that they
were ignorant of: Not that there was a Deluge, they could not be ignorant of
that; nor does he tell them that they were; But he tells them that they were
ignorant that the Heavens and the Earth of old were so and so constituted,
after a different manner than they are now, and that the state of Nature was
changed at the Deluge, it they had known or attended to this, they had made no
such objection, nor used any such argument as they did against the future
Conflagration of the World. They pretended that there had been no change in
Nature since the beginning, and the Apostle in answer tells them, that they are
willingly ignorant of the first constitution of the Heavens, and the Earth, and
of that change and dissolution that happened to them in the Deluge; and how the
present Heavens and Earth have another constitution, whereby in like manner
they are exposed, in God's due time, to be consumed or dissolved by Fire. This
is the plain, easy and natural import of the Apostle's discourse; thus all the
parts of it are coherent, and the sense genuine and apposite, and this is a
full confirmation of our first and general assertion, That the Ante-diluvian
Earth was of another form from the present Earth. This has been observed
formerly by some of the Ancients from this Text, but that it has not been
generally observed, was partly because they had no Theory to back such an
interpretation, and make it intelligible; and partly because they did not
observe, that the Apostle's discourse here was an argumentation, and not a bare
affirmation, or simple contradiction to those that raised the scruple; it is an
answer upon a ground taken, he premiseth and then infers; in the fifth and
sixth Verses, concerning the Deluge; and in the seventh, concerning the
Conflagration. And when I had discovered in my thoughts from the consideration
of the Deluge, and other natural reasons, that the Earth was certainly once in
another form, it was a great assurance and confirmation to me, when I reflected
on this place of S. Peter's; which seems to be so much directed and intended
for the same purpose, or to teach us the same conclusion, that though I
designed chiefly a Philosophical Theory of these things, yet I should not have
thought we had been just to Providence, if we had neglected to take notice of
this passage and Sacred evidence; which seems to have been left us on purpose,
to excite our enquiries, and strengthen our reasonings, concerning the first
state of things. Thus much from Divine Authority: We proceed now to prove the
same Proposition from Reason and Philosophy, and the contemplation of the
Chaos, from whence the first Earth arose.

We need not upon this occasion make a particular description of the Chaos, but
only consider it as a Fluid Mass, or a Mass of all sorts of little parts and
particles of matter mixed together, and floating in confusion, one with another.
It Is impossible that the surface of this mass should be of such a form and
figure, as the surface of our present Earth is. Or that any concretion or
consistent state which this mass could flow into immediately, or first settle
in, could be of such a form and figure as our present Earth. The first of these
Assertions is of easy proof; for a fluid body, we know, whether it be water or
any other liquor, always casts it self into a smooth and spherical surface; and
if any parts, by chance, or by some agitation, become higher than the rest,
they do not continue so, but glide down again every way into the lower places,
till they all come to make a surface of the same height, and of the same
distance every where from the Center of their gravity. A mountain of water is a
thing impossible in Nature, and where there are no Mountains there are no
Valleys. So also a Den or Cave within the water that has no walls but the
liquid Element, is a structure unknown to Art or Nature; all things there must
be full within, and even and level without, unless some External force keep
them by violence in another posture. But is this the form of our Earth, which
is neither regularly made within nor without? The surface and exterior parts
are broken into all sorts of inequalities, Hills and Dales, Mountains and
Valleys; and the plainer tracts of it lie generally inclined or bending one way
or other, sometimes upon an easy descent, and other times with a more sensible
and uneasy steepiness; and though the great Mountains of the Earth were taken
all away, the remaining parts would be more unequal than the roughest Sea;
whereas the face of the Earth should resemble the face of the calmest Sea, if
it was still in the form of its first mass. But what shall we say then to the
huge Mountains of the Earth, which lie sometimes in lumps or clusters heapt up
by one another, sometimes extended in long ridges or chains for many hundred
miles in length? And it is remarkable, that in every Continent, and in every
ancient and original Island, there is either such a cluster, or such a chain of
Mountains. And can there be any more palpable demonstrations than these are,
that the surface of the Earth is not in the same form that the surface of the
Chaos was, or that any fluid mass can stand or hold it self in?

Then for the form of the Earth within or under its surface, it is no less
impossible for the Chaos to imitate that; for it is full of cavities and empty
places, of dens and broken holes, whereof some are open to the Air, and others
covered and enclosed wholly within the ground. These are both of them
unimitable in any liquid substance, whose parts will necessarily flow together
into one continued mass, and cannot be divided into apartments and separate
rooms, nor have vaults or caverns made within it; the walls would sink, and the
roof fall in: For liquid bodies have nothing to sustain their parts, nor any
thing to cement them; they are all loose and incoherent, and in a perpetual
flux: Even an heap of Sand or fine Powder will suffer no hollowness within
them, though they be dry substances, and though the parts of them being rough,
will hang together a little, and stand a little upon an heap; but the parts of
liquors being glib, and continually in motion, they fall off from one another,
which way soever gravity inclines them, and can neither have any hills or
eminencies on their surface, nor any hollowness within their substance.

You will acknowledge, it may be, that this is true, and that a liquid mass or
Chaos, while it was liquid, was incapable of either the outward or inward form
of the Earth; but when it came to a concretion, to a state of consistency and
firmness, then it might go, you will say, into any form. No, not in its first
concretion, nor in its first state of consistence; for that would be of the
same form that the surface of it was when it was liquid; as water, when it
congeals, the surface of the Ice is smooth and level, as the surface of the
water was before; so Metals, or any other substances melted, or Liquors that of
themselves grow stiff and harden, always settle into the same form which they
had when they were last liquid, and are always solid within, and smooth
without, unless they be cast in a mould, that hinders the motion and flux of
the parts. So that the first concrete state or consistent surface of the Chaos,
must be of the same form or figure with the last liquid state it was in; for
that is the mould, as it were, upon which it is cast; as the shell of an Egg is
of a like form with the surface of the liquor it lies upon. And therefore by
analogy with all other liquors and concretions, the form of the Chaos, whether
liquid or concrete, could not be the same with that of the present Earth, or
like it: And consequently, that form of the first or primigenial Earth which
rise immediately out of the Chaos, was not the same, nor like to that of the
present Earth. Which was the first and preparatory Proposition we laid down to
be proved. And this being proved by the authority both of our Reason and our
Religion, we will now proceed to the Second which is more particular.

CHAP. V. The Second Proposition is laid down, viz. That the face of the Earth
before the Deluge was smooth, regular and uniform; without Mountains, and
without a Sea. The Chaos out of which the World rise is fully examined, and all
its motions observed, and by what steps it wrought it self into an habitable
World. Some things in Antiquity relating to the first state of the Earth are
interpreted, and some things in the Sacred Writings. The Divine Art and
Geometry in the construction of the first Earth is observed and celebrated.
WE have seen it proved, in the foregoing Chapter, That the form of the first
or Ante-diluvian Earth, was not the same, nor like the form of the present
Earth; this is our first discovery at a distance, but it is only general and
negative, tells us what the form of that Earth was not, but tells us not
expressly what it was; that must be our next enquiry, and advancing one step
further in our Theory, we lay down this Second Proposition? That the face of
the Earth before the Deluge, was smooth, regular and uniform; without
Mountains, and without a Sea. This is a bold step, and carries us into another
World, which we have never seen, nor ever yet heard any relation of; and a
World, it seems, of very different scenes and prospects from ours, or from any
thing we have yet known. An Earth without a Sea, and plain as the Elysian
fields; if you travel it all over, you will not meet with a Mountain or a Rock,
yet well provided of all reqnisite things for an habitable World; and the same
indeed with the Earth we still inhabit, only under another form. And this is
the great thing that now comes into debate, the great Paradox which we offer to
be examined, and which we affirm, That the Earth in its first rise and
formation from a Chaos; was of the form here described, and so continued for
many hundreds of years.

To examine and prove this, we must return to the beginning of the World, and
to that Chaos out of which the Earth and all Sublunary things arose: It Is the
motions and progress of this which we must now consider, and what form it
settled into when it first became an habitable World.

Neither is it perhaps such an intricate thing as we imagine at first sight, to
trace a Chaos into an habitable World; at least there is a particular pleasure
to see things in their Origin, and by what degrees and successive changes they
rise into that order and state we see them in afterward, when completed. I am
sure, if ever we would view the paths of Divine Wisdom, in the works and in the
conduct of Nature, we must not only consider how things are, but how they came
to be so. It Is pleasant to look upon a Tree in the Summer, covered with its
green Leaves, decked with Blossoms, or laden with Fruit, and casting a pleasing
shade under its spreading Boughs; but to consider how this Tree with all its
furniture, sprang from a little Seed; how Nature shaped it, and fed it, in its
infancy and growth; added new parts, and still advanced it by little and
little, till it came to this greatness and perfection, this, methinks, is
another sort of pleasure, more rational, less common, and which is properly the
contemplation of Divine Wisdom in the works of Nature. So to view this Earth,
and this Sublunary World, as it is now complete, distinguished into the several
orders of Bodies of which it consists, every one perfect and admirable in its
kind; this is truly delightful, and a very good entertainment of the mind; But
to see all these in their first Seeds, as I may so say; to take in pieces this
frame of Nature, and melt it down into its first principles; and then to
observe how the Divine Wisdom wrought all these things out of confusion into
order, and out of simplicity into that beautiful composition we now see them
in; this, methinks, is another kind of joy, which pierces the mind more deep,
and is more satisfactory. And to give our selves and others this satisfaction,
we will first make a short representation of the Chaos, and then show, how,
according to Laws established in Nature by the Divine Power and Wisdom, it was
wrought by degrees from one from into another, till it settled at length into an
habitable Earth; and that of such a frame and structure, as we have described
in this second Proposition.

By the Chaos I understand the matter of the Earth and Heavens, without from or
order; reduced into a fluid mass, wherein are the materials and ingredients of
all bodies, but mingled in confusion one with another. As if you should suppose
all sorts of Metals, Gold, Silver, Lead, etc. melted down together in a common
mass, and so mingled, that the parts of no one Metal could be discerned as
distinct from the rest, this would be a little Metallic Chaos: Suppose then
the Elements thus mingled, Air, Water and Earth, which are the principles of
all Terrestrial Bodies; mingled, I say, without any order of higher or lower,
heavier or lighter, solid or volatile, in such a kind of confused mass as is
here represented in this first Scheme.

page 36 fig. 1



Let this then represent to us the Chaos; in which the first change that we
should imagine to happen would be this, that the heaviest and grossest parts
would sink down toward the middle of it, (for there we suppose the center of
its gravity) and the rest would float above. These grosser parts thus sunk down
and compressed more and more, would harden by degrees, and constitute the
interior parts of the Earth. The rest of the mass, which swims above, would be
also divided by the same principle of gravity into two orders of Bodies, the
one liquid like Water, the other Volatile like Air. For the more fine and
active parts disentangling themselves by degrees from the rest, would mount
above them; and having motion enough to keep them upon the wing, would play in
those open place where they constitute that body we call AIR. The other parts
being grosser than these, and having a more languid motion could not fly up
separate from one another, as these did, but settled in a mass together, under
the Air, upon the body of the Earth, composing not only Water strictly so
called, but the whole mass of liquors, or liquid bodies, belonging to the
Earth. And these first separations being thus made, the body of the Chaos would
stand in that form which it is here represented in by the second Scheme.

page 37 fig: 2.



The liquid mass which encircled the Earth, was not, as I noted before, the
mere Element of Water, but a collection of all Liquors that belong to the
Earth. I mean of all that do originally belong to it. Now seeing there are two
chief kinds of Terrestrial Liquors, those that are fat, oily, and light; and
those that are lean and more Earthy, like common Water; which two are generally
found in compound liquors; we cannot doubt but there were of both sorts in this
common mass of liquids. And it being well known, that these two kinds mixed
together, if left to themselves and the general action of Nature, separate one
from another when they come to settle, as in Cream and thin Milk, Oil and
Water, and such like; we cannot but conclude, that the same Effect would follow
here, and the more oily and light part of this mass would get above the other,
and swim upon it. The whole mass being divided into two lesser masses, and so
the Globe would stand as we see it in this Third Figure.

page: 38. fig: 3.



Hitherto the changes of the Chaos are easy and unquestionable, and would be
dispatched in a short time; we must now look over again these two great masses
of the Air and Water, and consider how their impurities or grosser parts would
be disposed of; for we cannot imagine but they were both at first very muddy
and impure: And as the Water would have its sediment, which we are not here
concerned to look after, so the great Regions of the Air would certainly have
their sediment too; for the Air was as yet thick, gross, and dark; there being
an abundance of little Terrestrial particles swimming in it still, after the
grossest were sunk down; which, by their heaviness and lumpish figure, made
their way more easily and speedily. The lesser and lighter which remained,
would sink too, but more slowly, and in a longer time: so as in their descent
they would meet with that oily liquor upon the face of the Deep, or upon the
watery mass, which would entangle and stop them from passing any further;
whereupon mixing there with that unctious substance, they composed a certain
slime, or fat, soft, and light Earth, spread upon the face of the Waters; as
it is represented in this fourth Figure.

page 39. fig: 4.



This thin and tender Orb of Earth increased still more and more, as the little
Earthy parts that were detained in the Air could make their way to it. Some
having a long journey from the upper Regions, and others being very light would
float up and down a good while, before they could wholly disengage themselves
and descend. But this was the general rendezvous, which sooner or later they
all got to, and mingling more and more with that oily liquor, they sucked it all
up at length, and were wholly incorporate together, and so began to grow more
stiff and firm, making both but one substance, which was the first concretion,
or firm and consistent substance that rise upon the face of the Chaos. And the
whole Globe stood in this posture, as in Figure the fifth.

page 40. fig. 5.



It may be, you will say, we take our liberty, and our own time for the
separation of these two liquors, the Oily and the Earthy, the lighter and the
heavier; and suppose that done before the Air was cleared of Earthy particles,
that so they might be caught and stopped there in their descent. Whereas if all
these particles were fallen out of the Air before that separation was made in
the liquid mass, they would fall down through the Water, as the first did, and
so no concretion would be made, nor any Earthy crust formed upon the face of
the Waters, as we here suppose there was. It Is true, there could be no such Orb
of Earth formed there, if the Air was wholly purged of all its Earthy parts
before the Mass of liquids began to purify it self, and to separate the Oily
parts from the more heavy: But this is an unreasonable and incredible
supposition, if we consider, the mass of the Air was many thousand times
greater than the Water, and would in proportion require a greater time to be
purified; the particles that were in the Regions of the Air having a long way
to come before they reached the Watery mass, and far longer than the Oily
particles had to rise from any part of that mass to the surface of it. Besides
we may suppose a great many degrees of littleness and lightness in these Earthy
particles, so as many of them might float in the Air a good while, like
Exhalations, before they fell down. And lastly, We do not suppose the
separation of these two liquors wholly made and finished before the purgation of
the Air began, though we represent them so for distinction sake; Let them begin
to purify at the same time, if you please, these parts rising upwards, and
those falling downwards, they will meet in the middle, and unite and grow into
one body, as we have described. And this body or new concretion would be
increased daily, being sed and supplied both from above and below; and having
done growing, it would become more dry by degrees, and of a temper of greater
consistency and firmness, so as truly to resemble and be fit to make an
habitable Earth, such as Nature intended it for.

But you will further object, it may be, that such an effect as this would
indeed be necessary in some degree and proportion, but not in such a
proportion, and in such quantity as would be sufficient to make this crust or
concrete Orb an habitable Earth. This I confess appeared to me at first a real
difficulty, till I considered better the great disproportion there is betwixt
the Regions of the Air and the Circumference of the Earth, or of that exterior
Orb of the Earth, we are now a making; which being many thousand times less in
depth and extent than the Regions of the Air, taken as high as the Moon, though
these Earthy particles, we speak of, were very thinly dispersed through those
vast tracts of the Air, when they came to be collected and amassed together
upon the surface of a far lesser Sphere, they would constitute a body of a very
considerable thickness and solidity. We see the Earth sometimes covered with
Snow two or three feet deep, made up only of little flakes or pieces of Ice,
which falling from the middle Region of the Air, and meeting with the Earth in
their descent; are there stopped and heapt up one upon another. But if we should
suppose little particles of Earth to shower down, not only from the middle
Region, but from the whole capacity and extent of those vast spaces that are
betwixt us and the Moon, we could not imagine but these would constitute an Orb
of Earth some thousands of times deeper than the greatest Snow; which being
increased and swollen by that oily liquor it fell into, and incorporated with, it
would be thick, strong, and great enough in all respects to render it an
habitable Earth.

We cannot doubt therefore but such a body as this would be formed, and would
be sufficient in quantity for an habitable Earth. Then for the quality of it,
it will answer all the purposes of a Rising World. What can be a more proper
Seminary for Plants and Animals, than a soil of this temper and composition? A
finer and lighter sort of Earth, mixed with a benign Juice, easy and obedient
to the action of the Sun, or of what other causes were employed by the Author
of Nature, for the production of things in the new-made Earth. What sort or
disposition of matter could be more fit and ready to catch life from Heaven,
and to be drawn into all forms that the rudiments of life, or the bodies of
living Creatures would require? What soil more proper for vegetation than this
warm moisture, which could have no fault, unless it was too fertile and
luxuriant? And that is no fault neither at the beginning of a World. This I am
sure of, that the learned amongst the Ancients, (...).
both Greeks, Egyptians, Phoenicians, and others, have described the
primigenial soil, or the temper of the Earth, that was the first subject for
the Generation and Origin of Plants and Animals after such a manner, as is
truly expressed, and I think with advantage, by this draught of the primigenial
Earth.

Thus much concerning the matter of the first Earth. Let us reflect a little
upon the form of it also, whether External or Internal; both whereof do
manifestly show themselves from the manner of its production or formation. As
to the External form, you see it is according to the Proposition we were to
prove, smooth, regular and uniform, without Mountains, and without a Sea. And
the proof we have given of it is very easy; The Globe of the Earth could not
possibly rise immediately from a Chaos into the irregular form in which it is
at present. The Chaos being a fluid mass, which we know does necessarily fall
into a Spherical surface, whose parts are equi-distant from the Center, and
consequently in an equal and even convexity one with another. And seeing upon
the distinction of a Chaos and separation into several Elementary masses, the
Water would naturally have a superior place to the Earth, it is manifest, that
there could be no habitable Earth formed out of the Chaos, unless by some
concretion upon the face of the Water. Then lastly, seeing this concrete Orb of
Earth upon the face of the Water would be of the same form with the surface of
the Water it was spread upon, there being no causes, that we know of, to make
any inequality in it, we must conclude it equal and uniform, and without
Mountains, as also without a Sea; for the Sea and all the mass of Waters was
enclosed within this exterior Earth, which had no other basis or foundation to
rest upon.

The contemplation of these things, and of this posture of the Earth upon the
Waters, does so strongly bring to mind certain passages of Scripture, (which
will recur in another place) that we cannot, without injury to truth pass them
by here in silence. Passages that have such a manifest resemblance and
agreement to this form and situation of the Earth, that they seem visibly to
point at it: such are those expressions of the Psalmist, God has founded the
Earth upon the Seas. And in another Psalm, speaking of the wisdom and power of
God in the Creation, he says, To him who alone does great wonders; to him that
by wisdom made the Heavens; to him that extended or stretched out the Earth
above the Waters. What can be more plain or proper to denote that form of the
Earth that we have described, and to express particularly the enclosure of the
Waters within the Earth, as we have represented them? He says in another
place; By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made; he shut up the Waters of
the Sea as in Bags, (for so the word is to be rendered, and is rendered by all,
except the English) and laid up the Abyss as in storehouses. This, you see,
is very conformable to that System of the Earth and Sea, which we have proposed
here. Yet there is something more express than all this in that remarkable
place in the Proverbs of Solomon, where Wisdom declaring her Antiquity and
Existence before the foundation of the Earth, amongst other things, Prove. 8. 27.
says; When he prepared the Heavens, I was there: When he drew an Orb over the
surface of the Abyss; or when he set an Orb upon the face of the Abyss. We
render it in the English a Compass, or Circle, but it is more truly rendered an
Orb or Sphere; and what Orb or Spherical Body was this, which at the formation
of the Earth was built and placed round about the Abyss; but that wonderful
Arch, whose form and production we have described, encompassing the mass of
Waters, Vid. Fig. 5. p. 40.
which in Scripture is often called the Abyss or Deep? Lastly, This Orb is
represented by the Circle 1, and the Abyss by the Region 2.
This Scheme of the first Earth gives light to that place we mentioned before
of S. Peter's, where the first Earth is said to consist of Water and by Water:
and by reason thereof was obnoxious to a Deluge. The first part of this
character is plain from the description now given: and the second will appear
in the following Chapter. In the mean time, concerning these passages of
Scripture, which we have cited, we may truly and modestly say, that though they
would not, it may be, without a Theory premised, have been taken or interpreted
in this sense, yet this Theory being premised, I dare appeal to any
unprejudiced person, if they have not a fairer and easier, a more full and more
emphatical sense, when applied to that form of the Earth and Sea, we are now
speaking of, than to their present form, or to any other we can imagine.

Thus much concerning the external form of the first Earth. Let us now reflect
a little upon the Internal form of it, which consists of several Regions,
involving one another like Orbs about the same Center, or of the several
Elements cast circularly about each other; as it appears in the Fourth and
Fifth Figure. And as we have noted the External form of this primae^al Earth,
to have been marked and celebrated in the Sacred Writings; so likewise in the
Philosophy and Learning of the Ancients, there are several remains and
indications of this Internal form and composition of it. For it is observable,
that the Ancients in treating of the Chaos, and in raising the World out of it,
ranged it into several Regions or Masses, as we have done; and in that order
successively, rising one from another, as if it was a Pedigree or Genealogy.
And those Parts and Regions of Nature, into which the Chaos was by degrees
divided, they signified commonly by dark and obscure names, as the Night,
Tartarus, Oceanus, and such like, which we have expressed in their plain and
proper terms. And whereas the Chaos, when it was first set on work, ran all
into divisions, and separations of one Element from another, which afterward
were all in some measure united and associated in this primigenial Earth; the
Ancients accordingly made Contention the principle that reigned in the Chaos at
first, and then Love: The one to express the divisions, and the other the union
of all parties in this middle and common bond. These, and such like notions
which we find in the Writings of the Ancients figuratively and darkly
delivered, receive a clearer light, when compared with this Theory of the
Chaos; which representing every thing plainly, and in its natural colors, is a
Key to their thoughts, and an illustration of their obscurer Philosophy,
concerning the Original of the World; as we have shown at large in the Latin
Treatise. Lib. 2.


There is another thing in Antiquity, Chap. 7.
relating to the form and construction of the Earth, which is very remarkable,
and has obtained throughout all learned Nations and Ages. And that is the
comparison or resemblance of the Earth to an Egg. And this is not so much for
its External Figure, though that be true too: as for the inward composition of
it; consisting of several Orbs, one including another, and in that order, as to
answer the several Elementary Regions of which the new-made Earth was
constituted. For if we admit for the Yolk a Central fire (which though very
reasonable, we had no occasion to take notice of in our Theory of the Chaos)
and suppose the Figure of the Earth Oval, and a little extended toward the
Poles, (as probably it was, seeing the Vortex that contains it, is so) those
two bodies do very naturally represent one another; as in this Scheme, which
represents the Interior faces of both, a divided Egg, or Earth. Where, as the
two inmost Fig: 7. page 44.

Regions (A. B.) represent the Yolk and the Membrane that lies next above it;
so the Exterior Region of the Earth (D.) is as the Shell of the Egg, and the
Abyss (C.) under it as the White that lies under the Shell. And considering
that this notion of the Mundane Egg, or that the World was Oviform, has been
the sense and Language of all Antiquity, Tell. Theor. Sac. lib. 2. c. 10.
Latins, Greeks, Persians, Egyptians, and others, as we have showed elsewhere;
I thought it worthy our notice in this place; seeing it receives such a clear
and easy explication from that Origin and Fabric we have given to the first
Earth, and also reflects light upon the Theory it self, and confirms it to be
no fiction: This notion, which is a kind of Epitome or Image of it, having been
conserved in the most Ancient Learning.

Thus much concerning the first Earth, its production and form; and concerning
our Second Proposition relating to it: Which being proved by Reason, the laws
of Nature, and the motions of the Chaos; then attested by Antiquity, both as to
the matter and form of it; and confirmed by Sacred Writers, we may take it now
for a well established truth, and proceed upon this supposition, That the
Ante-diluvian Earth was smooth and uniform, without Mountains or Sea, to the
explication of the universal Deluge.

Give me leave only before we proceed any further, to annex here a short
Advertisement, concerning the Causes of this wonderful structure of the first
Earth. It Is true, we have proposed the Natural Causes of it, and I do not know
wherein our Explication is false or defective; but in things of this kind we
may easily be too credulous. And this structure is so mavelous, that it ought
rather to be considered as a particular effect of the Divine Art, than as the
work of Nature. The whole Globe of the Water vaulted over, and the exterior
Earth hanging above the Deep, sustained by nothing but its own measures and
manner of construction: A Building without foundation or cornerstone. This
seems to be a piece of Divine Geometry or Architecture; and to this, I think,
is to be referred that magnificent challenge which God Almighty made to Job; Job
38. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth? declare if thou have
understanding; Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know; or who has
stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened, or
who laid the cornerstone thereof? When the morning Stars sang together, and
all the Sons of God shouted for joy. Moses also when he had described the
Chaos, says, The Spirit of God moved upon, or sat brooding upon, the face of
the waters; without all doubt to produce some effects there. And S. Peter, when
he speaks of the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, how it stood in reference to
the Waters, adds, (...).
By the Word of God, or by the Wisdom of God it was made so. And this same
Wisdom of God, in the Proverbs, as we observed before, takes notice of this
very piece of work in the formation of the Earth. When he set an Orb over the
face of the Deep I was there. And lastly, the Ancient Philosophers, or at least
the best of them, to give them their due, always brought in Men's or Amor, (...).
as a Supernatural principle to unite and consociate the parts of the Chaos;
which was first done in the composition of this wonderful Arch of the Earth.
Wherefore to the great Architect, who made the boundless Universe out of
nothing, and formed the Earth out of a Chaos, let the praise of the Whole Work,
and particularly of this Masterpiece, for ever with all honor be given.

CHAP. VI. The dissolution of the First Earth: The Deluge ensuing thereupon.
And the form of the present Earth rising from the Ruins of the First.
WE have now brought to light the Ante-diluvian Earth out of the dark mass of
the Chaos; and not only described the surface of it, Vid. Fig. 5. and 6. page
40. and 44.
but laid open the inward parts, to show in what order its Regions lay. Let us
now close it up, and represent the Earth entire, and in large proportions, more
like an habitable World; as in this Figure, where you see the smooth unequal of
the Earth, and may imagine the great Abyss spread under it As at the aperture
a. a.
; which two are to be the only subject of our further contemplation.

Book jst. p. 46.



In this smooth Earth were the first Scenes of the World, and the first
Generations of Mankind; it had the beauty of Youth and blooming Nature, fresh
and fruitful, and not a wrinkle, scar or fracture in all its body; no Rocks nor
Mountains, no hollow Caves, nor gaping Channels, but even and uniform all over.
And the smoothness of the Earth made the face of the Heavens so too; the Air
was calm and serene; none of those tumultuary motions and conflicts of vapors,
which the Mountains and the Winds cause in ours: 'Twas suited to a golden Age,
and to the first innocence of Nature.

All this you will say is well, we are got into a pleasant World indeed, but
what is this to the purpose? what appearance of a Deluge here, where there is
not so much as a Sea, nor half so much Water as we have in this Earth? or what
appearance of Mountains; or Caverns, or other irregularities of the Earth,
where all is level and united: So that instead of loosing the Knot, this ties
it the harder. You pretend to show us how the Deluge was made, and you lock up
all the Waters within the womb of the Earth, and set Bars and Doors, and a Wall
of impenetrable strength and thickness to keep them there. And you pretend to
show us the original of Rocks and Mountains, and Caverns of the Earth, and
bring us to a wide and endless plain, smooth as the calm Sea.

This is all true, and yet we are not so far from the sight and discovery of
those things as you imagine; draw but the curtain and these Scenes will appear,
or something very like them. We must remember that S. Peter told us, that the
Ante-diluvian Earth perished, or was demolished; and Moses says, the great
Abyss was broken open at the Deluge. Let us then suppose, that at a time
appointed by Divine Providence, and from Causes made ready to do that great
execution upon a sinful World, that this Abyss was opened, or that the frame
of the Earth broke and fell down into the Great Abyss. At this one stroke all
Nature would be changed; and this single action would have two great and
visible Effects. The one Transient, and the other permanent. First an universal
Deluge would overflow all the parts and Regions of the broken Earth; during the
great commotion and agitation of the Abyss, by the violent fall of the Earth
into it. This would be the first and unquestionable effect of this dissolution,
and all that World would be destroyed. Then when the agitation of the Abyss
was asswag'd, and the Waters by degrees were retired into their Channels, and
the dry land appeared, you would see the true image of the present Earth in the
ruins of the first. The surface of the Globe would be divided into Land and
Sea; the Land would consist of Plains and Valleys and Mountains, according as
the pieces of this ruin were placed and disposed: Upon the banks of the Sea
would stand the Rocks, and near the shore would be Islands, or less fragments
of Earth compassed round by Water. Then as to Subterraneous Waters, and all
Subterraneous Caverns and hollownesses, upon this supposition those things
could not be otherwise; for the parts would fall hollow in many places in this,
as in all other ruins: And seeing the Earth fell into this Abyss, the Waters
at a certain height would flow into all those hollow places and cavities; and
would also sink and insinuate into many parts of the solid Earth. And though
these Subterraneous Vaults or holes, whether dry or full of Water, would be
more or less in all places, where the parts fell hollow; yet they would be
found especially about the roots of the Mountains, and the higher parts of the
Earth; for there the sides bearing up one against the other, they could not lie
so close at the bottoms, but many vacuities would be intercepted. Nor are there
any other inequalities or irregularities observable in the present form of the
Earth; whether in the surface of it, or interior construction, whereof this
hypothesis does not give a ready, fair, and intelligible account; and does at
one view represent them all to us, with their causes, as in a glass: And
whether that Glass be true, and the Image answer to the Original, if you doubt
of it, we will hereafter examine them piece by piece. But in the first place,
we must consider the General Deluge, how easily and truly this supposition
represents and explains it, and answers all the properties and conditions of it.

I think it will be easily allowed, that such a dissolution of the Earth as we
have proposed, and fall of it into the Abyss, would certainly make an
Universal Deluge; and effectually destroy the old World, which perished in it.
But we have not yet particularly proved this dissolution, and in what manner
the Deluge followed upon it: And to assert things in gross never makes that
firm impression upon our understandings, and upon our belief, as to see them
deduced with their causes and circumstances; And therefore we must endeavor to
show what preparations there were in Nature for this great dissolution, and
after what manner it came to pass, and the Deluge in consequence of it.

We have noted before, that Moses imputed the Deluge to the disruption of the
Abyss; and S. Peter, to the particular constitution of that Earth, which made
it obnoxious to be absorpt in Water, so, that our explication so far is
justified. But it was below the dignity of those Sacred Penmen, or the Spirit
of God that directed them, to show us the causes of this disruption, or of this
absorption; this is left to the enquiries of men. For it was never the design
of Providence, to give such particular explications of Natural things, as
should make us idle, or the use of Reason unnecessary; but on the contrary, by
delivering great conclusions to us, to excite our curiosity and inquisitiveness
after the methods, by which such things were brought to pass: And it may be
there is no greater trial or instance of Natural Wisdom, than to find out the
Chanel, in which these great revolutions of Nature, which we treat on, flow and
succeed one another.

Let us therefore resume that System of the Ante-diluvian Earth, which we have
deduced from the Chaos, and which we find to answer S. Peter's description, and
Moses his account of the Deluge. This Earth could not be obnoxious to a Deluge,
as the Apostle supposes it to have been, but by a dissolution; for the Abyss
was enclosed within its bowels. And Moses does in effect tell us, there was
such a dissolution; when he says, The fountains of the great Abyss were
borken open. For Fountains are broken open no otherwise than by breaking up the
ground that covers them? We must therefore here inquire in what order, and from
what causes the frame of this exterior Earth was dissolved, and then we shall
soon see how, upon that dissolution, the Deluge immediately prevailed and
overflowed all the parts of it.

I do not think it in the power of humane wit to determine how long this frame
would stand, how many Years, or how many Ages; but one would soon imagine, that
this kind of structure would not be perpetual, nor last indeed many thousands
of Years, if one consider the effect that the heat of the Sun would have upon
it and the Waters under it; drying and parching the one, and raresying the
other into vapors. For we must consider, that the course of the Sun at that
time, or the posture of the Earth to the Sun, was such, that there was no
diversity or alternation of seasons in the Year, as there is now; by reason of
which alternation, our Earth is kept in an equality of temper, the contrary
seasons balancing one another; so as what moisture the heat of the Summer sucks
out of the Earth, it is repaid in the Rains of the next Winter; and what chaps
were made in it, are filled up again, and the Earth reduced to its former
constitution. But if we should imagine a continual Summer, the Earth would
proceed in dryness still more and more, and the cracks would be wider and
pierce deeper into the substance of it; And such a continual Summer there was,
at least an equality of seasons in the Ante-diluvian Earth, as shall be proved
in the follwing Book, concerning Paradise. In the mean time this being
supposed, let us consider what effect it would have upon this Arch of the
exterior Earth, and the Waters under it.

We cannot believe, but that the heat of the Sun, within the space of some
hundreds of years, would have reduced this Earth to a considerable degree of
dryness in certain parts; and also have much raresi'd and exhaled the Waters
beneath it: And considering the structure of that Globe, the exterior crust,
and the Waters lying round under it, both exposed to the Sun, we may fitly
compare it to an Aeolipile, or an hollow Sphere with Water in it, which the
heat of the Fire rarefies and turns into Vapors and Wind. The Sun here is as
the Fire, and the exterior Earth is as the Shell of the Aeolipile, and the
Abyss as the Water within it; now when the heat of the Sun had pierced through
the Shell and reached the Waters, it began to rarefie them, and raise them into
Vapors; which rarefaction made them require more space and room than they
needed before, while they lay close and quiet. And finding themselves penned in
by the exterior Earth, they pressed with violence against that Arch, to make
it yield and give way to their dilatation and eruption. So we see all Vapors
and Exhalations enclosed within the Earth, and agitated there, strive to break
out, and often shake the ground with their attempts to get loose. And in the
comparison we used of an Aeolipile, if the mouth of it be stopped that gives the
vent, the Water raresi'd will burst the Vessel with its force. And the
resemblance of the Earth to an Egg, which we used before, holds also in this
respect; for when it heats before the Fire, the moisture and Air within being
rarefi'd, makes it often burst the Shell. And I do the more willingly mention
this last comparison, because I observe that some of the Ancients, when they
speak of the doctrine of the Mundane Egg, say, that after a certain period of
time it was broken.

But there is yet another thing to be considered in this case; for as the heat
of the Sun gave force to these Vapors more and more, and made them more strong
and violent; so on the other hand, it also weakened more and more the Arch of
the Earth, that was to resist them; sucking out the moisture that was the
cement of its parts, drying it immoderately, and chapping it in sundry places.
And there being no Winter then to close up and unite its parts, and restore the
Earth to its former strength and compactness, it grew more and more disposed to
a dissolution. And at length, these preparations in Nature being made on either
side, the force of the Vapors increased, and the walls weakened, which should
have kept them in, when the appointed time was come, that Allwise Providence
had designed for the punishment of a sinful World, the whole fabric brake, and
the frame of the Earth was torn in pieces, as by an Earthquake; and those great
portions or fragments, into which it was divided, fell down into the Abyss,
some in one posture, and some in another.

This is a short and general account how we may conceive the dissolution of the
first Earth, and an universal Deluge arising upon it. And this manner of
dissolution has so many examples in Nature every Age, that we need not insist
farther upon the Explication of it. The generality of Earthquakes arise from
like causes, and often end in a like effect, a partial Deluge, or Inundation of
the place or Country where they happen; and of these we have seen some
instances even in our own times: But whenever it so happens that the Vapors
and Exhalations shut up in the caverns of the Earth, by rarefaction or
compression come to be straightened, they strive every way to set themselves at
liberty, and often break their prison, or the cover of the Earth that kept them
in; which Earth upon that disruption falls into the Subterraneous Caverns that
lie under it: And if it so happens that those Caverns are full of Water, as
generally they are, if they be great or deep, that City or tract of Land is
drowned. And also the fall of such a mass of Earth, with its weight and bulk,
does often force out the Water so impetuously, as to throw it upon all the
Country round about. There are innumerable examples in History (whereof we
shall mention some hereafter) of Cities and Countires thus swallowed up, or
overflowed, by an Earthquake, and an Inundation arising upon it. And according
to the manner of their fall or ruin, they either remained wholly under water,
and perpetually drowned, as Sodom and Gomorrha, Plato's Atlantis, Bura and
Helice, and other Cities and Regions in Greece and Asia; or they partly
emerg'd, and became dry Land again; when (their situation being pretty high)
the Waters, after their violent agitation was abated, retired into the lower
places, and into their Channels.

Now if we compare these partial dissolutions of the Earth with an universal
dissolution, we may as easily conceive an Universal Deluge from an Universal
Dissolution, as a partial Deluge from a partial. If we can conceive a City, a
Country, an Island, a Continent thus absorpt and overflown; if we do but
enlarge our thought and imagination a little, we may conceive it as well of the
whole Earth. And it seems strange to me, that none of the Ancients should hit
upon this way of explaining the Universal Deluge; there being such frequent
instances in all Ages and Countries of Inundations made in this manner, and
never of any great Inundation made otherwise, unless in maritime Countries, by
the irruption of the Sea into grounds that lie low. It Is true, they would not
so easily imagine this Dissolution, because they did not understand the true
from of the Ante-diluvian Earth; but, methinks, the examination of the Deluge
should have led them to the discovery of that: For observing the difficulty, or
impossibility of an Universal Deluge, without the Dissolution of the Earth; as
also frequent instances of these Dissolutions accompanied with Deluges, where
the ground was hollow, and had Subterraneous Waters; this, methinks, should
have prompted them to imagine, that those Subterraneous Waters were universal
at that time, or extended quite round the Earth; so as a dissolution of the
exterior Earth could not be made any where but it would fall into Waters, and
be more or less overflowed. And when they had once reached this thought, they
might conclude both what the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth was, and that the
Deluge came to pass by the dissolution of it. But we reason with ease about the
finding out of things, when they are once found out; and there is but a thin
paper-wall sometimes between the great discoveries and a perfect ignorance of
them. Let us proceed now to consider, whether this supposition will answer all
the conditions of an Universal Deluge, and supply all the defects which we
found in other Explications.

The great difficulty proposed, was to find Water sufficient to make an
Universal Deluge, reaching to the tops of the Mountains; and yet that this
Water should be transient, and after some time should so return into its
Channels, that the dry Land would appear, and the Earth become again habitable.
There was that double impossibility in the common opinion, that the quantity of
Water necessary for such a Deluge was no where to be found, or could no way be
brought upon the Earth; and then if it was brought, could no way be removed
again. Our explication quite takes off the edge of this Objection; for,
performing the same effect with a far less quantity of Water, it is both easy
to be found, and easily removed when the work is done. When the exterior Earth
was broke, and fell into the Abyss, a good part of it was covered with Water
by the mere depth of the Abyss it fell into, and those parts of it that were
higher than the Abyss was deep, and consequently would stand above it in a
calm Water, were notwithstanding reached and overtop'd by the waves, during the
agitation and violent commotion of the Abyss. For it is not imaginable what
the commotion of the Abyss would be upon this dissolution of the Earth, nor to
what height its waves would be thrown, when those prodigious fragments were
tumbled down into it. Suppose a stone of ten thousand weight taken up into the
Air a mile or two, and then let fall into the middle of the Ocean, I do not
believe but that the dashing of the water upon that impression, would rise as
high as a Mountain. But suppose a mighty Rock or heap of Rocks to fall from
that height, or a great Island, or a Continent; these would expel the waters
out of their places, with such a force and violence, as to fling them among the
highest Clouds.

It Is incredible to what height sometimes great Stones and Cinders will be
thrown, at the eruptions of fiery Mountains; and the pressure of a great mass
of Earth falling into the Abyss, though it be a force of another kind, could
not but impel the water with so much strength, as would carry it up to a great
height in the Air: and to the top of any thing that lay in its way, any
eminency, high fragment, or new Mountain: And then rolling back again, it would
sweep down with it whatsoever it rusht upon, Woods, Building, living Creatures,
and carry them all headlong into the great gulf. Sometimes a mass of water
would be quite struck off and separate from the rest, and tossed through the Air
like a flying River; but the common motion of the waves was to climb up the
hills, or inclined fragments; and then return into the valleys and deeps again,
with a perpetual fluctuation going and coming, ascending and descending, till
the violence of them being spent by degrees, they settled at last in the places
allotted for them; where bounds are set that they cannot pass over, that they
return not again to cover the Earth. Psalm. 104. 6, 7, 8, 9.


Neither is it to be wondered, that the great Tumult of the waters, and the
extremity of the Deluge lasted for some months; for besides, that the first
shock and commotion of the Abyss was extremely violent, from the general fall
of the Earth, there were ever and anon some secondary ruins; or some parts of
the great ruin, that were not well settled, broke again, and made new
commotions: And 'twas a considerable time before the great fragments that fell,
and their lesser dependencies could be so adjusted and fitted, as to rest in a
firm and immovable posture: For the props and stays whereby they leaned one
upon another, or upon the bottom of the Abyss, often failed, either by the
incumbent weight, or the violent impulses of the water against them; and so
renewed, or continued the disorder and confusion of the Abyss. Besides, we are
to observe, that these great fragments falling hollow, they enclosed and bore
down with them under their concave surface a great deal of Air; and while the
water compassed these fragments, and overflowed them, the Air could not readily
get out of those prisons, but by degrees, as the Earth and Water above would
give way; so as this would also hinder the settlement of the Abyss, and the
retiring of the Water into those Subterraneous Channels, for some time. But at
length, when this Air had found a vent, and left its place to the Water, and
the ruins, both primary and secondary, were settled and fixed, then the Waters
of the Abyss began to settle too, and the dry Land to appear; first the tops
of the Mountains, then the high Grounds, then the Plains and the rest of the
Earth. And this gradual subsidency of the Abyss (which Moses also has
particularly noted) and discovery of the several parts of the Earth, would also
take up a considerable time.

Thus a new World appeared, or the Earth put on its new form, and became
divided into Sea, and Land; and the Abyss, which from several Ages, even from
the beginning of the World, had lain hid in the womb of the Earth, was brought
to light and discovered; the greatest part of it constituting our present
Ocean, and the rest filling the lower cavities of the Earth: Upon the Land
appeared the Mountains and the Hills, and the Islands in the Sea, and the Rocks
upon the shore. And so the Divine Providence, having prepared Nature for so
great a change, at one stroke dissolved the frame of the old World, and made us
a new one out of its ruins, which we now inhabit since the Deluge. All which
things being thus explained, deduced, and stated, we now add and pronounce our
Third and last Proposition; That the disruption of the Abyss, or dissolution
of the primaeval Earth and its fall into the Abyss, was the cause of the
Universal Deluge, and of the destruction of the old World.

CHAP. VII. That the Explication we have given of an Universal Deluge is not an
Idea only, but an account of what really came to pass in this Earth, and the
true Explication of Noah's Flood; as is proved by Argument and from History. An
Examination of Tehom-Rabba, or the great Abyss, and that by it the Sea cannot
be understood, nor the Subterraneous Waters, as they are at present. What the
true Notion and Form of it was, collected from Moses and other Sacred Writers;
The frequent allusions in Scripture to the opening and shutting the Abyss, and
the particular style of Scripture in its reflections on the Origin, And the
Formation of the Earth. Observations on Deucalion's Deluge.
WE have now given an account of the first great revolution of Nature, and of
the Universal Deluge, in a way that is intelligible, and from causes that
answer the greatness of the effect; We have supposed nothing but what is also
proved, both as to the first form of the Earth, and as to the manner of its
Dissolution: and how far from that would evidently and necessarily arise a
general Deluge; which was that, which put a period to the old World, and the
first state of things. And though all this has been deduced in due order, and
with connection and consequence of one thing upon another, so far as I know,
which is the true evidence of a Theory; yet it may not be sufficient to command
the Assent and Belief of some persons, who will allow, it may be, and
acknowledge, that this is a fair Idea of a possible Deluge in general, and of
the destruction of a World by it; but this may be only an Idea, they will say; we
desire it may be proved from some collateral arguments, taken either from
Sacred History, or from observation, that this has really been exemplified
upon the Earth, and that Noah's Flood came to pass this way. And seeing we have
designed this first Book chiefly for the Explication of Noah's Deluge, I am
willing to add here a Chapter or two extraordinary upon this occasion; to show,
that what we have delivered is more than an Idea, and that it was in this very
way that Noah's Deluge came to pass. But they who have not this doubt, and have
a mind to see the issue of the Theory, may skip these two Chapters, if they
please, and proceed to the following, where the order is continued.

To satisfy then the doubtful in this particular, let us lay down in the first
place that conclusion which they seem to admit, viz. That this is a possible
and consistent Explication of an Universal Deluge; and let us see how far this
would go, if well considered, toward the proof of what they desire, or toward
the demonstration of Noah's Deluge in particular. It is granted on both hands,
that here has been an Universal Deluge upon the Earth, which was Noah's
Deluge; and it is also granted, that we have given a possible and consistent
Idea of an Universal Deluge; Now we have proved Chap. II. and III. that all
other ways hitherto assigned for the Explication of Noah's Flood are incongrous
or impossible; therefore it came to pass in that possible and competent way
which we have proposed. And if we have truly proved, in the forementioned
Chapters, the impossibility or unintelligibility of it in all other ways, this
argumentation is undeniable. Besides, we may argue thus, as it is granted that
there has been an Universal Deluge upon the Earth; so I suppose it will be
granted that there has been but one: Now the dissolution of the Earth,
whenever it happened, would make one Universal Deluge, and therefore the only
one, and the same with Noah's. That such a Dissolution as we have described,
would make an Universal Deluge, I think, cannot be questioned; and that there
has been such a dissolution, besides what we have already alleged, shall be
proved at large from natural Observations upon the Form and Figure of the
present Earth, in the Third Section and last Chap. of this Book; In the mean
time we will proceed to History, both Sacred and Profane, and by comparing our
Explication with those, give further assurance of its truth and reality.

In the first place, it agrees, which is most considerable, with Moses's
Narration of the Deluge; both as to the matter and manner of it. The matter of
the Deluge Moses makes to be the Waters from above, and the Waters from below;
or he distinguishes the Causes of the Deluge, Genesis 7. 11.
as we do, into Superior and Inferior; and the Inferior causes he makes to
be the disruption of the Abyss, which is the principal part, and the great
hinge of our Explication. Then as to the manner of the Deluge, the beginning
and the ending, the increase and decrease, he says it increased gradually,
ver. 17, 18, 19, 20. cap. 8. 3, 5.
and decreased gradually, by going and coming; that is after many repeated
fluctuations and reciprocations of the waves, the waters of the Abyss began to
be more composed, and to retire into their Channels, whence they shall never
return to cover the Earth again. This agrees wholly with our Theory; we suppose
the Abyss to have been under an extreme commotion and agitation by the fall of
the Earth into it, and this at first increased more and more, till the whole
Earth was fallen; Then continuing for some time at the height of its rage,
overwhelming the greatest Mountains, it afterward decreased by the like
degrees, leaving first the tops of the Mountains, then the Hills and the
Fields, till the Waters came to be wholly drawn off the Earth into their
Channels.

It was no doubt a great oversight in the Ancients, to fancy the Deluge like a
great standing Pool of water, reaching from the bottom of the Valleys to the
tops of the Mountains, every where alike, with a level and uniform surface; by
reason of which mistaken notion of the Deluge, they made more water necessary
to it than was possible to be had, or being had, than it was possible to get
quit of again; for there are no Channels in the Earth that could hold so much
water, vid. St. Austin in loc.
either to give it, or to receive it. And the Psalmist speaking of the Deluge,
as it seems to me, notes this violent commotion of the Abyss. Psalm. 104.
The Waters went up by the Mountains, came down by the Valleys unto the place
which thou have founded for them. verse. 8, 9.
I know some interpret that passage of the state of the waters in the
beginning, when they covered the face of the whole Earth, Genesis 1. 2. but that
cannot be, because of what follows in the next Verse; Thou have set a bound
that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the Earth. Which
is not true, if the preceding words be understood of the state of the waters at
the beginning of the World; for they did pass those bounds, and did return
since that time to cover the Earth, namely at the Deluge: But if these words be
referred to the time of the Deluge, and the state of the waters then, it is both
a just description of the motion of the Abyss, and certainly true, that the
waters since that time are so settled in their Channels, that they shall never
overflow the Earth again. As we are assured by the promise made to Noah, and
that illustrious pledge and confirmation of it, the Rainbow, that the Heavens
also shall never pour out so much waters again; their state being changed as
well as that of the Earth, or Sea, from what they were before the Deluge.

But before we leave Moses's Narration of the Deluge, we must examine further,
what is, or can be understood by his TEHOMRABBA, Genesis 7. 11.
or great Abyss, which he says was broken up at the Deluge; for this will
help us to discover, whether our Explication be the same with his, and of the
same Flood. And first we must consider, whether by the Tehom-Rabba, or Mosaical
Abyss, can be understood the Sea or Ocean, under that form we see it in at
present; and it is plain, methinks, that the Sea cannot be understood by this
great Abyss, both because the Sea is not capable upon any disruption to make
such an universal Deluge; and because the Narration of Moses, and his
expressions concerning this Abyss, do not agree to the Sea. Some of the
Ancients indeed did imagine, that the waters of the Sea were much higher than
the Land, and stood, as it were, on an heap; so as when these waters were let
loose, they overflowed the Earth, and made a Deluge. But this is known to be a
gross mistake; the Sea and the Land make one Globe, and the Waters couch
themselves, as close as may be, to the Center of this Globe in a Spherical
convexity; so that if all the Mountains and Hills were scaled, and the Earth
made even, the Waters would not overflow its smooth surface; much less could
they overflow it in the form that it is now in, where the Shores are higher
than the Sea, the Inland parts than the Shores, and the Mountains still far
above all: So as no disruption of the Sea could make an universal Deluge, by
reason of its situation. But besides that, the quantity of Water contained in
the Sea is no way sufficient to make a Deluge in the present form of the Earth;
for we have shown before, Chap. 2. that Eight such Oceans as ours would be
little enough for that purpose. Then as to the expressions of Moses concerning
this Abyss, if he had meant the Sea by it, and that the Deluge was made by the
disruption of the Sea, why did he not say so? There is no mention of the Sea in
all the History of the Deluge: Moses had mentioned the Sea before, Genesis 1. 10.
and used a word that was common and known to signify the Sea; And if he had a
mind to express the same thing here, why should he not use the same word and
the same term? In an Historical relation we use terms that are most proper and
best known; but instead of that he uses the same term here that he did, Genesis
1. 2. when he says, Darkness was upon the face of the Abyss, or of the Deep,
as we render it; there the Abyss was open, or covered with darkness only,
namely before the exterior Earth was formed; Here the same Abyss is mentioned
again, but covered, by the formation of the Earth upon it; and the covering of
this Abyss was broken or cloven asunder, and the Waters gusht out that made
the Deluge. This I am sure is the most natural interpretation or signification
of this word, according as it is used in Moses's writings. Furthermore, we must
observe what Moses says concerning this Abyss, and whether that will agree
with the Sea or no; he says the Fountains of the great Abyss were broken
open; now if by the great Abyss you understand the Sea, how are its Fountains
broken open? To break open a Fountain, is to break open the ground that covers
it, and what ground covers the Sea? So that upon all considerations, either of
the word that Moses here uses, Tehom-Rabba, or of the thing affirmed
concerning it, breaking open its Fountains; or of the effect following the
breaking open its Fountains, drowning of the Earth; from all these heads it is
manifest, that the Sea cannot be understood by the great Abyss, whose
disruption was the cause of the Deluge.

And as the Mosaical Abyss cannot be the Sea, so neither can it be those
Subterraneous waters that are dispersed in the Cells and Caverns of the Earth;
for as they are now lodged within the Earth, they are not one Abyss, but
several Cisterns and Receptacles of water, in several places, especially under
the roots of Mountains and Hills; separate one from another, sometimes by whole
Regions and Countries interposed. Besides what Fountains, if they were broken
up, could let out this water, or bring it upon the face of the Earth? When we
sink a Mine, or dig a Well, the waters, when uncovered, do not leap out of
their places, out of those Cavities, or at least, do not flow upon the Earth;
It Is not as if you open^d a Vein, where the Blood spirts out, and rises higher
than its Source; but as when you take off the cover of a Vessel, the water does
not fly out for that: So if we should imagine all the Subterraneous Caverns of
the Earth uncovered, and the waters laid bare, there they would lie unmoved in
their beds, if the Earth did not fall into them to force them up. Furthermore,
if these waters were any way extracted and laid upon the surface of the ground,
nothing would be gained as to the Deluge by that, for as much water would run
into these holes again when the Deluge begun to rise; so that this would be but
an useless labor, and turn to no account. And lastly, These waters are no way
sufficient for quantity to answer to the Mosaical Abyss, or to be the principal
cause of the Deluge, as that was.

Now seeing neither the Sea, as it is at present, nor the Subterraneous Waters,
as they are at present, can answer to the Mosaical Abyss, we are sure there is
nothing in this present Earth that can answer to it. Let us then on the other
hand compare it with that Subterraneous Abyss, which we have found in the
Ante-diluvian Earth, P. 40.
represented 5 Fig. 2. and examine their characters and correspondency: First,
Moses's Abyss was covered, and Subterraneous, for the Fountains of it are said
to have been cloven or burst open; then it was vast and capacious; and thirdly,
it was so disposed, as to be capable of a disruption, that would cause an
universal Deluge to the Earth. Our Ante-diluvian Abyss answers truly to all
these characters; 'twas in the womb of the Earth; the Earth was founded upon
those Waters, as the Psalmist says; or they were enclosed within the Earth as
in a Bag. Then for the capacity of it, it contained both all the Waters now in
the Ocean, and all those that are dispersed in the Caverns of the Earth: And
lastly, it is manifest its situation was such, that upon a disruption or
dissolution of the Earth which covered it, an universal Deluge would arise.
Seeing then this answers the description, and all the properties of the
Mosaical Abyss, and nothing else will, how can we in reason judge it otherwise
than the same, and the very thing intended and proposed in the History of
Noah's Deluge under the name of Tehom-Rabba, or the great Abyss, at whose
disruption the World was over-flow'd. And as we do not think it an unhappy
discovery to have found out (with a moral certainty) the feat of the Mosaical
Abyss, which has been almost as much sought for, and as much in vain, as the
seat of Paradise; so this gives us a great assurance, that the Theory we have
given of a general Deluge, is not a mere Idea, but is to be appropriated to the
Deluge of Noah, as a true explication of it.

And to proceed now from Moses to other Divine Writers; That our Description is
a reality, both as to the Ante-diluvian Earth, and as to the Deluge, we may
further be convinced from S. Peter's discourse concerning those two things. 2
Epist. 3. 6.
S. Peter says, that the constitution of the Ante-diluvian Earth was such, in
reference to the Waters, that by reason of that it was obnoxious to a Deluge;
we say these Waters were the great Abyss it stood upon, by reason whereof that
World was really exposed to a Deluge, and overwhelmed in it upon the disruption
of, this Abyss, as Moses witnesses. It Is true, S. Peter does not specify what
those waters were, nor mention either the Sea, or the Abyss; but seeing Moses
tells us, that it was by the waters of the Abyss that the Earth was
overwhelmed, S. Peter's waters must be understood of the same Abyss, because he
supposes them the cause of the same Deluge. And, I think, the Apostle's
discourse there cannot receive a better illustration, than from Moses's History
of the Deluge. Moses distinguishes the Causes of the Flood into those that
belong to the Heavens, and those that belong to the Earth; the Rains and the
Abyss: S. Peter also distinguishes the causes of the Deluge into the
constitution of the Heavens, in reference to its waters; and the constitution
of the Earth, in reference to its waters; and no doubt they both aim at the
same causes, as they refer to the same effect; only Moses mentions the
immediate Causes, the Rains and the Waters of the Abyss; and S. Peter mentions
the more remote and fundamental causes, that constitution of the Heavens, and
that constitution of the Earth, in reference to their respective Waters, which
made that world obnoxious to a Deluge: And these two speaking of Noah's Deluge,
and agreeing thus with one another, and both with us, or with the Theory which
we have given of a General Deluge, we may safely conclude, that it is no
imaginary Idea, but a true account of that Ancient Flood, whereof Moses has
left us the History.

And seeing the right understanding of the Mosaical Abyss is sufficient alone
to prove all we have delivered concerning the Deluge, as also concerning the
frame of the Ante-diluvian Earth, give me leave to take notice here of some
other places of Scripture, which we mentioned before, that seem manifestly to
describe this fame form of the Abyss with the Earth above it, Psalm. 24. 2. He
founded the Earth upon the Seas, 4 Esdr. 16. 58.
and established it upon the Floods; and Psalm. 136. 6. He stretched out the
Earth above the Waters. Now this Foundation of the Earth upon the Waters, or
extension of it above the Waters, does most aptly agree to that structure and
situation of the Abyss and the Ante-diluvian Earth, Chap. 6.
which we have assigned them, and which we have before described; but very
improperly and forc'dly to the present form of the Earth and the Waters. In
that second place of the Psalmist, the word may be rendered either, he
stretched, as we read it, or he fixed and consolidated the Earth above the
Waters, as the Vulgate and Septuagint translate it: For it is from the same word
with that which is used for the Firmament, Genesis 1. So that as the Firmament was
extended over and around the Earth, so was the Earth extended over and about
the Waters, in that first constitution of things; and I remember some of the
Ancients use this very comparison of the Firmament and Earth, to express the
situation of the Paradisiacal Earth in reference to the Sea or Abyss.

There is another remarkable place in the Psalms, to show the disposition of
the Waters in the first Earth; Psalm. 33. 7. He gathers the Waters of the Sea
as in a Bag, he lays up the Abysses in storehouses. This answers very fitly
and naturally to the place and disposition of the Abyss which it had before
the Deluge, enclosed within the vault of the Earth, as in a Bag or in a Store
house. I know very well what I render here in a Bag, is rendered in the
English, as an heap; but that translation of the word seems to be grounded on
the old Error, that the Sea is higher than the Land, and so does not make a
true sense. Neither are the two parts of the Verse so well suited and
consequent one to another, if the first express an high situation of the
Waters, and the second a low one. And accordingly, the Vulgate, Septuagint, and
Oriental Versions and Paraphrase, as also Symmachus, St. Jerome, and Basil,
render it as we do here, in a Bag, or by terms equivalent.

To these passages of the Psalmist, concerning the form of the Abyss and the
first Earth, give me leave to add this general remark, that they are commonly
ushered in, or followed, with something of Admiration in the Prophet. We
observed before, that the formation of the first Earth, after such a wonderful
manner, being a piece of Divine Architecture, when it was spoken of in
Scripture, it was usually ascribed to a particular Providence, and accordingly
we see in these places now mentioned, that it is still made the object of
praise and admiration: In that 136 Psalm it is reckoned among the wonders of
God, Verse. 4, 5, 6, Give praise to him who alone does great wonders; To him
that by wisdom made the Heavens: To him that stretched out the Earth above the
Waters. And in like manner, in that 33 Psalm, it is joined with the forming of
the Heavens, and made the subject of the Divine Power and Wisdom: Verse. 6, 7,
8, 9. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them
by the breath of his mouth; He gathers the Waters of the Sea together, as in
a Bag, he lays up the Abyss in Storehouses. Let all the Earth fear the
Lord; Let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of him; For he spoke,
and it was; he commanded, and it stood fast. Namely, all things stood in that
wonderful posture in which the Word of his Power and Wisdom had established
them. David often made the works of Nature, and the External World, the matter
of his Meditations, and of his praises and Philosophical Devotions; reflecting
sometimes upon the present form of the World, and sometimes upon the primitive
form of it: And though Poetical expressions, as the Psalms are, seldom are so
determinate and distinct, but that they may be interpreted more than one way,
yet, I think, it cannot but be acknowledged that those expressions and passages
that we have instanced in, are more fairly and aptly understood of the Ancient
form of the Sea, or the Abyss, as it was enclosed within the Earth, than of
the present form of it in an open Chanel.

There are also in the Book of Job many noble reflections upon the works of
Nature, and upon the formation of the Earth and the Abyss; whereof that in
Chap. 26. 7. He stretches out the North over the Empty places, and hangs the
Earth upon nothing, seems to parallel the expression of David; He stretched out
the Earth upon the Waters; for the word we render the empty place is TOHU,
which is applied to the Chaos and the first Abyss, Genesis 1. 2. and the hanging
the Earth upon nothing is much more wonderful, if it be understood of the first
habitable Earth, that hung over the Waters, sustained by nothing but its own
peculiar form, and the libration of its parts, than if it be understood of the
present Earth, and the whole body of it; for if it be in its Center or proper
place, whither should it sink further, or whither should it go? But this
passage, together with the foregoing and following Verses, requires a more
critical examination than this Discourse will easily bear.

There is another remarkable Discourse in Job, that contains many things to our
present purpose, it is Chap. 38. where God reproaches Job with his ignorance of
what passed at the beginning of the World, and the formation of the Earth,
Verse. 4, 5, 6. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth?
Declare if thou have understanding: Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou
know; or who has stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened, or who laid the cornerstone? All these questions have far
more force and Emphasis, more propriety and elegacy, if they be understood of
the first and Ante-diluvian form of the Earth, than if they be understood of
the present; for in the present form of the Earth there is no Architecture, no
structure, no more than in a ruin; or at least none comparatively to what was
in the first form of it. And that the exterior and superficial part of the
Earth is here spoken of, appears by the rule and line applied to it; but what
rule or regularity is there in the surface of the present Earth? what line was
used to level its parts? But in its original construction when ^it lay smooth
and regular in its surface, as if it had been drawn by rule and line in every
part; and when it hung poised upon the Deep, without pillar or foundation
stone, then just proportions were taken, and every thing placed by weight and
measure: And this, I doubt not, was that artificial structure here alluded to,
and when this work was finished, ver. 7.
then the morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.

Thus far the questions proceed upon the form and construction of the first
Earth; in the following verses (8, 9, 10, 11.) they proceed upon the demolition
of that Earth, the opening the Abyss, and the present state of both. Or who
shut up the Sea with doors when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of a
womb? Who can doubt but this was at the breaking open of the Fountains of the
Abyss, Genesis 7. 11. when the waters gusht out, as out of the great womb of
Nature; and by reason of that confusion and perturbation of Air and Water that
rise upon it, a thick mist and darkness was round the Earth, and all things as
in a second Chaos, When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick
darkness a swaddling band for it, and brake up for it my decreed place, and made
bars and doors. Namely, (taking the words as thus usually rendered) the present
Chanel of the Sea was made when the Abyss was broke up, and at the same time
were made the shory Rocks and Mountains which are the bars and boundaries of
the Sea. And said hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed. Which last sentence shows, that this cannot be
understood of the first disposition of the waters as they were before the
Flood, for their proud waves broke those bounds, whatsoever they were, when
they overflowed the Earth in the Deluge. And that the womb which they broke out
of was the great Abyss, (...)
the Chaldee Paraphrase in this place does expressly mention; and what can be
understood by the womb of the Farth, but that Subterraneous capacity in which
the Abyss lay? Then that which follows, is a description or representation of
the great Deluge that ensued, and of that disorder in Nature, that was then,
and how the Waters were settled and Bounded afterward. Not unlike the
description in the 104 Psalm, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. and thus much for these places
in the book of Job.

There remains a remarkable discourse in the Proverbs of Solomon, relating to
the Mosaical Abyss, and not only to that, but to the Origin of the Earth in
general; where Wisdom declares her antiquity and pre-existence to all the works
of this Earth, Chap. 8. ver. 23. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, ere the Earth was. When there were no Deeps or
Abysses, I was brought forth; when no fountains abounding with water. Then in
the 27. verse, When he prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he set a Compass
upon the face of the Deep or Abyss. When he established the Clouds above, when
he strengthened the fountains of the Abyss. Here is mention made of the Abyss,
and of the Fountains of the Abyss, and who can question, but that the
Fountains of the Abyss here, are the same with the Fountains of the Abyss which
Moses mentions, and were broken open, as he tells us, at the Deluge? Let us
observe therefore what form Wisdom gives to this Abyss, and consequently to the
Mosaical: And here seem to be two expressions that determine the form of it,
verse. 28. He strengthened the fountains of the Abyss, that is, the cover of
those Fountains, for the Fountains could be strengthened no other way than by
making a strong cover or Arch over them. And that Arch is expressed more fully
and distinctly in the foregoing verse, When he prepared the Heavens, I was
there; when he set a Compass on the face of the Abyss; we render it Compass,
the word signifies a Circle or Circumference, or an Orb or Sphere. So there was
in the beginning of the World a Sphere Orb or Arch set round the Abyss,
according to the restimony of Wisdom, who was then present. And this shows us
both the form of the Mosaical Abyss, which was included within this Vault: and
the form of the habitable Earth, which was the outward surface of this Vault,
or the cover of the Abyss that was broke up at the Deluge.

And thus much, I think, is sufficient to have noted out of Scripture,
concerning the Mosaical Abyss, to discover the form, place and situation of it;
which I have done the more largely, because that being determined, it will draw
in easily all the rest of our Theory concerning the Deluge. I will now only add
one or two general Observations, and so conclude this discourse; The first
Observation is concerning the Abyss; namely, That the opening and shutting of
the Abyss, is the great hinge upon which Nature turns in this Earth: This
brings another face of things, other Scenes and a New World upon the stage: And
accordingly it is a thing often mentioned and alluded to in Scripture,
sometimes in a Natural, sometimes in a Moral or Theological sense; and in both
senses, our Savior shuts and opens it as he pleases. Our Savior, who is both
Lord of Nature and of Grace, whose Dominion is both in Heaven and in Earth,
has a double Key; that of the Abyss, whereby Death and Hell are in his power,
Job 11. 10, 12, 14.
and all the revolutions of Nature are under his Conduct and Providence; Apoc.
1. 18. 20. 1, 2, 3. 21. 1.
And the Key of David, whereby he admits or excludes from the City of God, and
the Kingdom of Heaven whom he pleases. Apoc. 3. 7.
Of those places that refer to the shutting and opening the Abyss in a natural
sense, Isa. 22. 22.
I cannot but particularly take notice of that in Job, Chap. 12. ver. 14, 15.
God breaks down, and Chap. 11. 10.
and it cannot be built again: he shuts up man, and there can be no opening:
Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up; also he sends them out,
and they overturn the Earth. Though these things be true of God in lesser and
common instances, yet to me it is plain, that they principally refer to the
Deluge, the opening and shutting the Abyss, with the dissolu^ion or subversion
of the Earth thereupon; and accordingly they are made the great effects of the
Divine Power and Wisdom in the foregoing Verse, With God is wisdom and
strength, Verse 13.
he has counsel and understanding; Behold, he breaks down, etc. And also in
the conclusion it is repeated again, Verse 6.
With him is strength and wisdom; which solemnity would scarce have been used
for common instances of his power. When God is said to build or pull down, and
no body can build again, it is not to be understood of an House or a Town, God
builds and unbuilds Worlds; and who shall build up that Arch that was broke
down at the Deluge? Where shall they lay the Foundation, or how shall the
Mountains be reared up again to make part of the Roof? This is the Fabric,
which when God breaks down, none can build up again. He withholdeth the
waters and they dry up: As we showed the Earth to have been immoderately chapt
and parcht before its dissolution. He sends them forth and they overturn the
Earth. What can more properly express the breaking out of the waters at the
disruption of the Abyss? and the subversion or dissolution of the Earth in
consequence of it? It Is true this last passage may be applied to the breaking
out of waters in an ordinary Earthquake, and the subversion of some part of the
Earth, which often follows upon it; but it must be acknowledged, that the sense
is more weighty, if it be referred to the great Deluge; and the great Earthquake
which laid the World in ruins and in water. And Philosophical descriptions in
Sacred Writings, like Prophecies, have often a lesser and a greater
accomplishment and interpretation.

I could not pass by this place without giving this short Explication of it. We
proceed now to the second Observation, which is concerning the style of
Scripture, in most of those places we have cited, and others upon the same
subject. The reflections that are made in several parts of the Divine Writings,
upon the Origin of the World, and the formation of the Earth, seem to me to be
writ in a stile-something approaching to the nature of a Prophetical style, and
to have more of a Divine Enthusiasm and Elocution in them, than the ordinary
text of Scripture; the expressions are lofty, and sometimes abrupt, and often
figurative and disguised, as may be observed in most of those places we have
made use of, and particularly in that speech of Wisdom, Prove. 8. where the 26.
verse is so obscure, that no two Versions that I have yet met with, whether
Ancient or Modern, agree in the Translation of that Verse. And therefore though
I fully believe that the construction of the first Earth is really intended in
those words, yet seeing it could not be made out clear without a long and
critical discussion of them, I did not think that proper to be insisted upon
here. We may also observe, that whereas there is a double form or composition
of the Earth, that which it had at first, or till the Deluge, and that which it
has since; sometimes the one, and sometimes the other may be glanced upon in
these Scripture phrases and descriptions; and so there may be in the same
discourse an intermixture of both. And it commonly happens so in an
Enthusiastic or Prophetic style, that by reason of the eagerness and
trembling of the Fancy, it does not always regularly follow the same even
thread of discourse, but strikes many times upon some other thing that has
relation to it, or lies under or near the same view. Of this we have frequent
examples in the Apocalypse, and in that Prophecy of our Savior's, Matthew. 24.
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the World. But notwithstanding
any such unevenness or indistinctness in the style of those places which we
have cited concerning the Origin and form of the Earth, we may at least make
this remark, that if there never was any other form of the Earth but the
present, nor any other state of the Abyss, than what it is in now, it is not
imaginable, what should give occasion to all those expressions and passages
that we have cited; which being so strange in themselves and paradoxical,
should yet so much favor, and so fairly comply with our suppositions. Tell.
Theor. lib. 2. c. 6.
What I have observed in another place, in treating of Paradise, that the
expressions of the Ancient Fathers were very extravagant, if Paradise was
nothing but a little plot of ground in Mesopotamia, as many of late have
fansied; may in like manner be observed concerning the ancient Earth and
Abyss, if they were in no other form, nor other state than what they are under
now, the expressions of the Sacred Writers concerning them are very strange and
inaccountable, without any sufficient ground, that we know, or any just
occasion for such uncouth representations. If there was nothing intended or
referred to in those descriptions, but the present form and state of the Earth,
that is so well known, that in describing of it there would be nothing dark or
mysterious, nor any occasion for obscurity in the style or expression, whereof
we find so much in those. So as, all things considered, what might otherwise be
made an exception to some of these Texts alleged by us, viz. that they are too
obscure, becomes an argument for us: as implying that there is something more
intended by them, than the present and known form of the Earth. And we having
proposed another form and structure of the Earth, to which those characters
suit and answer more easily, as this opens and gives light to those difficult
places, so it may be reasonably concluded to be the very sense and notion
intended by the holy Writers.

And thus much, I think, is sufficient to have observed out of Scripture, to
verify our Explication of the Deluge, and our Application of it to Noah's
Flood, both according to the Mosaical History of the Flood, and according to
many occasional reflections and discourses dispersed in other places of
Scripture, concerning the same Flood, or concerning the Abyss and the first
form of the Earth. And though there may be some other passages of a different
aspect, they will be of no force to disprove our conclusions, because they
respect the present form of the Earth and Sea; and also because expressions
that deviate more from the common opinion, are more remarkable and more
proving; in that there is nothing could give occasion to such, but an intention
to express the very truth. So, for instance, if there was one place of
Scripture that said the Earth was moved, and several that seemed to imply, that
the Sun was moved, we should have more regard to that one place for the motion
of the Earth, than to all the other that made against it; because those others
might be spoken and understood according to common opinion and common belief,
but that which affirmed the motion of the Earth, could not be spoke upon any
other ground, but only for truth and instruction sake. I leave this to be
applied to the present subject.

Thus much for the Sacred Writings. As to the History of the ancient Heathens,
we cannot expect an account or Narration of Noah's Flood, under that name and
notion; but it may be of use to observe two things out of that History. First,
that the Inundations recorded there came generally to pass in the manner we
have described the Universal Deluge; namely, by Earthquakes and an eruption of
Subterraneous waters, the Earth being broken and falling in: and of this we
shall elsewhere give a full account out of their Authors. Secondly, that
Deucalion's Deluge in particular, which is supposed by most of the Ancient
Fathers to represent Noah's Flood, is said to have been accompained with a
gaping or disruption of the Earth; Bibl. lib. 1.
Apollodorus says, that the Mountains of Thessaly were divided asunder, or
separate one from another at that time: And Lucian (de dea Syria) tells a very
remarkable story to this purpose, concerning Deucalion's Deluge, and a ceremony
observed in the Temple of Hieropolis, in commemoration of it; which ceremony
seems to have been of that nature, as impli'd that there was an opening of the
Earth at the time of the Deluge, and that the waters subsided into that again
when the Deluge ceased. He says, that this Temple at Hieropolis was built upon
a kind of Abyss, or had a bottomless pit, or gaping of the Earth in one part
of it, and the people of Arabia and Syria, and the Countries the eabouts twice
a year repaired to this Temple, and brought with them every one a vessel of
water, which they poured out upon the floor of the Temple, and made a kind of
an Inundation there in memory of Deucalion's Deluge; and this water sunk by
degrees into a Chasm or opening of a Rock, which the Temple stood upon, and so
left the floor dry again. And this was a rite solemnly and religiously
performed both by the Priests and by the People. If Moses had left such a
Religious rite among the Jews, I should not have doubted to have interpreted it
concerning his Abyss, and the retiring of the waters into it; but the actual
disruption of the Abyss could not well be represented by any ceremony. And
thus much concerning the present question, and the true application of our
Theory to Noah's Flood.

CHAP. VIII. The particular History of Noah's Flood is explained in all the
material parts and circumstances of it, according to the preceding Theory. Any
seeming difficulties removed, and the whole Section concluded, with a Discourse
how far the Deluge may be looked upon as the effect of an ordinary Providence,
and how far of an extraordinary.
WE have now proved our Explication of the Deluge to be more than an Idea, or
to be a true piece of Natural History; and it may be the greatest and most
remarkable that has yet been since the beginning of the World. We have shown
it to be the real account of Noah's Flood, according to Authority both Divine
and Humane; and I would willingly proceed one step further, and declare my
thoughts concerning the manner and order wherein Noah's Flood came to pass; in
what method all those things happened and succeeded one another, that make up
the History of it, as causes or effects, or other parts or circumstances: As
how the Ark was born upon the waters, what effect the Rains had, at what time
the Earth broke, and the Abyss was opened; and what the condition of the Earth
was upon the ending of the Flood, and such like. But I desire to propose my
thoughts concerning these things only as conjectures, which I will ground as
near as I can upon Scripture and Reason, and am very willing they should be
rectified where they happen to be amiss. I know how subject we are to mistakes
in these great and remote things, when we descend to particulars; but I am
willing to expose the Theory to a full trial, and to show the way for any to
examine it, provided they do it with equity and sincerity. I have no other
design than to contribute my endeavors to find out the truth in a subject of
so great importance, and wherein the World has hitherto had so little
satisfaction: And he that in an obscure argument proposes an Hypothesis that
reaches from end to end, though it be not exact in every particular, it is not
without a good effect; for it gives aim to others to take their measures
better, and opens their invention in a matter which otherwise, it may be, would
have been impenetrable to them: As he that makes the first way through a thick
Forest, though it be not the streightest and shortest, deserves better, and
has done more, than he that makes it streighter and smoother afterward.

Providence that rules all things and all Ages, after the Earth had stood
above sixteen hundred Years, thought fit to put a period to that World; and
accordingly, it was revealed to Noah, that for the wickedness and degeneracy of
men, God would destroy mankind with the Earth (Genesis 6. 13.) in a Deluge of
water; whereupon he was commanded, in order to the preserving of Himself and
Family, as a stock for the new World, to build a great Vessel or Ark, to float
upon the waters, and had instructions given him for the building of it both as
to the matter and as to the form. Noah believed the word of God, though against
his senses, and all external appearances, and set himself to work to build an
Ark, according to the directions given, which after many years labor was
finished; whilst the incredulous World, secure enough, as they thought against
a Deluge, continued still in their excesses and insolences, and laughed at the
admonition of Noah, and at the folly of his design of building an extravagant
Machine, a floating house, to save himself from an imaginary Inundation; for
they thought it no less, seeing it was to be in an Earth where there was no
Sea, nor any Rain neither in those parts, according to the ordinary course of
Nature, as shall be shown in the second Book of this Treatise.

But when the appointed time was come, the Heavens began to melt, and the Rains
to fall, and these were the first surprising causes and preparatives to the
Deluge; They fell, we suppose, (tho we do not know how that could proceed from
natural causes) throughout the face of the whole Earth; which could not but
have a considerable effect on that Earth, being even and smooth, without Hills
and eminencies, and might lay it all under water to some depth; so as the Ark,
if it could not float upon those Rain-waters, at least taking the advantage of
a River, or a Dock or Cistern made to receive them, it might be a float before
the Abyss was broken open. For I do not suppose the Abyss broken open before
any Rain fell; And when the opening of the Abyss and of the Floodgates of
Heaven are mentioned together, I am apt to think those Floodgates were
distinct from the common Rain, and were something more violent and impetuous.
So that there might be preparatory Rains before the disruption of the Abyss:
and I do not know but those Rains, so covering up and enclosing the Earth on
every side, might providentially contribute to the disruption of it; not only
by softning and weakening the Arch of the Earth in the bottom of those cracks
and Chasms which were made by the Sun, and which the Rain would first run into,
but especially by stopping on a sudden all the pores of the Earth, and all
evaporation, which would make the vapors within struggle more violently, as we
get a Fever by a Cold; and it may be in that struggle, the Doors and the Bars
were broke, and the great Abyss gusht out, as out of a womb.

However, when the Rains were fallen, we may suppose the face of the Earth
covered over with water; and whether it was these waters that S. Peter refers
to, or that of the Abyss afterward, I cannot tell, when he says in his first
Epistle, Chap. 3. 20. Noah and his Family were saved by water; so as the water
which destroyed the rest of the World, was an instrument of their conservation,
in as much as it bore up the Ark, and kept it from that impetuous shock, which
it would have had, if either it had stood upon dry land when the Earth fell, or
if the Earth had been dissolved without any water on it or under it. However,
things being thus prepared, let us suppose the great frame of the exterior
Earth to have broke at this time, or the Fountains of the great Abyss, as Moses
says, to have been then opened, from thence would issue, upon the fall of the
Earth, with an unspeakable violence, such a Flood of waters as would overrun
and overwhelm for a time all those fragments which the Earth broke into, and
bury in one common Grave all Mankind, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth.
Besides, if the Floodgates of Heaven were any thing distinct from the Forty
days Rain, their effusion, it is likely, was at this same time when the Abyss
was broken open; for the sinking of the Earth would make an extraordinary
convulsion of the Regions of the Air, and that crack and noise that must be in
the falling World, and in the collision of the Earth and the Abyss, would make
a great and universal Concussion above, which things together, must needs so
shake, or so squeeze the Atmosphere, as to bring down all the remaining
Vapors; But the force of these motions not being equal throughout the whole
Air, but drawing or pressing more in some places than in other, where the
Center of the Convulsion was, there would be the chiefest collection, and there
would fall, not showers of Rain, or single drops, but great spouts or caskades
of water; and this is that which Moses seems to call, not improperly, the
Gataracts of Heaven, or the Windows of Heaven being set open.

Thus the Flood came to its height; and it is not easy to represent to our
selves this strange Scene of things, when the Deluge was in its fury and
extremity; when the Earth was broken and swallowed up in the Abyss, whose
raging waters rise higher than the Mountains, and filled the Air with broken
waves, with an universal mist, and with thick darkness, so as Nature seemed to
be in a second Chaos; and upon this Chaos rid the distressed Ark, that bore the
small remains of Mankind. No Sea was ever so tumultuous, as this, nor is there
any thing in present Nature to be compared with the disorder of these waters;
All the Poetry, and all the Hyperboles that are used in the description of
Storms and raging Seas, were literally true in this, if not beneath it. The Ark
was really carried to the tops of the highest Mountains, and into the places of
the Clouds, and thrown down again into the deepest Gulfs; and to this very
state of the Deluge and of the Ark, which was a Type of the Church in this
World, David seems to have alluded in the name of the Church, Psalm. 42. 7.
Abyss calls upon Abyss at the noise of thy Cataracts or water-spouts; all thy
waves and billows have gone over me. It was no doubt an extraordinary and
miraculous Providence, that could make a Vessel, so ill manned, live upon such a
Sea; that kept it from being dashed against the Hills, or overwhelmed in the
Deeps. That Abyss which had devoured and swallowed up whole Forests of Woods,
Cities, and Provinces, nay the whole Earth, when it had conquered all, and
triumphed over all, could not destroy this single Ship. Dion. Argonaut. l. 1.
v. 47.
I remember in the story of the Argonauticks, when Jason set out to fetch the
Golden Fleece, the Poet says, all the Gods that day looked down from Heaven to
view the Ship; and the Nymphs stood upon the Mountain-tops to see the noble
Youth of Thessaly pulling at the Oars; We may with more reason suppose the good
Angels to have looked down upon this Ship of Noah's; and that not out of
couriosity, as idle spectators, but with a passionate concern for its safety
and deliverance. A Ship whose Cargo was no less than a whole World; that
carried the fortune and hopes of all posterity, and if this had perished, the
Earth for any thing we know, had been nothing but a Desert, a great ruin, a
dead heap of Rubbish, from the Deluge to the Conflagration. But Death and Hell,
the Grave, and Destruction have their bounds. We may entertain our selves with
the consideration of the face of the Deluge, and of the broken and drowned
Earth, in this Scheme with the floating Ark, and the guardian Angels.

page 68.



Thus much for the beginning and progress of the Deluge. It now remains only
that we consider it in its decrease, and the state of the Earth, after the
waters were retired into their Channels, which makes the present state of it.
Moses says, God brought a wind upon the waters, and the tops of the Hills
became bare, and then the lower grounds and Plains by degrees; the waters being
sunk into the Channels of the Sea, and the hollowness of the Earth, and the
whole Globe appearing in the form it is now under. There needs nothing be added
for explication of this, it is the genuine consequence of the Theory we have
given of the Deluge; and whether this wind was a descending wind to depress and
keep down the swellings and inequalities of the Abyss, or whether it was only
to dry the Land as fast as it appeared, or might have both effects, I do not
know; But as nothing can be perpetual this is violent, so this commotion of the
Abyss abated after a certain time, and the great force that impelled the
waters, decreasing, their natural gravity began to take effect, and to reduce
them into the lowest places, at an equal height, and in an even surface, and
level one part with another: That is, in short, the Abyss became our Sea, fixed
within its Chanel, Job 38. 10, 11.
and bounded by Rocks and Mountains: Then was the decreed place established for
it, and Bars and Doors were set; then was it said, hitherto shall thou come,
and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stopped. And the Deluge being
thus ended, and the waters settled in their Channels, the Earth took such a
broken Figure as is represented in those larger Schemes, p. 100. And this will
be the form and state of it till its great change comes in the Conflagration,
when we expect a New Heaven and a New Earth.

But to pursue this prospect of things a little further; we may easily imagine,
that for many years after the Deluge ceast; the face of the Earth was very
different from what it is now, and the Sea had other bounds than it has at
present. I do not doubt but the Sea reached much further inland, and climbed
higher upon the sides of the Mountains; And I have observed in many places, a
ridge of Mountains some distance from the Sea, and a Plain from their roots to
the shore; which Plain no doubt was formerly covered by the Sea, bounded
against those Hills as its first and natural Ramparts, or as the ledges or lips
of its Vessel. And it seems probable, that the Sea does still grow narrower
from Age to Age, and sinks more within its Chanel and the bowels of the Earth,
according as it can make its way into all those Subterraneous Cavities, and
crowd the Air out of them. We see whole Countries of Land gained from it, and
by several indications, as ancient Seaports left dry and useless, old Sea-marks
far within the Land, pieces of Ships, Anchors, etc. left at a great distance
from the present shores; from these signs, and such like, we may conclude that
the Sea reached many places formerly that now are dry Land, and at first I
believe was generally bound in on either side with a chain of Mountains. So I
should easily imagine the Mediterranean Sea, for instance, to have been bounded
by the continuation of the Alps through Dauphine and Languedock to the
Pyreneans, and at the other end by the Darmatick Mountains almost to the Black
Sea. Then Atlas major which runs along with the Mediterranean from Egypt to
the Atlantic Ocean, and now parts Barbary and Numidia may possibly have been
the Ancient Barriere on the Africa side. And in our own Island I could easily
figure to my self, in many parts of it, other Sea-bounds than what it has at
present; and the like may be observed in other Countries.

And as the Sea had much larger bounds for some time after the Deluge, so the
Land had a different face in many respects to what it has now; for we suppose
the Valleys and lower grounds, where the descent and derivation of the water
was not so easy, to have been full of Lakes and Pools for a long time; and
those were often converted into Fens and Bogs, where the ground being spongy,
sucked up the water, and the loosened Earth swelled into a soft and pappy
substance; which would still continue so, if there was any course of water
sensible or insensible, above or within the ground, that fed this moist place:
But if the water stood in a more firm Basin, or on a soil which for its
heaviness or any other reason would not mix with it, it made a Lake or clear
Pool. And we may easily imagine there were innumerable such Lakes, and Bogs and
fastnesses for many years after the Deluge, till the World begun to be pretty
well stockt with people, and humane industry cleans'd and drained those
unfruitful and unhabitable places. And those Countries that have been later
cultivated, or by a lazier people, retain still, in proportion to their
situation and soil, a greater number of them.

Neither is it at all incongruous or inconvenient to suppose, that the face of
the Earth stood in this manner for many years after the Deluge; for while
Mankind was small and few, they needed but a little ground for their seats or
sustenance; and as they grew more numerous, the Earth proportionably grew more
dry, and more parts of it fit for habitation. De Leg. li. 3.
I easily believe that Plato's observation or tradition is true, that Men at
first, after the Flood, lived in the Up-lands and sides of the mountains, and
by degrees sunk into the Plains and lower Countries, when Nature had prepared
them for their use, and their numbers required more room. The History of Moses
tells us, Genesis 11.
that sometime after the Deluge, Noah and his posterity, his Sons and his
Grandchildren, changed their quarters, and fell down into the Plains of
Shiner, from the sides of the Hills where the Ark had rested; and in this Plain
was the last general rendezvous of Mankind; so long they seem to have kept in a
body, and from thence they were divided and broken into companies, and
dispersed, first, into the neighboring Countries, and then by degrees
throughout the whole Earth; the several successive Generations, like the waves
of the Sea when it flows, overreaching one another, and striking out further
and further, upon the face of the Land. Not that the whole Earth was peopled by
an uniform propagation of Mankind every way, from one place, as a common
center: like the swelling of a Lake upon a Plain: for sometimes they shot out
in length, like Rivers: and sometimes they show into remote Countries in
Colonies, like swarms from the Hive, and settled there, leaving many places
uninhabited betwixt them and their first home. Sea-shores and Islands were
generally the last places inhabited: for while the memory or story of the
Deluge was fresh amongst them, they did not care for coming so near their late
Enemy: or, at least, to be enclosed and surrounded by his forces.

And this may be sufficient to have discoursed concerning all the parts of the
Deluge, and the restitution of the Earth to an habitable form, for the further
union of our Theory with the History of Moses; There rests only one thing in
that History to be taken notice of, which may be thought possibly not to agree
so well with our account of the Deluge; namely, that Moses seems to shut up the
Abyss again at the end of the Deluge, which our Explication supposes to
continue open. But besides that half the Abyss is still really covered, Moses
says the same thing of the windows of Heaven, that they were shut up too; and
he seems in both to express only the cessation of the Effect which proceeded
from their opening: For as Moses had ascribed the Deluge to the opening of
these two, so when it was to cease, he says, these two were shut up; as they
were really put into such a condition, both of them, that they could not
continue the Deluge any longer, nor over be the occasion of a second; and
therefore in that sense, and as to that effect were for ever shut up. Some may
possibly make that also an Objection against us, that Moses mentions and
supposes the Mountains at the Deluge, for he says, the waters reached fifteen
Cubits above the tops of them; whereas we suppose the Ante-diluvian Earth to
have had a plain and uniform surface, without any inequality of Hills and
Valleys. But this is easily answered, 'twas in the height of the Deluge that
Moses mentioned the Mountains, and we suppose them to have risen then or more
toward the beginning of it, when the Earth was broke; and these Mountains
continuing still upon the face of the Earth, Moses might very well take them
for a standard to measure and express to Posterity the height of the waters,
though they were not upon the Earth when the Deluge begun. Neither is there any
mention made, as is observed by some, of Mountains in Scripture, or of Rain,
till the time of the Deluge.

We have now finished our account of Noah's Flood, both generally and
particularly; and I have not wittingly omitted or concealed any difficulty that
occurred to me, either from the History, or from abstract reason: Our Theory, so
far as I know, has the consent and authority of both: And how far it agrees
and is demonstrable from natural observation, or from the form and Phenomenon
of this Earth, as it lies at present, shall be the subject of the remaining
part of this First Book. In the mean time I do not know any thing more to be
added in this part, unless it be to conclude with an Advertisement to prevent
any mistake or misconstruction, as if this Theory, by explaining the Deluge in
a natural way, in a great measure, or, by natural causes, did detract from the
power of God, by which that great judgment was brought upon the World in a
Providential and miraculous manner.

To satisfy all reasonable and intelligent persons in this particular, I
answer and declare, first, That we are far from excluding Divine Providence,
either ordinary or extraordinary, from the causes and conduct of the Deluge. I
know a Sparrow does not fall to the ground without the will of our Heavenly
Father, much less does the great World fall in pieces without his good pleasure
and superintendency. In him all things live, move, and have their being; Things
that have Life and Thought have it from him, he is the Fountain of both: Things
that have motion only, without Thought, have it also from him: And what has
only naked Being, without Thought or Motion, owe still that Being to him. And
these are not only derived from God at first, but every moment continued and
conserved by him. So intimate and universal is the dependence of all things
upon the Divine Will and Power.

In the second place, they are guilty, in my Judgment, of a great Error or
indiscretion, that oppose the course of Nature to Providence. St. Paul says
(Act. 14. 17.) God has not left us without witness, in that he gives us Rain
from Heaven; yet Rains proceed from natural causes, and fall upon the Sea as
well as upon the Land. In like manner, Mat. 6. 21.
our Savior makes those things instances of Divine Providence, which yet come
to pass in an ordinary course of Nature; In that part of his excellent Sermon
upon the Mount, that concerns Providence. Luke 12. 24.
He bids them Consider the Lilies how they grow, they toil not, neither do they
spin, and yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these; He
bids them also consider the Ravens, they neither sow nor reap, neither have
they Storehouse nor Barn, and God feeds them. The Lilies grow, and the
Ravens are fed according to the ordinary course of Nature, and yet they are
justly made arguments of Providence by our Savior; nor are these things less
Providential, because constant and regular; on the contrary, such a disposition
or establishment of second causes, as will in the best order, and for a long
succession, produce the most regular effects, assisted only with the ordinary
concourse of the first cause, is a greater argument of wisdom and contrivance,
than such a disposition of causes as will not in so good an order, or for so
long a time produce regular effects, without an extraordinary concourse and
interposition of the First cause. This, I think, is clear to every man's
judgment. We think him a better Artist that makes a Clock that strikes
regularly at every hour from the Springs and Wheels which he puts in the work,
than he that has so made his Clock that he must put his finger to it every
hour to make it strike: And if one should contrive a piece of Clock-work so
that it should beat all the hours, and make all its motions regularly for such
a time, and that time being come, upon a signal given, or a Spring touched, it
should of its own accord fall all to pieces; would not this be looked upon as a
piece of greater Art, than if the Workman came at that time prefixed, and with a
great Hammer beat it into pieces? I use these comparisons to convince us, that
it is no detraction from Divine Providence, that the course of Nature is exact
and regular, and that even in its greatest changes and revolutions it should
still conspire and be prepared to answer the ends and purposes of the Divine
Will in reference to the Moral World. This seems to me to ^e the great Art of
Divine Providence, so to adjust the two Worlds, Humane and Natural, Material
and Intellectual, as seeing thorough the possibilities and futuritions of each,
according to the first state and circumstances he puts them under, they should
all along correspond and fit one another, and especially in their great Crises
and Periods.

Thirdly, Besides the ordinary Providence of God in the ordinary course of
Nature, there is doubtless an extraordinary Providence that does attend the
greater Scenes and the greater revolutions of Nature. This methinks, besides
all other proof from the Effects, is very rational and necessary in it self;
for it would be a limitation of the Divine Power and Will so to be bound up to
second causes, as never to use, upon occasion, an extraordinary influence or
direction: And it is manifest, taking any Systeme of Natural causes, if the best
possible, that there may be more and greater things done, if to this, upon
certain occasions you join an extraordinary conduct. And as we have taken
notice before, that there was an extraordinary Providence in the formation or
composition of the first Earth, so I believe there was also in the dissolution
of it; And I think it had been impossible for the Ark to have lived upon the
raging Abyss, or for Noah and his Family to have been preserved, if there had
not been a miraculous hand of Providence to take care of them. But it is hard to
separate and distinguish an ordinary and extraordinary Providence in all cases,
and to mark just how far one goes, and where the other begins. And writing a
Theory of the Deluge here, as we do, we were to exhibit a Series of causes
whereby it might be made intelligible, or to show the proximate Natural Causes
of it; wherein we follow the example both of Moses and S. Peter; and with the
same veneration of the Divine Power and Wisdom in the government of Nature, by
a constant ordinary Providence, and an occasional extraordinary.

So much for the Theory of the Deluge, and the second Section of this Discourse.

CHAP. IX.
The Second Part of this Discourse, proving the same Theory from the Effects
and present form of the Earth. First, by a general Scheme of what is most
remarkable in this Globe, and then by a more particular Induction; beginning
with an Account of Subterraneous Cavities and Subterraneous Waters.
WE have now finished our explication of the Universal Deluge, and given an
account, not only of the possibility of it, but (so far as our knowledge can
reach) of its Causes; and of that form and structure of the Earth, whereby the
Old World was subject to that sort of Fate. We have not begged any Principles or
Suppositions for the proof of this, but taking that common ground, which both
Moses and all Antiquity presents to us, viz. That this Earth rose from a Chaos;
We have from that deduced, by an easy train of consequences, what the first
Form of it would be; and from that Form, as from a nearer ground, we have by a
second train of consequences made it appear, that at some time or other that
first Earth would be subject to a dissolution, and by that dissolution to a
Deluge. And thus far we have proceeded only by the intuition of Causes, as is
most proper to a Theory; but for the satisfaction of those that require more
sensible arguments, and to complete our proofs on either hand, we will now
argue from the Effects; and from the present state of Nature, and the present
form of the Earth, prove that it has been broken, and undergone such a
dissolution as we have already described, and made the immediate occasion of
the Deluge. And that we may do this more perspicuously and distinctly, we will
lay down this Proposition to be proved, viz. That the present form and
structure of the Earth, both as to the surface and as to the Interior parts of
it, so far as they are known and accessible to us, does exactly answer to our
Theory concerning the form and dissolution of the first Earth, and cannot be
explained upon any other Hypothesis yet known.

Orators and Philosophers treat Nature after a very different manner; Those
represent her with all her graces and ornaments, and if there be any thing that
is not capable of that, they dissemble it, or pass it over slightly. But
Philosophers view Nature with a more impartial eye, and without favor or
prejudice give a just and free account, how they find all the parts of the
Universe, some more, some less perfect. And as to this Earth in particular, if
I was to describe it as an Orator, I would suppose it a beautiful and regular
Globe, and not only so, but that the whole Universe was made for its sake; that
it was the darling and favorite of Heaven, that the Sun shined only to give it
light, to ripen its Fruit, and make fresh its Flowers; and that the great
Concave of the Firmament, and all the Stars in their several Orbs, were
designed only for a spangled Cabinet to keep this Jewel in. This Idea I would
give of it as an Orator; But a Philosopher that overheard me, would either
think me in jest, or very injudicious, if I took the Earth for a body so
regular in it self, or so considerable, if compared with the rest of the
Universe. This, he would say, is to make the great World like one of the
Heathen Temples, a beautiful and magnificent structure, and of the richest
materials, yet built only for a little brute Idol, a Dog, or a Crocodile, or
some deformed Creature, placed in a corner of it.

We must therefore be impartial where the Truth requires it, and describe the
Earth as it is really in it self; and though it be handsome and regular enough
to the eye in certain parts of it, single tracts and single Regions; yet if we
consider the whole surface of it, or the whole Exterior Region, it is as a
broken and confused heap of bodies, placed in no order to one another, nor with
any correspondency or regularity of parts: And such a body as the Moon appears
to us, when it is looked upon with a good Glass, rude and ragged; as it is also
represented in the modern Maps of the Moon; such a thing would the Earth appear
if it was seen from the Moon. They are both in my judgment the image or picture
of a great Ruin, Vid. Fig. p. 100.
and have the true aspect of a World lying in its rubbish.

Our Earth is first divided into Sea and Land, without any regularity in the
portions, either of the one or the other; In the Sea lie the Islands, scattered
like limbs torn from the rest of the body; great Rocks stand reared up in the
waters; The Promontories and Capes shoot into the Sea, and the Sinus's and
Creeks on the other hand run as much into the Land; and these without any order
or uniformity. Upon the other part of our Globe stand great heaps of Earth or
stone, which we call Mountains; and if these were all placed together, they
would take up a very considerable part of the dry Land; In the rest of it are
lesser Hills, Valleys, Plains, Lakes, and Marshes, Sands and Deserts, etc. and
these also without any regular disposition. Then the inside of the Earth, or
inward parts of it, are generally broken or hollow, especially about the
Mountains and high Lands, as also toward the shores of the Sea, and among the
Rocks. How many Holes and Caverns, and strange Subterraneous passages do we see
in many Countries; and how many more may we easily imagine, that are unknown
and unaccessible to us?

This is the pourtraicture of our Earth, drawn without flattery; and as oddly
as it looks, it will not be at all surprising to one that has considered the
foregoing Theory; For it is manifest enough, that upon the dissolution of the
first Earth, and its fall into the Abyss, this very face and posture of things,
which we have now described, or something extremely like it, would immediately
result. The Sea would be opened, and the face of the Globe would be divided
into Land and Water: And according as the fragments fell, some would make
Islands or Rocks in the Sea, others would make Mountains or Plains upon the
Land; and the Earth would generally be full of Caverns and hollownesse,
especially in the Mountainous parts of it. And we see the resemblance and
imitation of this in lesser ruins, when a Mountain sinks and falls into
Subterraneous water; or which is more obvious, when the Arch of a Bridge is
broken, and falls into the water, if the water under it be not so deep as to
overflow and cover all its parts, you may see there the image of all these
things in little Continents, and Islands, and Rocks under water: And in the
parts that stand above the water, you see Mountains, and Precipices, and Plains
and most of the varieties that we see and admire in the parts of the Earth.
What need we then seek any further for the Explication of these things? Let us
suppose this Arch of the Bridge, as the great Arch of the Earth, which once it
had, and the water under it as the Abyss, and the parts of this ruin to
represent the parts of the Earth; There will be scarce any difference but of
lesser and greater, the same things appearing in both. But we have naturally
that weakness or prejudice, that we think great things are not to be explained
from easy and familiar instances; We think there must be something difficult
and operose in the explication of them, or else we are not satisfied; whether
it is that we are ashamed to see our ignorance and admiration to have been so
groundless, or whether we fancy there must be a proportion between the
difficulty of the explication, and the greatness of the thing explained; but
that is a very false Judgment, for let things be never so great, if they be
simple, their explication must be simple and easy; And on the contrary, some
things that are mean, common, and ordinary, may depend upon causes very
difficult to find out; for the difficulty of explaining an effect does not
depend upon its greatness or littleness, but upon the simplicity or composition
of its causes. And the effects and Phenomenon we are here to explain, though
great, yet depending upon causes very simple, you must not wonder if the
Explication, when found out; be familiar and very intelligible.

And this is so intelligible, and so easily deducible from the forementioned
causes, that a Man born blind or brought up all his life in a Cave, that had
never seen the face of the Earth, nor ever heard any description of it, more
than that it was a great Globe, having this Theory proposed to him, or being
instructed what the form of the first Earth was, how it stood over the waters,
and then how it was broke and fell into them, he would easily of his own accord
foretell what changes would arise upon this dissolution; and what the new form
of the Earth would be. As in the first place he would tell you, that this
second Earth would be distinguished and checkered into Land and Water; for the
Orb which fell being greater than the circumference it fell upon, all the
fragments could not fall flat and lie drowned under water; and those that stood
above, would make the dry Land or habitable part of the Earth. Then in the
second place, he would plainly discern that these fragments that made the dry
Land, could not lie all plain and smooth and equal, but some would be higher
and some lower, some in one posture and some in another, and consequently would
make Mountains, Hills, Valleys, and Plains, and all other varieties we have in
the situation of the parts of the Earth. And lastly, a blind man would easily
divine that such a great ruin could not happen but there would be a great many
holes and cavities amongst the parts of it, a great many intervals and empty
places in the rubbish, as I may so say; for this we see happens in all ruins
more or less; and where the fragments are great and hard, it is not possible
they should be so adjusted in their fall, but that they would lie hollow in
many places, and many unfill'd spaces would be intercepted amongst them; some
gaping in the surface of the Earth, and others hid within; so as this would
give occasion to all sorts of fractures and cavities either in the skin of the
Earth, or within its body. And these Cavities, that I may add that in the last
place, would be often filled with Subterraneous waters, at least at such a
depth; for the foundations of the Earth standing now within the waters, so high
as those waters reached they would more or less propagate themselves every way.

Thus far our Blind man could tell us what the New World would be, or the form
of the Earth upon the great dissolution; and we find his reasonings and
inferences very true, these are the chief lineaments and features of our Earth;
which appear indeed very irregular and very inaccountable when they are looked
upon naked in themselves, but if we look upon them through this Theory, we see
as in a glass all the reasons and causes of them. There are different Genius's
of Men, and different conceptions, and every one is to be allowed their liberty
as to things of this nature; I confess, for my own part, when I observe how
easily and naturally this Hypothesis does apply it self to the general face of
this Earth, hits and falls in so luckily and surprizingly with all the odd
postures of i^s parts, I cannot, without violence, bear off my mind from fully
assenting to it: And the more odd and extravagant, as I may so say, and the
more diversified the effects and appearances are, to which an Hypothesis is to
be applied, if it answers them all and with exactness, it comes the nearer to a
moral certitude and infallibility. As a Lock that consists of a great deal of
workmanship, many Wards, and many odd pieces and contrivances, if you find a
Key that answers to them all, and opens it readily, it is a thousand to one that
it is the true Key, and was made for that purpose.

An eminent Philosopher of this Age, Monsteur des Carts, has made use of the
like Hypothesis to explain the irregular form of the present Earth; though he
never dreamed of the Deluge, nor thought that first Orb built over the Abyss,
to have been any more than a transient crust, and not a real habitable World
that lasted for more than sixteen hundred years, as we suppose it to have been.
And though he has, in my opinion, in the formation of that first Orb, and upon
the dissolution of it, committed some great oversights, C. 7. and lib. 2. c. 4.
whereof we have given an account in the Latin Treatise; however he saw a
necessity of such a thing, and of the disruption of it, to bring the Earth into
that form and posture wherein we now find it.

Thus far we have spoken in general concerning the agreement and congruity of
our supposition with the present face of the Earth, and the easy account it
gives of the causes of it. And though I believe to ingenuous persons that are
not prejudiced by the forms and opinions of the Schools against every thing
that looks like a novelty or invention, thus much might be sufficient; yet for
the satisfaction of all, we will, as a farther proof of our Theory, or that
part of it which concerns the dissolution of the Earth, descend to particular
explication of three or four of the most considerable and remarkable things
that occur in the fabric of this present Earth; namely, The great Chanel of
the Ocean; Subterraneous Cavities and Subterraneous Waters; and lastly,
Mountains and Rocks. These are the wonders of the Earth as to the visible frame
of it; and who would not be pleased to see a rational account of these? of
their Origin, and of their properties; Or who would not approve of an
Hypothesis, when they see that Nature in her greatest and strangest works may
easily be understood by it, and is in no other way, that we know of,
intelligible.

We will speak first of Subterraneous Cavities and Waters, because they will be
of easier dispatch, and an introduction to the rest.

That the inside of the Earth is hollow and broken in many places, and is not
one firm and united mass, we have both the Testimony of Sense and of easy
Observations to prove: How many Caves and Dens and hollow passages into the
ground do we see in many Countries, especially amongst Mountains and Rocks; and
some of them endless and bottomless so far as can be discovered. We have many
of these in our own Island, in Derbishire, Somersetshire, Wales, and other
Counties, and in every Continent or Island they abound more or less. These
hollownesses of the Earth the Ancients made prisons, or storehouses for the
Winds, and set a God over them to confine them, or let them loose at his
pleasure. For some Ages after the Flood, as all Antiquity tells us, These were
the first houses men had, at least in some parts of the Earth; here rude
mortals sheltered themselves, as well as they could, from the injuries of the
Air, till they were beaten out by wild beasts that took possession of them. The
Ancient Oracles also used to be given out of these Vaults and recesses under
ground, the Sibyls had their Caves, and the Delphick Oracle, and their Temples
sometimes were built upon an hollow Rock. Places that are strange and solemn
strike an awe into us, and incline us to a kind of superstitious timidity and
veneration, and therefore they thought them fit for the seats and residences of
their Deities. They fansied also that steams rise sometimes, or a sort of
Vapor in those hollow places, that gave a kind of Divine fury or inspiration.
But all these uses and employments are now in a great measure worn out, we know
no use of them but to make the places talked on where they are, to be the
wonders of the Country, to please our curiosity to gaze upon and admire; but
we know not how they came, nor to what purpose they were made at first.

It would be very pleasant to read good descriptions of these Subterraneous
places, and of all the strange works of Nature there; how she furnishes these
dark neglected Grottoes; they have often a little Brook runs murmuring through
them, and the roof is commonly a kind of petrefied Earth or Icy fret-work;
proper enough for such rooms. But I should be pleased especially to view the
Sea-caves, or those hollow Rocks that lie upon the Sea, where the waves Roll in
a great way under ground, and wear the hard Rock into as many odd shapes and
figures as we see in the Clouds. It Is pleasant also to see a River in the
middle of its course throw itself into the mouth of a Cave, or an opening of
the Earth, and run under ground sometimes many miles; still pursuing its way
through the dark pipes of the Earth, till at last it find an outlet. There are
many of these Rivers taken notice of in History in the several parts of the
Earth, as the Rhone in France, Guadiana in Spain, and several in Greece,
Alpheus, Lycus, and Erasinus; then Niger in Africa, Tigris in Asia, etc. And I
believe if we could turn Derwent, or any other River into one of the holes of
the Peak, it would groap its way till it found an issue, it may be in some
other Country. These Subterraneous Rivers that emerge again, show us that the
holes of the Earth are longer and reach farther than we imagine, and if we
could see into the ground, as we ride or walk, we should be affrighted to see
so often Waters or Caverns under us.

But to return to our dry Caves; these commonly stand high, and are sometimes
of a prodigious greatness: Geo. l. 16.
Strabo mentions some in the Mountains toward Arabia, that are capable to
receive four thousand men at once. 1 Samuel 24. 3, 4.
The Cave of Engedi hid David and six hundred men, so as Saul, when he was in
the mouth of it, did not perceive them. In the Mountains of the Traconites
there are many of these vast dens and recesses, and the people of that Country
defended themselves a long time in those strong Holds against Herod and his
Army; They are placed among such craggy Rocks and Precipices, that, Ant. Iud.
l. 14. chapter 27.
as Josephus tells us, Herod was forced to make a sort of open chests, and in
those by chains of Iron he let down his Soldiers from the top of the Mountains
to go fight them in their dens. I need add no more instances of this kind; In
the Natural History of all Countries, or the Geographical descriptions of them,
you find such places taken notice of, more or less; yet if there was a good
collection made of the chief of them in several parts, it might be of use, and
would make us more sensible how broken and torn the body of the Earth is.

There are Subterraneous Cavities of another nature, and more remarkable, which
they call Volcano's, or fiery Mountains; that belch out flames and smoke and
ashes, and sometimes great stones and broken Rocks, and lumps of Earth, or some
metallic mixture; and throw them to an incredible distance by the force of the
eruption. These argue great vacuities in the bowels of the Earth, and magazines
of combustible matter treasured up in them. And as the Exhalations within these
places must be copious, so they must lie in long Mines or Trains to do so great
execution, and to last so long. It Is scarce credible what is reported
concerning some eruptions of Vesuvius and Aetna. The Eruptions of Vesuvius seem
to be more frequent and less violent of late; The flame and smoke break out at
the top of the Mountain, where they have eaten away the ground and made a great
hollow, so as it looks at the top, when you stand upon the brimes of it, like
an Amphitheater, or like a great Caldron, about a mile in circumference, and
the burning Furnace lies under it. The outsides of the Mountain is all spread
with Ashes, but the inside much more; for you wade up to the midleg in Ashes to
go down to the bottom of the Cavity, and it is extremely heavy and troublesome
to get up again. The inside lies sloping, and one may safely go down if it be
not in a raging fit; but the middle part of it or center, which is a little
raised like the bottom of a Platter, is not to be ventured upon, the ground
there lies false and hollow, there it always smoaks, and there the Funnel is
supposed to be; yet there is no visible hole or gaping any where when it does
not rage. Naples stands below in fear of this fiery Mountain, which has often
covered its Streets and Palaces with its Ashes; and in sight of the Sea (which
lies by the side of them both) and as it were in defiance to it, threatens at
one time or another, to burn that fair City. History tells us, that some
eruptions of Vesuvius have carried Cinders and Ashes as far as Constantinople;
this is attested both by Greek and Latin Authors; particularly, that they were
so affrighted with these Ashes and darkness, that the Emperor left the City,
and there was a day observed yearly for a memorial of this calamity or prodigy.

Aetna is of greater same than Vesuvius, and of greater fury, all Antiquity
speaks of it; not only the Greeks and Romans, but as far as History reaches,
either real or fabulous, there is something recorded of the Fires of Aetna. The
Figure of the Mountain is inconstant, by reason of the great consumptions and
ruins it is subject to; The Fires and Aestuations of it are excellently
described by Virgil, upon occasion of Aeneas his passing by those Coasts. --
Horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis;
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo and candente favilla;
Attollitque globos flammarum and sydera lambit;
Interdum scopulos, avolsaque viscera Montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemitu glomerat, fundoque exaesluat into.
Fama est Enceladi semustum fulmine corpus
Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper Aetnam
Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis.
Et fessum quoties mutet latus, intremere omnem
Murmr Trinacriam and coelum subtexere fumo.
-- Aetna, whose ruins make a thunder;
Sometimes black clouds of smoke, that roll about
Mingled with flakes of fire, it belches out.
And sometimes Balls of flame it darts on high,
Or its torn bowels flings into the Sky.
Within deep Cells under the Earth, a store
Of fire-materials, molten Stones, and Ore,
I^ gathers; then spews out, and gathers more.
Emceladus when thunderstruck by Jove,
Was buried here, and Aetna thrown above;
And when, to change his wearied side, he turns,
The Island trembles and the Mountain burns.


Not far from Aetna lies Str^mbolo, and other adjacent Islands, where there are
also such magazines of Fire; and throughout all Regions and Countries in the
West Indies and in the East, in the Northern and Southern parts of the Earth,
there are some of these Volcano's, which are sensible evidences that the Earth
is incompact and full of Caverns; besides the roarings, and bellowings that use
to be heard before an eruption of these Volcano's, argue some dreadful
hollowness in the belly or under the roots of the Mountain, where the
Exhalations struggle before they can break their Prison.

The Subterraneous Cavities that we have spoke of hitherto, are such as are
visible in the surface of the Earth, and break the skin by some gaping Orifice;
but the Miners and those that work under ground meet with many more in the
bowels of the Earth, that never reach to the top of it; Burrows, and Channels,
and Clefts, and Caverns; that never had the comfort of one beam of light since
the great fall of the Earth. And where we think the ground is firm and solid,
as upon Heaths and Downs, it often betrays its hollowness, by sounding under
the Horses feet and the Chariot-wheels that pass over it. We do not know when
and where we stand upon good ground, if it was examined deep enough; and to
make us further sensible of this, we will instance in two things that argue the
unsoundness and hollowness of the Earth in the inward recesses of it, though
the surface be entire and unbroken; These are Earthquakes and the communication
of Subterraneous waters and Seas: Of which two we will speak a little more
particularly.

Earthquakes are too evident demonstrations of the hollowness of the Earth,
being the dreadful effects or consequences of it; for if the body of the Earth
was sound and compact, there would be no such thing in Nature as an Earthquake.
They are commonly accompanied with an heavy dead found, like a dull thunder
which arises from the Vapors that are striving in the womb of Nature when her
throes are coming upon her. And that these Caverns where the Vapors lie are
very large and capacious, we are taught sometimes by sad experience; for whole
Cities and Countries have been swallowed up into them, as Sodom and Gomorrha,
and the Region of Pentapolis, and several Cities in Greece, and in Asia, and
other parts. Whole Islands also have been thus absort in an Earthquake; the
pillars and props they stood upon being broken, they have sunk and fallen in as
an house blown up. I am also of opinion that those Islands that are made by
divulsion from a Continent, as Sicily was broken off from Italy, and Great
Britain, as some think, from France, have been made the same way; that is, the
Isthmus or necks of Land that joined these Islands with their Continents
before, have been hollow, and being either worn by the water, or shak'd by an
Earthquake, have sunk down, and so made way for the Sea to overflow them, and
of a Promontory to make an Island. For it is not at all likely that the neck of
Land continued standing, and the Sea overflowed it, and so made an Island; for
then all those passages between such Islands, and their respective Continents
would be extremely shallow and unnavigable, which we do not find them to be.
Nor is it any more wonder if such a neck of Land should fall, than that a
Mountain should sink, or any other Tract of Land, and a Lake rise in its place,
which has often happened, Plato supposes his Atlantis to have been greater
than Asia and Africa together, and yet to have sunk all into the Sea; whether
that be true or no, I do not think it impossible that some arms of the Sea or
Sinus's might have had such an original as that; and I am very apt to think,
that for some years after the Deluge, till the fragments were well settled and
adjusted, great alterations would happen as to the face of the Sea and the
Land; many of the fragments would change their posture, and many would sink
into the water that stood out before, the props failing that bore them up, or
the joints and corners whereby they leaned upon one another: and thereupon a
new face of things would arise, and a new Deluge for that part of the Earth.
Such removes and interchanges, I believe, would often happen in the first Ages
after the Flood; as we see in all other ruins there happen lesser and
secondary ruins after the first, till the parts be so well poised and settled,
that without some violence they scarce change their posture any more.

But to return to our Earthquakes, and to give an instance or two of their
extent and violence: Pliny mentions one in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar that
struck down Twelve Cities of Asia in one night. And Fournier gives us an
account of one in Peru, that reached three hundred leagues along the Seashore,
and seventy leagues inland; and levelled the Mountains all along as it went,
threw down the Cities, turned the Rivers out of their Channels, and made an
universal havoc and confusion; And all this, he says, was done within the
space of seven or eight minutes. There must be dreadful Vaults and Mines under
that Continent, that gave passage to the Vapors, and liberty to play for nine
hundred miles in length, and above two hundred in breadth. Asia also has been
very subject to these desolations by Earthquakes; and many parts in Europe, as
Greece, Italy, and others. The truth is, our Cities are built upon ruins, and
our Fields and Countries stand upon broken Arches and Vaults, and so does the
greatest part of the outward frame of the Earth, and therefore it is no wonder
if it be often shaken; there being quantities of Exhalations within these
Mines, or Cavernous passages, that are capable of rarefaction and inflammation;
and, upon such occasions, requiring more room, they shake or break the ground
that covers them. And thus much concerning Earthquakes.

A second observation that argues the hollowness of the Earth, is the
communication of the Seas and Lakes under ground. The Caspian and Mediterranean
Seas, and several Lakes, receive into them great Rivers, and yet have no
visible out let: These must have Subterraneous out-lets, by which they empty
themselves, otherwise they would redound and overflow the brims of their
Vessel. The Mediterranean is most remarkable in this kind, because it is
observed that at one end the great Ocean flows into it through the straits of
Gibralter, with a sensible current, and toward the other end about
Constantinople the Pontus flows down into it with a stream so strong, that
Vessels have much ado to stem it; and yet it neither has any visible
evacuation or outlet, nor over-flows its banks. And besides that it is thus
fed at either end, it is sed by the navel too, as I may so say; it sucks in, by
their Channels, several Rivers into its belly, whereof the Nile is one very
great and considerable. These things have made it a great Problem, What becomes
of the water of the Mediterranean Sea? And for my part, I think, the solution
is very easy, namely, that it is discharged by Subterraneous passages, or
conveyed by Channels under the ground into the Ocean. And this manner of
discharge or conveyance is not peculiar to the Mediterranean, but is common to
it with the Caspian Sea, and other Seas and Lakes, that receive great Rivers
into them, and have no visible issue.

I know there have been proposed several other ways to answer this difficulty
concerning the e^flux or consumption of the waters of the Mediterranean; some
have supposed a double current in the strait of Gibralter, one that carried the
water in, and another that brought it out; like the Arteries and Veins in our
Body, the one exporting our blood from the heart, and the other re-importing
it: So they supposed one current upon the surface, which carried the water into
the Mediterranean, and under it at a certain depth a counter-current, which
brought the water back into the Ocean. But this has neither proof nor
foundation; for unless it was included in pipes, as our blood is, or consisted
of liquors very different, these cross currents would mingle and destroy one
another. Others are of opinion, that all the water that flows into the
Mediterranean, or a quantity equal to it, is consumed in Exhalations every day:
This seems to be a bolder supposition than the other, for if so much be
consumed in Vapors and Exhalations every day as flows into this Sea, what if
this Sea had an outlet, and discharged by that, every day, as much as it
received; in a few days the Vapors would have consumed all the rest; and yet
we see many Lakes that have as free an outlet as an inlet, and are not
consumed, or sensibly diminisht by the Vapors. Besides, This Reason is a
Summer-reason, and would pass very ill in Winter, when the heat of the Sun is
much less powerful: At least there would be a very sensible difference betwixt
the height of the waters in Summer and Winter, if so much was consumed every
day as this Explication supposes. And the truth is, this want of a visible
outlet is not a property belonging only to the Mediterranean Sea, as we noted
before, but is also in other Seas and great Lakes, some lying in one Climate
and some in another, where there is no reason to suppose such excessive
Exhalations; and though it is true some Rivers in Africa, and in others parts of
the Earth, are thus exhaled and dried up, without ever flowing into the Sea (as
were all the Rivers in the first Earth) yet this is where the sands and parched
ground suck up a great part of them; the heat of the Climate being excessively
strong, and the Chanel of the River growing shallower by degrees, and, it may
be, divided into lesser branches and rivulets; which are causes that take no
place here. And therefore we must return to our first reason, which is
universal, for all seasons of the Year and all Climates; and seeing we are
assured that there are Subterraneous Channels and passages, for Rivers often
fall into the ground, and sometimes rise again, and sometimes never return; why
should we doubt to ascribe this effect to so obvious a cause? Nay, I believe
the very Ocean does evacuate it self by Subterraneous out-lets; for considering
what a prodigious mass of water falls into it every day from the wide mouths of
all the Rivers of the Earth, it must have out-lets proportionable; and those
Syrtes or great Whirlpools that are constant in certain parts or Sinus's of the
Sea, as upon the Coast of Norway and of Italy, arise probably from
Subterraneous out-lets in those places, whereby the water sinks, and turns, and
draws into it whatsoever comes within such a compass; and if there was no issue
at the bottom, though it might by contrary currents turn things round within in
its Sphere, yet there is no reason from that why it should suck them down to
the bottom. Neither does it seem improbable, that the currents of the Sea are
from these in-draughts, and that there is always a submarine inlet in some
part of them, to make a circulation of the Waters. But thus much for the
Subterraneous communication of Seas and Lakes.

And thus much in general concerning Subterraneous Cavities, and concerning the
hollow and broken frame of the Earth. If I had now Magic enough to show you at
one view all the inside of the Earth, which we have imperfectly described; if
we could go under the roots of the Mountains, and into the sides of the broken
rocks; or could dive into the Earth with one of those Rivers that sink under
ground, and follow its course and all its windings till it rise again, or led
us to the Sea, we should have a much stronger and more effectual Idea of the
broken form of the Earth, than any we can excite by these faint descriptions
collected from Reason. The Ancients I remember used to represent these hollow
Caves and Subterraneous Regions in the nature of a World underground, and
supposed it inhabited by the Nymphs especially the Nymphs of the waters and the
Sea-Goddesses; so Orpheus sung of old; and in imitation of him Virgil has made
a description of those Regions; feigning the Nymph Cyrene to send for her son
to come down to her, and make her a visit in those shades where mortals were
not admitted. Duc age, Virgil.
duc ad nos, fas illi limina Divum
Tangere, ait: Simul alta jubet discedere late
Flumina, qua juvenis gressus inferret, at illum
Curvata in montis faciem circumstitit unda,
Accepitque sinu vasto, misitque sub amnem.
Iamque domum ^mirans Genetricis and humida regna,
Speluncisque lacos clausos, lucosque sonantes,
Ibat, and ingenti motu stup^factus aquarum
Omnia sub magna labentia slumina terra
Spectabat diversa locis; Phasimque Licumque, etc.
Et Thalami matris pendentia pumice tecta, etc.
Come lead the Youth below, bring him to me,
The Gods are pleased our Mansions he should see;
Straight she commands the floods to make him way,
They open their wide bosom and obey;
Soft is the path, and easy is his tread,
A watery Arch hends over his dewy head;
And as he goes he wonders, and looks round,
To see this newfound Kingdom under ground.
The silent Lakes in hollow Caves he sees,
And on their banks an echoing grove of Trees;
The fall of waters amongst the Rocks below
He hears, and sees the Rivers how they flow:
All the great Rivers of the Earth are there,
Prepared, as in a womb, by Nature's care.
Last, to his mother's bedchamber he is brought,
Where the high roof with Pumice-stone is wrought, etc.


If we now could open the Earth as this Nymph did the Water, and go down into
the bosom of it: see all the dark Chambers and Apartments there, how ill
contrived, and how ill kept: so many holes and corners, some filled with smoke
and fire, some with water, and some with vapors and moldy Air; how like a
ruin it lies gaping and torn in the parts of it? we should not easily believe
that God created it into this form immediately out of nothing; It would have
cost no more to have made things in better order; nay, it had been more easy
and more simple; and accordingly we are assured that all things were made at
first in Beauty and proportion. And if we consider Nature and the manner of the
first formation of the Earth, it is evident that there could be no such holes
and Caverns, nor broken pieces, made then in the body of it; for the grosser
parts of the Chaos falling down toward the Center, they would there compose a
mass of Earth uniform and compact, the water swimming above it; and this first
mass under the water could have no Caverns or vacuities in it; for if it had
had any, the Earthy parts, while the mass was liquid or semi-liquid, would have
sunk into them and filled them up, expelling the Air or Water that was there;
And when afterward there came to be a crust or new Earth formed upon the face
of the Waters, there could be no Cavities, no dens, no fragments in it, no more
than in the other; And for the same general reason, that is, passing from a
liquid form into a concrete or solid, leasurely and by degrees, it would flow
and settle together in an entire mass; There being nothing broken, nor any
thing hard, to bear the parts off from one another, or to intercept any empty
spaces between them.

It Is manifest then that the Earth could not be in this Cavernous form
originally, by any work of Nature; nor by any immediate action of God, seeing
there is neither use nor beauty in this kind of construction; Do we not then,
as reasonably, as aptly, ascribe it to that desolation that was brought upon
the Earth in the general Deluge? When its outward frame was dissolved and fell
into the great Abyss: How easily does this answer all that we have observed
concerning the Subterraneous Regions? That hollow and broken posture of things
under ground, all those Caves and holes, and blind recesses, that are otherwise
so inaccountable, say but that they are a Ruin, and you have in one word
explained them all. For there is no sort of Cavities, interior or exterior,
great or little, open or shut, wet or dry, of what form or fashion soever, but
we might reasonably expect them in a ruin of that nature. And as for the
Subterraneous waters, seeing the Earth fell into the Abyss. the pillars and
foundations of the present (exterior) Earth must stand immersed in water, and
therefore at such a depth from the surface every where, there must be water
found, if the soil be of a nature to admit it. It Is true, all Subterraneous
waters do not proceed from this original, for many of them are the effects of
Rains and melted Snows sunk into the Earth; but that in digging any where you
constantly come to water at length, even in the most solid ground, this cannot
proceed from these Rains or Snows, but must come from below, and from a cause
as general as the effect is; which can be no other in my judgment than this,
that the roots of the exterior Earth stand within the old Abyss, whereof, as a
great part lies open in the Sea, so the rest lies hid and covered among the
fragments of the Earth; sometimes dispersed and only moistning the parts, as
our blood lies in the flesh, and in the habit of the body; sometimes in greater
or lesser masses, as the blood in our Vessels. And this I take to be the true
account of Subterraneous waters as distinguished from Fountains and Rivers, and
from the matter and causes of them.

Thus much we have spoke to give a general Idea of the inward parts of the
Earth, and an easy Explication of them by our Hypothesis; which whether it be
true or no, if you compare it impartially with Nature, you will confess at
least, that all these things are just in such a form and posture as if it was
true.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Chanel of the Sea, and the Original of it; The Causes
of its irregular form and unequal depths: As also of the Original of Islands,
their situation, and other properties.
WE have hitherto given an account of the Subterraneous Regions, and of their
general form; We now come above ground to view the surface of the Globe, which
we find Terraqueous, or divided into Sea and Land: These we must survey, and
what is remarkable in them as to their frame and structure, we must give an
account of from our Hypothesis, and show to be inaccountable from any other yet
known.

As for the Ocean, there are two things considerable in it, the Water and the
Chanel that contains it. The Water no doubt is as ancient as the Earth and
cotemporary with it, and we suppose it to be part of the great Abyss wherein
the World was drowned; the rest lying covered under the hollow fragments of
Continents and Islands. But that is not so much the subject of our present
discourse as the Chanel of the Ocean, that vast and prodigious Cavity that runs
quite round the Globe, and reaches, for ought we know, from Pole to Pole, and
in many places is unsearchably deep: When I present this great Gulf to my
imagination, emptied of all its waters, naked and gaping at the Sun, stretching
its jaws from one end of the Earth to another, it appears to me the most
ghastly thing in Nature. What hands or instruments could work a Trench in the
body of the Earth of this vastness, and lay Mountains and Rocks on the side of
it, as Ramparts to enclose it?

But as we justly admire its greatness, so we cannot at all admire its beauty
or elegancy, for it is as deformed and irregular as it is great. And there
appearing nothing of order or any regular design in its parts, it seems
reasonable to believe that it was not the work of Nature, according to her
first intention, or according to the first model that was drawn in measure and
proportion, by the Line and by the Plummet, but a secondary work, and the best
that could be made of broken materials. And upon this supposition it is easy to
imagine, how upon the dissolution of the primaeval Earth the Chanel of the Sea
was made, or that huge Cavity that lies between the several Continents of the
Earth; which shall be more particularly explained after we have viewed a little
better the form of it, and the Islands that lie scattered by its shores.

There is no Cavity in the Earth, whether open or Subterraneous; that is
comparably so great as that of the Ocean, nor would any appear of that
deformity if we could see it empty. The inside of a Cave is rough and
unsightly; The beds of great Rivers and great Lakes when they are laid dry,
look very raw and rude; The Valleys of the Earth, if they were naked, without
Trees and without Grass, nothing but bare ground and bare stones, from the tops
of their Mountains would have a ghastly aspect; but the Sea-chanel is the
complex of all these; here Caves, empty Lakes, naked Valleys are represented as
in their original, or rather far exceeded and outdone as to all their
irregularities; for the Cavity of the Ocean is universally irregular, both as
to the shores and borders of it; as to the uncertain breadth and the uncertain
depth of its several parts, and as to its ground and bottom and the whole
mould: If the Sea had been drawn round the Earth in regular figures and
borders, it might have been a great beauty to our Globe, and we should
reasonably have concluded it a work of the first Creation, or of Nature's first
production; but finding on the contrary all the marks of disorder and
disproportion in it, we may as reasonably conclude, that it did not belong to
the first order of things, but was something succedaneous, when the degeneracy
of Mankind, and the judgments of God had destroyed the first World, and
subjected the Creation of some kind of Vanity.

Nor can it easily be imagined, if the Sea had been always, and the Earth, in
this Terraqueous form, broke into Continents and Islands, how Mankind could
have been propagated at first through the face of the Earth, all from one head
and from one place. For Navigation was not then known, at least as to the grand
Ocean, or to pass from Continent to Continent; And, I believe, Noah's Ark was
the first Ship, or Vessel of bulk, that ever was built in the World; how could
then the Posterity of Adam overflow the Earth, and stock the several parts of
the World, if they had been distant or separate then, as they are now, by the
interposal of the great Ocean? But this consideration we will insist upon more
largely in another place; let us reflect upon the irregularities of the
Sea-chanel again, and the possible causes of it.

If we could imagine the Chanel of the Sea to have been made as we may imagine
the Chanel of Rivers to have been, by long and insensible attrition: The Water
wearing by degrees the ground under it, by the ^orce it has from its descent
and course, we should not wonder at its irregular form; but it is not possible
this Chanel should have had any such original; whence should its water have
descended, from what Mountains, or from what Clouds? Where is the springhead
of the Sea? What force could eat away half the surface of the Earth, and wear
it hollow to an immeasurable depth? This must not be from feeble and lingering
causes, such as the attrition of waters, but from some great violence offered
to Nature, such as we suppose to have been in the general Deluge, when the
frame of the Earth was broken. And after we have a little surveyed the
Seacoast, and so far as we can, the form of the Sea-chanel, we shall the more
easily believe that they could have no other original than what we assign.

The shores and coasts of the Sea are no way equal or uniform, but go in a line
uncertainly crooked and broke; indented and jag'd as a thing torn, as you may
see in the Maps of the Coasts and the Sea-charts; and yet there are innumerable
more inequalities than are taken notice of in those draughts; for they only
mark the greater Promontories and Bays; but there are besides those a multitude
of Creeks and out-lets, necks of Land and Angles, which break the evenness of
the shore in all manner of ways. Then the height and level of the shore is as
uncertain as the line of it; It Is sometimes high and sometimes low, sometimes
spread in sandy Plains, as smooth as the Sea it self, and of such an equal
height with it, that the waves seem to have no bounds but the mere figure and
convexity of the Globe; In other places it is raised into banks and ramparts of
Earth, and in others it is walled in with Rocks; And all this without any order
that we can observe, or any other reason than that this is what might be
expected in a ruin.

As to the depths and soundings of the Sea, they are under no rule nor equality
any more than the figures of the Shores; Shallows in some places, and Gulphs in
others; beds of Sands sometimes, and sometimes Rocks under water; as Navigators
have learned by a long and dangerous experience: And though we that are upon
dry Land, are not much concerned how the Rocks and the Shelves lie in the Sea,
yet a poor shipwreckt Mariner, when he has run his Vessel upon a Rock in the
middle of the Chanel, expostulates bitterly with Nature, who it was that placed
that Rock there, and to what purpose? Was there not room enough, says he, upon
the Land, or the Shore, to lay your great stones, but they must be thrown into
the middle of the Sea, as it were in spite to Navigation? The best Apology that
can be made for Nature in this case, so far as I know, is to confess that the
whole business of the Sea-chanel is but a ruin, and in a ruin things tumble
uncertainly, and commonly lie in confusion: Though to speak the truth, it
seldom happens, unless in narrow Seas, that Rocks or Banks or Islands lie in
the middle of them, or very far from the Shores.

Having viewed the more visible parts of the Chanel of the Sea, we must now
descend to the bottom of it, and see the form and contrivance of that; but who
shall guide us in our journey, while we walk, (...). 38. 16.
as Job says, in the search of the deep? Or who can make a description of that
which none has seen? It is reasonable to believe, that the bottom of the Sea
is much more rugged, broken and irregular than the face of the Land; There are
Mountains, and Valleys, and Rocks, and ridges of Rocks, and all the common
inequalities we see upon Land; besides these, it is very likely there are Caves
under water, and hollow passages into the bowels of the Earth, by which the
Seas circulate and communicate one with another, and with Subterraneous waters;
Those great Eddees and infamous Syrtes and Whirlpools that are in some Seas, as
the Baltic and the Mediterranean, that suck into them and overwhelm whatever
comes within their reach, show that there is something below that sucks from
them in proportion, and that drinks up the Sea as the Sea drinks up the Rivers.
We ought also to imagine the Shores within the water to go inclined and
sloping, but with great inequality; there are many Shelves in the way, and
Chambers, and sharp Angles; and many broken Rocks and great stones lie rolled
down to the bottom.

It Is true these things affect us little, because they are not exposed to our
senses; and we seldom give our selves the trouble to collect from reason what
the form of the invisible and inaccessible parts of the Earth is; or if we do
sometimes, those Idea's are faint and weak, and make no lasting impression upon
our imagination and passions; but if we should suppose the Ocean dry, and that
we looked down from the top of some high Cloud upon the empty Shell, how
horridly and barbarously would it look? And with what amazement should we see
it under us like an open Hell, or a wide bottomless pit? So deep, and hollow,
and vast; so broken and confused, so every way deformed and monstrous. This
would effectually waken our imagination, and make us enquire and wonder how
such a thing came in Nature; from what causes, by what force or engines could
the Earth be torn in this prodigious manner? did they dig the Sea with Spades,
and carry out the molds in hand-baskets? Where are the entrails laid? and how
did they cleave the Rocks asunder? If as many Pioneers as the Army of Xerxes,
had been at work ever since the beginning of the World, they could not have
made a ditch of this greatness. Nor is it the greatness only, but that wild and
multifarious confusion which we see in the parts and fashion of it, that makes
it strange and inaccountable; it is another Chaos in its kind, who can paint the
Scenes of it? Gulfs, and Precipices, and Cataracts; Pits within Pits, and Rocks
under Rocks, broken Mountains and ragged Islands* that look as if they had been
Countries pulled up by the roots, and planted in the Sea.

If we could make true and full representations of these things to our selves,
I think we should not be so bold as to make them the immediate product of
Divine Omnipotence; being destitute of all appearance of Art or Counsel. The
first orders of things are more perfect and regular: and this Decorum seems to
be observed, that Nature does not fall into disorder till Mankind be first
degenerate and leads the way. Monsters have been often made an argument against
Providence; if a Calf have two heads, or five legs, straight there must not be
a God in Heaven, or at least not upon Earth; and yet this is but a chance that
happens once in many years, and is of no consequence at all to the rest of the
World: But if we make the standing frame of Nature monstrous, or deformed and
disproportioned, and to have been so not by corruption and degeneracy, but
immediately by Divine Creation or Formation, it would not be so easy to answer
that objection against Providence. Let us therefore prevent this imputation,
and supposing, according to our Theory, that these things were not originally
thus, let us now explain more distinctly how they came to pass at the Deluge,
or upon the dissolution of the first Earth.

And we will not content our selves with a general answer to these observations
concerning the Sea-chanel, as if it was a sufficient account of them to say
they were the effects of a ruin; there are other things to be considered and
explained besides this irregularity, as the vast hollowness of this Cavity,
bigger incomparably than any other belonging to the Earth; and also the
declivity of the sides of it, which lie shelving from top to bottom; For
notwithstanding all the inequalities we have taken notice of in the Chanel of
the Sea, it has one general form, which may, though under many differences, be
observed throughout, and that is, that the shores and sides within the water
lie inclined, and you descend by degrees to the deepest part, which is toward
the middle. This, I know, admits of many exceptions, for sometimes upon a rocky
shore, or among rocky Islands the Sea is very deep close to the Rocks, and the
deeper commonly the higher and sleeper the Rocks are. Also where the descent is
more leisurely, it is often after a different manner, in some coasts more equal
and uniform, in others more broken and interrupted, but still there is a
descent to the Chanel or deepest part, and this in the deep Ocean is
fathomless; And such a deep Ocean, and such a deep Chanel there is always
between Continents. This, I think, is a property as determinate as any we can
pitch upon in the Chanel of the Sea, and with those other two mentioned, its
vast Cavity and universal irregularity, is all one can desire an account of as
to the form of it; we will therefore from this ground take our rise and first
measures for the Explication of the Sea-chanel.

Let us suppose then in the dissolution of the Earth when it began to fall,
that it was divided only into three or four fragments, according to the number
of our Continents; but those fragments being vastly great could not descend at
their full breadth and expansion, or at least could not descend so fast in the
middle as toward the extremities; because the Air about the edges would yield
and give place easily, not having far to go to get out of the way; but the Air
that was under the middle of the fragment could not without a very swift motion
get from under the concave of it, and consequently its descent there would be
more resisted and suspended; but the sides in the mean time would continually
descend, bending the fragment with their weight, and so making it of a lesser
compass and expansion than it was before: And by this means there would be an
interval and distance made between the two falling fragments, and a good part
of the Abyss, after their descent, would lie uncovered in the middle betwixt
them; as may be seen in this Figure, where the fragments A. B. bending
downwards in their extremities* separate as they go, and after they are fallen
leave a good space in the Abyss betwixt them, altogether uncovered; This space
is the main Chanel of the great Ocean, lying betwixt two Continents; and the
inclining sides show the declivity of the Shores.

This we have represented here only in a Ring or Circle of the Earth, in the
first Figure; but it may be better represented in a broader surface, as in the
second Figure, where the two fragments A. B. that are to make the two opposite
Continents, fall in like double Doors opening downwards, the Hinges being
toward the Land on either side, so as at the bottom they leave in the middle
betwixt them a deep Chanel of water, a. a. a. such as is betwixt all
Continents; and the water reaching a good height upon the Land on either side,
makes Sea there too, but shallower, and by degrees you descend into the deepest
Chanel.

This gives an account of two things that we mentioned to be considered and
explained as to the Sea, how the great Cavity of its Chanel was made, and how
it was made in that general form of declivity in its sides from the Land: The
third thing was the irregularities of it, both as to its various depths, and as
to the form of the shores and of the bottom. And this is as easily and
naturally explained from the same supposition as the former two; for though we
have hitherto represented the fragments A. B. as even and regular after their
fall, because that was most simple, and there was no occasion then to represent
them otherwise, yet we must suppose that as soon as in their fall they hit upon
the top or bottom of the Abyss, that great force and weight with which they
descended broke off all the edges and extremities, and so made innumerable
ruptures and inequalities in the shores, and as many within the Sea, and at the
bottom; where the broken Rocks and lumps of Earth would lie in all imaginable
disorder; as you may conceive from the third Figure. For when the motion came
on a sudden to be obstructed, the load of the fragment still pressing it
forwards, such a concussion arise as made thousands of lesser fragments, of all
shapes and magnitudes, and in all postures and forms, and most of them
irregular. And by these fractions and secondary ruins the line of the shores
was broken, and the level of them too; In some places they would stand high, in
others low, sometimes rought and sometimes even, and generally crooked, with
Angles and in-lets, and uncertain windings. The bottom also, by the same stroke
was diversifi'd into all manner of forms, sometimes Rocky with Pits and Gulfs,
and sometimes spread in plain beds, sometimes shallow and sometimes deep; for
those differences would depend only upon the situation of the secondary
fragments; and so it might come to pass, that some places near the shore might
be excessive deep when a Rock or Rocks stood in a steep posture, as (Figure 3.)
b. b. b. and, on the contrary, sometimes places much more advanced into the
Ocean, might be less deep, where a fragment of Earth lay under water, or one
bore up another, as c. c. c. but these cases would not be very frequent. To
conclude, There fig. 1. page 92.

fig. 2.

fig. 3.

are no properties of the Sea-chanel, that I know of, nor differences or
irregularities in the form of it, which this Hypothesis does not give a fair
account of: And having thus far opened the way, and laid down the general
grounds for their Explication, other things that are more minute, we leave to
the curiosity of particular Genius's; being unwilling to clog the Theory at
first with things that may seem unnecessary. We proceed now to the
consideration of Islands.

We must in the first place distinguish between Original Islands and Factitious
Islands; Those I call factitious, that are not of the same date and Antiquity
with the Sea, but have been made some at one time, some at another, by
accidental causes, as the aggestion of Sands and Sand-beds, or the Sea leaving
the tops of some shallow places that lie high, and yet flowing about the lower
skirts of them; These make sandy and plain Islands, that have no high Land in
them, and are but mock-Islands in effect. others are made by divulsion from
some Continent, when an Isthmus or the neck of a Promontory running into the
Sea, sinks or falls in, by an Earthquake or otherwise, and the Sea entering in
at the gap passes through, and makes that Promontory or Country become an
Island. Thus the Island Sicily is supposed to have been made, and all Africa
might be an Island, if the Isthmus between the Mediterranean and the red Sea
should sink down. And these Islands may have Rocks and Mountains in them, if
the Land had so before. Lastly, There are Islands that have been said to rise
from the bottom of the Sea; History mentions such in both the Archipelago's,
Aegaean and Indian; and this seems to argue that there are great fragments or
tracts of Earth that lie loose at the bottom of the Sea, or that are not
incorporated with the ground; which agrees very well with our Explication of
the Sea-chanel.

But besides these Islands and the several sorts of them, there are others
which I call Original; because they could not be produced in any of the
forementioned ways, but are of the same Origin and Antiquity with the Chanel of
the Sea; and such are the generality of our Islands; They were not made of
heaps of Sands, nor torn from any Continent, but are as ancient as the
Continents themselves, namely, ever since the Deluge, the common Parent of them
both. Nor is there any difficulty to understand how Islands were made at the
dissolution of the Earth, any more than how Continents were made; for Islands
are but lesser Continents, or Continents greater Islands; and according as
Continents were made of greater masses of Earth or greater fragments standing
above the Water, so Islands were made of less, but so big always, and in such a
posture, as to bear their tops above the Water. Yet though they agree thus far,
there is a particular difference to be taken notice of as to their Origin; for
the Continents were made of those three or four primary masses into which the
falling Orb of the Earth was divided, but the Islands were made of the
fractures of these, and broken off by the fall from the skirts and extremities
of the Continents; We noted before, that when those great masses and primary
fragments came to dash upon the Abyss in their fall, the sudden stop of the
motion, and the weighty bulk of the descending fragment broke off all the edges
and extremities of it, which edges and extemities broken off made the Islands;
and accordingly we see that they generally lie scattered along the sides of the
Continents, and are but splinters, as it were, of those greater bodies. It Is
ture, besides these, there were an infinite number of other pieces broke off
that do not appear, some making Rocks under water, some shallows and banks in
the Sea; but the greatest of them when they fell either one upon another, or in
such a posture as to prop up one another, their heads and higher parts would
stand out of the water and make Islands.

Thus I conceive the Islands of the Sea were at first produced; we cannot
wonder therefore that they should be so numerous, or far more numerous than the
Continents; These are the Parents, and those are the Children; Nor can we
wonder to see along the sides of the Continents several Islands or sets of
Islands, sown, as it were, by handfuls, or laid in trains; for the manner of
their generation would lead us to think they would be so placed. So the
American Islands lie scattered upon the Coast of that Continent; the Maldivian
and Philippine upon the East-Indian shore, and the Hesperides upon the Africa;
and there seldom happen to be any toward the middle of the Ocean, though, by
an accident, that also might come to pass. Lastly, It suits very well with our
Explication, that there should be Mountains and Rocks, sometimes in clusters,
sometimes in long chains, in all Islands; (as we find there are in all that are
true and Original) for it is that makes them high enough to appear above the
water, and strong enough to continue and preserve themselves in that high
situation.

And thus much may suffice for a summary Explication of the causes of the
Sea-chanel and Islands, according to our Hypothesis.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Mountains of the Earth, their greatness and irregular
Form, their Situation, Causes, and Origin.
WE have been in the hollows of the Earth, and the Chambers of the Deep,
amongst the damps and steams of those lower Regions; let us now go air our
selves on the tops of the Mountains, where we shall have a more free and large
Horizon, and quite another face of things will present it self to our
observation.

The greatest objects of Nature are, methinks, the most pleasing to behold; and
next to the great Concave of the Heavens, and those boundless Regions where the
Stars inhabit, there is nothing that I look upon with more plaesure than the
wide Sea and the Mountains of the Earth. There is something august and stately
in the Air of these things, that inspires the mind with great thoughts and
passions; We do naturally, upon such occasions, think of God and his greatness:
and whatsoever has but the shadow and appearance of INFINITE, as all things
have that are too big for our comprehension, they fill and over-bear the mind
with their Excess, and cast it into a pleasing kind of stupor and admiration.

And yet these Mountains we are speaking of, to confess the truth, are nothing
but great ruins; but such as show a certain magnificence in Nature; as from
old Temples and broken Amphitheaters of the Romans we collect the greatness of
that people. But the grandeur of a Nation is less sensible to those that never
see the remains and monuments they have left, and those who never see the
mountainous parts of the Earth, scarce ever reflect upon the causes of them, or
what power in Nature could be sufficient to produce them. The truth is, the
generality of people have not sense and curiosity enough to raise a question
concerning these things, or concerning the Original of them. You may tell them
that Mountains grow out of the Earth like Fuzz-balls, or that there are
Monsters under ground that throw up Mountains as Moles do Mole-hills; they will
scarce raise one objection against your doctrine; or if you would appear more
Learned, tell them that the Earth is a great Animal and these are Wens that
grow upon its body. This would pass current for Philosophy; so much is the
World drowned in stupidity and sensual pleasures, and so little inquisitive
into the works of God and Nature.

There is nothing does more awaken our thoughts or excite our minds to enquire
into the causes of such things, than the actual view of them; as I have had
experience my self when it was my fortune to cross the Alps and Appennine
Mountains; for the sight of those wild, vast and indigested heaps of Stones and
Earth, did so deeply strike my fancy, that I was not easy till I could give my
self some tolerable account how that confusion came in Nature. It Is true, the
height of Mountains compared with the Diameter of the Earth is not
considerable, but the extent of them and the ground they stand upon, bears a
considerable proportion to the surface of the Earth; and if from Europe we may
take our measures for the rest, I easily believe, that the Mountains do at
least take up the tenth part of the dry Land. The Geographers are not very
careful to describe or note in their Charts, the multitude or situation of
Mountains; They mark the bounds of Countries, the site of Cities and Towns, and
the course of Rivers, because these are things of chief use to civil affairs
and commerce, and that they design to serve, and not Philosophy or Natural
History. But Cluverius in his description of Ancient Germany, Switzerland and
Italy, has given Maps of those Countries more approaching to the natural face
of them, and we have drawn (at the end of this Chapter) such a Map of either
Hemisphere, without marking Countries or Towns, or any such artificial things;
distinguishing only Land and Sea, Islands and Continents, Mountains and not
Mountains; and it is very useful to imagine the Earth in this manner, and to
look often upon such bare draughts as show us Nature undrest, for then we are
best able to judge what her true shapes and proportions are.

It Is certain that we naturally imagine the surface of the Earth much more
regular than it is; for unless we be in some Mountainous parts, there seldom
occur any great inequalities within so much compass of ground as we can, at
once, reach with our Eye; and to conceive the rest, we multiply the same Iden,
and extend it to those parts of the Earth that we do not see; and so fancy the
whole Globe much more smooth and uniform than it is. But suppose a man was
carried asleep out of a Plain Country amongst the Alps, and left there upon the
top of one of the highest Mountains, when he waked and looked about him, he
would think himself in an enchanted Country, or carried into another World;
every thing would appear to him so different to what he had ever seen or
imagined before. To see on every hand of him a multitude of vast bodies thrown
together in confusion, as those Mountains are; Rocks standing naked round about
him; and the hollow Valleys gaping under him; and at his feet it may be, an
heap of frozen Snow in the midst of Summer. He would hear the thunder come from
below, and see the black Clouds hanging beneath him; Upon such a prospect, it
would not be easy to him to persuade himself that he was still upon the same
Earth; but if he did, he would be convinced, at least, that there are some
Regions of it strangely rude, and ruine-like, and very different from what he
had ever thought of before. But the Inhabitants of these wild places are even
with us; for those that live amongst the Alps and the great Mountains, think
that all the rest of the Earth is like their Country, all broken into
Mountains, and Valleys, and Precipices; They never see other, and most people
think of nothing but what they have seen at one time or another.

These Alps we are speaking of are the greatest range of Mountains in Europe;
and it is prodigious to see and to consider of what extent these heaps of Stones
and Rubbish are; one way they overspread Savoy and Dauphine, and reach through
France to the Pyrenean Mountains, and so to the Ocean. The other way they run
along the skirts of Germany, through Stiria, Pannonia, and Dalmatia, as far as
Thrace and the Black Sea. Then backwards they cover Switzerland and the parts
adjacent; and that branch of them which we call the Appennines, strikes through
Italy, and is, as it were, the backbone of that Country. This must needs be a
large space of ground which they stand upon; Yet it is not this part of Europe
only that is laden with Mountains, the Northern part is as rough and rude in
the face of the Country, as in the manners of the people; Bohemia, Silesia,
Denmark, Norway, Sweedland, Lapland, and Iseland, and all the coasts of the
Baltic Sea, are full of Clifts, and Rocks, and Crags of Mountains: Besides the
Riphean Mountains in Muscovy, which the Inhabitants there use to call the
Stone-girdle, and believe that it girds the Earth round about.

Nor are the other parts of our Continent more free from Mountains than Europe,
nor other parts of the Earth than our Continent: They are in the New World as
well as the Old; and if they could discover two or three New Worlds or
Continents more, they would still find them there. Neither is there any
Original Island upon the Earth, but is either all a Rock, or has Rocks and
Mountains in it. And all the dry Land, and every Continent, is but a kind of
Mountain: though that Mountain has a multitude of lesser ones, and Valleys,
and Plains, and Lakes, and Marshes, and all variety of grounds.

In America, the Andes, or a ridge of Mountains so called, are reported to be
higher than any we have, reaching above a thousand Leagues in length, and
twenty in breadth, where they are the narrowest. In Africa the Mountain Atlas,
that for its height was said to bear the Heavens on its back, runs all along
from the Western Sea to the borders of Egypt, parallel with the Mediterranean.
There also are the Mountains or the Moon, and many more whereof we have but an
imperfect account, as neither indeed of that Country in the remote and inner
parts of it. Asia is better known, and the Mountains thereof better described:
Taurus, which is the principal was adjudg'd by the ancient Geographers the
greatest in the World. It divides Asia into two parts, which have their
denomination from it: And there is an Anti-Taurus the greater and the less,
which accordingly divide Armenia into greater and less. Then the Cruciform
Mountains of Imaus, the famous Caucasus, the long Chains of Tartary and China,
and the Rocky and Mountainous Arabia. If one could at once have a prospect of
all these together, one would be easily satisfied, that the Globe of the Earth
is a more rude and indigested Body than it is commonly imagined; If one could
see, I say, all the Kingdoms and Regions of the Earth at one view, how they lie
in broken heaps; The Sea has overwhelmed one half of them, and what remains
are but the taller parts of a ruin. Look upon those great ranges of Mountains
in Europe or in Asia whereof we have given a short survey, in what confusion do
they lie? They have neither form nor beauty, nor shape, nor order, no more than
the Clouds in the Air. Then how barren, how desolate, how naked are they? How
they stand neglected by Nature? Neither the Rains can soften them, nor the Dews
from Heaven make them fruitful.

I have given this short account of the Mountains of the Earth, to help to
remove that prejudice we are apt to have, or that conceit, That the present
Earth is regularly formed. And to this purpose I do not doubt but that it would
be of very good use to have natural Maps of the Earth, as we noted before, as
well as civil; and done with the same care and judgment. Our common Maps I call
Civil, which note the distinction of Countries and of Cities, and represent the
Artificial Earth as inhabited and cultivated: But Natural Maps leave out all
that, and represent the Earth as it would be if there was not an Inhabitant
upon it, nor evor had been; the Skeleton of the Earth, as I may so say, with
the site of all its parts. Methinks also every Prince should have such a
Draught of his own Country and Dominions, to see how the ground lies in the
several parts of them, which highest, which lowest; what respect they have to
one another, and to the Sea; how the Rivers flow, and why; how the Mountains
stand, how the Heaths, and how the Marches are placed. Such a Map or Survey
would be useful both in time of War and Peace, and many good observations might
be made by it, not only as to Natural History and Philosophy, but also in order
to the perfect improvement of a Country. But to return to our Mountains.

As this View of the multitude and greatness of them may help to rectify our
mistakes about the form of the Earth, so before we proceed to examine their
causes it will be good to observe farther, that these Mountains are placed in
no order on with another, that can either respect use or beauty; and if you
consider them singly, they do not consist of any proportion of parts that is
referable to any design, or that has the least footsteps of Art or Counsel.
There is nothing in Nature more shapeless and ill-figur'd than an old Rock or a
Mountain, and all that variety that is among them, is but the various modes of
irregularity; so as you cannot make a better character of them, in short, than
to say they are of all forms and figures, except regular. Then if you would go
within these Mountains, (for they are generally hollow,) you would find all
things there more rude, if possible, than without: And lastly, if you look upon
an heap of them together, or a Mountainous Country, they are the greatest
examples of confusion that we know in Nature; no Tempest or Earthquake puts
things into more disorder. It Is true, they cannot look so ill now as they did
at first; a ruin that is fresh looks much worse than afterward, when the
Earth grows discolored and skinned over. But I fancy if we had seen the
Mountains when they were new born and raw, when the Earth was fresh-broken, and
the waters of the Deluge newly retired, the fractions and confusions of them
would have appeared very ghastly and frightful.

After this general Survey of the Mountains of the Earth and their properties,
let us now re^lect upon the causes of them. There is a double pleasure in
Philosophy, first that of Admiration, whilst we contemplate things that are
great and wonderful, and do not yet understand their Causes; for though
admiration proceed from ignorance, yet there is a certain charm and sweetness
in that passion. Then the second pleasure is greater and more intellectual,
which is that of distinct knowledge and comprehension, when we come to have the
Key that unlocks those secrets, and see the methods wherein those things come
to pass that we admired before; The reasons why the World is so or so, and from
what causes Nature, or any part of Nature, came into such a state; and this we
are now to enquire after as to the Mountains of the Earth, what their original
was, how and when the Earth came into this strange frame and structure? In the
beginning of our World, when the Earth rise from a Chaos, 'twas impossible it
should come immediately into this Mountainous form; because a mass that is
fluid, as a Chaos is, cannot li^ in any other figure than what is regular; for
the constant Laws of Nature do certainly bring all liquors into that form* And
a Chaos is not called so from any confusion or brokenness in the form of it,
but from a confusion and mixture of all sorts of ingredients in the composition
of it. So we have already produced, in the precedent Chapters a double argument
that the Earth was not originally in this form, both because it rise from a
Ch^os, which could not of it self, or by any immediate concretion, settle into
a form of this nature, as has been shown in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters; as
also because if it had been originally made thus, it could never have undergone
a Deluge, as has been proved in the Second and Third Chapters. If this be then
a secondary and succedaneous form, the great question is from what causes it
arises.

Some have thought that Mountains, and all other irregularities in the Earth,
have rise from Earthquakes, and such like causes; others have thought that they
came from the universal Deluge; yet not from any dissolution of the Earth that
was then, but only from the great agitation of the waters, which broke the
ground into this rude and unequal form. Both these causes seem to me very
incompetent and insufficient. Earthquakes seldom make Mountains, they often
take them away, and sink them down into the Caverns that lie under them;
Besides, Earthquakes are not in all Countries and Climates as Mountains are;
for, as we have observed more than once, there is neither Island that is
original, nor Continent any where in the Earth, in what Latitude soever, but
has Mountains and Rocks in it. And lastly, what probability is there, or how
is it credible, that those vast tracts of Land which we see filled with
Mountains both in Europe, Asia and Africa, were raised by Earthquakes, or any
eruptions from below. In what Age of the World was this done, and why not
continued? As for the Deluge, which they allege as another cause, I doubt not
but Mountains were made in the time of the general Deluge, that great change
and transformation of the Earth happened then, but not from such causes as are
pretended, that is, the bare rolling and agitation of the waters; For if the
Earth was smooth and plain before the Flood, as they seem to suppose as well as
we do, the waters could have little or no power over a smooth surface to tear
it any way in pieces, no more than they do a meadow or low ground when they lie
upon it; for that which makes Torrents and Land-floods violent, is their fall
from the Mountains and high Lands, which our Earth is now full of, but if the
Rain fell upon even and level ground, it would only sadden and compress it;
there is no possibility how it should raise Mountains in it. And if we could
imagine an universal Deluge as the Earth is now constituted, it would rather
throw down the Hills and Mountains than raise new ones; or by beating down
their tops and loose parts, help to fill the Valleys, and bring the Earth
nearer to evenness and plainness.

Seeing then there are no hopes of explaining the Origin of Mountains, either
from particular Earthquakes, or from the general Deluge, according to the
common notion and Explication of it; these not being causes answerable to such
vast effects; Let us try our Hypothesis again; which has made us a Chanel
large enough for the Sea, and room for all subterraneous Cavities, and I think
will find us materials enough to raise all the Mountains of the Earth. We
suppose the great Arch or circumference of the first Earth to have fallen into
the Abyss at the Deluge, and seeing that was large than the surface it fell
upon, it is absolutely certain, that it could not all fall flat, or lie under
the water; Now as all those parts that stood above the water made dry Land, or
the present habitable Earth, so such parts of the dry Land as stood higher than
the rest, made Hills and Mountains; and this is the first and general account
of them, and of all the inequalities of the Earth. But to consider these things
a little more particularly; There is a double cause and necessity of Mountains,
first this now mentioned, because the exterior Orb of the Earth was greater
than the interior which it fell upon, and therefore it could not all fall
flat; and secondly, because this exterior Orb did not fall so flat and large
as it might, or did not cover all the bottom of the Abyss, as it was very
capable to do; but as we showed before in explaining the Chanel of the Ocean,
it left a gaping in the middle, or an Abyss-chanel, as I should call it; and
the broader this Abyss-chanel was, the more Mountains there would be upon the
dry Land; for there would be more Earth, or more of the falling Orb left, and
less room to place it in, and therefore it must stand more in heaps.

In what parts of the Earth these heaps would lie, and in what particular
manner, it cannot be expected that we should tell; but all that we have
hitherto observed concerning Mountains, how strange soever and otherwise
unaccountable, may easily be explained, and deduced from this original; we
shall not wonder at their greatness and vastness, seeing they are the ruins of
a broken World; and they would take up more or less of the dry Land, according
as the Ocean took up more or less space of our Globe: Then as to their figure
and form, whether External or Internal, it is just such as answers our
expectation, and no more than what the Hypothesis leads us to; For you would
easily believe that these heaps would be irregular in all manner of ways,
whether considered apart, or in their situation to one another. And they would
lie commonly in Clusters and in Ridges, for those are two of the most general
postures of the parts of a ruin, when they fall inwards. Lastly, We cannot
wonder that Mountains should be generally hollow; For great bodies falling
together in confusion, or bearing and leaning against one another, must needs
make a great many hollownesses in them, and by their unequal Applications empty
spaces will be intercepted. We see also from the same reason, why mountainous
Countries are subject to Earthquakes; and why Mountains often sink and fall
down into the Caverns that lie under them; their joints and props being decayed
and worn, they become unable to bear their weight. And all these properties you
see hang upon one and the same string, and are just consequences from our
supposition concerning the dissolution of the first Earth. And there is no
surer mark of a good Hypothesis, than when it does not only hit luckily in one
or two particulars, but answers all that it is to be applied to, and is
adequate to Nature in her whole extent.

But how fully or easily soever these things may answer Nature, you will say,
it may be, that all this is but an Hypothesis; that is, a kind of fiction or
supposition that things were so and so at first, and by the coherence and
agreement of the Effects with such a supposition, you would argue and prove
that they were really so. This I confess is true, this is the method, and if we
would know any thing in Nature further than our senses go, we can know it not
otherwise than by an Hypothesis. When things are either too little for our
senses, or too remote and inaccessible, we have no way to know the inward
Nature, and the causes of their sensible properties, but by reasoning upon an
Hypothesis. If you would know, for example, of what parts Water, or any other
Liquor consists, they are too little to be discerned by the Eye, you must
therefore take a supposition concerning their invisible figure and form, and if
that agrees and gives the reason of all their sensible qualities, you
understand the nature of Water. In like manner, if you would know the nature of
a Comet, or of what matter the Sun consists, which are things inaccessible to
us, you can do this no otherwise than by an Hypothesis; and if that Hypothesis
be easy and intelligible, and answers all the Phenomenon of those two bodies,
you have done as much as a Philosopher or as Humane reason can do. And this is
what we have attempted concerning the Earth and concerning the Deluge. We have
laid down an Hypothesis that is easy and perspicuous, consisting of a few
things, and those very intelligible, and from this we have given an account how
the Old World was destroyed by a Deluge of Water, and how the Earth came into
this present form; so distinguished and interrupted with Sea and Land,
Mountains and Valleys, and so broken in the surface and inward parts of it.

But to speak the Truth, this Theory is something more than a bare Hypothesis;
because we are assured that the general ground that we go upon is true, namely,
That the Earth rise at first from a Chaos; for besides Reason and Antiquity,
Scripture it self does assure us of that; and that one point being granted, we
have deduced from it all the rest by a direct chain of consequences, which I
think cannot be broken easily in any part or link of it. Besides, the great
hinge of this Theory upon which all the rest turns, is the distinction we make
of the Ante diluvian Earth and Heavens from the Post-diluvian, as to their form
and constitution. And it will never be beaten out of my head, 2 Ep. Chap. 3. 5,
6.
but that S. Peter has made the same distinction sixteen hundred years since,
and to the very same purpose; so that we have sure footing here again, and the
Theory rises above the character of a bare Hypothesis. And whereas an
Hypothesis that is clear and proportioned to Nature in every respect, is
accounted morally certain, we must in equity give more than a moral certitude
to this Theory. But I mean this only as to the general parts of it; for as to
particularities. I look upon them only as problematical, and accordingly I
affirm nothing therein but with a power of revocation, and a liberty to change
my opinion when I shall be better informed. Neither do I know any Author that
has treated a matter new, remote, and consisting of a multitude of
particulars, who would not have had occasion, if he had lived to have seen his
Hypothesis fully examined, to have changed his mind and manner of explaining
things, in many material instances.

To conclude both this Chapter and this Section, we have here added a Map or
Draught of the Earth, according to the Natural face of it, as it would appear
from the Moon, if we were a little nearer to her; or as it was at first after
the Deluge, before Cities were built, distinctions of Countries made, or any
alte^ations by humane industry. It Is chiefly to expose more to view the
Mountains of the Earth, and the proportions of Sea and Land, to show it as it
lies in it self, and as a Naturalist ought to conceive and consider it. It Is
true, there are far more Mountains upon the Earth than what are here
represented, for more could not conveniently be placed in this narrow Scheme;
But the best and most effectual way of representing the body of the Earth as it
is by Nature, would be, not in plain Tables, but by a rough Globe, expressing
all the considerable inequalities that are upon the Earth. The smooth Globes
that we use, do but nourish in us the conceit of the Earth's regularity, and
though they may be convenient enough for Geographical purposes, they are not so
proper for Natural Science; nothing would be more useful, in this respect, than
a rough Globe of the largest dimensions, wherein the Chanel of the Sea should
be really hollow, as it is in Nature, with all its unequal depths according to
the best soundings, and the shores expressed both according to matter and form,
little Rocks standing where there are Rocks, and Sands and Beaches in the
places where they are found; and all the Islands planted in the Sea-chanel in a
due form, and in their solid dimensions. Then upon the Land should stand all
the ranges of Mountains, in the same order or disorder that Nature has set
them there; And the inland Seas, and great Lakes, or rather the beds they lie
in, should be duly represented; as also the vast deserts of Sand as they lie
upon the Earth. And this being done with care and due Art, would be a true
Epitome or true model of our Earth. Where we should see, besides other
instructions, what a rude Lump our World is, which we are so apt to dote upon.

CHAP. XII. A short review of what has been already treated of, and in what
manner. The several Faces and Schemes under which the Earth would appear to a
Stranger, that should view it first at a distance, and then more closely, and
the Application of them to our subject. All methods, whether Philosophical or
Theological, that have been offered by others for the Explication of the Form
of the Earth, are examined and disproved. A conjecture concerning the other
Planets, their Natural Form and State compared with ours.
WE have finished the Three Sections of this Book, and in this last Chapter we
will make a short review and reflection upon what has been hitherto treated
of, and add some further confirmations of it. The Explication of the Universal
Deluge was the first proposal and design of this Discourse, to make that a
thing credible and intelligible to the mind of Man: And the full Explication of
this drew in the whole Theory of the Earth: Whose original we have deduced from
its first Source, and showed both what was its primaeval Form, and how it came
into its present Form. The sum of our Hypothesis concerning the Universal
Deluge was this; That it came not to pass, as was vulgarly believed, by any
excess of Rains, or any Inundation of the Sea, nor could ever be effected by a
mere abundance of Waters; unless we suppose some dissolution of the Earth at
the same time, namely when the Great Abyss was broken open. And accordingly we
showed that without such a dissolution, or if the Earth had been always in the
same form it is in now, no mass of water, any where to be found in the World*
could have equaled the height of the Mountains, or made such an Universal
Deluge. Secondly, We showed that the form of the Earth at first, and till the
Deluge, was such as made it capable and subject to a Dissolution: And thirdly,
That such a dissolution being supposed, the Doctrine of the Universal Deluge is
very reasonable and intelligible; And not only the Doctrine of the Deluge, but
the same supposition is a Key to all Nature besides, showing us how our Globe
became Terraqueous, what was the original of Mountains, of the Sea-chanel, of
Islands, of subterraneous Cavities; Things, which without this supposition, are
as unintelligible as the universal Flood it self. And these things reciprocally
confirming one another, our Hypothesis of the Deluge is armed both breast and
back, by the causes and by the effects.

It remains now, that, as to confirm our Explication of the Deluge, we showed
all other accounts that had been given of it to be ineffectual or impossible,
so to confirm our doctrine concerning the dissolution of the Earth, and
concerning the Original of Mountains, Seas, and all inequalities upon it, or
within it, we must examine what causes have been assigned by others, or what
accounts given of these things: That seeing their defectiveness, we may have
the more assurance and satisfaction in our own method.

And in order to this, let us observe first the general forms under which the
Earth may be considered, or under which it does appear accordingly as we view
it more nearly or remotely; And the first of these and the most general is that
of a Terraqueous Globe. If a Philosopher should come out of another World out
of curiosity to see our Earth, the first discovery or observation he would make
would be this, that it was a Terraqueous Globe; Thus much he might observe at a
great distance when he came but near the borders of our World. This we discern
in the Moon and most of the Planets, that they are divided into Sea and Land,
and how this division came, would be his first remark and inquiry concerning
our Earth; and how also those subdivisions of Islands, or little Earths which
lie in the Water, how these were formed, and that great Chanel that contains
them both.

The second form that the Earth appears under, is that of an uneven and
Mountainous Globe. When our Traveller had got below tho Circle of the Moon, he
would discern the bald tops of our Mountains, and the long ranges of them upon
our Continents. We cannot from the Earth discern Mountains and Valleys in the
Moon, directly, but from the motion of the light and shadows which we see
there, we easily collect that there are such inequalities: And accordingly we
suppose that our Mountains would appear at a great distance, and the shady
Valleys lying under them; and that this curious person that came to view our
Earth, would make that his second Enquiry, how those Mountains were formed? and
how our Globe came to be so rude and irregular? for we may justly demand how
any irregularity came into Nature, seeing all her first motions and her first
forms are regular, and whatsoever is not so is but secondary, and the
consequence of some degeneracy, or of some decay.

The Third visible form of our Earth is that of a broken Globe; and broken
throughout, but in the outward parts and Regions of it. This, it may be, you
will say, is not a visible form; it does not appear to the eye, without
reasoning, that the surface of the Earth is so broken. Suppose our new Visitant
had now passed the middle Region of the Air, and was alighted upon the top of
Pick Teneriffe for his first resting place, and that sitting there he took a
view of the great Rocks, the wide Sea, and of the shores of Africa and Europe;
for we'll suppose his piercing Eye to reach so far; I will not say that at
first sight he would pronounce that the surface of this Globe was broken,
unless he knew it to be so by comparison with some other Planet like to it; but
the broken form and figure of many parts of the Rocks, and the posture in which
they lay, or great portions of them, some inclined, some prostrate, some
erected, would naturally lead him to that thought, that they were a ruin; He
would see also the Islands tore from the Continents, and both the shores of the
Continents and their inland parts in the same disorder and irregular situation.
Besides, he had this great advantage in viewing the Earth at a distance, that
he could see a whole Hemisphere together, which, as he made his approaches
through the Air, would have much what the same aspect and countenance as it is
represented with in the great Scheme; Page 100.
And if any man should accidentally hit upon that Scheme, not knowing or
thinking that it was the Earth, I believe his first thought of it would be,
that it was some great broken body, or ruined frame of matter; and the
original, I am sure, is more manifestly so. But we'll leave our Strange
Philosopher to his own observations, and wish him good Guides and Interpreters
in his Survey of the Earth, and that he would make a favorable report at his
return home, of our little dirty Planet.

In the mean time, let us pursue, in our own way, this Third Idea of the Earth
a little further, as it is a broken Globe, Nature I know has dissembled and
covered this form as much as may be, and time has helped to repair some of the
old breaches, or fill them up; besides, the changes that have been made by Art
and Humane industry, by Agriculture, Planting, and Building Towns, has made
the face of the Earth quite another thing from what it was in its naked
rudeness. As mankind is much altered from its Pristine state, from what it was
four thousand years ago, or toward the first Ages after the Flood, when the
Nations lived in simplicity or barbarousness; so is the Earth too, and both so
disguised and transformed, that if one of those Primitive Fathers should rise
from the dead, he would scarce know this to be the same World which he lived in
before. But to discern the true form of the Earth, whether entire or broken,
regular or disordered, we must in the first place take away all those ornaments
or additions made by Art or Nature, and view the bare carcass of the Earth, as
it has nothing on it but Rocks and Mountains, Deserts and Fields, and hollow
Valleys, and a wide Sea. Then secondly, We must in our imagination empty this
Chanel of the Sea, take out all the Waters that hinder the sight of it, and
look upon the dry Ditch, measure the depth and breadth of it in our mind, and
observe the manner of its construction, and in what a wild posture all the
parts of it lie; according as it has been formerly represented. Chap. 10.
And lastly, We must take off the cover of all Subterraneous places and deep
Caverns, to see the inside of the Earth; and lay bare the roots of Mountains,
to look into those holes and Vaults that are under them, filled sometimes with
Fire, sometimes with Water, and sometimes with thick Air and Vapors. The
object being thus prepared, we are then to look fix'dly upon it, and to
pronounce what we think of this disfigured mass, whether this Exterior frame
does not seem to be shattered; and whether it does more aptly resemble a
new-made World, or the ruins of one broken. I confess when this Idea of the
Earth is present to my thoughts, I can no more believe that this was the form
wherein it was first produced, than if I had seen the Temple of Jerusalem in
its ruins, when defaced and sacked by the Babylonians, I could have persuaded
my self that it had never been in any other posture, and that Solomon had given
orders for building it so.

So much for the form of the Earth: It remains now that we examine what causes
have been assigned by others of these irregularities in the form of the Earth,
which we explain by the dissolution of it; what accounts any of the Ancients
have given or attempted to give, how the Earth swelled into Mountains in
certain places, and in others was depressed into low Valleys, how the body of
it was so broken, and how the Chanel of the Sea was made. The Elements
naturally lie in regular forms one above another, and now we find them mixed,
confounded and transposed, how comes this disturbance and disordination in
Nature? The Explications of these things that have been given by others, may be
reduced to two general sorts, Philosophical or Theological, and we will try
them both for our satisfaction.

Of Philosophers none was more concerned to give an account of such things than
Epicurus, both because he acknowledged the Origin of the Earth to have been
from a Chaos, and also admitted no causes to act in Nature but Matter and
Motion: Yet all the account we have from the Epicureans of the form of the
Earth, and the great inequalities that are in it, is so slight and trivial,
that methinks it does not deserve the name of a Philosophical Explication. They
say that the Earth and Water were mixed at first, or rather the Earth was above
the Water, and as the Earth was condensed by the heat of the Sun, and the
Winds, the Water was squeezed out in certain places, which either it found
hollow or made so; and so was the Chanel of the Sea made. Then as for
Mountains, while some parts of the Earth shrunk and sunk in this manner, others
would not sink, and these standing still while the others fell lower, made the
Mountains. How the subterraneous Cavities were made according to them, I do not
find.

This is all the Account that Monsieur Gassendi (who seems to have made it his
business, as well as his pleasure, to embellish that Philosophy) can help us to
out of the Epicurean Authors, how the Earth came into this form; and he that
can content himself with this, is, in my mind, of an humor very easy to be
pleased. Do the Sun and the Wind use to squeaze pools of Water out of the
Earth, and that in such a quantity as to make an Ocean? They dry the Earth, and
the Waters too, and rarifie them into vapors, but I never knew them to be the
causes of pressing Water out of the Earth by condensation. Could they compress
the Earth any otherwise, than by drying it and making it hard? and in
proportion, as it was more dry, would it not the more imbibe and suck up the
Water? and how were the great Mountains of the Earth made, in the North and in
the South, where the influence of the Sun is not great? What sunk the Earth
there, and made the flesh start from the bones? But it is no wonder that
Epicurus should give such a mean account of the Origin of the Earth, and the
form of its parts, who did not so much as understand the general Figure of the
Body of it, that it was in some manner Spherical, or that the Heavens encompast
it round. One must have a blind love for that Philosophy, and for the
conclusions it drives at, not to see its lameness and defects in those first
and fundamental parts.

Aristotle, though he was not concerned to give an account how the Earth came
into this present form, as he supposed it, Eternal; yet upon another
consideration he seems obliged to give some reason how the Elements came into
this disorder; seeing he supposes, that, according to the order of Nature, the
Water should lie above the Earth in a Sphere, as the Air does above the Water,
and his Fire above the Air. This he touches upon in his Meteors, but so gently
and fearfully, as if he was handling hot coals. He says the Sea is to be
considered as the Element, or body of Waters that belongs to this Earth, and
that these Waters change places, and the Sea is some Ages in one part of the
Globe, and some Ages in another; but that this is at such great distances of
time that there can be no memory or record of it. And he seems willing to
suppose that the Water was once all over the Earth, but that it drid up in
certain places, and continuing in others, it there made the Sea.

What a miserable account is this? As to his change or removal of the
Sea-chanel in several Ages, as it is without all proof or probability, if he
mean it of the Chanel of the great Ocean, so it is nothing to the purpose here;
for the question is not why the Chanel of the Sea is in such a part of the
Earth, rather than in another, but why there is any such prodigious Cavity in
or upon the Earth any where. And if we take his supposition, that the Element
of Water was once higher than the Earth, and lay in a Sphere about it, then let
him tell us in plain terms how the Earth got above, or how the Cavity of the
Ocean was made, and how the the Mountains rise; for this Elementary Earth which
lay under the Water, was, I suppose, equal and smooth when it lay there; and
what reason was there, that the Waters should be dried in one part of it, more
than another, if they were every where of an equal depth, and the ground equal
under them? It was not the Climates made any distinction, for there is Sea
toward the Poles, as well as under the Equator; but suppose they were dried
up in certain places, that would make no Mountains, no more than there are
Mountains in our dried Marches: And the places where they were not dried, would
not therefore become as deep and hollow as the Sea chanel, and tear the Earth
and Rocks in pieces. If you should say that this very Elementary Earth, as it
lay under the Waters, was unequal, and was so originally, formed into Mountains
and Valleys, and great Cavities; besides, that the supposition is altogether
irrational in it self, you must suppose a prodigious mass of Water to cover
such an Earth; as much as we found requisite for the vulgar Deluge, namely,
eight Oceans; and what then is become of the other seven? Upon the whole I do
not see that either in Epicurus's way, who seems to suppose that the Waters
were at first within the Earth; nor in Aristotle's way, who seems to suppose
them upon the Earth, any rational or tolerable account can be given of the
present form of the Earth.

Wherefore some modern Authors, dissatisfied, as very well they might be, with
these Explications given us by the Ancients concerning the form of the Earth,
have pitched upon other causes, more true indeed in their kind, and in their
degree, but that ^all as much short of those effects to which they would apply
them. They say that all the irregularities of the body of the Earth have risen
from Earthquakes in particular places, and from Torrents and Inundations, and
from eruptions of Fire, or such like causes, whereof we see some instances more
or less every Age; And these have made that havoc upon the face of the Earth,
and turned things up-side down, raising the Earth in some places, and making
great Cavities or Chasms in others, so as to have brought it at length into
that torn, broken, and disorderly form in which we now see it.

These Authors do so far agree with us, as to acknowledge that the present
irregular form of the Earth must have proceeded from ruins and dissolutions of
one sort or other, but these ruins they make to have been partial only, in
this or in that Country, by piecemeal, and in several Ages, and from no other
causes but such as still continue to act in Nature, namely, accidental
Earthquakes and Eruptions of Fires and Waters. These causes we acknowledge as
readily as they do, but not as capable to produce so great effects as they
would ascribe to them; The surface of the Earth may be a little changed by such
accidents as these, but for the most part they rather sink the Mountains than
raise new ones: As when Houses are blown up by Mines of Powder, they are not
set higher, but generally fall lower and flatter: Or suppose they do sometimes
raise an Hill, or a little Mount, what is that to the great Mountains of our
World, to those long and vast piles of Rocks and Stones, which the Earth can
scarce bear? What Is that to strongbackt Taurus or Atlas, to the American Andes,
or to a Mountain that reaches from the Pyreneans to the Euxine Sea? There Is as
much difference between these and those factitious Mountains they speak of, as
betwixt them and Mole-hills.

And to answer more distinctly to this opinion, as before in speaking of
Islands we distinguished betwixt Factitious and Original Islands, so, if you
please, we may distinguish here betwixt Factitious and Original Mountains; and
allowing some few, and those of the fifth or sixth magnitude, to have risen
from such accidental causes, we enquire concerning the rest and the greatest,
what was their Original? If we should suppose that the seven Hills upon which
Rome stands, came from ruins or eruptions, or any such causes, it does not
follow that the Alps were made so too. And as for Mountains, so for the
Cavities of the Earth, I suppose there may be disruptions sometimes made by
Earthquakes, and holes worn by subterraneous Fires and Waters; but what is that
to the Chanel of the Atlantic Ocean, or of the Pacifick Ocean, which is
extended an hundred and fifty degrees under the Equator, and toward the Poles
still further. He that should derive such mighty things from no greater causes,
I should think him a very credulous Philosopher. And we are too subject indeed
to that fault of credulity in matter of Philosophizing; Many when they have
found out causes that are proper for certain effects within such a compass,
they cannot keep them there, but they will make them do every thing for them;
and extend them often to other effects of a superior nature or degree, which
their activity can by no means reach to. Aetna has been a burning Mountain
ever since and above the memory of Man, yet it has not destroyed that Island,
nor made any new Chanel to the Sea, though it stands so near it. Neither is
Vesuvius above two or three miles distant from the Seaside, to the best of my
remembrance, and yet in so many Ages it has made no passage to it, neither
open nor subterraneous. It Is true some Isthmus's have been thrown down by
Earthquakes, and some Lakes have been made in that manner, but what is this to a
Ditch nine thousand miles broad? such an one we have upon the Earth, and of a
depth that is not measurable; what proportion have these causes to such an
instance? and how many thousand Ages must be allowed to them to do their work,
more than the Chronology of our Earth will bear?

Besides, When were these great Earthquakes and disruptions, that did such
great execution upon the body of the Earth? Was this before the Flood or since?
If before, then the old difficulty returns, how could there be a Flood, if the
Earth was in this Mountainous form before that time? This, I think, is
demonstrated impossible in the Second and Third Chapters. If since the Flood,
where were the Waters of the Earth before these Earthquakes made a Chanel for
them? Besides, Where is the History or Tradition that speaks of these strange
things, and of this great change of the Earth? Has any writ of the Origins of
the Alps? In what year of Rome, or what Olympiad they were born? Or how they
grew from little ones? how the Earth groaned when it brought them forth, when
its bowels were torn by the ragged Rocks? Do the Chronicles of the Nations
mention these things, or ancient fame, or ancient Fables? were they made all at
once, or in successive Ages? These causes continue still in Nature, we have
still Earthquakes and subterraneous Fires and Waters, why should they not still
operate and have the same effects? We often hear of Cities thrown down by
Earthquakes; or Countries swallowed up, but whoever heard of a new chain of
Mountains made upon the Earth, or a new Chanel made for the Ocean? We do not
read that there has been so much as a new Sinus of the Sea ever since the
memory of Man* Which is far more feasible than what they pretend. And things of
this nature being both strange and sensible, excite admiration and great
attention when they come to pass, and would certainly have been remembered or
propagated in some way or other, if they had ever happened since the Deluge.
They have recorded the foundation of Cities and Monarchies, the appearance of
Blazing Stars, the eruptions of fiery Mountains, the most remarkable
Earthquakes and Inundations, the great Eclipses or obscurations of the Sun, and
any thing that looked strange or prodigy-like, whether in the Heavens or on
Earth: And these which would have been the greatest prodigles and greatest
changes that ever happened in nature, would these have escaped all observation
and memory of Men? That Is as incredible as the things themselves are.

Lastly, To comprehend all these opinions together, both of the Ancient and
Modern Authors, they seem all to agree with us in this, That the Earth was once
under another form; otherwise why do they go about to show the causes how it
came into this form. I desire then to know what form they suppose the Earth to
have been under before the Mountains were made, the Chanel of the Sea, or
subterraneous Cavities. Either they must take that form which we have assigned
it before the Deluge, or else they must suppose it covered with Water, till the
Sea-chanels were made, and the Mountains brought forth; Fig. 2. p. 37.
as in that Fig. page 37. And no doubt it was once in this form, both reason
and the authority of Moses assures us of it; and this is the Test which every
opinion must be brought to, how the Earth-emerg'd out of that watery form? and
in particular, as to that opinion which we are now examining, the question is,
how by Earthquakes, and fiery eruptions, subterraneous Waters, and such like
causes, the body of the Earth could be wrought from that form to this present
form? And the thing is impossible at first sight; for such causes as these
could not take place in such an Earth. As for subterraneous Waters, there could
be none at that time, for they were all above ground; and as for subterraneous
Exhalations, whether Fiery or Aerie, there was no place for them neither, for
the Earth when it lay under the Water was a solid uniform mass, compact and
close united in its parts, as we have shown before upon several occasions; no
Mines or hollow Vaults for the Vapors to be lodged in, no Storehouses of
Fire* nothing that could make Earthquakes, nor any sort of ruins or eruptions:
These are Engines that cannot play but in an Earth already broken, hollow, and
cavernous. Therefore the Authors of this opinion do in effect beg the question;
they assign such causes of the present form of the Earth, as could not take
place, nor have any activity until the Earth was in this form: These causes may
contribute something to increase the rudeness and inequalities of the Earth in
certain places, but they could not be the original causes of it: And that not
only because of their disproportion to such effects, but also because of their
incapacity, or nonexistence at that time when these effects were to be wrought.

Thus much concerning the Philosophical opinions, or the natural Causes that
have been assigned for the irregular form of this present Earth. Let us now
consider the Theological opinions, how Mountains were made at first, and the
wonderful Chanel of the Sea: And these Authors say, God Almighty made them
immediately when he made the World; and so dispatched the business in a few
words. This is a short account indeed, but we must take heed that we do not
derogate from the perfection of God, by ascribing all things promiscuously to
his immediate action. I have often suggested that the first order of things is
regular and simple, according as the Divine Nature is; and continues so till
there is some degeneracy in the moral World; I have also noted upon several
occasions, especially in the Lat. Treat. Cap. II. the deformity and
incommodiousness of the present Earth; and from these two considerations we may
reasonably infer, that the present state of the Earth was not Original, but is
a state of subjection to Vanity, wherein it must continue till the redemption
and restitution of all things.

But besides this general consideration, there are many others, both Natural
and Theological against this opinion, which the Authors of it, ^ Ep. Chap. 3.
5, 6.
I believe, will find unanswerable. As first, S. Peter's distinction betwixt
the present Earth and the Ante-diluvian; and that in opposition to certain
profane persons, who seem to have been of the same opinion with these Authors,
namely, That the Heavens and the Earth were the same now that they had been
from the beginning, and that there had been no change in Nature, either of
late, or in former Ages; These S. Peter confutes and upbraids them with
ignorance or forgetfulness of the change that was brought upon Nature at the
Deluge, or that the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were of a different form
and constitution from the present, whereby that World was obnoxious to a Deluge
of Water, as the present is to a Deluge of Fire. Let these Authors put
themselves in the place of those Objectors, and see what answer they can make
to the Apostle, whom I leave to dispute the case with them. I hope they will
not treat this Epistle of S. Peter's so rudely as Didymus Alexandrinus did, an
ancient Christian, and one of S. Ierom's Masters, he was of the same opinion
with these Theological Authors, and so fierce in it, that seeing S. Peter's
doctrine here to be contrary, he said this Epistle of S. Peter's was corrupted,
and was not to be received into the Canon. And all this because it taught that
the Heavens and the Earth had changed their form, and would do so again at the
Conflagration; so as the same World would be T^iform in success of time. We
acknowledge his Exposition of S. Peter's words to be very true, but what he
makes an argument of the corruption of this Epistle, is rather, in my mind, a
peculiar argument of its Divine Inspiration. In the second place, these Writers
dash upon the old rock, the impossibility of explaining the Deluge, if there
were Mountains from the beginning, and the Earth then in the same form as it is
in now. Thirdly, They make the state of Paradise as unintelligible as that of
the Deluge; For those properties that are assigned to Paradise by the Ancients,
are inconsistent with the present form of the Earth: As will appear in the
Second Book. Lastly, They must answer, and give an account of all those marks
which we have observed in Nature (both in this Chapter, and the Ninth, Tenth,
and Eleventh,) of fractions, ruins, and dissolutions that have been on the
Earth, and which we have shown to be inexplicable, unless we admit that the
Earth was once in another form.

These arguments being premised, let us now bring their opinion close to the
Test, and see in what manner these Mountains must have been made according to
them, and how the Chanel of the Sea, and all other Cavities of the Earth. Let
us to this purpose consider the Earth again in that transient incomplete form
which it had when the Abyss encompast the whole body of it; Fig. 2. p. 37.
we both agree that the Earth was once in this state, and they say that it came
immediately out of this state into its present form, there being made by a
supernatural Power a great Chanel or Ditch in one part of it, which drew off
the Waters from the rest, and the Earth which was squeezed and forced out of
this Ditch, made the Mountains. So there is the Chanel of the Sea made, and the
Mountains of the Earth; how the subterraneous Cavities were made according to
these Authors, I do not well know. This I confess seems to me a very gross
thought, and a way of working very un-God-like; but however let us have patience
to examine it.

And in the first place, if the Mountains were taken out of the Chanel of the
Sea, then they are equal to it, and would fill it up if they were thrown in
again. But these proportions upon examination will not agree; for though the
Mountains of the Earth be very great, yet they do not equal by much the great
Ocean. The Ocean extends to half the surface of the Earth; and if you suppose
the greatest depth of the Ocean to answer the height of the greatest Mountains,
and the middle depth to the middle sort of Mountains, the Mountains ought to
cover all the dry Land to make them answer to all the capacity of the Ocean;
whereas we supposed them upon a reasonable computation to cover but the tenth
part of the dry Land; and consequently, neither they, nor the Sea-chanel, could
have been produced in this manner, because of their great disproportion to one
another. And the same thing appears, if we compare the Mountains with the
Abyss, which covered the Earth before this Chanel was made; for this Chanel
being made great enough to contain all the Abyss, the Mountains taken out of it
must also be equal to all the Abyss, but the aggregate of the Mountains will
not answer this by many degrees; for suppose the Abyss was but half as deep as
the deep Ocean, to make this Calculus answer, all the dry Land ought to be
covered with Mountains, and with Mountains as high as the Ocean is deep, or
doubly high to the depth of the Abyss, because they are but upon one half of
the Globe. And this is the first argument against the reciprocal production of
Mountains and the Sea, their incongruency or disproportion.

Secondly, We are to consider that a great many Mountains of the Earth are far
distant from any Seas, as the great inland Mountains of Asia and of Africa,
and the Sarmatick Mountains, and others in Europe, how were these great bodies
slung through the Air from their respective Seas, whence they were taken, to
those places where they stand? What appearance is there in common reason, or
credibility, that these huge masses of Earth and Stone that stand in the middle
of Continents, were dug out of any Seas* We think it strange, and very
deservedly, that a little Chapel should be transported from Palestine to Italy
over Land and Sea, much more the transportation of Mount Atlas or Taurus through
the Air, or of a range of Mountains two or three thousand miles long, would
surely upon all accounts appear incongruous and incredible: Besides, neither
the hollow form of Mountains, nor the stony matter whereof they commonly
consist, agrees with that supposition, that they were pressed or taken out of the
Chanel of the Sea.

Lastly, We are to consider that the Mountains are not barely laid upon the
Earth, as a Tombstone upon a Grave, nor stand as Statues do upon a Pedestal,
as this opinion seems to suppose; but they are one continued substance with the
body of the Earth, and their roots reach into the Abyss; as the Rocks by the
Seaside go as deep as the bottom of the Sea in one continued mass: And it is a
ridiculous thing to imagine the Earth first a plain surface, then all the
Mountains set upon it, as Hay-cocks in a Field, standing upon their flat
bottoms. There is no such common surface in Nature, nor consequently any such
super-additions: It Is all one frame or mass, only broken and disjoynted in the
parts of it. To conclude, It Is not only the Mountains that make the
inequalities of the Earth, or the irregularity of its surface, every Country,
every Province, every Field has an unequal and different situation, higher or
lower, inclined more or less, and sometimes one way, sometimes another, you can
scarce take a miles compass in any place where the surface of the ground
continues uniform; and can you imagine that there were Moulds or Stones brought
from the Sea-chanel to make all those inequalities? Or that Earthquakes have
been in every County, and in every Field? The inner Veins and Lares, the beds
or Strata of the Earth are also broken as well as the surface. These must
proceed from universal causes, and all those that have been alleged, whether
from Philosophy or Theology, are but particular or Topical. I am fully
satisfied, in contemplation of these things, and so I think every unprejudiced
person may be, that to such an irregular variety of situation and construction,
as we see every where in the parts of the Earth, nothing could answer but some
universal concussion or dislocation, in the nature of a general ruin.

We have now finished this first part of our Theory, and all that concerns the
Deluge or dissolution of the Earth; and we have not only established our own
Hypothesis by positive arguments, but also produced and examined all
suppositions that have been offered by others, whether Philosophical or
Theological, for the Explication of the same things; so as nothing seems now to
remain further upon this subject. For a conclusion of all, we will consider, if
you please, the rest of the Earths, or of the Planets within our Heavens, that
appertain to the same common Sun; to see, so far as we can go by rational
conjectures, if they be not of the same Fabric, and have undergone the like
fate, and forms with our Earth. It is now acknowledged by the generality of
Learned Men, that the Planets are Opake bodies, and particularly our next
neighbor, the Moon, is known to be a Terraqueous Globe, consisting of
Mountains and Valleys, as our Earth does; and we have no reason to believe but
that she came into that form by a dissolution, or from like causes as our Earth
did. Mercury is so near the Sun, that we cannot well discern his face, whether
spotted or no, nor make a judgment of it. But as for Venus and Mars, if the
spots that be observed in them be their Waters or their Sea, as they are in the
Moon, it is likely* They are also Terraqueous Globes, and in much what a like
form with the Moon and the Earth, and, for ought we know, from like causes.
Particularly as to Venus, it is a remarkable passage that S. Austin has
preserved out of Varro, he says, De Civ. Dei lib. 21. c. 8.
That about the time of the great Deluge there was a wonderful alteration or
Catastrophe happened to the Planet Venus, and that she changed her Color,
form, figure, and magnitude. This is a great presumption that she suffered her
dissolution about the same time that our Earth did. I do not know that any such
thing is recorded concerning any of the other Planets, but the body of Mars
looks very rugged, broken, and much disordered.

Saturn and Jupiter deserve a distinct consideration, as having something
particular and different from the rest of the Planets. Saturn is remarkable for
his Hoop or Ring, which seems to stand off, or higher than his body, and would
strongly induce one to believe, that the exterior Earth of that Planet, at its
dissolution, did not all fall in, but the Polar parts sinking into the Abyss,
the middle or Aequinoctial parts still subsisted, and bore themselves up in the
nature of an Arch about the Planet, or of a Bridge, as it were, built over the
Sea of Saturn. And as some have observed concerning the figure of Jupiter, that
it is not wholly Sphaerical, but a Sphaeroid, protuberant in the Equator, and
deprest toward the Poles: So I should suspect Saturn to have been much more
so, before his disruption: Namely, That the Body of that Planet in its first
state, was more flat and low toward the Poles, and also weaker and thinner:
and about the Equator higher, fuller and stronger Built: By reason of which
figure and construction the Polar parts did more easily fall in, or were sucked
in (as Cuppingglasses draw in the Flesh) when the Abyss below grew more empty.
Whereas the middle parts about the Equator, being a more just Arch and
strongly built, would not yield or sink, but stood firm and unbroken, and
continues still in its first posture. Planets break in different ways,
according to the quality of their matter, the manner of their construction, and
the Nature of the Causes that act upon them. Their dissolutions are sometimes
total, as in our Earth, sometimes partial: and both of these may be under great
variety. In partial dissolutions, the middle parts sometimes stand, and the
Polar are broke* or the Polar stand and the middle are broke. Or one
Hemisphere, or part of an Hemisphere may be sunk, the rest standing. There may
be Causes and occasions for all these varieties and many more, in diversifying
the Phenomenon of an immense Universe. But to return to Saturn.

That this present uncouth form of Saturn was not its Original form, I am very
well satisfied, if that Planet rise from a Chaos, as ours did. And if this be
an adventitious form, I know no account can be given of it with more
probability, than by supposing it the effect of some fraction or disruption in
the Polar parts. Neither do I know any Phenomenon hitherto observed concerning
Saturn, that does disprove this Hypothesis or conjecture.

As to Jupiter, that Planet without doubt is also turned about its Axis,
otherwise how should its four Moons be carried round him? And this is also
collected from the motion of that permanent Spot (if it be found to be so) that
is upon its Body. Which Spot I take to be either a Lake, or a Chasm and Hiatus
into the Abyss of the Planet: That is, part of the Abyss open or uncovered,
like the Aperture we made in the Seventh Figure. And this might either have
been left so by Providence, Chap. 6. p. 46.
at first, for some reasons and causes fitting that Earth: or it may have
fallen in afterward, as Plato's Atlantis, or as So^^m and Gomorrha, for some
judgment upon part of that World.

To conclude, Seeing all the Planets that are placed in this Heaven, and are
the foster-children of this Sun, seem to have some affinity one with another,
and have much-what the same countenance, and the same general Phenomenon; It
seems probable that they rise much-what the same way, and after the like manner
as our Earth, each one from its respective Chaos; And that they had the same
Elementary Regions at first, and an exterior Orb ^orm'd over their Abyss: And
lastly, That every one of them has suffered, or is to suffer its Deluge, as
our Earth has done. These, I say, are probable conjectures according to the
Analogy of Reason and Nature, so far as we can judge concerning things very
remote and inaccessible.

And these things being thus, and our Theory of the Deluge, and the Dissolution
which brought it, having such a general agreement both with our Heavens and our
Earth, I think there is nothing but the uncouthness of the thing to some men's
understandings, the custom of thinking otherwise, and the uneasiness of entering
into a new set of thoughts, that can be a bar or hindrance to its reception.
But it may be improved, I doubt not, in many respects, and in some
particularities rectified. The first attempts in great Things are seldom or
never perfect: Such is the weakness of our Understandings, and the want of a
full Natural History. And in assigning Causes of such great effects, fair
conjectures are to be allowed, till they be displaced by others more evident
and more certain. Accordingly I readily submit to these terms, and leave this,
and all other parts of the Theory, to further examination and enquiries.

FINIS.
THE THEORY OF THE EARTH: Containing an Account OF THE Original of the Earth,
AND OF ALL THE GENERAL CHANGES Which it has already undergone OR IS TO UNDERGO
Throughout the whole Course of its Duration.

THE SECOND BOOK Concerning the PRIMAEVAL EARTH, AND Concerning PARADISE.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
BOOK II. Concerning the Primaeval Earth, and concerning Paradise.
CHAP. I. The Introduction and Contents of the Second Book. The general state
of the Primaeval Earth, and of Paradise.
WE have already seen a World begin and perish; An Earth raised from the
rudiments of a Chaos, and dissolved and destroyed in an Universal Deluge. We
have given also an imperfect description of that primaeval Earth, so far as was
necessary to show the Causes and manner of its dissolution. But we must not
content our selves with this; Seeing that Earth was the first Theater upon
which Mortals appeared and acted, and continued so for above Sixteen Hundred
Years; and that with Scenes, as both Reason and History tell us, very
extraordinary and very different from these of our present Earth, it is
reasonable we should endeavor to make a more full discovery and description of
it; Especially seeing Paradise was there; that seat of pleasure which our first
Parents lost, and which all their posterity have much ado to find again.

In the First Book we so far described This Newfound World, as to show it very
different in form and fabric from the present Earth; there was no Sea there,
no Mountains, nor Rocks, nor broken Caves, 'twas all one continued and regular
mass, smooth, simple and complete, as the first works of Nature use to be. But
to know thus much only, does rather excite our curiosity than satisfy it; what
were the other properties of this World? how were the Heavens, how the
Elements? what accommodation for humane life? why was it more proper to be the
seat of Paradise than the present Earth? Unless we know these things, you will
say, it will seem but an aerie Idea to us; and it is certain that the more
properties and particular^ties that we know concerning any thing, the more real
it appears to be.

As it was our chief design therefore in the precedent Book, to give an account
of the Universal Deluge, by way of a Theory; so we propose to our selves
chiefly in this Book, from the same Theory to give an account of Paradise; and
in performing of this, we shall be led into a more full examination and display
of that first Earth, and of its qualities. And if we be so happy, as by the
conduct of the same principles and the same method, to give as fair an account,
and as intelligible of the state of Paradise in that Original Earth, as we have
done of the Deluge by the dissolution of it, and of the form of this Earth
which succeeded, one must be very morose or melancholy to imagine that the
grounds we go upon, all this while, are wholly false or ^ictitious. A
foundation which will bear the weight of two Worlds without sinking, must
surely stand upon a firm Rock. And I am apt to promise my self that this Theory
of the Earth will find acceptance and credit, more or less, with all but those,
that think it a sufficient answer to all arguments, to say it is a Novelty.

But to proceed in our disquisition concerning Paradise, we may note, in the
first place, two opinions to be avoided, being both extremes; one that places
Paradise in the extra-mundane Regions, or in the Air, or in the Moon, and the
other that makes it so inconsiderable, as to be confined to a little spot of
ground in Mesopotamia, or some other Country of Asia, the Earth being now as it
was then. This offends as much in the defect, as the other in the excess. For
it is not any single Region of the Earth that can be Paradisiacal, unless all
Nature conspire, and a certain Order of things proper and peculiar for that
state. Nor is it of less importance to find out this peculiar Order of things,
than to find out the particular, seat of Paradise, but rather pre-requisite to
it: We will endeavor therefore to discover and determine both, so far as a
Theory can go, beginning with that which is more general.

It Is certain there were some qualities and conditions of Paradise that were
not merely Topical, but common to all the rest of the Earth at that time; and
these we must consider in the first place, examine what they were, and upon
what they depended. History, both Sacred and Profane, must tell us what they
were, and our Theory must show us upon what causes they depended. I had once, I
confess, proposed to my self another method, independent upon History or
Effects; I thought to have continued the description of the Primitive or
Ante-diluvian Earth from the contemplation of its causes only, and then left it
to the judgment of others to determine, whether that was not the Earth where
the Golden Age was past, and where Paradise stood. For I had observed three
conditions or characters of it, which I thought were sufficient to answer all
that we knew concerning that first state of things, viz. The regularity of its
surface; The situation or posture of its Body to the Sun; and the Figure of it:
From these three general causes, I thought might be deduc^d all the chief
differences of that Earth from the present, and particularly those that made it
more capable of being Paradisiacal.

But upon second thoughts I judged it more useful and expedient to lay aside
the Causes at present, and begin with the Effects, that we might have some
sensible matter to work upon. Bare Idea's of things are looked upon as Romantic
till Effects be proposed, whereof they are to give an account; It Is that makes
us value the Causes when necessity puts us upon enquiry after them; and the
reasons of things are very acceptable, when they ease the mind, anxious, and at
a loss, how to understand Nature without their help. We will therefore, without
more ado, premise those things that have been taken notice of as extraordinary
and peculiar to the first Ages of the World, and to Paradise, and which neither
do, nor can, obtain in the present Earth; whereof the first is a perpetual
Spring or Equinox; The second, the Long aevity of Animals, and the third Their
production out of the Earth, and the great fertility of the soil in all other
things.

These difficulties guard the way to Paradise like the flaming Sword, and must
be removed before we can enter; these are general Preliminaries which we must
explain before we proceed to enquire after the particular place of this Garden
of Pleasure. The Ancients have taken notice of all these in the first Ages of
the World, or in their Golden Age, as they call it; and I do not doubt but what
they ascribed to the Golden Age, was more remarkably true of Paradise; yet was
not so peculiar to it, but that it did in a good measure extend to other parts
of the Earth at that time. And it is manifest that their Golden Age was
contemporary with our Paradise; for they make it begin immediately after the
production and inhabitation of the Earth (which They, as well as Moses, raise
from the Chaos) and to degenerate by degrees till the Deluge; when the World
ended and begun again.

That this parallel may the better appear, we may observe, that as we say that
the whole Earth was, in some sense, Paradisiacal in the first Ages of the
World, and that there was besides, one Region or Portion of it that was
peculiarly so, and bore the denomination of Paradise; So the Ancients besides
their Golden Age; which was common to all the Earth, noted some parts of it
that were more Golden, if I may so say, than the rest, and which did more
particularly answer to Paradise; as their Elysian Fields, Fortunate Islands,
Gardens of Hesperides, Alcinous, etc. these had a double portion of
pleasantness, and besides the advantages which they had common with the rest of
the Earth at that time, had something proper and singular, which gave them a
distinct consideration and character from the rest.

Having made this observation, let us proceed, and see what Antiquity says
concerning that first and Paradisiacal state of things, upon those three Heads
forementioned; First, That there was a perpetual Spring, and constant serenity
of the Air; This is often repeated by the Ancient Poets, in their description
of the Golden Age: Non alios prima crescentis origin mundi
Illuxisse dies, Virgil.
aliumve habuisse tenorem,
Crediderim: Ver illud erat, Ver magnus agebat
Orbis, and hybernis parcebant flatibus Euri.
Such days the newborn Earth enjoyed of old,
And the calm Heavens in this same tenor rolled:
All the great World had then one constant Spring,
No cold East-winds, such as our Winters bring.
For I interpret this in the same sense with Ovid's Verses of the Golden Age:
Ver erat Aeternum: placidique tepentibus auris
Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores.
The Spring was constant, and soft Winds that blew,
Raised, without Seed, Flowers always sweet and new.
And then upon the expiration of the Golden Age, He says, Jupiter antiqui
contraxit tempora Veris, etc.
When Jove begun to reign he changed the Year,
And for one Spring four Seasons made appear.


The Ancients supposed, that in the reign of Saturn, who was an Ante-diluvian
God, as I may so call him, Time flowed with a more even motion, and there was
no diversity of Seasons in the Year; but Jupiter, they say, first introduced
that, when he came to manage affairs. This is expressed after their way, who
seldom give any severe and Philosophical accounts of the changes of Nature. And
as they supposed this perpetual Spring in the Golden Age, so they did also in
their particular Elysiums; as I could show largely from their Authors, if it
would not multiply Citations too much. It Is true, their Elysiums respected the
New Heavens, and New Earth to come, rather than the past, but they are both
framed upon the same model, and have common properties.

The Christian Authors have no less celebrated the perpetual Spring and
Serenity of the Heavens in Paradise; such expressions or descriptions you will
find in Justin Martyr, S. Basil, Damascen, Isidore Hispalensis, De Great. prim.
hom.
and others; insomuch that Bellarmine, I remember, reflecting upon those
Characters of Paradise, which many of the Fathers have given in these respects,
says, Such things could not be, unless the Sun had then another course from
what he has now; or which is more easy, the Earth another situation. Which
conjecture will hereafter appear to have been well-grounded. In the mean time,
let us see the Christian Poetry upon this subject, as we have seen the Roman
upon the other. Alcimus Avitus has thus described Paradise in his Notes upon
Genesis: Non hic alterni succedit temporis unquam
Bruma, nec aestivi redeunt post frigora Soles;
Hic Ver assiduum Coeli clementia servat.
Turbidus Auster abest, semperque sub aere sudo
Nubila diffugiunt, jugi cessura sereno.
Nec poscit Natura loci, quos non habet, imbres,
Sed contenta suo dotantur germina rore.
Perpetuo viret omne solum, terraeque benignae
Blanda nitet facies: Stant semper collibus herbae,
Arboribusque comae, etc.
No change of Seasons or excess was there,
No Winter chilled, nor Summer scorched the Air,
But, with a constant Spring, Nature was fresh and fair.
Rough Winds or Rains that Region never knew,
Watered with Rivers and the morning Dew;
The Heavens still clear, the Fields still green and gay,
No Clouds above, nor on the Earth decay;
Trees kept their leaves and verdure all the Year,
And Fruits were never out of Season there.


And as the Christian Authors, so likewise the Jewish have spoken of Paradise
in the same manner; they tell us also that the days there were always of the
same length throughout the whole Year; and that made them fancy Paradise to lie
under the Aequinoctial; as we shall see in its due place. It Is true, we do not
find these things mentioned expressly in the Sacred Writings, but the Effects
that flowed from them are recorded there, and we may reasonably suppose
providence to have foreseen, that when those Effects came to be scanned and
narrowly looked into, they would lead us to a di^covery of the Causes, and
particularly of this great and general Cause, that perpetual Aequinox and unity
of seasons in the Year, till the Deluge. The Longaevity of the Ante-diluvians
cannot be explained upon any other supposition, as we shall have occasion to
show hereafter; and that you know is recorded carefully in Scripture: As also
that there was no Rainbow before the Flood; which goes upon the same ground,
that there was no variety of Seasons, nor any Rain: And this by many is thought
to be understood by Moses his words, Genesis 2. 5, 6. which he speaks of the first
and Paradisiacal Earth. Lastly, Seeing the Earth then brought forth the
principles of life and all living Creatures (Man excepted) according to Moses,
Genesis 1. 24. we must suppose that the state of the Heavens was such as favored
these Conceptions and Births, which could not possibly be brought to
perfection, as the Seasons of the Year are at present. The first time that we
have mention made in Scripture of Summer and Winter, and the differences of
Seasons, is at the ending of the Deluge. Genesis 8. 22. Hence forward all the days
of the Earth, Seed-time and Harvest, Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, Day and
Night shall not cease. It Is true these words are so lax, that they may be
understood either of a new course of Nature then instituted, or of an old one
restored; but seeing it does appear from other arguments and considerations,
that there was at that time a new course of Nature constituted, it is more
reasonable to interpret the words in that sense; which, as it is agreeable to
truth, according to Reason and Antiquity; so it renders that remark of Moses of
far greater importance, if it be understood as an indication of a new order
then settled in Nature, which should continue thenceforwards so long as the
Earth endured. Nor do I at all wonder that such things should not be expressly
and positively declared in Scripture, for Natural Mysteries in the Holy
Writings, as well as Prophetical, are many times, on set purpose, incompleatly
delivered, so as to awaken and excite our thoughts rather than fully resolve
them: This being often more suitable to the designs of Providence in the
government of the World. But thus much for this first common or general
Character of the Golden Age, and of Paradise, a perpetual Serenity and
perpetual Aequinox.

The second Character is the Longaevity of Men, and, as is probable, of all
other Animals in proportion. This, methinks, is as strange and surprising as
the other; and I know no difference betwixt the Ante-diluvian World and the
present, so apt to affect us, if we reflect upon it, as this wonderful
disproportion in the Ages of Men; Our forefathers and their Posterity; They
lived seven, eight, nine hundred Years and upwards, and it is a wonder now if a
Man live to one hundred. Our Oaks do not last so long as their Bodies did;
Stone and Iron would scarce out-wear them. And this property of the first Ages,
or their Inhabitants, how strange soever, is well attested, and beyond all
exception, having the joint consent of Sacred and Profane History. The
Scripture sets down the precise Age of a s^ries of Ante diluvian Patriarchs,
and by that measures the time from the beginning of the World to the Deluge; so
as all Sacred Chronology stand upon that bottom. Yet I know some have thought
this so improbable and incongruous a thing, that to save the credit of Moses
and the Sacred History, they interpret these years of Lunar years or months;
and so the Ages of these Patriarchs are reduced to much what the same measure
with the common life of man at this time. It may be observed in this, as in
many other instances, that for want of a Theory to make things credible and
intelligibile, men of wit and parts have often deprest the sense of Scripture;
and that not out of any ill will to Scripture or Religion, but because they
could not otherwise, upon the stock of their notions, give themselves a
rational account of things recorded there. But I hope when we come to explain
the Causes of this Longaevity, we shall show that it is altogeth^r us strange a
thing that Men should have such short lives as they have now, as that they had
such long lives in the first Ages of the World. In the mean time, there are a
great many collateral reasons to assure us that Lunar years cannot be here
understood by Moses, for all Antiquity gives the same account of those first
Ages of the World, and of the first Men, that they were extremely long-lived.
We meet with it generally in the description of the Golden Age; and not only
so, but in their Topical Paradises also they always supposed a great vivacity
or longaevity in those that enjoyed them. Book 1. Chapter 4. Jew. Ant.
And Josephus speaking upon this subject, says, the Authors of all the learned
Nations, Greeks or Barbarians, bear witness to Moses's doctrine in this
particular. And in the Mosaical History it self, there are several
circumstances and marks that discover plainly, that the years of the Patriarchs
cannot be understood of Lunar years; Chap. 4.
as we shall have occasion to show in another place. We proceed in the mean
time to the third and last Character, The extraordinary fertility of the Soil,
and the production of Animals out of the new-made Earth.

The first part of this Character is unquestionable; All Antiquity speaks of
the plenty of the Golden Age, and of their Paradises, whether Christian or
Heathen. The fruits of the Earth at first were spontaneous, and the ground
without being torn and tormented, satisfied the wants or desires of Man. When
Nature was fresh and full, all things flowed from her more easily and more
pure, like the first running of the Grape, or the Honeycomb; but now she must
be pressed and squeezed, and her productions taste more of the Earth and of
bitterness. The Ancient Poets have often pleased themselves in making
descriptions of this happy state, and in admiring the riches and liberality of
Nature at that time, but we need not transcribe their Poetry here, seeing this
point is not, I think, contested by any. The second part of this Character,
concerning the spontaneous Origin of living Creatures out of that first Earth,
is not so unquestionable, and as to Man, Moses plainly implies that there was a
particular action or ministry of Providence in the formation of his Body, but
as to other Animals He seems to suppose that the Earth brought them forth as it
did Herbs and Plants. (Genesis 1. 24. compared with the 11. Verse.) And the truth
is, there is no such great difference betwixt Vegetable and Animal Eggs, or
betwixt the Seeds out of which Plants rise, and the Eggs out of which all
Animals rise, but that we may conceive, the one as well as the other, in the
first Earth: And as some warmth and influence from the Sun is required for the
Vegetation of Seeds, so that influence or impregnation which is necessary to
make Animal Eggs fruitful, was imputed by the Ancients to the Ether, or to an
active and pure Element which had the same effect upon our great Mother the
Earth, as the irradiation of the Male has upon the Females Eggs. Tum Pater
Omnipotens foecundis imbribus Ether
Conjugis in gremium laetae descendit.
In fruitful showers of Ether Jove did glide
Into the bosom of his joyful Bride.


It Is true, this opinion of the spontaneous Origin of Animals in the first
Earth, has lain under some Odium, because it was commonly reckoned to be
Epicuru^'s opinion peculiarly; and he extended it not only to all brute
Creatures, but to Mankind also, whom he supposed to grow out of the Earth in
great numbers, in several Parts and Countries, like other Animals; which is a
notion contrary to the Sacred Writings; for they declare, that all Mankind,
though diffused now through the several parts and Regions of the Earth, rise at
first from one Head or single Man and Woman; which is a Conclusion of great
importance, and that could not, I think, by the Light of Nature, have ever been
discovered. And this makes the Epicurean opinion the more improbable, for why
should two rise only, if they sprung from the Earth? or how could they rise in
their full growth and perfection, as Adam and Eve did? But as for the opinion
of Animals rising out of the Earth at first, that was not at all peculiar to
Epicurus; The Stoics were of the same mind, and the Pythagoreans, and the
Egyptians, and, I think, all that supposed the Earth to rise from a Chaos.
Neither do I know any harm in that opinion, if duly limited and stated; for
what inconvenience is it, or what diminution of Providence, that there should
be the principles of Life, as well as the principles of Vegetation, in the new
Earth? And unless you suppose all the first Animals, as well as the first Man,
to have been made at one stroke, in their full growth and perfection, which we
have neither reason nor authority sufficient to believe; if they were made
young, little and weak, as they come now into the World, there seems to be no
way for their production more proper, and decorous, than that they should
spring from their great Mother the Earth. Lastly, considering the innumerable
little Creatures that are upon the Earth, Insects and Creeping things: and that
these were not created out of nothing, but formed out of the ground: I think
that an office most proper for Nature, that can set so many hands to work at
once; and that has hands fit for all those little operations or manufactures,
how small soever, that would less become the dignity of Superior Agents.

Thus much for the Preliminaries, or three general Characters of Paradise,
which were common to it with the rest of the Primaeval Earth; and were the
chief ingredients of the Golden Age, so much celebrated by the Ancients. I know
there were several other differences betwixt that Earth and this, but these are
the original; and such as are not necessary to be premised for the general
Explication of Paradise, we reserve for another place. We may, in the mean time
observe, how preposterously they go to work, that set themselves immediately to
find out some pleasant place of the Earth to six Paradise in, before they have
considered, or laid any grounds, to explain the general conditions of it,
wheresoever it was. These must be first known and determined, and we must take
our aim and directions from these, how to proceed further in our enquiries
after it; otherwise we fail without a Compass, or seek a Port and know not
which way it lies. And as we should think him a very unskilful Pilot that
sought a place in the New World, or America, that really was in the Old; so
they commit no less an error, that seek Paradise in the present Earth, as now
constituted, which could only belong to the former, and to the state of the
first World: As will appear more plainly in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. The great Change of the World since the Flood, from what it was in
the first Ages. The Earth under its present form could not be Paradisiacal, nor
any part of it.
THE Scheme of this World passes away, says an holy Author: The mode and
form, both of the Natural and Civil World, changes continually more or less,
but most remarkably at certain Periods, when all Nature puts on another face;
as it will do at the Conflagration, and has done already from the time of the
Deluge. We may imagine how different a prospect the first World would make from
what we see now in the present state of things, if we consider only those
generals by which we have described it in the foregoing Chapter, and what their
influence would be upon Mankind and the rest of Nature. For every new state of
Nature does introduce a new Civil Order, and a new face and Economy of Humane
affairs: And I am apt to think that some two Planets, that are under the same
state or Period, do not so much differ from one another, as the same Planet
does from it self, in different periods of its duration. We do not seem to
inhabit the same World that our first forefathers did, nor scarce to be the
same race of Men. Our life now is so short and vain, as if we came into the
World only to see it and leave it; by that time we begin to understand our
selves a little, and to know where we are, and how to act our part, we must
leave the stage, and give place to others as mere Novices as we were our selves
at our first entrance. And this short life is employed, in a great measure, to
preserve our selves from necessity, or diseases, or injuries of the Air, or
other inconveniences; to make one Man easy, ten must work and do drudgery;
The Body takes up so much time, we have little leisure for Contemplation, or to
cultivate the mind. The Earth does not yield us food, but with much labor and
industry, and what was her free will offering before, or an easy liberality
can scarce now be extorted from her. Neither are the Heavens more favorable,
sometimes in one extreme, sometimes in another; The Air often impure or
infectious, and, for a great part of the year, Nature her self seems to be sick
or dead. To this vanity the external Creation is made subject as well as
Mankind, and so must continue till the restitution of all things.

Can we imagine, in those happy Times and Places we are treating of, that
things stood in this same posture? are these the fruits of the Golden Age and
of Paradise, or consistent with their happiness? And the remedies of these
evils must be so universal, you cannot give them to one place or Region of the
Earth, but all must participate: For these are things that flow from the course
of the Heavens, or such general Causes as extend at once to all Nature. If
there was a perpetual Spring and perpetual Aequinox in Paradise, there was at
the same time a perpetual Aequinox all the Earth over; unless you place
Paradise in the middle of the Torrid Zone. So also the long-lives of the
Ante-diluvians was an universal Effect, and must have had an universal Cause.
It Is true, in some single parts or Regions of the present Earth, the
Inhabitants live generally longer than in others, but do not approach in any
measure the Age of their Ante-diluvian forefathers; and that degree of
longaevity which they have above the rest, they owe to the calmness and
tranquillity of their Heavens and Air; which is but an imperfect participation
of that cause which was once Universal, and had its effect throughout the whole
Earth. And as to the fertility of this Earth, though in some spots it be
eminently more fruitful than in others, and more delicious, yet that of the
first Earth was a fertility of another kind, being spontaneous, and extending
to the production of Animals, which cannot be without a favorable concourse
from the Heavens also.

Thus much in general; We will now go over those three forementioned Characters
more distinctly, to show by their unsuitableness to the present state of
Nature, that neither the whole Earth, as it is now, nor any part of it, could
be Paradisiacal. The perpetual Spring, which belonged to the Golden Age, and to
Paradise, is an happiness this present Earth cannot pretend to, nor is capable
of, unless we could transfer the Sun from the Ecliptic to the Equator, or,
which is as easy, persuade the Earth to change its posture to the Sun. If
Archimedes had found a place to plant his Machines in for removing of the
Earth, all that I should have desired of him, would have been only to have
given it an heave at one end, and set it a little to rights again with the Sun,
that we might have enjoyed the comfort of a perpetual Spring, which we have
lost by its dislocation ever since the Deluge. And there being nothing more
indispensably necessary to a Paradisiacal state than this unity and equality of
Seasons, where that cannot be, it is in vain to seek for the rest of Paradise.

The spontaneous fruitfulness of the ground was a thing peculiar to the
primigenial soil, which was so tempered, as made it more luxuriant at that time
than it could ever be afterward; and as that rich temperament was spent, so by
degrees it grew less fertile. The Origin or production of Animals out of the
Earth, depended not only upon this vital constitution of the soil at first, but
also upon such a posture and aspect of the Heavens, as favored, or at least
permitted, Nature, to make her best works out of this prepared matter, and
better than could be made in that manner, after the Flood. Noah, we see, had
orders given him to preserve the Races of living Creatures in his Ark, when the
Old World was destroyed; which is an argument to me, that Providence foresaw
that the Earth would not be capable to produce them under its new form; and
that, not only for want of fitness in the soil, but because of the diversity of
Seasons, which were then to take place, whereby Nature would be disturbed in
her work, and the subject to be wrought upon would not continue long enough in
the same due temper. But this part of the second Character concerning the
Original of Animals, deserves to be further examined and explained.

The first principles of Life must be tender and ductile, that they may yield
to all the motions and gentle touches of Nature; otherwise it is not possible
that they should be wrought with that curiosity, and drawn into all those
little fine threads and textures, that we see and admire in some parts of the
Bodies of Animals* And as the matter must be so constituted at first, so it
must be kept in a due temper till the work be finished, without any excess of
heat or cold; and accordingly we see that Nature has made provision in all
sorts of Creatures, whether Oviparous or Viviparous, that the first rudiments
of Life should be preserved from all injuries of the Air, and kept in a
moderate warmth. Eggs are enclosed in a Shell, or Film, and must be cherished
with an equal gentle heat, to begin formation and continue it, otherwise the
work miscarries: And in Viviparous Creatures, the materials of life are safely
lodged in the Females womb, and conserved in a fit temperature 'twixt heat and
cold, while the Causes that Providence has employed, are busy at work,
fashioning and placing and joining the parts, in that due order which so
wonderful a Fabric requires.

Let us now compare these things with the birth of Animals in the new-made
World, when they first rose out of the Earth, to see what provision could be
made there for their safety* and nourishment, while they were a making, and
when newly made; And though we take all advantages we can, and suppose both the
Heavens and the Earth favorable, a fit soil and a warm and constant temper of
the Air, all will be little enough to make this way of production feasible or
probable. But if we suppose there was then the same inconstancy of the Heavens
that is now, the same vicissitude of seasons, and the same inequality of heat
and cold, I do not think it at all possible that they could be so formed, or
being newform'd, preserved and nourished. It Is true, some little Creatures that
are of short dispatch in their formation, and find nourishment enough
wheresoever they are br^d, might be produced and brought to perfection in this
way, notwithstanding any inequality of Seasons; because they are made all at a
heat, as I may so say, begun and ended within the compass of one Season; But
the great question is concerning the more perfect kinds of Animals, that
require a long stay in the womb, to make them capable to sustain and nourish
themselves when they first come into the World. Such Animals being big and
strong, must have a pretty hardness in their bones, and force and firmness in
their Muscles and Joints, before they can bear their own weight, and exercise
the common motions of their body: And accordingly we see Nature has ordained
for these a longer time of gestation, that their limbs and members might have
time to acquire strength and solidity. Besides the young ones of these Animals
have commonly the milk of the Dam to nourish them after they are brought forth,
which is a very proper nourishment, and like to that which they had before in
the womb; and by this means their stomachs are prepared by degrees for courser
food: Whereas our Terrigenous Animals must have been weaned as soon as they
were born, or as soon as they were separated from their Mother the Earth, and
therefore must be allowed a longer time of continuing there.

These things being considered, we cannot in reason but suppose, that these
Terrigenous Animals were as long, or longer, a perfecting, than our Viviparous,
and were not separated from the body of the Earth for ten, twelve, eighteen or
more months, according as their Nature was; and seeing in this space of time
they must have suffer^d, upon the common Hypothesis, all vicissitudes and
variety of seasons, and great excesses of heat and cold, which are things
incompatible with the tender principles of life and the formation of living
Creatures, as we have shown before; we may reasonably and safely conclude, that
Nature had not, when the World began, the same course she has now, or that the
Earth was not then in its present posture and constitution: Seeing, I say,
these first spontaneous Births, which both the Holy Writ, Reason, and Antiquity
seem to allow, could not be finished and brought to maturity, nor afterward
preserved and nourisht, upon any other supposition.

Longaevi^y is the last Character to be considered, and as inconsistent with
the present state of the Earth as any other. There are many things in the story
of the first Ages that seem strange, but nothing so prodigy-like as the long
lives of those Men; that their houses of Clay should stand eight or nine
hundred years and upwards, and those we build of the hardest Stone or Marble
will not now last so long. This has excited the curiosity of ingenious and
learned men in all Ages to enquire after the possible Causes of that
longaveity; and if it had been always in conjunction with innocence of life and
manners, and expired when that expired, we might have thought it some peculiar
blessing or reward attending that; but 'twas common to good and bad, and lasted
till the Deluge, whereas mankind was degenerate long before. Amongst Natural
Causes, some have imputed it to the sobriety and simplicity of their diet and
manner of living in those days, that they eat no flesh, and had not all those
provocations to gluttony which Wit and Vice have since invented. This might
have some effect, but not possibly to that degree and measure that we speak of.
There are many Monastical persons now that live abstemiously all their lives,
and yet they think an hundred years a very great age amongst them. Others have
imputed it to the excellency of their Fruits and some unknown virtue in their
Herbs and Plants in those days; But they may as well say nothing, as say that
which can neither be proved nor understood. It could not be either the quantity
or quality of their food that was the cause of their long lives, for the Earth
was said to be cursed long before the Deluge, and probably by that time was more
barren and juiceless (for the generality) than ours is now; yet we do not see
that their longaevity decreast at all, from the beginning of the World to the
Flood. Methusalah was Noah's Grandfather, but one entire remove from the
Deluge, and he lived longer than any of his Forefathers. That food that will
nourish the parts and keep us in health, is also capable to keep us in long
life, if there be no impediments otherwise; for to continue health is to
continue life; as that fuel that is fit to raise and nourish a flame, will
preserve it as long as you please, if you add fresh fuel, and no external
causes hinder: Neither do we observe that in those parts of the present Earth
where people live longer than in others, that there is any thing extraordinary
in their food, but that the difference is chiefly from the Air and the
temperateness of the Heavens; And if the Ante-diluvians had not enjoyed that
advantage in a peculiar manner, and differently from what any parts of the
Earth do now, they would never have seen, seven, eight, or nine hundred years
go over their heads, though they had been nourished with Nectar and Ambrosia.

Others have thought that the long lives of those Men of the old World
proceeded from the strength of their Stamina, or first principles of their
bodies; which if they were now as strong in us; they think we should still live
as long as they did. This could not be the sole and adaequate cause of their
longaevity, as will appear both from History and Reason. Shem, who was born
before the Flood, and had in his body all the virtue of the Ante-diluvian
Stamina and constitution, fell three hundred years short of the age of his
forefathers, because the greatest part of his life was past after the Flood.
That their Stamina were stronger than ours are, I am very ready to believe, and
that their bodies were greater; and any race of strong Men, living long in
health, would have children of a proportionably strong constitution with
themselves; but then the question is, How was this interrupted? We that are
their posterity, why do not we inherit their long lives? how was this
constitution broken at the Deluge, and how did the Stamina fail so fast when
that came? why was there so great a Crisis then and turn of life, or why was
that the period of their strength?

We see this longaevity sunk half in half immediately after the Flood, and
after that it sunk by gentler degrees, but was still in motion and declension
till it was ^ixt at length, Ps. 90. 10. called a Psalm of Moses.
before David's time, in that which has been the common standard of Man's Age
ever since: As when some excellent fruit is transplanted into a worse Climate
and Soil, it degenerates continually till it comes to such a degree of meanness
as suits that Air and Soil, and then it stands. That the Age of Man did not
fall all on a sudden from the Antediluvian measure to the present, I impute it
to the remaining Stamina of those first Ages, and the strength of that pristine
constitution which could not wear off but by degrees. We see the Blacks do not
quit their complexion immediately by removing into another Climate, but their
posterity changes by little and little, and after some generations they become
altogether like the people of the Country where they are. Thus by the change of
Nature that happened at the Flood, the unhappy influence of the Air and unequal
Seasons weakened by degrees the innate strength of their bodies and the vigor
of their parts, which would have been capable to have lasted several more
hundreds of years, if the Heavens had continued their course as formerly, or
the Earth its position. To conclude this particular, If any think that the
Ante-diluvian longaevity proceeded only from the Stamina, or the mere strength
of their bodies, and would have been so under any constitution of the Heavens,
let them resolve themselves these Questions; first, Why these Stamina, or this
strength of constitution failed? Secondly, Why did it fail so much and so
remarkably at the Deluge? Thirdly, Why in such proportions as it has done
since the Deluge? And lastly, Why it has stood so long immovable, and without
any further diminution? Within the compass of five hundred years they sunk from
nine hundred to ninety; and in the compass of more than three thousand years
since they have not sunk ten years, or scarce any thing at all. Who considers
the reasons of these things, and the true resolution of these questions, will
be satisfied, that to understand the causes of that longaevity something more
must be considered than the make and strength of their bodies; which, though
they had been made as strong as the Behemoth or Leviathan, could not have
lasted so many Ages, if there had not been a particular concurrence of external
causes, such as the present state of Nature does not admit of.

By this short review of the three general Characters of Paradise and the
Golden Age, we may conclude how little consistent they are with the present
from and order of the Earth. Who can pretend to assign any place or Region in
this Terraqueous Globe, Island or Continent, that is capable of these
conditions, or that agrees either with the descriptions given by the ancient
Heathens of their Paradise, or by the Christian Fathers of Scripture Paradise.
But where then, will you say, must we look for it, if not upon this Earth? This
puts us more into despair of finding it than ever; it is not above nor below, in
the Air or in the subterraneous Regions: no, doubtless 'twas upon the surface
of the Earth, but of the Primitive Earth, whose form and properties as they
were different from this, so they were such as made it capable of being truly
Paradisiacal, both according to the forementioned Characters, and all other
qualities and privileges reasonably ascribed to Paradise.

CHAP. III. The Original differences of the Primitive Earth from the present or
Post-diluvian. The three Characters of Paradise and the Golden Age found in the
Primitive Earth. A particular Explication of each Character.
WE have hitherto only perplexed the Argument and our selves, by showing how
inexplicable the state of Paradise is according to the present order of things,
and the present condition of the Earth. We must now therefore bring into view
that Original and Ante-diluvian Earth where we pretend its seat was, and show
it capable of all those privileges which we have denied to the present; in
virtue of which privileges, and of the order of Nature established there, that
primitive Earth might be truly Paradisiacal, as in the Golden Age; and some
Region of it might be peculiarly so, according to the received Idea of
Paradise. And this, I think, is all the knowledge and satisfaction that we can
expect, or that Providence has allowed us in this Argument.

The Primigenial Earth, which in the first Book (Chap. 5.) we raised from a
Chaos, and set up in an habitable form, we must now survey again with more
care, to observe its principal differences from the present Earth, and what
influence they will have upon the question in hand. These differences, as we
have said before, were chiefly three; The form of it, which was smooth, even
and regular. The posture and situation of it to the Sun, which was direct, and
not, as it is at present, inclined and oblique; And the Figure of it, which was
more apparently and regularly Oval than it is now. From these three differences
flowed a great many more, inferior and subordinate; and which had a
considerable influence upon the moral World at that time, as well as the
natural. But we will only observe here their more immediate effects, and that
in reference to those general Characters or properties of the Golden Age and of
Paradise, which we have instanced in, and whereof we are bound to give an
account by our Hypothesis.

And in this respect the most fundamental of those three differences we
mentioned, was, that of the right posture and situation of the Earth to the
Sun; for from this immediately followed a perpetual Aequinox all the Earth
over, or, if you will, a perpetual Spring: and that was the great thing we
found a wanting in the present Earth to make it Paradisiacal, or capable of
being so. Wherefore this being now found and established in the Primitive Earth,
the other two properties, of Longaevity and of Spontaneous and Vital fertility,
will be of more easy explication. In the mean time let us view a little the
reasons and causes of that regular situation in the first Earth.

The truth is, one cannot so well require a reason of the regular situation the
Earth had then, for that was most simple and natural; as of the irregular
situation it has now, standing oblique and inclined to the Sun or the
Ecliptic: Whereby the course of the year is become unequal, and we are cast
into a great diversity of Seasons. But however, stating the first aright with
its circumstances, we shall have a better prospect upon the second, and see
from what causes, and in what manner, it came to pass. Let us therefore suppose
the Earth, with the rest of its fellow Planets, to be carried about the Sun in
the Ecliptic by the motion of the liquid Heavens; and being at that time
perfectly uniform and regular, having the same Center of its magnitude and
gravity, it would by the equality of its libration necessarily have its Axis
parallel to the Axis of the same Ecliptic, both its Poles being equally
inclined to the Sun. And this posture I call a right situation, as opposed to
oblique or inclined: or a parallel situation, if you please. Now this is a
thing that needs no proof besides its own evidence; for it is the immediate
result and common effect of gravity or libration, that a Body freely left to it
self in a fluid medium, should settle in such a posture as best answers to its
gravitation; and this first Earth whereof we speak, being uniform and every way
equally balanced, there was no reason why it should incline at one end, more
than at the other, toward the Sun. As if you should suppose a Ship to stand
North and South under the Equator, if it was equally built and equally
ballasted, it would not incline to one Pole or other, but keep its Axis
parallel to the Axis of the Earth; but if the ballast lay more at one end, it
would dip toward that Pole, and rise proportionably higher toward the other.
So those great Ships that fail about the Sun once a year, or once in so many
years, whilst they are uniformly built and equally poised, they keep steady and
even with the Axis of their Orbit; but if they lose that equality, and the
Center of their gravity change, the heavier end will incline more toward the
common Center of their motion, and the other end will recede from it. So
particularly the Earth, which makes one in that aerie Fleet, when it escaped so
narrowly from being shipwrackt in the great Deluge, was however so broken and
disordered, that it lost its equal poise, and thereupon the Center of its
gravity changing, one Pole became more inclined toward the Sun, and the other
more removed from it, and so its right and parallel situation which it had
before to the Axis of the Ecliptic, was changed into an oblique; in which skew
posture it has stood ever since, and is likely so to do for some Ages to come.
I instance in this, as the most obvious cause of the change of the situation of
the Earth, though it may be, upon this, followed a change in its Magnetism, and
that might also contribute to the same effect.

However, This change and obliquity of the Earth's posture had a long train of
consequences depending upon it; whereof that was the most immediate, that it
altered the form of the year, and brought in that inequality of Seasons which
has since obtained: As, on the contrary, while the Earth was in its first and
natural posture, in a more easy and regular disposition to the Sun, That had
also another respective train of consequences, whereof one of the first, and
that which we are most concerned in at present, was, that it made a perpetual
Aequinox or Spring to all the World, all the parts of the year had one and the
same tenor, face and temper; there was no Winter or Summer, Seed-time or
Harvest, but a continual temperature of the Air and Verdure of the Earth. And
this fully answers the first and fundamental character of the Golden Age and of
Paradise; And what Antiquity, whether Heathen or Christian, has spoken
concerning that perpetual serenity and constant Spring that reigned there,
which in the one was accounted fabulous, and in the other hyperbolical, we see
to have been really and Philosophically true. Nor is there any wonder in the
thing, the wonder is rather on our side, that the Earth should stand and
continue in that forced posture wherein it is now, spinning yearly about an
Axis, I mean that of the Equator, that does not belong to the Orbit of its
motion; This, I say, is more strange than that it once stood in a posture that
was straight and regular; As we more justly admire the Tower at Pisa, that
stands crook'd, than twenty other straight Towers that are much higher.

Having got this foundation to stand upon, the rest of our work will go on more
easily; and the two other Characters which we mentioned, will not be of very
difficult explication. The spontaneous fertility of the Earth, and its
production of Animals at that time, we have in some measure explained before;
supposing it to proceed partly from the richness of the Primigenial soil, and
partly from this constant Spring and benignity of the Heavens, which we have
now established; These were always ready to excite Nature, and put her upon
action, and never to interrupt her in any of her motions or attempts. We have
showed in the Fifth Chapter of the First Book, how this primigenial soil was
made, and of what ingredients; which were such as compose the richest and
fattest soil, being a light Earth mixed with unctuous juices, and then
afterward refreshed and diluted with the dews of Heaven all the year long, and
cherisht with a continual warmth from the Sun. What more hopeful beginning of a
World than this? You will grant, I believe, that whatsoever degree or
whatsoever kind of fruitfulness could be expected from a Soil and a Sun, might
be reasonably expected there. We see great Woods and Forests of Trees rise
spontaneously, and that since the Flood (for who can imagine that the ancient
Forests, whereof some were so vastly great were planted by the hand of Man?)
why should we not then believe that Fruit Trees and Corn rose as spontaneously
in that first Earth? That which makes Husbandry and Humane Arts so necessary
now for the Fruits and productions of the Earth, is partly indeed the decay of
the Soil, but chiefly the diversity of Seasons, whereby they perish, if care be
not taken of them; but when there was neither Heat nor cold, Winter nor Summer,
every Season was a Seed-time to Nature, and every Season an^ Harvest.

This, it may be you will allow as to the Fruits of the Earth, but that the
same Earth should produce Animals also will not be thought so intelligible.
Since it has been discovered, that the first materials of all Animals are
Eggs, as Seeds are of Plants, it does not seem so hard to conceive that these
Eggs might be in the first Earth, as well as those Seeds; for there is a great
analogy and similitude betwixt them; Especially if you compare these Seeds
first with the Eggs of Insects or Fishes, and then with the Eggs of Viviparous
Animals. And as for those juices which the Eggs of Viviparous Animals imbibe
thorough their coats from the womb, they might as well imbibe them, or
something analogous to them, from a conveniently tempered Earth, as Plant-Eggs
do; And these things being admitted, the progress is much-what the same in
Seeds as Eggs, and in one sort of Eggs as in another.

It Is true, Animal-Eggs do not seem to be fruitful of themselves, without the
influence of the Male; and this is not necessary in Plant-Eggs or Vegetable
Seeds. But neither does it seem necessary in all Animal Eggs, if there be any
Animals sponte orta, as they call them, or bred without copulation. And, as we
observed before, according to the best knowledge that we have of this Male
influence, it is reasonable to believe, that it may be supplied by the Heavens
or Ether. The Ancients, both the Stoics and Aristotle, have supposed that
there was something of an Ethereal Element in the Male-geniture, from whence
the virtue of it chiefly proceeded; and if so, why may we not suppose, at that
time, some general impression or irradiation of that purer Element to fructify
the new-made Earth? Moses says there was an incubation of the Spirit of God
upon the mass; and without all doubt that was either to form or fructify it,
and by the mediation of this active principle; but the Ancients speak more
plainly with express mention of this Ether, and of the impregnation of the
Earth by it, as betwixt Male and Female. As in the place before-cited; Tum
Pater omnipotens faecundis imbribus Ether
Conjugis in gremium laetae descendit; and omnes
Magnus alit magno commixtus corpore, foetus.
Which notion, De Civ. D. lib. 4. c. 10.
I remember, S. Austin says, Virgil did not take from the fictions of the
Poets, but out of the Books of the Philosophers. Some of the gravest Authors
amongst the Romans have reported that this virtue has been conveyed into the
Wombs of some Animals by the Winds or the Zephyri; and as I easily believe that
the first fresh Air was more impregnated with this Ethereal principle than
ours is, so I see no reason but those balmy dews that fell every night in the
Primitive Earth, might be the Vehicle of it as well as the Male-geniture is
now; and from them the teeming Earth and those vital Seeds which it contained,
were actuated, and received their first fruitfulness.

Now* this Principle, howsoever conveyed to those rudiments of life which we
call Eggs, is that which gives the first stroke toward Animation; and this
seems to be by exciting a ferment in those little masses whereby the parts are
loosened, and disposed for that formation which is to follow afterward. And I
see nothing that hinders but that we may reasonably suppose that these Animal
productions might proceed thus far in the Primigenial Earth; And as to their
progress and the formation of the Body, by what Agents or Principles soever
that great work is carried on in the womb of the Female, it might by the same
be carried on there. Neither would there be any danger of miscarrying by excess
of Heat or Cold, for the Air was always of an equal temper and moderate warmth;
And all other impediments were removed, and all principles ready, whether
active or passive; so as we may justly conclude, that as Eve was the Mother of
all living as to Mankind, so was the Earth the Great Mother of all living
Creatures besides.

The Third Character to be explained, and the most extraordinary in appearance,
is that of LONGAEVITY. This sprung from the same root, in my opinion, with the
other; though the connection, it may be, is not so visible. We showed in the
foregoing Chapter, that no advantage of Diet, or of strong Constitutions, could
have carried their lives, before the Flood, to that wonderful length, if they
had been exposed to the same changes of Air and of Seasons that our Bodies are:
But taking a perpetual Aequinox, and fixing the Heavens, you fix the life of
Man too; which was not then in such a rapid flux as it is now, but seemed to
stand still, as the Sun did once, without declension. There is no question but
every thing upon Earth, and especially the Animate World, would be much more
permanent, if the general course of Nature was more steady and uniform; A
stabi^ity in the Heavens makes a stability in all things below; and that change
and contrariety of qualities that we have in these Regions, is the fountain of
corruption, and suffers nothing to be long in quiet: Either by intestine
motions and fermentations excited within, or by outward impressions, Bodies are
no sooner well constituted, but they are tending again to dissolution. The
Ether in their little pores and chinks is unequally agitated, and differently
moved at different times, and so is the Air in their greater, and the Vapors
and Atmosphere round about them: All these shake and unsettle both the texture
and continuity of Bodies. Whereas in a fixed state of Nature, where these
principles have always the same constant and uniform motion, when they are once
suited to the forms and compositions of Bodies, they give them no further
disturbance; they enjoy a long and lasting peace without any commotions or
violence, within or without.

We find our selves, sensible changes in our Bodies upon the turn of the Year,
and the change of Seasons; new fermentations in the Blood and resolutions of
the Humors; which if they do not amount to diseases, at least they disturb
Nature, and have a bad effect not only upon the fluid parts, but also upon the
more solid; upon the Springs and Fibers in the Organs of the Body; to weaken
them and unfit them by degrees for their respective functions. For though the
change is not sensible immediately in these parts, yet after many repeated
impressions every year, by unequal heat and cold, dryness and moisture,
contracting and relaxing the Fibers, their tone at length is in a great measure
destroyed, and brought to a manifest debility; and the great Springs failing,
the lesser that depend upon them, fall in proportion, and all the symptoms of
decay and old age follow. We see by daily experience, that Bodies are kept
better in the same medium, as we call it, than if they often change their
medium, as sometimes in Air, sometimes in Water, moistened and dried, heated
and cooled; these different states weaken the contexture of the parts: But our
Bodies, in the present state of Nature, are put into an hundred different
mediums in the course of a Year; sometimes we are steept in Water, or in a
misty foggy Air for several days together, sometimes we are almost frozen with
cold, then fainting with heat at another time of the Year; and the Winds are of
a different nature, and the Air of a different weight and pressure, according
to the Weather and the Seasons: These things would wear our Bodies, though they
were built of Oak, and that in a very short time in comparison of what they
would last, if they were always incompast with one and the same medium, under
one and the same temper, as it was in the Primitive Earth.

The Ancients seem to have been sensible of this, and of the true causes of
those long periods of life; for wheresoever they assigned a great longaevity,
as they did not only to their Golden Age, but also to their particular and
topical Paradises, they also assigned there a constant serenity and equality of
the Heavens, and sometimes expressly a constant Aequinox; as might be made
appear from their Authors. And some of our Christian Authors have gone farther,
and connected these two together, as Cause and Effect; for they say that the
Longaevity of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs proceeded from a favorable Aspect
and influence of the Heavens at that time; which Aspect of the Heavens being
rightly interpreted, is the same thing that we call the Position of the
Heavens, or the right situation of the Sun and the Earth, from whence came a
perpetual Aequinox. And if we consider the present Earth, I know no place where
they live longer than in that little Island of the Bermudas, where, according
to the proportion of time they hold out there, after they are arrived from
other parts, one may reasonably suppose, that the Natives would live two
hundred Years. And there is nothing appears in that Island that should give long
life above other places, but the extraordinary steddiness of the Weather, and
of the temper of the Air throughout the whole Year, so as there is scarce any
considerable difference of Seasons.

But because it would take up too much time to show in this place the full and
just reasons why, and how these long periods of life depend upon the stability
of the Heavens: and how on the contrary, from their inconstancy and mutability
these periods are shortened, as in the present order of Nature; we will set
apart the next Chapter to treat upon that subject; yet by way of digression
only, so as those that have a mind may pass to the following, where the thread
of this discourse is continued. In the mean time, you see, we have prepared an
Earth for Paradise, and given a fair and intelligible account of those three
general Characters, which, according to the rules of method, must be determined
before any further progress can be made in this Argument. For in the doctrine
of Paradise there are two things to be considered, the state of it, and the
place of it; And as it is first in order of Nature, so it is much more
material, to find out the state of it, than the Region where it stood. We need
not follow the Windings of Rivers, and the interpretation of hard names, to
discover this, we take more faithful Guides, The unanimous reports of
Antiquity, Sacred and Profane, supported by a regular Theory. Upon these
grounds we go, and have thus far proceeded on our way; which we hope will grow
more easy and pleasant, the nearer we come to our journeys end.

CHAP. IV. A digression, concerning the Natural Causes of Longaevity. That the
Machine of an Animal consists of Springs, and which are the two principal. The
Age of the Ante-diluvians to be computed by Solar not Lunar Years.
TO confirm our opinion concerning the reasons of Longaevity in the first
Inhabitants of the World, it will not be amiss to deduce more at large the
Natural Causes of long or short periods of life. And when we speak of long or
short periods of life, we do not mean those little differences of ten, twenty
or forty Years which we see amongst Men now adays, according as they are of
stronger or weaker constitutions, and govern themselves better or worse, but
those grand and famous differences of several hundreds of Years, which we have
examples of in the different Ages of the World, and particularly in those that
lived before and since the Flood. Neither do we think it peculiar to this Earth
to have such an inequality in the lives of Men, but the other Planets, if they
be inhabited, have the same property, and the same difference in their
different periods; All Planets that are in their Ante-diluvian state, and in
their first and regular situation to the Sun, have long-lived Inhabitants; and
those that are in an oblique situation, have shortliv'd; unless there be some
counter-causes that hinder this general rule of Nature from taking place.

We are now so used to a short life, and to drop away after threescore or
fourscore years, that when we compare our lives with those of the
Ante-diluvians, we think the wonder lies wholly on their side, why they lived
so long; and so it does, popularly speaking; but if we speak Philosophically,
the wonder lies rather on our side, why we live so little, or so short a time:
For seeing our Bodies are such Machines as have a faculty of nourishing
themselves, that is, of repairing their lost or decayed parts, so long as they
have good nourishment to make use of, why should they not continue in good
plight, and always the same? as a flame does, so long as it is supplied with
fuel? And that we may the better see on whether side the wonder lies, and from
what causes it proceeds, we will propose this Problem to be examined, Why the
frame or Machine of an humane Body, or of another Animal, having that
construction of parts and those faculties which it has, lasts so short a time?
And though it fall into no disease, nor have any unnatural accident, within the
space of eighty years, more or less, fatally and inevitably decays, dies and
perishes?

That the state and difficulty of this question may the better appear, let us
consider a Man in the prime and vigor of his life, at the age of twenty or
twenty four years, of an healthful constitution, and all his Vitals sound; let
him be nourished with good food, use due exercise, and govern himself with
moderation in all other things; The Question is, Why this Body should not
continue in the same plight, and in the same strength, for some Ages? or at
least why it should decay so soon, and so fast as we see it does? We do not
wonder at things that happen daily, though the causes of them be never so hard
to find out; We contract a certain famil^arity with common events, and fancy we
know as much of them as can be known, though in reality we know nothing of them
but matter of fact; which the vulgar knows as well as the Wise or the Learned.
We see daily instances of the shortness of man's life, how soon his race is
run, and we do not wonder at it, because it is common, yet if we examine the
composition of the Body, it will be very hard to find any good reasons why the
frame of it should decay so soon.

I know it is easy to give general and superficial answers and accounts of
these things, but they are such, as being strictly examined, give no
satisfaction to an inquisitive mind: You would say, it may be, that the
Interior parts and Organs of the Body wear and decay by degrees, so as not
performing so well their several offices and functions, for the digestion and
distribution of the food and its juices, all the other parts suffer by it, and
draws on insensibly a decay upon the whole frame of the Body. This is all true;
but why, and how comes this to pass? from what causes? where is the first
failure, and what are the consequences of it? The inward parts do not destroy
themselves, and we suppose that there is no want of good food, nor any disease,
and we take the Body in its full strength and vigor, why does it not continue
thus, as a Lamp does, if you supply it with Oil? The causes being the same, why
does not the same effect still follow? why should not the flame of life, as
well as any other flame, if you give it fuel, continue in its force without
languishing or decay*

You will say, it may be, The case is not the same in a simple Body, such as a
Lamp or a Fire, and in an Organical Body; which being variously compounded of
multiplicity of parts, and all those parts put in connection and dependence one
upon another, if any one fail, it will disorder the whole frame; and therefore
it must needs be more difficult for such a body to continue long in the same
state, than for a simple Body that has no variety of parts or operations. I
acknowledge such a Body is much more subject to diseases and accidents than a
more simple, but barring all diseases and accidents, as we do, it might be of
as long a duration as any other, if it was supplied with nourishment adequately
to all its parts: As this Lamp we speak of, if it consisted of twenty branches,
and each of these branches was to be fed with a different Oil, and these Oils
could be all mixed together in some common Cistern, whence they were to be
distributed into the several branches, either according to their different
degrees of lightness, one rising higher than another; or according to the
capacity and figure of the little pipes they were to pass thorough; such a
compounded Lamp, made up of such artifices, would indeed be more subject to
accidents, and to be out of order, by the obstruction of some of the little
pipes, or some unfit qualities in the Oils, but all these casualties and
disorders excepted, as they are in our case, if it was supplied with convenient
liquors, it would burn as long as any other, though more plain and simple.

To instance yet, for more plainness, in another sort of Machine, supppose a
Mill, where the Water may represent the nourishment and humors in our Body,
and the frame of Wood and Stone, the solid parts; if we could suppose this Mill
to have a power of nourishing it self by the Water it received, and of
repairing all the parts that were worn away, whether of the Wood work or of the
Stone, feed it but with a constant stream, and it would subsist and grind for
ever. And it is the same thing for all other Artificial Machines of this nature,
if they had a faculty of nourishig themselves, and repairing their parts. And
seeing those natural Machines we are speaking of, the Body of Man, and of other
Animals, have and enjoy this faculty, why should they not be able to preserve
themselves beyond that short period of time which is now the measure of their
life?

Thus much we have said to show the difficulty proposed and enforce it; We must
now consider the true answer and resolution of it; and to that purpose bring
into view again those causes which we have assigned, both of the long periods
of life before the Flood, and of the short ones since. That there was a
perpetual Aequinox and stability of the Heavens before the Flood, we have
showed both from History and Reason; neither was there then any thing of
Clouds, Rains, Winds, Storms or unequal weather, as will appear in the
following Chapter; And to this steddiness of Nature and universal calmness of
the External World, we have imputed those long periods of life which Men
enjoyed at that time: As on the contrary* when that great change and revolution
happened to Nature at the Deluge, and the Heavens and the Earth were cast in
another mould, then was brought in, besides many other new Scenes, that
shortness and vanity in the life of Man, and a general instability in all
sublunary things, but especially in the Animate World.

It is not necessary to show, more than we have done already, how that
Primitive state of Nature contributed to long life; neither is it required that
it should actively contribute, but only be permissive, and suffer our Bodies to
act their parts; for if they be not disturbed, nor any harm done them by
External Nature, they are built with art and strength enough to last many
hundreds of years. And as we observed before concerning the posture of the
Earth, that that which it had at first, being simple and regular, was not so
much to be accounted for, as its present posture, which is irregular; so
likewise for the life of Man, the difficulty is not why they lived so long in
the old World; that was their due and proper course; but why our Bodies being
made after the same manner, should endure so short a time now. This is it
therefore which we must now make our business to give an account of, namely,
how that vicissitude of Seasons, inconstancy of the Air, and unequal course of
Nature which came in at the Deluge, do shorten Life; and indeed hasten the
dissolution of all Bodies, Animate or Inanimate*

In our Bodies we may consider three several qualities on dispositions, and
according to each whereof they suffer decay; First, Their continuity; Secondly,
That disposition whereby the are capable of receiving nourishment, which we may
call Nutribility; and Thirdly, The Tone or Tonick disposition of the Organs
whereby they perform their several functions. In all these three respects they
would decay in any state of Nature, but far sooner, and faster in the present
state than in the Primaeval. As for their Continuity, we have noted before that
all consistent Bodies must be less durable now, than under that first order of
the World, because of the unequal and contrary motions of the Elements, or of
the Air and Ether that penetrato and pervade them; and it is part of that
vanity which all things now are subject to, to be more perishable than in their
first Constitution. If we should consider our Bodies only as breathing Statues,
consisting of those parts they do, and of that tenderness, the Air which we
breath, and wherewith we are continually incompast, changing so often 'twixt
moist and dry, hot and cold, a slew and eager motion, these different actions
and restless changes would sooner weaken and destroy the union of the parts,
than if they were always in a calm and quiet medium.

But it is not the gross and visible Continuity of the parts of our Body that
frist dacays, there are finer Textures that are spoiled insensibly, and draw on
the decay of the rest; such are those other two we mentioned, That disposition
and temper of the parts whereby they are fit to receive their full nourishment;
and especially that construction and texture of the Organs that are preparatory
to this Nutrition. The Nutribility of the Body depends upon a certain
temperament in the parts, soft and yielding, which makes them open to the Blood
and Juices in their Circulation and passage through them, and mixing
intimately, and universally, hold fast and retain many of their Particles; as
muddy Earth does the parts of the Water that runs into it and mixeth with it:
And when these Nutritious Particles retained are more than the Body spends,
that Body is in its growth; as when they are fewer, it is in its decay. And as
we compared the flesh and tender parts when they are young and in a growing
disposition, to a muddy soil, that opens to the Water, swells and incorporates
with it? so when they become hard and dry, they are like a sandy Earth, that
suffers the Water to glide through it, without incorporating or retaining many
of its parts; and the sooner they come to this temper, the sooner follows their
decay: For the same Causes that set limits to our Growth, set also limits to
our Life; and he that can resolve that Question, why the time of our Growth is
so short, will also be able to resolve the other in a good measure, why the
time of our Life is so short. In both cases, that which stops our progress is
external Nature, whose course, while it was even and steady, and the ambient
Air mild and balmy, preserved the Body much longer in a fresh and fit temper to
receive its full nourishment, and consequently gave larger bounds both to our
Growth and Life.

But the Third thing we mentioned is the most considerable, The decay of the
Organick parts; and especially of the Organs preparatory to Nutrition. This is
the point chiefly to be examined and explained, and therefore we will endeavor
to state it fully and distinctly. There are several functions in the Body of an
Animal, and several Organs for the conduct of them; and I am of opinion, that
all the Organs of the Body are in the nature of Springs, and that their action
is Tonical. The action of the Muscles is apparently so, and so is that of the
Heart and the Stomach; and as for those parts that make secretions only, as the
Glandules and Parenchymata, if they be any more than merely passive, as
Strainers, it is the Tone of the parts, when distended, that performs the
separation: And accordingly in all other active Organs, the action proceeds
from a Tone in the parts. And this seems to be easily proved, both as to our
Bodies and all other Bodies: for no matter that is not fluid* has any motion
or action in it, but in virtue of some Tone; If matter be fluid, its parts are
actually in motion, and consequently may impel or give motion to other Bodies;
but if it be solid or consistent, the parts are not separate or separately
moved from one another, and therefore cannot impel or give motion to any other,
but in virtue of their Tone; they having no other motion themselves.
Accordingly we see in Artificial Machines there are but two general sorts,
those that move by some fluid or volatile matter, as Water, Wind, Air, or some
active Spirit; And those which move by Springs, or by the Tonick disposition of
some part that gives motion to the rest: For as for such Machines as act by
weights, it is not the weight that is the active principle, but the Air or
Ether that impels it. It Is true, the Body of an Animal is a kind of mixed
Machine, and those Organs that are the Primary parts of it, partake of both
these principles; for there are Spirits and Liquors that do assist in the
motions of the Muscles, of the Heart and of the Stomach; but we have no
occasion to consider them at present, but only the Tone of the solid Organs.

This being observed in the first place, Wherein the force of our Organs
consists, we might here immediately subjoyn, how this force is weakened and
destroyed by the unequal course of Nature which now obtains, and consequently
our Life shortened; for the whole state and Economy of the Body depends upon
the force and action of these Organs. But to understand the business more
distinctly, it will be worth our time to examine, upon which of the Organs of
the Body Life depends more immediately, and the prolongation of it; that so
reducing our Inquiries into a narrower compass, we may manage them with more
ease and more certainty.

In the Body of Man there are several Compages, or setts of parts; some whereof
need not be considered in this question; There is that Systeme that serves for
sense and local-motion, which is commonly called the ANIMAL Compages; and that
which serves for generation, which is called the GENITAL. These have no
influence upon long Life, being parts nourished, not nourishing, and that are
fed from others as Rivers from their Fountain: Wherefore having laid these
aside, there remain two Compages more, the NATURAL and VITAL, which consist of
the Heart and Stomach, with their appendages. These are the Sources of Life,
and these are all that is absolutely necessary to the constitution of a Living
Creature; what parts we find more, few or many, of one sort or other, according
to the several kinds of Creatures, is accidental to our purpose; The form of an
Animal, as we are to consider it here, lies in this little compass, and what is
superadded is for some new purposes, besides that of mere Life, as for Sense,
Motion, Generation, and such like. As in a Watch, besides the Movement, which
is made to tell you the hour of the day, which constitutes a Watch, you may
have a fancy to have an Alarm added, or a Minute-motion, or that it should
tell you the day of the Month; and this sometimes will require a new Spring,
sometimes only new Wheels; however if you would examine the Nature of a Watch,
and upon what its motion, or, if I may so say, its Life depends, you must lay
aside those secondary Movements, and observe the main Spring, and the Wheels
that immediately depend upon that, for all the ret is accidental. So for the
Life of an Animal, which is a piece of Nature's Clockwork, if we would examine
upon what the duration of it depends, we must lay aside those additional parts
or Systems of parts, which are for other purposes, and consider only the first
principles and fountains of Life, and the causes of their natural and necessary
decay.

Having thus reduced our Inquiries to these two Organs, The Stomach and the
Heart, as the two Master-Springs in the Mechanism of an Animal, upon which all
the rest depend, let us now see what their action is, and how it will be more
or less durable and constant, according to the different states of External
Nature. We determined before, that the force and action of all Organs in the
Body was Tonical, and of none more remarkably than of these two, the Heart and
Stomach; for though it be not clearly determined what the particular structure
of these Organs, or of their Fibers is, that makes them Tonical, yet it is
manifest by their actions that they are so. In the Stomach, besides a peculiar
ferment that opens and dissolves the parts of the Meat, and melts them into a
fluor or pulp, the coats of it, or Fibers whereof they consist, have a motion
proper to them, proceeding from their Tone, whereby they close the Stomach, and
compress the Meat when it is received, and when turned into Chyle, press it
forwards, and squeeze it into the Intestines; and the Intestines also partaking
of the same motion, push and work it still forwards into those little Veins
that convey it toward the Heart. The Heart has the same general motions with
the Stomach, of opening and shutting, and has also a peculiar ferment which
rarifies the Blood that enters into it; and that Blood by the Spring of the
Heart, and the particular Texture of its Fibers, is thrown out again to make
its Circulation through the Body. This is, in short, the action of both these
Organs; and indeed the mystery of the Body of an Animal, and of its operations
and Economy, consists chiefly in Springs and Ferments; The one for the solid
parts, the other in the fluid.

But to apply this Fabric of the organick parts to our purpose, we may observe
and conclude, that whatsoever weakens the Tone or Spring of these two Organs,
which are the Bases of all Vitality, weaken the principle of Life, and shorten
the natural duration of it; And if of two Orders or Courses of Nature, the one
be favorable and easy to these Tonick principles in the Body, and the other
uneasy and prejudicial, that course of Nature will be attended with long
periods of Life, and this with short. And we have shown, that in the Primitive
Earth the course of Nature was even, steady and unchangeable, without either
different qualities of the Air, or unequal Seasons of the Year, which must
needs be more easy to these principles we speak of, and permit them to
continue longer in their strength and vigor, than they can possibly do under
all those changes of the Air, of the Atmosphere, and of the Heavens, which we
now suffer yearly, monthly, and daily. And though Sacred History had not
acquainted us with the Longaevity of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, nor profane
History with those of the Golden Age, I should have concluded, from the Theory
alone, and the contemplation of that state of Nature, that the forms of all
things were much more permanent in that World than in ours, and that the lives
of Men and all other Animals had longer periods.

I confess, I am of opinion, that it is this that makes not only these living
Springs or Tonick Organs of the Body, but all Artificial Springs also, though
made of the hardest Metal, decay so fast. The different pressure of the
Atmosphere, sometimes heavier, sometimes lighter, more rare or more dense,
moist or dry, and agitated with different degrees of motion, and in different
manners; this must needs operate upon that nicer contexture of Bodies, which
makes them Tonical or Elastick; altering the figure or minuteness of the pores,
and the strength and order of the Fibers upon which that propriety depends:
bending and unbending, closing and opening the parts. There is a subtle and
Ethereal Element that traverseth the pores of all Bodies, and when it is
straightened and pent up there, or stopped in its usual course and passage, its
motion is more quick and eager, as a Current of Water, when it is obstructed or
runs through a narrower Chanel; and that strife and those attempts which these
little active Particles make to get free, and follow the same tracts they did
before* do still press upon the parts of the Body that are changed, to redress
and reduce them to their first and Natural posture, and in this consists the
force of a Spring. Accordingly we may observe, that there is no Body that is or
will be Tonical or Elastick, if it be left to it self, and to that posture it
would take naturally; for then all the parts are at ease, and the subtle matter
moves freely and uninterruptedly within its pores; but if by distention, or by
compression, or by flexion, or any other way, the situation of the parts and
pores be so altered, that the Air sometimes, but for the most part that
subtiler Element, is uneasy and comprest too much, it causes that renitency
or tendency to restitution, which we call the Tone or Spring of a Body. Now as
this disposition of Bodies does far more easily perish than their Continuity,
so I think there is nothing that contributes more to its perishing (whether in
Natural or Artificial Springs) than the unequal action and different qualities
of the Ether, Air, and Atmosphere.

It will be objected to us, it may be, that in the beginning of the Chapter we
instanced in Artificial things, that would continue for ever, if they had but
the power of nourishing themselves, as Lamps, Mills, and such like; why then
may not Natural Machines that have that power, last for ever? The case is not
the same as to the Bodies of Animals, and the things there instanced in, for
those were springless Machines, that act only by some external cause, and not
in virtue of any Tone or interior temper of the parts, as our Bodies do; and
when that Tone or temper is destroyed, no nourishment can repair it. There is
something, I say, irreparable in the Tonical disposition of matter, which when
wholly lost, cannot be restored by Nutrition; Nutrition may answer to a bare
consumption of parts, but where the parts are to be preserved in such a
temperament, or in such a degree of humidity and dryness, warmth, rarity or
density, to make them capable of that nourishment, as well as of their other
operations, as Organs, (which is the case of our Bodies) there the Heavens, the
Air, and external Causes will change the qualities of the matter in spite of
all Nutrition; and the qualities of the matter being changed (in a course of
Nature, where the Cause cannot be taken away) that is a fault incorrigible, and
irreparable by the nourishment that follows, being hindered of its effect by
the indisposition or incapacity of the Recipient. And as they say, a fault in
the first concoction cannot be corrected in the second; so neither can a fault
in the Prerequisites to all the concoctions be corrected by any of them.

I know the Ancients made the decay and term of Life to depend rather upon the
humors of the Body, than the solid parts, and supposed an Humidum radicale and
a Calidum innatum, as they call them, a Radical Moisture and Congenit heat to
be in every Body from its birth and first formation; and as these decayed, life
decayed. But who is wiser for this account, what does this instruct us in? We
know there is heat and moisture in the Body, and you may call the one Radical,
and the other Innate if you please; this is but a sort of Cant, for we know no
more of the real Physical Causes of that effect we inquired into, than we did
before. What makes this heat and moisture fail, if the nourishment be good, and
all the Organs in their due strength and temper? The first and original failure
is not in the fluid, but in the solid parts, which if they continued the same,
the humors would do so too. Besides, What befell this Radical moisture and heat
at the Deluge, that it should decay so fast afterward, and last so long
before? There is a certain temper, no doubt, of the juices and humors of the
Body, which is more fit than any other to conserve the parts from dryness and
decay; but the cause of that dryness and decay, or other inhability in the
solid parts, whence is that, if not from external Nature? It Is thither we must
come at length in our search of the reasons of the Natural decay of our Bodies,
we follow the fate and Laws of that: and, I think, by those Causes, and in that
order, that we have already described and explained.

To conclude this Discourse, we may collect from it what judgment is to be made
of those Projectors of Immortality, or undertakers to make Men live to the Age
of Methusalah, if they will use their methods and medicines; There is but one
method for this, To put the Sun into his old course, or the Earth into its
first posture; there is no other secret to prolong life; Our Bodies will
sympathize with the general course of Nature, nothing can guard us from it, no
Elixir, no Specific, no Philosopher's-stone. But there are Enthusiasts in
Philosophy, as well as in Religion; Men that go by no principles, but their own
conceit and fancy, and by a Light within, which shines very uncertainly, and,
for the most part, leads them out of the way of truth. And so much for this
disquisition, concerning the Causes of Longaevity, or of the long and short
periods of Life in the different periods of the World.

That the Age of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs is to be computed by Solar or
common Years, not by Lunar or Months.

Having made this discourse of the unequal periods of life, only in reference
to the Ante diluvians and their famed Longaevity, lest we should seem to have
proceeded upon an ill-grounded and mistaken supposition, we are bound to take
notice of, and confute, That Opinion which makes the Years of the Ante-diluvian
Patriarchs to have been Lunar, not Solar, and so would bear us in hand, that
they lived only so many Months, as Scripture says they lived Years. Seeing
there is nothing could drive Men to this bold interpretation, but the
incredibility of the thing, as they fansied; They having no Notions or
Hypothesis whereby it could appear intelligible or possible to them; and seeing
we have taken away that stumblingstone, and showed it not only possible but
necessary, according to the constitution of that World, that the periods of
Life should be far longer than in this; by removing the ground or occasion of
their misinterpretation, we hope we have undeceived them, and let them see that
there is no need of that subterfuge, either to prevent an incongruity, or save
the credit of the Sacred Historian.

But as this opinion is inconsistent with Nature truly understood, so is it
also with common History; for besides what I have already mentioned in the
first Chapter of this Book, Josephus tells us, that the Historians of all
Nations, Lib. 1. Jew. Ant. Chap. 4.
both Greeks and Barbarians, give the same account of the first Inhabitants of
the Earth; Manetho, who writ the story of the Egyptians, Berosus, who writ the
Chaldaean History, and those Authors that have given us an account of the
Phoenician Antiquities; besides Molus and Hestiaeus, and Hieronymus the
Egyptian; and amongst the Greeks Hesiodus, Hecateus, Hellanicus, Acusilaus,
Ephorus and Nicolaus: We have the Suffrages of all these, and their common
consent, that in the first Ages of the World Men lived a thousand Years. Now we
cannot well suppose, that all these Historians meant Lunar Years, or that they
all conspired together to make and propagate a Fable.

Lastly, as Nature and Profane History do disown and confute this opinion, so
much more does Sacred History; not indeed in professed terms, for Moses does
not say that he uses Solar Years, but by several marks and observations, or
collateral Arguments, it may be clearly collected, that he does not use Lunar.
As first, because He distinguishes Months and Years in the History of the
Deluge, and of the life of Noah; for Genesis 7. 11. he says in the six hundredth
year of Noah's life, in the second month, etc. It cannot be imagined that in
the same verse and sentence these two terms of Year and Month should be so
confounded as to signify the same thing; and therefore Noah's Years were not
the same with Months, nor consequently those of the other Patriarchs, for we
have no reason to make any difference. Besides, what ground was there, or how
was it proper or pertinent to reckon, as Moses does there, first, second, third
Month, as so many going to a Year, if every one of them was a Year? And seeing
the Deluge begun in the six hundredth year of Noah's life, and in the second
Month, and ended in the six hundredth and first Year (Chap. 8. 13.) the first
or second Month, all that was betwixt these two terms, or all the duration of
the Deluge, made but one year in Noah's life, or it may be not so much; and we
know Moses reckons a great many Months in the duration of the Deluge; so as
this is a demonstration that Noah's years are not to be understood of Lunar.
And to imagine that his Years are to be understood one way, and those of his
fellow-Patriarchs another, would be an inaccountable fiction. This Argument
therefore extends to all the Ante-diluvians; And Noah's life will take in the
Post-diluvians too, for you see part of it runs amongst them, and ties together
the two Worlds: so that if we exclude Lunar years from his life, we exclude
them from all, those of his Fathers, and those of his Children.

Secondly, If Lunar years were understood in the Ages of the Ante-diluvian
Patriarchs, the interval betwixt the Creation and the Deluge would be too
short, and in many respects incongruous. There would be but 1656 months from
the beginning of the World to the Flood; which converted into common years,
make but 127 years, and five months, for that interval. This perverts all
Chronology, and besides, makes the number of people so small and inconsiderable
at the time of the Deluge, that destroying of the World then was not so much as
destroying of a Country Town would be now: For from one couple you cannot well
imagine there could arise above five hundred persons in so short a time; but if
there was a thousand, it is not so many as we have sometimes in a good Country
Village. And were the Floodgates of Heaven opened, and the great Abyss broken
up to destroy such an handful of people? and the Waters raised fifteen Cubits
above the highest Mountains throughout the face of the Earth, to drown a Parish
or two? is not this more incredible than our Age of the Patriarchs? Besides,
This short interval does not leave room for Ten Generations, which we find from
Adam to the Flood, nor allows the Patriarchs age enough at the time when they
are said to have got Children. One hundred twenty seven years for Ten
Generations is very strait; and of these you must take off forty six years for
one Generation only, or for Noah, for he lived six hundred years before the
Flood, and if they were Lunar, they would come however to forty six of our
years; so that for the other Nine Generations you would have but eighty one
years, that is, nine years a-piece; at which Age they must all be supposed to
have begun to get Children; which you cannot but think a very absurd
supposition. Thus it would be, if you divide the whole time equally amongst the
Nine. Generations, but if you consider some single instances, as they are set
down by Moses, it is still worse; for Mahaleel and his Grandchild Enoch are said
to have got Children at sixty five years of Age, which if you suppose months,
they were but five years old at that time; now I appeal to any one, Whether it
is more incredible that men should live to the age of nine hundred years, or
that they should beget Children at the age of five years.

You will say, it may be, it is true these inconveniences follow, if our Hebrew
Copies of the Old Testament be Authentic; but if the Greek Translation by the
Septuagint be of better Authority, as some would have it to be, that gives a
little relief in this case; for the Septuagint make the distance from the
Creation to the Flood six hundred years more than the Hebrew Text does, and so
give us a little more room for our Ten Generations: And not only so, but they
have so conveniently disposed those additional years, as to salve the other
inconvenience too, of the Patriarchs having Children so young; for what
Patriarchs are found to have got Children sooner than the rest, and so soon,
that upon a computation by Lunar years, they would be but mere Children
themselves at that time, to these, more years are added and placed opportunely,
before the time of their getting Children; so as one can scarce forbear to
think that it was done on purpose to cure that inconvenience, and to favor and
protect the computation by Lunar years. The thing looks so like an artifice,
and as done to serve a turn, that one cannot but have a less opinion of that
Chronology for it.

But not to enter upon that dispute at present, methinks they have not wrought
the cure effectually enough; for with these six hundred Lunar years added, the
sum will be only one hundred seventy three common years and odd months; and
from these deducting, as we did before, for Noah, forty six years, and for
Adam, or the first Generation, about eighteen, (for he was two hundred and
thirty years old, according to the Septuagint, when he begot Seth) there will
remain but one hundred and nine years for eight Generations; which will be
thirteen years a-piece and odd months; a low age to get children in, and to
hold for eight Generations together. Neither is the other inconvenience we
mentioned, well cured by the Septuagint account, namely, the small number of
people that would be in the World at the Deluge; for the Septuagint account, if
understood of Lunar years, adds but forty six common years to the Hebrew
account, and to the age of the World at the Deluge, in which time there could
be but a very small accession to the number of Mankind. So as both these
incongruities continue, though not in the same degree, and stand good in either
account, if it be understood of Lunar years.

Thirdly, It Is manifest from other Texts of Scripture, and from other
considerations, that our first Fathers lived very long, and considerably longer
than men have done since; whereas if their years be interpreted Lunar, there is
not one of them that lived to the age that Men do now; Methusalah himself did
not reach threescore and fifteen years, upon that interpretation; Which does
depress them not only below those that lived next to the Flood, but below all
following Generations to this day; and those first Ages of the World, which
were always celebrated for strength and vivacity, are made as weak and feeble
as the last dregs of Nature. We may observe, that after the Flood for some
time, till the pristine Crasis of the Body was broken by the new course of
Nature, they lived five, four, three, two hundred years, and the Life of Men
shortn'd by degrees; but before the Flood, when they lived longer, there was no
such decrease or gradual declension in their lives. For Noah, who was the last,
lived longer than Adam; and Methusalah who was last but two, lived the longest
of all: So that it was not simply their distance from the beginning of the
World that made them live a shorter time, but some change which happened in
Nature after such a period of time; namely at the Deluge, when the declension
begun. Let Us set down the Table of both states. A Table of the Ages of the
Ante-diluvian Fathers.
Years. Adam 930 Seth 912 Enos 905 Cainan 910 Mahaleel 895 Iared 962 Enoch 365
Methusalah 969 Lamech 777 Noah 950 A Table of the Ages of the Post-diluvian
Fathers, from Shem to Joseph.
Years. Shem 600 Arphaxad 438 Salah 433 Eber 464 Peleg 239 Reu 239 Serug 230
Nahor 148 Terah 205 Abraham 175 Isaac 180 Jacob 147 Joseph 110

From these Tables we see that Men's Lives were much longer before the Flood,
and next after it, than they are now; which also is confirmed undeniably by
Jacob's complaint of the shortness of his life, in comparison of his
Forefathers, when he had lived one hundred and thirty years, Genesis 47. 9. The
days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years; few and
evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the
days of the years of the life of my Fathers. There was then, it is certain,
long-lived men in the World before Jacob's time; when were they, before the
Flood or after? We say both, according as the Tables show it? But if you count
by Lunar years, there never were any, either before or after, and Jacob's
complaint was unjust and false; for he was the oldest Man in the World himself,
or at least there was none of his Forefathers that lived so long as he.

The Patrons of this opinion must needs find themselves at a loss, how or where
to break off the account of Lunar years in Sacred History, if they once admit
it. If they say, that way of counting must only be extended to the Flood, then
they make the Post-diluvian Fathers longer lived than the Ante-diluvian; did
the Flood bring in Longaevity? how could that be the cause of such an effect?
Besides, if they allow the Post-diluvians to have lived six hundred (common)
years, that being clearly beyond the standard of our lives, I should never
stick at two or three hundred years more for the first Ages of the World. If
they extend their Lunar account to the Post-diluvians too, they will still be
entangled in worse absurdities; for they must make their lives miserably short,
and their Age of getting Children altogether incongruous and impossible. Nahor,
for example, when he was but two years and three months old must have begot
Terah, Abraham's Father: And all the rest betwixt him and Shem must have had
Children before they were three years old: A pretty race of Pigmies. Then their
lives were proportionably short, for this Nahor lived but eleven years and six
months at this rate; and his Grandchild Abraham, who is said to have died in a
good old age, and full of years, (Genesis 25. 8.) was not fourteen years old. What
a ridiculous account this gives of Scripture-Chronology and Genealogies? But
you will say, it may be, these Lunar years are not to be carried so far as
Abraham neither; tell us then where you will stop, and why you stop in such a
place rather than another. If you once take in Lunar years, what ground is
there in the Text, or in the History, that you should change your way of
computing, at such a time, or in such a place? All our Ancient Chronology is
founded upon the Books of Moses, where the terms and periods of times are
expressed by years, and often by Genealogies, and the Lives of Men; now if these
years are sometimes to be interpreted Lunar, and sometimes Solar, without any
distinction made in the Text, what light or certain rule have we to go by? let
these Authors name to us the parts and places where, and only where, the Lunar
years are to be understood, and I dare undertake to show, that their method is
not only arbitrary, but absurd and incoherent.

To conclude this Discourse, we cannot but repeat what we have partly observed
before, How necessary it is to understand Nature, if we would rightly
understand those things in holy Writ that relate to the Natural World. For
without this knowledge, as we are apt to think some things consistent and
credible that are really impossible in Nature; so on the other hand, we are apt
to look upon other things as incredible and impossible that are really founded
in Nature. And seeing every one is willing so to expound Scripture, as it may
be to them good sense, and consistent with their Notions in other things, they
are forced many times to go against the easy and natural importance of the
words, and to invent other interpretations more compliant with their
principles, and, as they think, with the nature of things. We have, I say, a
great instance of this before us in the Scripture-History of the long lives of
the Ante-diluvians, where without any ground or shadow of ground in the
Narration, only to comply with a mistaken Philosophy, and their ignorance of
the Primitive World, many men would beat down the Scripture account of years
into months, and sink the lives of those first Fathers below the rate of the
worst of Ages. Whereby that great Monument, which Providence has left us of
the first World, and of its difference from the Second, would not only be
defaced, but wholly demolished. And all this sprung only from the seeming
incredibility of the thing; for they cannot show in any part of Scripture, New
or Old, that these Lunar years are made use of, or that any computation,
literal or Prophetical, proceeds upon them: Nor that there is any thing in the
Text or Context of that place, that argues or intimates any such account. We
have endeavored, upon this occasion, effectually to prevent this
misconstruction of Sacred History, for the future; both by showing the
incongruities that follow upon it, and also that there is no necessity from
Nature of any such shift or evasion, as that is: But rather on the contrary,
that we have just and necessary reasons to conclude, That as the Forms of all
things would be far more permanent and lasting in that Primitive state of the
Heavens and the Earth; so particularly the Lives of Men, and of other Animals.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Waters of the Primitive Earth: What the state of the
Regions of the Air was then, and how all Waters proceeded from them; how the
Rivers arose, what was their course, and how they ended. Some things in Sacred
Writ that confirm this Hydrography of the first Earth; especially the Origin of
the Rainbow.
HAving thus far cleared our way to Paradise, and given a rational account of
its general properties; before we proceed to discourse of the place of it,
there is one affair of moment, concerning this Primitive Earth, that must first
be stated and explained; and that is, How it was watered; from what causes, and
in what manner. How could Fountains rise, or Rivers flow in an Earth of that
Form and Nature? We have shut up the Sea with thick walls on every side, and
taken away all communication that could be 'twixt it and the External Earth;
and we have removed all the Hills and the Mountains where the Springs use to
rise, and whence the Rivers descend to water the face of the ground: And
lastly, we have left no issue for these Rivers, no Ocean to receive them, nor
any other place to disburthen themselves into: So that our Newfound World is
like to be a dry and barren Wilderness, and so far from being Paradisiacal,
that it would scarce be habitable.

I confess there was nothing in this whole Theory that gave such a stop to my
thoughts, as this part of it, concerning the Rivers of the first Earth; how
they rise, how they flowed, and how they ended: It seem^d at first, that we had
wiped away at once the Notion and whole Doctrine of Rivers, we had turned the
Earth so smooth, that there was not an Hill or rising for the head of a Spring,
nor any fall or descent for the course of a River: Besides, I had sucked in the
common opinion of Philosophers, That all Rivers rise from the Sea, and return
to it again; and both those passages, I see, were stopped up in that Earth. This
gave me occasion to reflect upon the modern and more solid opinion, concerning
the Origin of Fountains and Rivers, That they rise chiefly from Rains and
melted Snows, and not from the Sea alone; and as soon as I had demurred in that
particular, I see it was necessary to consider, and examine, how the Rains fell
in that first Earth, to understand what the state of their Waters and Rivers
would be.

And I had no sooner applied my self to that Inquiry, but I easily discovered,
that the Order of Nature in the Regions of the Air, would be then very
different from what it is now, and the Meteorology of that World was of another
sort from that of the present. The Air was always calm and equal, there could
be no violent Meteors there, nor any that proceeded from extremity of Cold; as
Ice, Snow or Hail; nor Thunder neither; for the Clouds could not be of a
quality and consistency fit for such an effect, either by falling one upon
another, or by their disruption. And as for Winds, they could not be either
impetuous or irregular in that Earth; seeing there were neither Mountains nor
any other inequalities to obstruct the course of the Vapors; nor any unequal
Seasons, or unequal action of the Sun, nor any contrary and struggling motions
of the Air: Nature was then a stranger to all those disorders. But as for
watery Meteors, or those that rise from watery Vapors more immediately, as
Dews, and Rains, there could not but be plenty of these, in some part or other
of that Earth; for the action of the Sun in raising Vapors, was very strong
and very constant, and the Earth was at first moist and soft, and according as
it grew more dry, the Rays of the Sun would pierce more deep into it, and reach
at length the great Abyss which lay underneath, and was an unexhausted
storehouse of new Vapors. But, it is true, the same heat which extracted these
Vapors so copiously would also hinder them from condensing into Clouds or
Rain, in the warmer parts of the Earth; and there being no Mountains at that
time, nor contrary Winds, nor any such causes to stop them or compress them, we
must consider which way they would tend, and what their course would be, and
whether they would any where meet with causes capable to change or condense
them; for upon this, it is manifest, would depend the Meteors of that Air, and
the Waters of that Earth.

And as the heat of the Sun was chiefly toward the middle parts of the Earth,
so the copious Vapors raised there were most rarefied and agitated; and being
once in the open Air, their course would be that way, where they found least
resistance to their motion; and that would certainly be toward the Poles, and
the colder Regions of the Earth. For East and West they would meet with as warm
an Air, and Vapors as much agitated as themselves, which therefore would not
yield to their progress that way; but toward the North and the South, they
would find a more easy passage, the Cold of those parts attracting them, as we
call it, that is, making way to their motion and dilatation without much
resistance, as Mountains and Cold places usually draw Vapors from the warmer.
So as the regular and constant course of the Vapors of that Earth, which were
raised chiefly about the Aequinoctial and middle parts of it, would be toward
the extreme parts of it, or toward the Poles.

And in consequence of this, when these Vapors were arrived in those cooler
Climats, and cooler parts of the Air, they would be condensed into Rain; for
wanting there the cause of their agitation, namely, the heat of the Sun, their
motion would soon begin to languish, and they would fall closer to one another
in the form of Water. For the difference betwixt Vapors and Water is only
gradual, and consists in this, that Vapors are in a flying motion, separate
and distant each from another; but the parts of Water are in a creeping motion,
close to one another; like a swarm of Bees, when they are settled; as Vapors
resemble the same Bees in the Air before they settle together. Now there is
nothing puts these Vapors upon the wing, or keeps them so, but a strong
agitation by Heat; and when that fails, as it must do in all colder places and
Regions, they necessarily return to Water again. Accordingly therefore we must
suppose they would soon, after they reached these cold Regions, be condensed,
and fall down in a continual Rain or Dew upon those parts of the Earth. I say a
continual Rain; for seeing the action of the Sun, which raised the Vapors, was
(at that time) always the same, and the state of the Air always alike, nor any
cross Winds, nor any thing else that could hinder the course of the Vapors
toward the Poles, nor their condensation when arrived there; it is manifest
there would be a constant Source or storehouse of Waters in those parts of the
Air, and in those parts of the Earth.

And this, I think, was the established order of Nature in that World, this was
the state of the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth; all their Waters came from
above, and that with a constant supply and circulation; for when the crowd of
Vapors, raised about the middle parts of the Earth, found vent and issue this
way toward the Poles, the passage being once opened, and the Chanel made, the
Current would be still continued without intermission; and as they were
dissolved and spent there, they would suck in more and more of those which
followed, and came in fresh streams from the hotter Climates. Aristotle, I
remember, in his Meteors, speaking of the course of the Vapors, says, there
is a River in the Air, constantly slowing betwixt the Heavens and the Earth,
made by the ascending and descending Vapors; This was more remarkably true in
the Primitive Earth, where the state of Nature was more constant and regular;
there was indeed an uninterrupted flood of Vapors rising in one Region of the
Earth, and flowing to another, and there continually distilling in Dews and
Rain, which made this Aereal River. As may be easily apprehended from this
Scheme of the Earth and Air.

Book. 2d. fig. 1st. p. 155.



Thus we have found a Source for Waters in the first Earth, which had no
communication with the Sea; and a Source that would never fail, neither
diminish or overflow, but feed the Earth with an equal supply throughout all
the parts of the year. But there is a second difficulty that appears at the end
of this, How these Waters would flow upon the even surface of the Earth, or
form themselves into Rivers; there being no descent or declivity for their
course. There were no Hills, nor Mountains, not high Lands in the first Earth,
and if these Rains fell in the frigid Zones, or toward the Poles, there they
would stand, in Lakes and Pools, having no descent one way more than another;
and so the rest of the Earth would be no better for them. This, I confess,
appeared as great a difficulty as the former, and would be unanswerable, for
ought I know, if that first Earth was not watered by Dews only (as I believe
some Worlds are) or had been exactly Spherical; but we noted before, that it
was Oval or Oblong; and in such a Figure, it is manifest, the Polar parts are
higher than the Aequinoctial, that is, more remote from the Center, as appears
to the eye in this Scheme. This affords us a present remedy, and sets us free
of the second difficulty; for by this means the Waters which fell about the
extreme parts of the Earth, would have a continual descent toward the middle
parts of it; this Figure gives them motion and distribution; and many Rivers
and Rivulets would flow from those Mother-Lakes to refresh the face of the
Earth, bending their course still toward the middle parts of it.

Book 2d. fig. 2d. p. 156.



It Is true, These derivations of the Waters at first would be very irregular
and diffuse, till the Channels were a little worn and hollowed; and though that
Earth was smooth and uniform, yet it is impossible, upon an inclining surface,
but that Waters should find a way of creeping downwards, as we see upon a
smooth Table, or a flagg'd Pavement, if there be the least inclination, Water
will flow from the higher to the lower parts of it, either directly, or winding
to and fro: So the smoothness of that Earth would be no hindrance to the course
of the Rivers, provided there was a general declivity in the site and libration
of it, as it is plain there was from the Poles toward the Equator. The Current
indeed would be easy and gentle all along, and if it chanced in some places to
rest or be stopped, it would spread it self into a pleasant Lake, till by fresh
supplies it had raised its Waters so high, as to overflow and break loose
again; then it would pursue its way, with many other Rivers its companions,
through all the temperate Climates, as far as the Torrid Zone.

But you will say, When they were got thither, what would become of them then?
How would they end or finish their course? This is the third difficulty,
concerning the ending of the Rivers in that Earth; what issue could they have
when they were come to the middle parts of it, whether it seems, they all
tended. There was no Sea to lose themselves in, as our Rivers do; nor any
Subterraneous passages to throw themselves into; how would they die, what would
be their fate at last? I answer, The greater Rivers, when they were come
toward those parts of the Earth, would be divided into many branches, or a
multitude of Rivulets; and those would be partly exhaled by the heat of the
Sun, and partly drunk up by the dry and sandy Earth. But how and in what manner
this came to pass, requires a little further Explication.

We must therefore observe in the first place, that those Rivers as they drew
nearer to the Aequinoctial parts, would find a less declivity or descent of
ground than in the beginning or former part of their course; that is evident
from the Oval Figure of the Earth, for near the middle parts of an Oval, the
Semidiameters, as I may call them, are very little shorter one than another;
and for this reason the Rivers, when they were advanced toward the middle
parts of the Earth, would begin to flow more slowly, and by that weakness of
their Current, suffer themselves easily to be divided and distracted into
several lesser streams and Rivulets; or else, having no force to wear a Chanel,
would lie shallow upon the ground like a plash of Water; and in both cases
their Waters would be much more exposed to the action of the Sun, than if they
had kept together in a deeper Chanel, as they were before.

Secondly, We must observe, that seeing these Waters could not reach to the
middle of the Torrid Zone, for want of descent; that part of the Earth having
the Sun always perpendicular over it, and being refresht by no Rivers, would
become extremely dry and parched, and be converted at length into a kind of
sandy Desert; so as all the Waters that were carried thus far, and were not
exhaled and consumed by the Sun, would be sucked up* as in a Sponge* by these
Sands of the Torrid Zone. This was the common Grave wherein the Rivers of the
first Earth were buried; and this is nothing but what happens still in several
parts of the present Earth, especially in Africa, where many Rivers never flow
into the Sea, but expire after the same manner as these did, drunk up by the
Sun and the Sands. And one arm of Euphrates dies, as I remember, amongst the
Sands of Arabia, after the manner of the Rivers of the first Earth.

Thus we have conquered the greatest difficulty, in my apprehension, in this
whole Theory, To find out the state of the Rivers in the Primitive and
Ante-diluvian Earth, their origin, course, and period. We have been forced to
win our ground by Inches, and have divided the difficulty into parts, that we
might encounter them single with more ease. The Rivers of that Earth, you see,
were in most respects different, and in some contrary to ours; and if you could
turn our Rivers backwards, to run from the Sea toward their Fountain-heads,
they would more resemble the course of those Ante-diluvian Rivers; for they
were greatest at their first setting out, and the Current afterward, when it
was more weak, and the Chanel more shallow, was divided into many branches, and
little Rivers; like the Arteries in our Body, that carry the Blood, they are
greatest at first, and the further they go from the Heart, their Source, the
less they grow and divide into a multitude of little branches, which lose
themselves insensibly in the habit of the flesh, as these little Floods did in
the Sands of the Earth.

Book. 2d. fig. 3. p. 158.



Because it pleases more, and makes a greater impression upon us, to see
things represented to the Eye, than to read their description in words, we have
ventured to give a model of the Primaeval Earth, with its Zones or greater
Climates, and the general order and tracts of its Rivers: Not that we believe
things to have been in the very same form as here exhibited, but this may serve
as a general Idea of that Earth, which may be wrought into more exactness,
according as we are able to enlarge or correct our thoughts hereafter. And as
the Zones here represented resemble the Belts or Eusciae of Jupiter, so we
suppose them to proceed from like causes, if that Planet be in an Ante-diluvian
state, as the Earth we here represent. As for the Polar parts in that first
Earth, I can say very little of them, they would make a Scene by themselves,
and a very particular one; The Sun would be perpetually in their Horizon, which
makes me think the Rains would not fall so much there as in the other parts of
the Frigid Zones, where accordingly we have made their chief seat and
receptacle. That they flowed from thence in such a like manner as is hero
represented, we have already proved; And sometimes in their passage swelling
into Lakes, and toward the end of their course parting into several streams
and branches, they would water those parts of the Earth like a Garden.

We have before compared the branchings of these Rivers toward the end of
their course to the ramifications of the Arteries in the Body, when they are
far from the Heart near the extreme parts; and some, it may be, looking upon
this Scheme, would carry the comparison further, and suppose, that as in the
Body the Blood is not lost in the habit of the flesh, but strained thorough it,
and taken up again by the little branches of the Veins; so in that Earth the
Waters were not lost in those Sands of the Torrid Zone, but strained or
percolated thorough them, and received into the Channels of the other
Hemisphere. This indeed would in some measure answer the Notion which several
of the Ancient Fathers make use of, that the Rivers of Paradise were trajected
out of the other Hemisphere into this, by Subterraneous passages. But, I
confess, I could never see it possible, how such a trajection could be made,
nor how they could have any motion, being arrived in another Hemisphere; and
therefore I am apt to believe, that doctrine amongst the Ancients arose from an
intanglement in their principles; They supposed generally, that Paradise was in
the other Hemisphere, as we shall have occasion to show hereafter; and yet they
believed that Tigris, Euphrates, Nile, and Gunges were the Rivers of Paradise,
or came out of it; and these two opinions they could not reconcile, or make
out, but by supposing that these four Rivers had their Fountain-heads in the
other Hemisphere, and by some wonderful trajection broke out again here. This
was the expedient they found out to make their opinions consistent one with
another; but this is a method to me altogether unconceivable; and, for my part,
I do not love to be led our of my depth, leaning only upon Antiquity. How there
could be any such communication, either above ground, or underground; betwixt
the two Hemispheres does not appear, and therefore we must still suppose the
Torrid Zone to have been the Barrier betwixt them, which nothing could pass
either way.

We have now examined and determined the state of the Air, and of the Waters in
the Primitive Earth, by the light and consequences of reason; and we must not
wonder to find them different from the present order of Nature; what things are
said of them, or relating to them in Holy Writ do testify or imply as much;
and it will be worth our time to make some reflection upon those passages for
our further confirmation. Moses tells us, that the Rainbow was set in the
Clouds after the Deluge; those Heavens then that never had a Rainbow before,
were certainly of a constitution very different from ours. And S. Peter does
formally and expressly tell us, 2 Epist. Chap. 3. 5.
that the Old Heavens, or the Ante-diluvian Heavens had a different
constitution from ours, and particularly, that they were composed or
constituted of Water; which Philosophy of the Apostle's may be easily
understood, if we attend to two things, first, that the Heavens he speaks of,
were not the Starry Heavens, but the Aereal Heavens, or the Regions of our Air,
where the Meteors are; Secondly, That there were no Meteors in those Regions,
or in those Heavens, till the Deluge, but watery Meteors, and therefore, he
says, they consisted of Water. And this shows the foundation upon which that
description is made, how coherently the Apostle argues, and answers the
objection there proposed: how justly also he distinguishes the first Heavens
from the present Heavens, or rather opposes them one to another; because as
those were constituted of Water and watery Meteors only, so the present
Heavens, he says, have treasures of Fire, fiery Exhalations and Meteors, and a
disposition to become the Executioners of the Divine wrath and decrees in the
final Conflagration of the Earth.

This minds me also of the Celestial Waters, or the Waters above the
Firmaments, which Scripture sometimes mentions, and which, methinks, cannot be
explained so fitly and emphatically upon any supposition as this of ours. Those
who place them above the Starry Heavens, seem neither to understand Astronomy
nor Philosophy; and, on the other hand, if nothing be understood by them, but
the Clouds and the middle Region of the Air, as it is at present, methinks that
was no such eminent and remarkable thing, as to deserve a particular
commemoration by Moses in his six days work; but if we understand them, not as
they are now, but as they were then, the only Source of Waters, or the only
Source of Waters upon that Earth, (for they had not one drop of Water but what
was Celestial,) this gives it a new force and Emphasis: Besides, the whole
middle Region having no other sort of Meteors but them, That made it still the
greater singularity, and more worthy commemoration. As for the Rivers of
Paradise, there is nothing said concerning their Source, or their issue, that
is either contrary to this, or that is not agreeable to the general account we
have given of the Waters and Rivers of the first Earth. They are not said to
rise from any Mountain, but from a great River, or a kind of Lake in Eden,
according to the custom of the Rivers of that Earth: And as for their end and
issue, Moses does not say, that they disburthen'd themselves into this or that
Sea, as they usually do in the description of great Rivers, but rather implies
that they spent themselves in compassing and watering certain Countries, which
falls in again very easily with our Hypothesis. But I say this rather to comply
with the opinions of others than of my own judgment. For I think that
suggestion about the Supercoelestial Waters made by Moses, was not so much
according to the strict nature and speciality of Causes, as for the ease and
profit of the People, in their belief and acknowledgment of Providence for so
great a benefit, by what Causes soever it was brought to pass.

But to return to the Rainbow, which we mentioned before, and is not to be past
over so slightly. This we say, is a Creature of the modern World, and was not
seen nor known before the Flood. Moses (Genesis 9. 12, 13.) plainly intimates as
much, or rather directly affirms it; for he says. The Bow was set in the Clouds
after the Deluge, as a confirmation of the promise or Covenant which God made
with Noah, that he would drown the World no more with Water. And how could it
be a sign of this, or given as a pledge and confirmation of such a promise, if
it was in the Clouds before, and with no regard to this promise? and stood
there, it may be, when the World was going to be drowned. This would have been
but cold comfort to Noah, to have had such a pledge of the Divine Veracity.
You Will say, it may be, that it was not a sign or pledge that signified
naturally, but voluntarily only, and by Divine Institution; I am of opinion, I
confess, that it signified naturally, and by connection with the effect,
importing thus much, that the state of Nature was changed from what it was
before, and so changed, that the Earth was no more in a condition to perish by
Water. But however, let us grant that it signified only by institution; to make
it significant in this sense, it must be something new, otherwise it could not
signify any new thing, or be the confirmation of a new promise. If God
Almighty had said to Noah, I make a promise to you, and to all living
Creatures, that the World shall never be destroyed by Water again, and for
confirmation of this, Behold, I set the Sun in the firmament: Would this have
been any strengthening of Noah's faith, or any satisfaction to his mind? Why,
says Noah, the Sun was in the Firmament when the Deluge came, and was a
spectator of that sad Tragedy; why may it not be so again? what sign or
assurance is this against a second Deluge? when God gives a sign in the
Heavens, or on the Earth, of any Prophecy or Promise to be fulfilled, it must
be by something new, or by some change wrought in Nature; whereby God does
testify to us, that he is able and willing to stand to his promise. Isa. 7.
God says to Ahaz, Ask a sign of the Lord; Ask it either in the depth, or in
the height above: And when Ahaz would ask no sign, God gives one unaskt,
Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. So when Zachary was promised a
Son, he asks for a sign, Luke 1.
Whereby shall I know this? for I am old, and my Wife well stricken in years;
and the sign given him was, that he became dumb, and continued so till the
promise was fulfilled. Accordingly, when Abraham asked a sign whereby he might
be assured of God's promise that his seed should inherit the Land of Canaan,
Genesis 15. 8. It Is said (ver. 17.) When the Sun went down and it was dark, behold
a smoking furnace and a burning Lamp passed betwixt the pieces of the beasts
that he had cut asunder. So in other instances of signs given in external
Nature, Isa. 38.
as the sign given to King Hezekiah for his recovery, and to Gideon for his
victory; to confirm the promise made to Hezekiah, Judge. 7.
the shadow went back ten degrees in Ahaz. Dial: And for Gideon, his Fleece was
wet, and all the ground about it dry; and then to change the trial, it was dry
and all the ground about it wet. These were all signs very proper, significant,
and satisfactory, having something surprising and extraordinary, yet these were
signs by institution only; and to be such they must have something new and
strange, as a mark of the hand of God, otherwise they can have no force or
significancy. Accordingly we see Moses himself in another place speaks this
very sense, when in the Mutiny or Rebellion of Corah and Dathan, he speaks thus
to the People, If these men die the common death of men, then the Lord has not
sent me. But if the Lord make a new thing, and the Earth open her moath and
swallow them up, etc. then you shall understand that these men have provoked
the Lord, Nunr. 26. 29, 30. So in the case of Noah, if God created a new
creature (when are Moses's words in the forecited place) the sign ws effectual.
But where every thing continues to be as it was before, and the face of Nature,
in all its parts, the very same, it cannot signify any thing new, nor any new
intention in the Author of Nature; and consequently, cannot be a sign or
pledge, a token or assurance of the accomplishment of any new Covenant or
promise made by him.

This, methinks, is plain to common Sense, and to every Man's Reason; but
because it is a thing of importance, to prove that there was no Rainbow before
the Flood, and will confirm a considerable part of this Theory, by discovering
what the state of the Air was in the Old World, give me leave to argue it a
little further, and to remove some prejudices that may keep others from
assenting to clear Reason. I know it is usually said, that signs, like words,
signify any thing by institution, or may be appl^^d to any thing by the will
of the Imposer; as hanging out a white Flag is calling for mercy, a Bush at the
door, a sign of Wine to be fold, and such like. But these are instances nothing
to our purpose, these are signs of something present, and that signify only by
use and repeated experience; we are speaking of signs of another nature, given
in confirmation of a promise, or threatening, or prophecy, and given with design
to cure our unbelief, or to excite and beget in us Faith in God, in the
Prophet, or in the Promiser, such signs, I say, when they are wrought in
external Nature, must be some new Appearance, and must thereby induce us to
believe the effect, or more to believe it, than if there had been no sign, but
only the affirmation of the Promiser; for otherwise the pretended sign is a
mere Cipher and superfluity. But a thing that obtained before, and in the same
manner (even when that came to pass, which we are now promised shall not come
to pass again) signifies no more, than if there had been no sign at all: it can
neither signify another course in Nature, nor another purpose in God; and
therefore is perfectly insignificant. Some instance in the Sacraments, Jewish
or Christian, and make them signs in such a sense as the Rainbow is: But those
are rather Symbolical representations or commemorations; and some of them,
marks of distinction and consecration of our selves to God in such a Religion;
They were also new, and very particular when first instituted; but all such
instances fall short and do not reach the case before us; we are speaking of
signs confirmatory of a promise; when there is something affirmed de futuro,
and to give us a further argument of the certainty of it, and of the power and
veracity of the Promiser, a sign is given: This we say, must indispensably be
something new, otherwise it cannot have the nature, virtue, and influence of a
sign.

We have seen how incongruous it would be to admit that the Rainbow appeared
before the Deluge, and how dead a sign that would make it, how forc^d,
fruitless and ineffectual, as to the promise it was to confirm; Let us now on
the other hand suppose, that it first appeared to the Inhabitants of the Earth
after the Deluge, How proper, and how apposite a sign would this be for
Providence to pitch upon, to confirm the Promise made to Noah and his
posterity, That the World should be no more destroyed by Water? It had a secret
connection with the effect it self, and was so far a natural sign; but however
appearing first after the Deluge, and in a watery Cloud, there was, methinks, a
great easiness, and propriety of application for such a purpose. And if we
suppose, that while God Almighty was declaring his promise to Noah, and the
sign of it, there appeared at the same time in the Clouds a fair Rainbow, that
mavelous and beautiful Meteor, which Noah had never seen before; it could not
but make a most lively impression upon him, quickening his Faith, and giving him
comfort and assurance, that God would be steadfast to his promise.

Nor ought we to wonder, that Interpreters have commonly gone the other way,
and supposed that the Rainbow was before the Flood; This, I say, was no wonder
in them, for they had no Hypothesis that could answer to any other
interpretation; And in the interpretation of the Texts of Scripture that
concern natural things, they commonly bring them down to their own Philosophy
and Notions: 2 Epist. c. 3. 5.
As we have a great instance in that discourse of S. Peter's, concerning the
Deluge, and the Ante-diluvian Heavens, and Earth, which, for want of a Theory,
they have been scarce able to make sense of; for they have forc'dly applied to
the present Earth, or the present form of the Earth, what plainly respected
another. A like instance we have in the Mosaical Abyss, or Tehom-Rabba, by
whose disruption the Deluge was made; this they knew not well what to make of,
and so have generally interpreted it of the Sea, or of our Subterraneous
Waters; without any propriety, either as to the word, or as to the sense. A
third instance is this of the Rainbow, where their Philosophy has misguided
them again; for to give them their due, they do not allege, nor pretend to
allege, any thing from the Text, that should make them interpret thus, or
think the Rainbow was before the Flood; but they pretend to go by certain
reasons, as that the Clouds were before the Flood, therefore the Rainbow; and
if the Rainbow was not before the Flood, then all things were not made within
the six days Creation: To whom these reasons are convictive, they must be led
into the same belief with them, but not by any thing in the Text, nor in the
true Theory, at least if ours be so; for by that you see that the Vapors were
never condensed into drops, nor into Rain in the temperate and inhabited
Climates of that Earth, and consequently there could never be the production or
appearance of this Bow in the Clouds. Thus much concerning the Rainbow.

To recollect our selves, and conclude this Chapter, and the whole disquisition
concerning the Waters of the Primitive Earth; we seem to have so well satisfied
the difficulties proposed in the beginning of the Chapter, that they have
rather given us an advantage; a better discovery, and such a new prospect of
that Earth, as makes it not only habitable, but more fit to be Paradisical. The
pleasantness of the site of Paradise is made to consist chiefly in two things,
its Waters, and its Trees, (Genesis 2. and Chap. 13. 10. Ezekiel. 31. 8.) and
considering the richness of that first soil in the Primitive Earth, it could
not but abound in Trees, as it did in Rivers and Rivulets; and be wooded like a
Grove, uss it was watered like a Garden, in the temperate Climates of it; so as
it would not be, methinks, so difficult to find one Paradise there, as not to
find more than one.

CHAP. VI. A Recollection and Review of what has been said concerning the
Primitive Earth; with a more full Survey of the State of the first World,
Natural and Civil, and the comparison of it with the present World.
WE have now, in a good measure, finished our description of the first and
Ante-diluvian Earth; And as Travelers, when they see strange Countries, make
it part of their pleasure and improvement, to compare them with their own, to
observe the differences, and wherein they excel, or come short of one another:
So it will not be unpleasant, nor unuseful, it may be, having made a discovery,
not of a new Country, but of a new World, and traveled it over in our
thoughts and fancy, now to sit down and compare it with our own: and 'twill be
no hard task, from the general differences which we have taken notice of
already, to observe what lesser would arise, and what the whole face of Nature
would be.

It Is also one fruit of traveling, that by seeing variety of places and
people, of humors, fashions, and forms of living, it frees us, by degrees,
from that pedantry and littleness of Spirit, whereby we are apt to censure
every thing for absurd and ridiculous, that is not according to our own way,
and the mode of our own Country; But if instead of crossing the Seas, we could
waft our selves over to our neighboring Planets, we should meet with such
varieties there, both in Nature and Mankind, as would very much enlarge our
thoughts and Souls, and help to cure those diseases of little minds, that make
them troublesome to others, as well as uneasy to themselves.

But seeing our heavy Bodies are not made for such Voyages, the best and
greatest thing we can do in this kind, is to make a Survey and reflection upon
the Ante-diluvian Earth, which in some sense was another World from this, and
it may be, as different as some two Planets are from one another. We have
declared already the general grounds upon which we must proceed, and must now
trace the consequences of them, and drive them down into particulars, which
will show us in most things, wherein that Earth, or that World, differed from
the present. The form of that Earth, and its situation to the Sun, were two of
its most fundamental differences from ours; As to the form of it, 'twas all one
smooth Continent, one continued surface of Earth, without any Sea, any
Mountains, or Rocks; any Holes, Dens or Caverns: And the situation of it to the
Sun was such as made a perpetual Aequinox. These two joined together, lay the
foundation of a new Astronomy, Meteorology, Hydrography and Geography; such as
were proper and peculiar to that World. The Earth by this means having its Axis
parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptic, the Heavens would appear in another
posture: and their diurnal motion, which is imputed to the Primum Mobile, and
supposed to be upon the Poles of the Equator, would then be upon the same
Poles with the second and Periodical motions of the Orbs and Planets; namely,
upon the Poles of the Ecliptic; by which means the Phenomenon of the Heavens
would be more simple and regular, and much of that intangledness and
perplexity, which we find now in Astronomy, would be taken away. Whether the
Sun and Moon would suffer any Eclipses then, cannot well be determined, unless
one knew what the course of the Moon was at that time, or whether she was then
come into our neighborhood: Her presence seems to have been less needful when
there were no long Winter-nights, nor the great Pool of the Sea to move or
govern.

As for the Regions of the Air and the Meteors, we have in the preceding
Chapter set down what the state of them would be, and in how much a better
order, and more peaceable, that Kingdom was, till the Earth was broken and
displaced, and the course of Nature changed: Nothing violent, nothing
frightful, nothing troublesome or incommodious to Mankind, came from above, but
the countenance of the Heavens was always smooth and serene. I have often
thought it a very desirable piece of power, if a Man could but command a fair
day, when he had occasion for it, for himself, or for his friends; it is more
than the greatest Prince or Potentate upon Earth can do; yet they never wanted
one in that World, nor ever see a foul one. Besides, they had constant breezes
from the motion of the Earth, and the course of the Vapors, which cooled the
open Plains, and made the weather temperate, as well as fair. But we have
spoken enough in other places upon this subject of the Air and the Heavens, Let
us now descend to the Earth.

The Earth was divided into two Hemispheres, separated by the Torrid Zone,
which at that time was uninhabitable, and utterly unpassable; so as the two
Hemispheres made two distinct Worlds, which, so far as we can judge, had no
manner of commerce or communication one with another. The Southern Hemisphere
the Ancients called Antichthon, the Opposite Earth, or the Other World. And
this name and notion remained long after the reason of it had c^ast. Just as
the Torrid Zone was generally accounted uninhabitable by the Ancients, even in
their time, because it really had been so once, and the Tradition remained
uncorrected, when the causes were taken away; namely, when the Earth had
changed its posture to the Sun after the Deluge.

This may be looked upon as the first division of that Primaval Earth, into two
Hemispheres, naturally severed and disunited: But it was also divided into five
Zones, two Frigid, two Temperate, and the Torrid betwixt them. And this
distinction of the Globe into ^^ve Zones, I think, did properly belong to that
Original Earth, and Primitive Geography, and improperly, and by translation
only, to the present. For all the Zones of our Earth are habitable, and their
distinctions are in a manner but imaginary, not fixed by Nature; whereas in that
Earth where the Rivers failed, and the Regions became uninhabitable, by reason
of dryness and heat, there begun the Torrid Zone; and where the Regions became
uninhabitable by reason of cold and moisture, there begun the Frigid Zone; and
these being determined, they became bounds on either side to the Temperate. But
all this was altered when the posture of the Earth was changed; and changed for
that very purpose, as some of the Ancients have said, That the uninhabitable
parts of the Earth might become habitable. Yet though there was so much of the
first Earth uninhabitable, there remained as much to be inhabited as we have
now; for the Sea, since the breaking up of the Abyss, has taken away half of
the Earth from us, a great part whereof was to them good Land. Besides, We are
not to suppose, that the Torrid Zone was of that extent we make it now, twenty
three degrees and more on either side of the Equator; these bounds are set
only by the Tropicks, and the Tropicks by the obliquity of the course of the
Sun, or of the posture of the Earth, which was not in that World. Where the
Rivers stopped, there the Torrid Zone would begin, but the Sun was directly
perpendicular to no part of it but the middle.

How the Rivers flowed in the first Earth we have before explained
sufficiently, and what parts the Rivers did not reach, were turned into Sands
and Deserts by the heat of the Sun; for I cannot easily imagine, that the Sandy
Deserts of the Earth were made so at first, immediately and from the beginning
of the World; from what causes should that be, and to what purpose in that age?
But in those Tracts of the Earth that were not refresht with Rivers and
moisture, which cement the parts, the ground would moulder and crumble into
little pieces, and then those pieces by the heat of the Sun were baked into
Stone. And this would come to pass chiefly in the hot and scorched Regions of
the Earth, though it might happen sometimes where there was not that extremity
of heat, if by any chance a place wanted Rivers and Water to keep the Earth in
due temper; but those Sands would not be so early or ancient as the other. As
for greater loose Stones, and rough Pebbles, there were none in that Earth;
Deucalion and Pyrrha when the Deluge was over, found new made Stones to cast
behind their backs; the bones of their mother Earth, which then were broken in
pieces, in that great ruin.

As for Plants and Trees, we cannot imagine but that they must needs abound in
the Primitive Earth, seeing it was so well watered, and had a soil so fruitful;
(...)
A new unlabored soil, replenistht with the Seeds of all Vegetables; and a
warm Sun that would call upon Nature early for her First Fruits, to be offered
up at the beginning of her course. Nature (...) a wild luxuriancy at first,
which humane industry by degrees gave form and order to; The Waters flowed with
a constant and gentle Current* and were easily led which way the Inhabitants
had a mind, for their use, or for their pleasure; and shady Trees, which grow
best in most and warm Countries, graced the Banks of their Rivers or Canals.
But that which was the beauty and crown of all, was their perpetual Spring* the
Fields always green, the Flowers always fresh, and the Trees always covered,
with Leaves and Fruit: But we have occasionally spoken of these things in
several places, and may do again hereafter, and therefore need not enlarge upon
them here.

As for Subterraneous things, Metals and Minerals, I believe they had none in
the first Earth; and the happier they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor courser Metals.
The use of these is either imaginary, or in such works, as, by the constitution
of their World, they had little occasion for. And Minerals are either for
Medicine* which they had no need of further than Herbs; or for Materials to
certain Arts, which were not then in use, or were supplied by other ways. These
Subterraneous things, Metals and metallic Minerals, are Factitious, not
Original bodies, coaeval with the Earth, but are made in process of time, after
long preparations and concoctions, (...)
by the action of the Sun within the bowels of the Earth. And if the Stamina or
principles of them ris^e from the lower Regions that lie under the Abyss, as I
am apt to think they do, (...) does not seem probable, that they could be drawn
through such a mass of Waters, or that the heat of the Sun could on a sudden
penetrate so deep, and be able to loosen them, and raise them into the
exterior Earth. And as the first Age of the World was called Golden, though it
knew not what Gold was; so the following Ages had their names from several
Metals, which lay then asleep in the dark and deep womb of Nature, and see not
the Sun till many Years and Ages afterward.

Having run through the several Regions of Nature, from top to bottom, from the
Heavens to the lower parts of the Earth, and made some observations upon their
order in the Ante-diluvian World; Let us now look upon Man and other living
Creatures, that make the Superior and Animate part of Nature. We have
observed, and sufficiently spoken to that difference betwixt the Men of the old
World, and those of the present, in point of Longaevity, and given the reasons
of it; but we must not imagine, that this long life was peculiar to Man, all
other Animals had their share of it, and were in their proportion longer-liv'd
than they are now. Nay, not only Animals, but also Vegetables, and the forms of
all living things were far more permanent; The Trees of the Field and of the
Forest, in all probability, out-lasted the lives of Men; and I do not know but
the first Groves of Pines and Cedars that grew out of the Earth, Ezekiel. 31. 8.
or that were planted in the Garden of God, might be standing when the Deluge
came, and see, from first to last, the entire course and period of a World.

We might add here, Civ. Dei lib^ 15. c. 9.
with S. Austin, another observation, both concerning Men and other living
Creatures in the first World, that They were greater, as well as longer-liv'd,
than they are at present. This seems to be a very reasonable conjecture, for
the state of every thing that has life, is divided into the time of its
growth, its consistency, and its decay; and when the whole duration is longer,
every one of these parts, though not always in like proportions, will be
longer. We must suppose then, that the growth both in Men and other Animals
lasted longer in that World than it does now, and consequently carried their
Bodies both to a greater height and bulk. And in like manner, their Trees would
be both taller, and every way bigger than ours; neither were they in any danger
there to be blown down by Winds and Storms, or struck with Thunder, though they
had been as high as the Ae^yptian Pyramids; and whatsoever their height was, if
they had Roots and Trunks proportionable, and were straight and well poised,
they would stand firm and with a greater majesty. The Fowls of Heaven making
their Nests in their Boughs, and under their shadow the Beasts of the Field
bringing forth their Young. When things are fairly possible in their causes,
and possible in several degrees, higher or lower, it is weakness of Spirit in
us, to think there is nothing in Nature, but in that one way, or in that one
degree, that we are used to. And whosoever believes those accounts given us,
both by the Ancients Plin. l. 7. c. 2. Strab. l. 17.
and Moderns Hort. Malabor. vol. 3.
, of the Indian Trees, will not think it strange that those of the first Earth,
should much exceed any that we now see in this World. ^That Allegorical
description of the glory of Assyria in Ezekiel Chap. 31. by allusion to Trees,
and particularly to the Trees of Paradise, was chiefly for the greatness and
stateliness of them; and there is all fairness of reason to believe, that in
that first Earth, both the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field, and
the Trees and their Fruit, were all, in their several kinds more large and
goodly than Nature produces any now.

So much in short concerning the Natural World, Inanimate or Animate; We should
now take a prospect of the Moral World of that time, or of the Civil and
Artificial World; what the Order and Economy of these was, what the manner of
living, and how the Scenes of humane life were different from ours at present.
The Ancients, especially the Poets, in their description of the Golden Age,
exhibit to us an Order of things, and a Form of Life, very remote from any
thing we see in our days; but they are not to be trusted in all particulars,
many times they exaggerate matters on purpose, that they may seem more strange,
or more great, and by that means move and please us more. A Moral or
Philosophic History of the World well writ, would certainly be a very useful
work, to observe and relate how the Scenes of Humane Life have changed in
several Ages, the modes and Forms of living, in what simplicity Men begun at
first, and by what degrees they came out of that way, by luxury, ambition,
improvement, or changes in Nature; then what new forms and modifications were
superadded by the invention of Arts, what by Religion, what by Superstition.
This would be a view of things more instructive, and more satisfactory,
factory, than to know what Kings Reigned in such an Age, and what Battles were
fought; which common History teaches* and teaches little more. Such affairs
are but the little under plots in the Tragi comedy of the World; the main
design is of another nature, and of far greater extent and consequence. But to
return to the subject.

As the Animate World depends upon the Inanimate, so the Civil World depends
upon them both, and takes its measures from them* Nature is the foundation
still, and the affairs of Mankind are a superstructure that will be always
proportioned to it. Therefore we must look back upon the model or picture of
their Natural World, which we have drawn before, to make our conjectures or
judgment of the Civil and Artificial that were to accompany it. We observed
from their perpetual Aequinox, and the smoothness of the Earth, that the Air
would be always calm, and the Heavens fair, no cold or violent Winds, Rains, or
Storms, no extremity of weather in any kind, and therefore they would need
little protection from the injuries of the Air in that state; whereas now one
great part of the affairs of life, is to preserve our selves from those
inconveniences, by building and clothing. How many Hands, and how many Trades
are employed about these two things, which then were in a manner needless, or
at least in such plainness and simplicity, that every man might be his own
workman. Tents and Bowers would keep them from all incommodities of the Air and
weather, better than Stonewalls, and strong Roofs defend ^s now; and Men are
apt to take the easiest ways of living, till necessity or vice put them upon
others that are more laborious, and more artificial. We also observed and
proved, that they had no Sea in the Primitive and Ante-diluvian World, which
makes a vast difference 'twixt us and them; This takes up half of our Globe,
and a good part of Mankind is busied with Sea-affairs and Navigation. They had
little need of Merchandising then. Nature supplied them at home with all
necessaries, which were few, and they were not so greedy of superfluities as we
are. We may add to these what concerned their Food and Diet; Antiquity does
generally suppose that Men were not Carnivo^us in those Ages of the World, or
did not feed upon Flesh, but only upon Fruit and Herbs. And this seems to be
plainly confirmed by Scripture; for after the Deluge God Almighty gives Noah
and his Posterity a License to eat Flesh, (Genesis 9. 2, 3.) Every moving thing
that lives shall be meat for you. Whereas before in the new-made Earth God had
prescribed them Herbs and Fruit for their Diet, Genesis 1. 29. Behold, I have
given you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth; and
every Tree, in the which is the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, to you it shall
be for meat. and of this Natural Diet they would be provided to their hands,
without further preparation, as the Birds and the Beasts are.

Upon these general grounds we may infer and conclude, that the Civil World
then, as well as the Natural, had a very different face and aspect from what it
has now; for of these Heads, Food and Clothing. Building and Traffic, with
that train of Arts, Trades and Manufactures that attend them, the Civil Order
of things is in a great measure constituted and compounded: These make the
business of life, the several occupations of Men, the noise and hurry of the
World; These fill our Cities, and our Fairs, and our Havens and Ports; yet all
these fine things are but the effects of indigency and necessitousness, and
were, for the most part, needless and unknown in that first state of Nature.
The Ancients have told us the same things in effect, but telling us them
without their grounds, which they themselves did not know, they looked like
Poetical stories, and pleasant fictions, and with most Men past for no better.
We have shown them in another light, with their Reasons and Causes, deduced
from the state of the Natural World, which is the Basis upon which they stand;
and this does not only give them a just and full credibility, but also lays a
foundation for after-thoughts, and further deductions, when they meet with
minds disposed to pursue Speculations of this Nature.

As for Laws, Government, natural Religion, Military and Judicial affai^^, with
all their Equipage, which make an higher order of things in the Civil and Moral
World, to calculate these upon the grounds given, would be more difficult, and
more uncertain; neither do they at all belong to the present Theory. But from
what we have already observed, we may be able to make a better judgment of
those Traditional accounts which the Ancients have left us concerning these
things, in the early Ages of the World, and the Primitive state of Nature. No
doubt in these, as in all other particulars, there was a great easiness and
simplicity in comparison of what is now, we are in a more pompous, forced, and
artificial method, which partly the change of Nature, and partly the Vices and
Vanities of Men have introduced and established. But these things, with many
more, ought to be the subject of a Philosophic History of the World, which we
mentioned before.

This is a short and general Scheme of the Primaeval World, compared with the
Modern; yet these things did not equally run through all the parts and Ages of
it, there was a declension and degeneracy, both Natural and Moral, by degrees,
and especially toward the latter end, but the principal form of Nature
remaining till the Deluge and the dissolution of that Heavens and Earth, till
then also this Civil frame of things would stand in a great measure* And though
such a state of Nature, and of Mankind, when it is proposed crudely, and without
its grounds, appear fabulous or imaginary, yet it is really in it self a state,
not only possible, but more easy and natural, than what the World is in at
present. And if one of the old Ante-diluvian Patriarchs should rise from the
dead, he would be more surprised to see our World in that posture it is, than
we can be by the story and description of his. As an Indian has more reason to
wonder at the European modes, than we have to wonder at their plain manner of
living. It Is we that have left the tract of Nature, that are wrought and
screwed up into artifices, that have disguised our selves; and it is in our
World that the Scenes are changed, and become more strange and Fantastical.

I will conclude this Discourse with an easy remark, and without any
particular Application of it. It Is a strange power that custom has upon weak
and little Spirits; whose thoughts reach no further than their Senses; and what
they have seen and been used to, they make the Standard and Measure of Nature,
of Reason, and of all Decorum. Neither are there any sort of Men more positive
and tenacicus of their petty opinions, than they are; nor more censorious, even
to bitterness and malice. And it is generally so, that those that have the least
evidence for the truth of their beloved opinions, are most peevish and
impatient in the defense of them. This sort of Men are the last that will be
made Wise Men, if ever they be; for they have the worst of diseases that
accompany ignorance, and do not so much as know themselves to be sick.

CHAP. VII. The place of Paradise cannot be determined from the Theory only,
nor from Scripture only. What the sense of Antiquity was concerning it, both as
to the Jews and Heathens, and especially as to the Christian Fathers. That they
generally placed it out of this Continent, in the Southern Hemisphere.
WE have now prepared our work for the last finishing strokes; described the
first Earth, and compared it with the present; and not only the two Earths, but
in a good measure the whole State and Economy of those two Worlds. It remains
only to determine the place of Paradise in that Primaeval Earth; I say, in that
Primaeval Earth, for we have driven the point so far already, that the seat of
it could not be in the present Earth, whose Form, Site, and Air are so
disposed, as could not consist with the first and most indispensable properties
of Paradise: And accordingly, we see with what ill success our modern Authors
have ranged over the Earth, to find a fit spot of ground to plant Paradise in;
some would set it on the top of an high Mountain, that it might have good Air
and fair weather, as being above the Clouds, and the middle Region; but then
they were at a loss for Water, which made a great part of the pleasure and
beauty of that place. Others therefore would seat it in a Plain, or in a
River-Island, that they might have Water enough, but then it would be subject
to the injuries of the Air, and foul weather at the seasons of the Year, from
which, both Reason and all Authority have exempted Paradise. It Is like seeking
a perfect beauty in a mortal Body, there are so many things required to it, as
to complexion, Features, Proportions and Air, that they never meet all together
in one person; neither can all the properties of a Terrestrial Paradise ever
meet together in one place, though never so well chosen, in this present Earth.

But in the Primaeval Earth, which we have described, it is easy to find a Seat
that had all those beauties and conveniences. We have every where through the
temperate Climates, a clear and constant Air, a fruitful Soil, pleasant Waters,
and all the general characters of Paradise; so that the trouble will be rather
in that competition, what part of Region to pitch upon in particular. But to
come as near it as we can, we must remember in the first place, how that Earth
was divided into two Hemispheres, distant and separated from one another, not
by an imaginary line, but by a real boundary that could not be past; so as the
first inquiry will be, in whether of these Hemispheres was the Seat of
Paradise. To answer this only according to our Theory, I confess, I see no
natural reason or occasion to place it in one Hemisphere more than in another;
I see no ground of difference or pre-eminence, that one had above the other;
and I am apt to think, that depended rather upon the will of God, and the
Series of Providence that was to follow in this Earth, than upon any natural
incapacity in one of these two Regions more than in the other, for planting in
it the Garden of God. Neither does Scripture determine, with any certainty,
either Hemisphere for the place of it; for when it is said to be in Eden, or to
be the Garden of Eden, it is no more than the Garden of pleasure or delight, as
the word signifies: And even the Septuagint, who render this word Eden, as a
proper name twice, (Genesis 2. ver. 8, and 10.) do in the same story render it
twice as a common name, signifying (...), pleasure, (Chap. 2. 15. and Chap. 3.
24.) and so they do accordingly render it in Ezekiel (Chap. 31. 9. 16, 18.)
where this Garden of Eden is spoken of again. Some have thought that the word
Mekiddim (Genesis 2. 8.) was to be rendered in the East, or Eastward, as we read
it, and therefore determined the site of Paradise; but it is only the Septuagint
Translate it so, all the other Greek Versions, and S. Jerome, the Vulgate, the
Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Syriack render it from the beginning, or in the
beginning, or to that effect. And we that do not believe the Septuagint to have
been infallible, or inspired, have no reason to prefer their single authority
above all the rest. Some also think the place of Paradise may be determined by
the four Rivers that are named as belonging to it, and the Countries they ran
thorough; but the names of those Rivers are to me uncertain, and two of them
altogether unintelligible. Where are there four Rivers in our Continent that
come from one Head, as these are said to have done, either at the entrance or
issue of the Garden? It Is true, if you admit our Hypothesis, concerning the
fraction and disruption of the Earth at the Deluge, then we cannot expect to
find Rivers now as they were before, the general Source is changed, and their
Channels are all broke up; but if you do not admit such a dissolution of the
Earth, but suppose the Deluge to have been only like a standing Pool, after it
had once covered the surface of the Earth, I do not see why it should make any
great haveck or confusion in it; and they that go that way, are therefore the
more obliged to show us still the Rivers of Paradise. Several of the Ancients,
as we shall show hereafter, supposed these four Rivers to have their Heads in
the other Hemisphere, and if so, the Seat of Paradise might be there too. But
let them first agree amongst themselves, concerning these Rivers, and the
Countries they run thorough, and we will undertake to show, that there cannot
be any such in this Continent.

Seeing then neither the Theory does determine, nor Scripture, where the place
of Paradise was, nor in whether Hemisphere, we must appeal to Antiquity, or the
opinions of the Ancients; for I know no other Guide, but one of these three,
Scripture, Reason, and Ancient Tradition; and where the two former are silent,
it seems very reasonable to consult the third. And that our Inquiries may be
comprehensive enough, we will consider what the Jews, what the Heathens, and
what the Christian Fathers have said or determined concerning the Seat of
Paradise. The Jews and Hebrew Doctors place it in neither Hemisphere, but
betwixt both, under the Aequinoctial, as you may see plainly in Abravanel,
Manasses Ben-Israel, Maimonides, Aben Ezra, and others But the reason why they
carried it no further than the Line, is because they supposed it certain, as
Aben Ezra tells us, that the days and nights were always equal in Paradise, and
they did not know how that could be, unless it stood under the Aequinoctial.
But we have shown another method, wherein that perpetual Aequinox came to pass,
and how it was common to all the parts and Climates of that Earth, which if
they had been aware of, and that the Torrid Zone at that time was utterly
uninhabitable, having removed their Paradise thus far from home, they would
probably have removed it a little further, into the temperate Climates of the
other Hemisphere.

The Ancient Heathens, Poets and Philosophers, had the notion of Paradise, or
rather of several Paradises in the Earth; and it is remarkable, that they placed
them generally, if not all of them, out of this Continent; in the Ocean, or
beyond it, or in another Orb or Hemisphere. The Garden of the Hesperides, the
Fortunate Islands, the Elysian Fields, Ogygia and Toprabane, as it is described
by Diodorus Siculus, with others such like; which as they were all
uncharacterized like so many Paradises, so they were all feared out of our
Continent by their Geography and descriptions of them.

Thus far Antiquity seems to incline to the other Hemisphere, or to some place
beyond the bounds of our Continent for the Seat of Paradise: But that which we
are most to depend upon in this affair, is Christian Antiquity, the Judgment
and Tradition of the Fathers upon this Argument. And we may safely say in the
first place, negatively, that none of the Christian Fathers, Latin or Greek,
ever placed Paradise in Mesopotamia; that is a conceit and invention of some
Modern Authors, which has been much encouraged of late, because it gave Men
ease and rest as to further inquiries, in an argument they could not well
manage. Secondly, We may affirm, that none of the Christian Fathers have placed
Paradise in any determinate Region of our Continent, Asia, Africa or Europe. I
have read of one or two Authors, I think, that fansied Paradise to have been at
Jerusalem, but 'twas a mere fancy, that no body regarded or pursued. The
controversy amongst the Fathers concerning Paradise, was quite another thing
from what it is now of late: They disputed and controverted, whether Paradise
was Corporeal or Intellectual only, and Allegorical; This was the grand point
amongst them. Then of those that thought it Corporeal, some placed it high in
the Air, some inaccessible by Deserts or Mountains, and many beyond the Ocean,
or in another World; And in these chiefly consisted the differences and
diversity of opinions amongst them; nor do we find that they named any
particular place or Country in the known parts of the Earth for the Seat of
Paradise, or that one contested for one spot of ground, and another for
another, which is the vain temerity of modern Authors; as if they could tell to
an Acre of Land where Paradise stood, or could set their foot upon the Center
of the Garden. These have corrupted and misrepresented the notion of our
Paradise, just as some modern Poets have the notion of the Elysian fields,
which Homer and the Ancients placed remote on the extremities of the Earth, and
these would make a little green Meadow in Campania Felix to be the famed
Elysium.

Thus much concerning the Fathers, negatively; but to discover as far as we
can, what their positive Assertions were in this Argument, we may observe, that
though their opinions be differently expressed, they generally concenter in this,
that the Southern Hemisphere was the Seat of Paradise. This, I say, seems
manifestly to be the sense of Christian Antiquity and Tradition, so far as
there is any thing definitive in the remains we have upon that subject. Some of
the Fathers did not believe Paradise to be Corporeal and Local, and those are
to be laid aside in the first place, as to this point; Others that thought it
Local, did not determine any thing (as most of them indeed did not) concerning
the particular place of it; But the rest that did, though they have expressed
themselves in various ways, and under various forms, yet, upon a due
interpretation, they all meet in one common and general conclusion, That
Paradise was seated beyond the Aequinoctial, or in the other Hemisphere.

And to understand this aright, we must reflect, in the first place, upon the
form of the Primaeval Earth, and of the two Hemispheres of which it consisted,
altogether incommunicable one with another, by reason of the Torrid Zone
betwixt them; so as those two Hemispheres were then as two distinct Worlds, or
distinct Earths, that had no commerce with one another. And this Notion or
Tradition we find among Heathen Authors, as well as Christian, this Opposite
Earth being called by them Antichthon, and its Inhabitants Antichthones: For
those words comprehend both the Antipodes and Antoeci, or all beyond the Line,
as is manifest from their best Authors, as Achilles Tatius, and Caesar
Germanicus upon Aratus, Probus Grammaticus, Censorinus, Pomponius Mela, and
Pliny. And these were called another World, and looked upon as another stock and
race of Mankind, Somn. Scip.
as appears from Cicero and Macrobius: But as the latter part was their
mistake, so the former is acknowledged by Christian Authors, as well as others;
and particularly S. Clement, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, mentions a
World, or Worlds beyond the Ocean, subject to Divine Providence, and the great
Lord of Nature, as well as ours. This passage of S. Clement is also cited by S.
Ierom, in his Commentary upon Ephesians. 2. 2. and by Origin Periarchon, where the
Inhabitants of that other World are called Antichthones. Lib. 2. c. 3.


I make this remark in the first place, that we may understand the true sense
and importance of those phrases and expressions amongst the Ancients, when they
say Paradise was in another World. Which are not to be so understood, as if
they thought Paradise was in the Moon, or in Jupiter, or hung above like a
Cloud or a Meteor, they were not so extravagant; but that Paradise was in
another Hemisphere, which was called Antichthon, another Earth, or another
World from Ours; and justly reputed so, because of an impossibility of commerce
or intercourse betwixt their respective Inhabitants. And this remark being
premised, we will now distribute the Christian Authors and Fathers that have
delivered their opinion concerning the place of Paradise, into three or four
ranks or orders; and though they express themselves differently, you will see,
when duly examined and expounded, they all conspire and concur in the
forementioned conclusion, That the Seat of Paradise was in the other Hemisphere.

In the first rank then we will place and reckon those that have set Paradise
in another World, or in another Earth; seeing, according to the foregoing
Explication, that is the same thing, as to affirm it seated beyond the Torrid
Zone in the other Hemisphere. In this number are Ephrem Syrus, Moses Bar Cepha,
Tatianus, and of later date Iacobus de Valentia. To these are to be added again
such Authors as say, that Adam, when he was turned out of Paradise, was brought
into our Earth, or into our Region of the Earth; for this is tantamount with
the former; And this seems to be the sense of S. Ierom in several places
against Iovinian, as also of Constantine, in his Oration in Eusebius, and is
positively asserted by Sulpitius Severus. And lastly, Those Authors that
represent Paradise as remote from our World, and inaccessible, so S. Austin,
Procopius Gazeus, Beda, Strabus Fuldensis, Historia Scholiastica, and others,
these I say, pursue the same notion of Antiquity; for what is remote from our
World (that is, from our Continent, as we before explained it) is to be
understood to be that Antichthon, (...)
or Anti-hemisphere which the Ancients opposed to ours.

Another set of Authors that interpret the Flaming Sword that guarded Paradise
to be the Torrid Zone, do plainly intimate, that Paradise in their opinion lay
beyond the Torrid Zone, or in the Antihemisphere; And thus Tertullian
interprets the Flaming Sword, and in such words as fully confirm our sense:
Paradise, He says, by the Torrid Zone, as by a wall of Fire, was severed from
the communication and knowledge of our World. It lay then on the other side of
this Zone. And S. Cyprian, or the ancient Author that passes under his name,
in his Comment upon Genesis, expresses himself to the same effect; so also S.
Austin and Isidore Hispalensis are thought to interpret it: And Aquinas who
makes Paradise inaccessible, gives this reason for it, Propter vehementiam
aestus in locis intermediis ex propinquitate Solis, and hoc significatur per
Flammeum Gladium: Because of that vehement heat in the parts betwixt us and
that, arising from the nearness of the Sun, and this is signified by the
Flaming Sword. And this interpretation of the Flaming Sword receives a
remarkable force and Emphasis from our Theory and description of the Primaeval
Earth, for there the Torrid Zone was as a wall of Fire indeed, or a Region of
flame which none could pass or subsist in, no more than in a Furnace.

There is another form of expression amongst the Ancients concerning Paradise,
which, if decyphered, is of the same force and signification with this we have
already instanced in; They say sometimes Paradise was beyond the Ocean, or that
the Rivers of Paradise came from beyond the Ocean. This is of the same import
with the former Head, and points still at the other Hemisphere; for, as we
noted before, some of them fixed their Antichthon and Antichth^nes beyond the
Ocean; that is, since there was an Ocean, Since the form of the Earth was
changed, and the Torrid Zone become habitable, and cosequently could not be a
boundary or separation betwixt the two Worlds. Wherefore, as some run still
upon the old division by the Torrid Zone, others took the new division by the
Ocean. Which Ocean they supposed to lie from East to West betwixt the Tropicks;
as may be seen in Ancient Authors, Geminus, Herodotus, Cicero de republica, and
Clemens Romanus, whom we cited before. De Civ. Dei lib. 16. c. 9.
S. Austin also speaks upon the same supposition, when he would confute the
doctrine of the Antipodes, or Antichth^nes; and Macrobius, I remember, makes it
an argument of Providence, that the Sun and the Planets, in what part of their
course soever they are betwixt the two Tropicks, have still the Ocean under
them, that they may be cooled and nourisht by its moisture. They thought the
Sea like a Girdle, went round the Earth, and the temperate Zones on either side
were the habitable Regions, whereof this was called the Oicoumene, and the
other Antichthon.

This being observed, it is not material, whether their Notion was true or
false, it shows us what their meaning was, and what part of the Earth they
designed, when they spoke of any thing beyond the Ocean; namely, that they
meant beyond the Line, in the other Hemisphere, or in the Antichthon; and
accordingly, when they say Paradise, or the Fountains of its Rivers were beyond
the Ocean, they say the same thing in other terms with the rest of those
Authors we have cited. In Moses Bar Cepha above mentioned, we find a Chapter
upon this subject, Qucmodo trajecerint Mortales inde ex Paradisi terra in hanc
Terram? How Mankind past out of that Earth or Co^tinent where Paradise was,
into that where we are? Namely, how they past the Ocean, that lay betwixt them,
as the answer there given explains it. And so Ephrem Syrus is cited often in
that Treatise, placing Paradise beyond the Ocean. The Essenes also, who were
the most Philosophic Sect of the Jews, placed Paradise, according to Josephus,
beyond the Ocean, under a perfect temperature of Air. And that passage in
Eusebius, in the Oration of Constantine, being corrected and restored to the
true reading, represents Paradise, in like manner, as in another Continent,
from whence Adam was brought, after his transgression, into this. And lastly,
there are some Authors, whose testimony and authority may deserve to be
considered, not for their own Antiquity, but because they are profess'dly
transcribers of Antiquity and Traditions, such as Strabus, Comestor, and the
like, who are known to give this account or report of Paradise from the
Ancients, that it was interposito Oceano ab Orb nostro vel a Zona nostra
habitabili secretus, Separated from our Orb or Hemisphere by the interposition
of the Ocean.

It is also observable, that many of the Ancients that took Tigris, Euphrates,
Nile and Ganges for the Rivers of Paradise, said that those Heads or Fountains
of them which we have in our Continent, are but their Capita secunda, their
second Sources, and that their first Sources were in another Orb where Paradise
was; and thus Hugo de Sancto Victore says, Sanctos communiter sensisse, That
the Holy Men of old were generally of that opinion. To this sense also Moses
Bar Cepha often expresses himself; as also Epiphanius, Procopius Gazaeus, and
Severianus in Catena. Which notion amongst the Ancients, concerning the
trajection or passage of the Paradisiacal Rivers underground, or under-Sea,
from one Continent into another, is to me, I confess, unintelligible, either in
the first or second Earth; but however it discovers their sense and opinion of
the Seat of Paradise, that it was not to be sought for in Asia or in Africa,
where those Rivers rise to us, but in some remoter parts of the World, where
they supposed their first Sources to be.

This is a short account of what the Christian Fathers have left us, concerning
the Seat of Paradise; and the truth is, it is but a short and broken account;
yet it is no wonder it should be so, if we consider, as we noted before, that
several of them did not believe Paradise to be Local and Corporeal; Others that
did believe it so, yet did not offer to determine the place of it, but left
that matter wholly untoucht and undecided; and the rest that did speak to that
point, did it commonly both in general terms, and in expressions that were
disguised, and needed interpretation; but all these differences and obscurities
of expression, you see, when duly stated and expounded, may signify one and
the same thing, and terminate all in this common Conclusion, That Paradise was
without our Continent, according to the general opinion and Tradition of
Antiquity. And I do not doubt but the Tradition would have been both more
express and more universal, if the Ancients had understood Geography better;
for those of the Ancients that did not admit or believe, that there were
Antipodes or Antichthones, as Lactantius, S. Austin, and some others, these
could not join in the common opinion about the place of Paradise, because they
thought there was no Land, nor any thing habitable (...), or besides this
Continent. And yet S. Austin was so cautious, that as he was bounded on the one
hand by his false Idea of the Earth, that he could not join with Antiquity as
to the place of Paradise; so on the other hand he had that respect for it, that
he would not say any thing to the contrary; therefore being to give his
opinion, he says only, Terrestrem esse Paradisum, and locum ejus ab hominum
cognitione esse remotissimum: That it is somewhere upon the Earth, but the
place of it very remote from the knowledge of Men.

And as their ignorance of the Globe of the Earth was one reason, why, the
doctrine of Paradise was so broken and obscure, so another reason why it is
much more so at present is, because the chief ancient Books writ upon that
subject, are lost; Ephrem Syrus, who lived in the Fourth Century, writ a
Commentary in Genesin five de Ortu rerum, concerning the Origin of the Earth;
and by those remains that are cited from it, we have reason to believe, that it
contained many things remarkable concerning the first Earth, and concerning
Paradise. Tertullian also writ a Book de Paradiso, which is wholly lost; and we
see to what effect it would have been, by his making the Torrid Zone to be the
Flaming Sword, and the partition betwixt this Earth and Paradise; which two
Earths he more than once distinguishes as very different from one another.
Cont. Marc. lib. 2. c. 2. c. 5.
The most ancient Author that I know upon this subject, at least of those that
writ of it literally, is Moses Bar Cepha, a Syrian Bishop, who lived about
seven hundred years since, and his Book is translated into Latin, by that
Learned and Judicious Man, Andreas Masius. Bar Cepha writes upon the same Views
of Paradise that we have here presented, that it was beyond the Ocean, in
another tract of Land, or another Continent from that which we inhabit: As
appears from the very Titles of his Eighth, Tenth, and Fourteenth Chapters. But
we must allow him for his mistaken Notions about the form of the Earth; for he
seems to have sansied the Earth plain, (not only as opposed to rough and
Mountainous, for so it was plain; but as opposed to Spherical) and the Ocean to
have divided it in two parts, an Interior, and an Exterior, and in that
Exterior part was Paradise. Such allowances must often be made for
Geographical mistakes, in examining and understanding the writings of the
Ancients. The rest of the Syrian Fathers, as well as Ephrem and Bar Cepha,
incline to the same doctrine of Paradise, and seem to have retained more of the
ancient notions concerning it, than the Greek and Latin Fathers have; and yet
there is in all some fragments of this doctrine, and but fragments in the best.

We might add in the last place, that as the most ancient Treatises concerning
Paradise are lost, so also the ancient Glosses and Catenae upon Scripture,
where we might have found the Traditions and Opinions of the Ancients upon this
subject, are many of them either lost or unpublisht; And upon this
consideration we did not think it improper to cite some Authors of small
Antiquity, but such as have transcribed several things out of ancient
Manuscript-glosses into their Commentaries. They living however before Printing
was invented, or Learning well restored, and before the Reformation. I add that
also before the Reformation, for since that time the Protestant Authors having
lessened the Authority of Traditions, the Pontificial Doctors content
themselves to insist only upon such as they thought were useful or necessary,
lest by multiplying others that were but matter of curiosity, they should bring
the first into question, and render the whole doctrine of Traditions more
dubious and exceptionable; And upon this account, there are some Authors that
writ an Age or two before the Reformation, that have with more freedom told us
the Tenets and Traditions of the Ancients in these Speculations, that are but
collateral to Religion, than any have done since. And I must confess, I am apt
to think that what remains concerning the doctrine of Paradise, and the
Primaeval Earth, is in a good measure Traditional; for one may observe, that
those that treat upon these subjects, quote the true Opinions, and tell you
some of the Ancients held so and so, as That Paradise was in another Earth, or
higher than this Earth, That there were no Mountains before the Flood, nor any
Rain, and such like: yet they do not name those ancient Authors that held these
Opinions; which makes me apt to believe, either that they were conveyed by a
Traditional communication from one to another, or that there were other Books
extant upon those subjects, or other Glosses, than what are now known.

Finally, To conclude this Discourse concerning the Seat of Paradise, we must
mind you again upon what Basis it stands. We declared freely, that we could not
by our Theory alone determine the particular place of it, only by that we are
assured that it was in the Primaeval Earth, and not in the present; but in what
Region, or in whether Hemisphere of that Earth it was seated, we cannot define
from Speculation only. It Is true, if we hold fast to that Scripture-conclusion,
That all Mankind rise from one Head, and from one and the same Stock and
Lineage, (which does not seem to be according to the sentiments of the
Heathens) we must suppose they were born in one Hemisphere, and after some time
translated into the other, or a Colony of them: But this still does not
determine, in whether of the two they begun, and were first seated before their
translation; and I am apt to think that depended rather, as we noted before,
upon the Divine Pleasure, and the train of affairs that was to succeed, than
upon Natural causes and differences. Some of the Ancients, I know, made both
the Soil and the Stars more noble in the Southern Hemisphere, than in ours, but
I do not see any proof or warrant for it; wherefore laying aside all natural
Topics, we are willing, in this particular, to refer our selves wholly to the
report and majority of Votes amongst the Ancients; who yet do not seem to me to
lay much stress upon the notion of a particular and Topical Paradise, and
therefore use general and remote expressions concerning it. And finding no
place for it in this Continent, they are willing to quit their hands of it, by
placing it in a Region some-where far off, and inaccessible. This, together
with the old Tradition, that Paradise was in another Earth, seems to me to give
an account of most of their Opinions concerning the Seat of Paradise: and that
they were generally very uncertain where to fix it.

CHAP. VIII. The uses of this Theory for the illustration of Antiquity; The
ancient Chaos explained; The inhabitability of the Torrid Zone; The change of
the Poles of the World; The doctrine of the Mundane Egg; How America was first
peopled; How Paradise within the Circle of the Moon.
WE have now dispatched the Theory of the Primaeval Earth, and revived a
forgotten World. It Is pity the first and fairest works of Nature should be lost
out of the memory of Man, and that we should so much dote upon the Ruins, as
never to think upon the Original Structure. As the modern Artists from some
broken pieces of an ancient Statue, make out all the other parts and
proportions; so from the broken and scattered limbs of the first World we have
shown you how to raise the whole Fabric again; and renew the prospect of those
pleasant Scenes that first see the light, and first entertained Man, when he
came to act upon this new-erected Stage.

We have drawn this Theory chiefly to give an account of the Universal Deluge,
and of Paradise; but as when one lights a Candle to look for one or two things
which they want, the light will not confine it self to those two objects, but
shows all the other in the room; so, methinks, we have unexpectedly cast a
light upon all Antiquity, in seeking after these two things, or in retrieving
the Notion and Doctrine of the Primaeval Earth, upon which they depended. For
in ancient Learning there are many Discourses, and many Conclusions delivered
to us, that are so obscure and confused, and so remote from the present state
of things, that one cannot well distinguish, whether they are fictions or
realities: and there is no way to distinguish with certainty, but by a clear
Theory upon the same subjects; which showing us the truth directly, and
independently upon them, shows us also by reflection, how far they are true or
false, and in what sense they are to be interpreted and understood. And the
present Theory being of great extent, we shall find it serviceable in many
things, for the illustration of such dubious and obscure doctrines in Antiquity.

To begin with their Ancient CHAOS, what a dark story have they made of it,
both their Philosophers and Poets; and how fabulous in appearance? It Is
delivered as confusedly as the Mass it self could be, and has not been reduced
to order, nor indeed made intelligible by any. They tell us of moral principles
in the Chaos instead of natural, of strife, and discord, and division on the
one hand, and Love, Friendship, and Venus on the other; and, after a long
contest, Love got the better of Discord, and united the disagreeing principles:
This is one part of their story. Then they make the forming of the World out of
the Chaos a kind of Genealogy or Pedigree; Chaos was the common Parent of all,
and from Chaos sprung, first, Night, and Tartarus, or Oceanus; Night was a
teeming Mother, and of her were born Ether and the Earth; The Earth conceived
by the influences of Ether, and brought forth Man and all Animals.

This seems to be a Poetical fiction rather than Philosophy; yet when it is set
in a true light, and compared with our Theory of the Chaos, 'twill appear a
pretty regular account, how the World was formed at first, or how the Chaos
divided it self successively into several Regions, rising one after another,
and propagated one from another, as Children and Posterity from a common
Parent. We showed in the first Book, Chap. 5. how the Chaos, from an uniform
mass, wrought it self into several Regions or Elements; the grossest part
sinking to the Center, upon this lay the mass of Water, and over the Water was
a Region of dark, impure, caliginous Air; This impure, caliginous Air is that
which the Ancients call Night, and the mass of Water Oceanus or Tartarus, for
those two terms with them are often of the like force, Tartarus being Oceanus
enclosed and locked up: Thus we have the first offspring of the Chaos, or its
firstborn twins, Nox and Oceanus. Now this turbid Air purifying it self by
degrees, as the more subtle parts flew upwards, and composed the Ether; so the
earthy parts that were mixed with it dropped down upon the surface of the Water,
or the liquid mass; and that mass on the other hand sending up its lighter and
more oily parts toward its surface, these two incorporate there, and by their
mixture and union compose a body of Earth quite round the mass of Waters: And
this was the first habitable Earth, which as it was, you see, the Daughter of
Nox and Oceanus, so it was the Mother of all other things, and all living
Creatures, which at the beginning of the World sprung out of its fruitful womb.

This doctrine of the Chaos, for the greater pomp of the business, the Ancients
called their Theogonia, or the Genealogy of the Gods; for they gave their Gods,
at least their Terrestrial Gods, an original and beginning; and all the
Elements and greater portions of Nature they made Gods and Goddesses, or their
Deities presided over them in such a manner, that the names were used
promiscuously for one another. We also mentioned before some moral principles,
which they placed in the Chaos, Eris and Eros; Strife, discord, and
disaffection which prevailed at first, and afterward Love, kindness and union
got the upper hand, and in spite of those factious and dividing principles
gathered together the separated Elements, and united them into an habitable
World. This is all easily understood, if we do but look upon the Schemes of the
rising World, as we have set them down in that fifth Chapter; for in the first
commotion of the Chaos, after an intestine struggle of all the parts, the
Elements separated from one another into so many distinct bodies or masses; and
in this state and posture things continued a good while, which the Ancients,
after their Poetic or Moral way, called the Reign of Eris or Contention, of
hatred, flight and disaffection; and if things had always continued in that
System, we should never have had an habitable World. But Love and good Nature
conquered at length, Venus rise out of the Sea, and received into her bosom,
and entangled into her embraces the falling Ether, viz. The parts of lighter
earth, which were mixed with the Air in that first separation, and gave it the
name of Night; These, I say, fell down upon the oily parts of the Sea-mass,
which lay floating upon the surface of it, and by that union and conjunction, a
new Body, and a new World was produced, which was the first habitable Earth.
This is the interpretation of their mystical Philosophy of the Chaos, and the
resolution of it into plain natural History: Which you may see more fully
discussed in the Latin Treatise. Lib. 2. c. 7.


In consequence of this, We have already explained, in several places the
Golden Age of the Ancients, and laid down such grounds as will enable us to
discern what is real, and what Poetical, in the reports and characters that
Antiquity has given of those first Ages of the World. And if there be any
thing amongst the Ancients that refers to another Earth, as Plato's Atlantis,
which he says, was absorpt by an Earthquake, and an inundation, as the
primaeval Earth was; or his Ethereal Earth mentioned in his Phaedo, which he
opposes to this broken hollow Earth; makes it to have longliv'd inhabitants,
and to be without Rains and Storms, as that first Earth was also; or the
pendulous Gardens of Alcinous, or such like, to which nothing answers in
present Nature, by reflecting upon the state of the first Earth, we find an
easy explication of them. We have also explained what the Antichthon and
Antichthones of the Ancients were, and what the true ground of that distinction
was. But nothing seems more remarkable than the inhabitability of the Torrid
Zone, if we consider what a general fame and belief it had amongst the
Ancients, and yet in the present form of the Earth we find no such thing, nor
any foundation for it. I cannot believe that this was so universally received
upon a slight presumption only, because it lay under the course of the Sun, if
the Sun had then the same latitude from the Equator in his course and motion
that he has now, and made the same variety of seasons; whereby even the
hottest parts of the Earth have a Winter, or something equivalent to it. But if
we apply this to the Primaeval Earth, whose posture was direct to the Sun,
standing always fixed in its Equinoctial, we shall easily believe that the
Torrid Zone was then uninhabitable by extremity of heat, there being no
difference of seasons, nor any change of weather, the Sun hanging always over
head at the same distance, and in the same direction. Besides this, the descent
of the Rivers in that first Earth was such, that they could never reach the
Equinoctial parts, as we have shown before; by which means, and the want of
Rain, that Region must necessarily be turned into a dry Desert. Now this being
really the state of the first Earth, the fame and general belief that the
Torrid Zone was uninhabitable had this true Original, and continued still with
posterity after the Deluge, though the causes then were taken away; for they
being ignorant of the change that was made in Nature at that time, kept up
still the same Tradition and opinion current, till observation and experience
taught later Ages to correct it. As the true miracles that were in the
Christian Church at first, occasioned a fame and belief of their continuance
long after they had really ceast.

This gives an easy account, and, I think, the true cause, of that opinion,
amongst the Ancients generally received, That the Torrid Zone was
uninhabitable. I say, generally received, for not only the Poets, both Greek
and Latin, but their Philosophers, Astsonomers and Geographers, had the same
notion, and delivered the same doctrine; as Aristotle, Cleomedes, Achilles
Tatius, Ptolomy, Cicero, Strabo, Mela, Pliny, Macrobius, etc. And to speak
truth, the whole doctrine of the Zones is calculated more properly for the
first Earth, than for the present; for the divisions and bounds of them now,
are but arbitrary, being habitable all over, and having no visible distinction;
whereas they were then determined by Nature, and the Globe of the Earth was
really divided into so many Regions of a very different aspect and quality;
which would have appeared at a distance, if they had been looked upon from the
Clouds, or from the Moon, as Jupiter's Belts, or as so many Girdles or
Swathing-bands about the body of the Earth: And so the word imports, and so the
Ancients use to call them Cinguli and Fasciae. But in the present form of the
Earth, if it was seen at a distance, no such distinction would appear in the
parts of it, nor scarce any other but that of Land and Water, and of Mountains
and Valleys, which are nothing to the purpose of Zones. And to add this note
further, When the Earth lay in this regular form, divided into Regions or
Walks, if I may so call them, as this gave occasion of its distinction, by
Zones, so if we might consider all that Earth as a Paradise, and Paradise as a
Garden; (for it is always called so in Scripture, and in Jewish Authors) And as
this Torrid Zone, bare of Grass and Trees, made a kind of Gravel-walk in the
middle: so there was a green Walk on either hand of it, made by the temperate
Zones; and beyond those lay a Canal, See Fig. 3. c. 5.
which watered the Garden from either side.

But to return to Antiquity; We may add under this Head another observation or
doctrine amongst the Ancients, strange enough in appearance, which yet receives
an easy explication from the preceding Theory; They say, The Poles of the
World did once change their situation, and were at first in another posture
from what they are in now, till that inclination happened; This the ancient
Philosophers often make mention of, See the Lat. Treat. lib. 2. c. 10.
as Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Diogenes, Leucippus, Democritus; as may be seen in
Laertius, and in Plutarch; and the Stars, they say, at first were carried about
the Earth in a more uniform manner. This is no more than what we have observed
and told you in other words, namely, That the Earth changed its posture at the
Deluge, and thereby made these seeming changes in the Heavens; its Poles before
pointed to the Poles of the Ecliptic, which now point to the Poles of the
Equator, and its Axis is become parallel with that Axis; and this is the
mystery and interpretation of what they say in other terms; this makes the
different aspect of the Heavens, and of its Poles: And I am apt to think, that
those changes in the course of the Stars, which the Ancients sometimes speak
of, and especially the Egyptians, if they did not proceed from defects in
their Calendar, had no other Physical account than this.

And as they say the Poles of the World were in another situation at first, so
at first they say, there was no variety of seasons in the Year, as in their
Golden Age. Which is very coherent with all the rest, and still runs along with
the Theory. And you may observe, that all these things we have instanced in
hitherto, are but links of the same chain, in connection and dependence upon one
another. When the Primaeval Earth was made out of the Chaos, its form and
posture was such, as, of course, brought on all those Scenes which Antiquity
has kept the remembrance of: though now in another state of Nature they seem
very strange; especially being disguised, as some of them are, by their odd
manner of representing them. That the Poles of the World stood once in another
posture; That the Year had no diversity of Seasons; That the Torrid Zone was
uninhabitable; That the two Hemispheres had no possibility of intercourse, and
such like; These all hang upon the same string; or lean one upon another as
Stones in the same Building; whereof we have, by this Theory, laid the very
foundation bare, that you may see what they all stand upon, and in what order.

There is still one remarkable Notion or Doctrine amongst the Ancients which we
have not spoken to; it is partly Symbolical, and the propriety of the Symbol, or
of the Application of it, has been little understood; It Is their doctrine of
the Mundane Egg, or their comparing the World to an Egg, and especially in the
Original composition of it. This seems to be a mean comparison, the World and
an Egg, what proportion, or what resemblance betwixt these two things? And yet
I do not know any Symbolical doctrine, or conclusion, that has been so
universally entertained by the Mystae, or Wise and Learned, of all Nations; as
has been noted before in the fifth Chapter of the First Book, Lib. 2. c. 10.
and at large in the Latin Treatise. It Is certain, that by the World in this
similitude, they do not mean the Great Universe, for that has neither Figure,
nor any determinate form of composition, and it would be a great vanity and
rashness in any one to compare this to an Egg; The works of God are immense, as
his rature is infinite, and we cannot make any image or resemblance of either
of them; but this comparison is to be understood of the Sublunary World, or of
the Earth; And for a general key to Antiquity upon this Argument, we may lay
this down as a Maxim or Canon, That what the Ancients have said concerning the
form and figure of the World, or concerning the Original of it from a Chaos, or
about its periods and dissolution are never to be understood of the Great
Universe, but of our Earth, or of this Sublunary and Terr^strial World. And
this observation being made, do but reflect upon our Theory of the Earth, the
manner of its composition at first, and the figure of it, being completed, and
you will need no other interpreter to understand this mystery. We have showed
there, that the figure of it, Book. 1. c. 5.
when finished, was Oval, and the inward form of it was a frame of four Regions
encompassing one another, where that of Fire lay in the middle like the Yolk*
and a shell of Earth enclosed them all. This gives a solution so easy and
natural, and shows such an aptness and elegancy in the representation, that one
cannot doubt, upon a view and compare of circumstances, but that we have truly
found out the Riddle of the Mundane Egg.

Amongst other difficulties arising from the Form of this present Earth, That
is one, How America could be peopled: or any other Continent, or Island remote
from all Continents the Sea interposing. This difficulty does not hold in our
Theory of the First Earth, where there was no Sea. And after the Flood, when
the Earth was broken and the S^a laid open, the same race of Men might continue
there, if settled there before. For I do not see any necessity of deducing all
Mankind from Noah after the Flood: If America was peopled before, it might
continue so; not but that the Flood was universal. But when the great frame of
the Earth broke at the Deluge, Providence foresaw into how many Continents it
would be divided after the ceasing of the Flood, and accordingly, as we may
reasonably suppose, made provision to save a remnant in every Continent, that
the race of Mankind might not be quite extinct in any of them. What provision
he made in our Continent we know from Sacred History, but as that takes notice
of no other Continent but ours, so neither could it take notice of any method
that was used there for saving of a remnant of Men; but 'twere great
presumption, methinks, to imagine that Providence had a care of none but us, or
could not find out ways of preservation in other places, as well as in that
where our habitations were to be. Asia, Africa and Europe were repeopled by the
Sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, but we read nothing of their going over
into America, or sending any Colonies thither; and that World which is near as
big as ours, must have stood long without people, or any thing of Humane race
in it, after the Flood, if it stood so till this was full, or till men
Navigated the Ocean, and by chance discovered it: it seems more reasonable to
suppose, that there was a stock providentially reserved there, as well as here,
out of which they sprung again* but we do not pretend in an Argument of this
nature to define or determine any thing positively. To conclude, As this is but
a secondary difficulty, and of no great force, so neither is it any thing
peculiar to us, or to our Hypothesis, but alike common to both; and if they can
propose any reasonable way, whereby the Sons of Noah might be transplanted into
America, with all my heart; but all the ways that I have met with hitherto,
have seemed to me mere fictions, or mere presumptions. Besides, finding Birds
and Beasts there, which are no where upon our Continent, nor would live in our
Countries if brought hither, it is a fair conjecture that they were not carried
from us, but originally bred and preserved there.

Thus much for the illustration of Antiquity in some points of Humane
literature, by our Theory of the Primaeval Earth; There is also in Christian
Antiquity a Tradition or Doctrine, that appears as obscure and as much a
Paradox as any of these, and better deserves an illustration, because it
relates more closely and expressly to our present subject: It Is that Notion or
Opinion amongst the Ancients concerning Paradise, that it was seated as high as
the Sphere of the Moon, or within the Lunar Circle. This looks very strange,
and indeed extravagantly, at first sight, but the wonder will cease, if we
understand this not of Paradise taken apart from the rest of the Earth, but of
the whole Primaeval Earth, wherein the Seat of Paradise was; That was really
seated much higher than the present Earth, and may be reasonably supposed to
have been as much elevated as the tops of ou^ Mountains are now. And that
phrase of reaching to the Sphere of the Moon, signifies no more than those
other expressions of reaching to Heaven, or reaching above the Clouds, which
are phrases commonly used to express the height of Buildings, or of Mountains,
and such like things: So the Builders of Babel said, they would make a Tower
should reach to Heaven; Olympus and Parnassus are said by the Poets to reach to
Heaven, or to rise above the Clouds; And Pliny and Solinus use this very
expression of the Lunar Circle, when they describe the height of Mount Atlas,
Eductus in viciniam Lunaris Circuli. Solin. c. 17.
The Ancients, I believe, aimed particularly by this phrase, to express an
height above the middle Region, or above our Atmosphere, that Paradise might be
serene; and where our Atmosphere ended, they reckoned the Sphere of the Moon
begun, and therefore said it reached to the Sphere of the Moon. Many of the
Christian Fathers expressed their opinion concerning the high situation of
Paradise in plain and formal terms, as S. Basil, Damascen, Moses Bar Cepha,
etc. but this phrase of reaching to the Lunar Circle is repeated by several of
them, and said to be of great Antiquity. Aquinas, Albertus, and others, ascribe
it to Bid, but many to S. Austin; and therefore Ambrosius Catharinus is angry
with their great Schoolman, Com. in Genesis c. 2.
that he should derive it from Bid, seeing S. Austin writing to Orosius,
delivered this doctrine, which surely, says he, S. Austin neither feigned nor
dreamed only* but had received it from Antiquity: And from so great Antiquity,
that it was no less than Apostolical, if we credit Albertus Magnus, Sum. Theol.
par. 2. tract. 13. q. 79
and the ancient Books he appeals to; for He says this Tradition was derived as
high as from S. Thomas the Apostle. His words are these, after he had delivered
his own opinion, Hoc tamen di^o, etc. But this I say, without prejudice to the
better opinion, for I have found it in some most ancient Books, that Thomas the
Apostle was the Author of that opinion, which is usually attributed to Bid and
Strabus, namely, That Paradise was so high as to reach to the Lunar Circle. But
this much concerning this Opinion, and concerning Antiquity.

To conclude all, we see this Theory, which was drawn only by a thread of
Reason, and the Laws of Nature, abstractly from all Antiquity, notwithstanding
casts a light upon many passages there, which were otherwise accounted
fictions, or unintelligible truths; and though we do not allege these as
proofs of the Theory, for it carries its own light and proof with it, yet
whether we will or no, they do mutually confirm, as well as illustrate, one
another; And it is a pleasure also, when one has wrought out truth by mere dint
of thinking, and examination of causes, and proposed it plainly and openly, to
meet with it again amongst the Ancients, disguised, and in an old fashioned
dress: scarce to be known or discovered, but by those that beforehand knew it
very well. And it would be a further pleasure and satisfaction, to have
rendered those Doctrines and Notions, for the future, intelligible and useful
to others, as well as delightful to our selves.

CHAP. IX. A general objection against this Theory, viz. That if there had been
such a Primitive Earth, as we pretend, the fame of it would have sounded
throughout all Antiquity. The Eastern and Western Learning considered. The most
considerable Records of both are lost. What footsteps remain relating to this
subject. The Jewish and Christian Learning considered; how far lost as to this
Argument, and what Notes or Traditions remain. Lastly, How far the Sacred
Writings bear witness to it. The Providential conduct of Knowledge in the
World. A recapitulation and state of the Theory.
HAving gone through the two First Parts, and the two First Books of this
Theory, that concern the Primitive World, the Universal Deluge, and the state
of Paradise, We have leisure now to reflect a little, and consider what may
probably be objected against a Theory of this nature. I do not mean single
objections against single parts, for those may be many, and such as I cannot
foresee; but what may be said against the body and substance of the Theory,
and the credibility of it, appearing new and surprising, and yet of great
extent and importance. This, I fancy, will induce many to say, surely this
cannot be a reality; for if there had been such a Primitive Earth, and such a
Primitive World as is here represented, and so remarkably different from the
present, it could not have been so utterly forgotten, or lain hid for so many
Ages; all Antiquity would have rung of it; the memory of it would have been
kept fresh by Books or Traditions. Can we imagine, that it should lie buried
for some thousands of years in deep silence and oblivion? and now only when the
second World is drawing to an end, we begin to discover that there was a first,
and that of another make and order from this.

To satisfy this objection, or surmise rather, it will be convenient to take a
good large scope and compass in our Discourse; We must not suppose, that this
Primitive World has been wholly lost out of the memory of Man, or out of
History, for we have some History and Chronology of it preserved by Moses, and
likewise in the Monuments of the Ancients, more or less; for they all supposed
a World before the Deluge. But it is the Philosophy of this Primitive World that
has been lost in a great measure; what the state of Nature was then, and
wherein it differed from the present or Postdiluvian order of things. This, I
confess, has been little taken notice of; it has been generally thought or
presumed, that the World before the Flood was of the same form and constitution
with the present World: This we do not deny, but rather think it designed and
Providential, that there should not remain a clear and full knowledge of that
first state of things; and we may easily suppose how it might decay and perish,
if we consider how little of the remote Antiquities of the World have ever been
brought down to our knowledge.

The Greeks and Romans divided the Ages of the World into three periods or
intervals, whereof they called the first the Obscure Period, the second the
Fabulous, and the third Historical. The dark and obscure Period was from the
beginning of the World to the Deluge; what passed then, either in Nature or
amongst Men, they have no Records, no account, by their own confession; all
that space of time was covered with darkness and oblivion; so that we ought
rather to wonder at those remains they have, and those broken notions of the
Golden Age, and the conditions of it, how they were saved out of the common
shipwreck, than to expect from them the Philosophy of that World, and all its
differences from the present. And as for the other Nations that pretend to
greater Antiquities, to more ancient History and Chronology, from what is left
of their Monuments, many will allow only this difference, that their fabulous
Age begun more high, or that they had more ancient Fables.

But besides that our expectations cannot be great from the learning of the
Gentiles, we have not the means or opportunity to inform our selves well what
Notions they did leave us concerning the Primitive World; for their Books and
Monuments are generally lost, or lie hid unknown to us. The Learning of the
World may be divided into the Eastern Learning and the Western; and I look upon
the Eastern as far more considerable for Philosophical Antiquities, and
Philosophical Conclusions; I say Conclusions, for I do not believe either of
them had any considerable Theory, or Contexture of Principles and Conclusions
together: But it is certain, that in the East, from what Source soever it came,
Humane or Divine, they had some extraordinary Doctrines and Notions dispersed
amongst them. Now as by the Western Learning we understand that of the Greeks
and Romans; so by the Eastern, that which was amongst the Egyptians,
Phoenicians, Chaldaeans, Assyrians, Indians, Aethiopians, and Persians; and of
the Learning of these Nations, how little have we now left? except some
Fragments and Citations in Greek Authors, what do we know of them? The modern
Bracmans, and the Persees or Pagan Persians, have some broken remains of
Traditions relating to the Origin and Changes of the World: But if we had, not
only those Books entire, whereof we have now the gleanings and reversions only,
but all that have perished besides, especially in that famous Library at
Alexandria; if these, I say, were all restored to the World again, we might
promise our selves the satisfaction of seeing more of the Antiquities, and
Natural History of the first World, than we have now left, or can reasonably
expect. That Library we speak of, at Alexandria, was a Collection, besides
Greek Books, of Egyptian, Chaldaean, and all the ^astern Learning; and
Cedrenus makes it to consist of an hundred thousand Volumes: But Josephus
says, when the Translation of the Bible by the Septuagint was to be added to
it, Demetrius Phalerius (who was Keeper or Governor of it) told the King then,
that he had already two hundred thousand Volumes, and that he hoped to make
them five hundred thousand; and he was better than his word, or his Successors
for him, for Ammianus Marcellinus, and other Authors, report them to have
increased to seven hundred thousand. This Li^brary was unfortunately burnt in
the sacking of Alexandria by Caesar, and considering that all these were
ancient Books, and generally of the Eastern Wisdom, 'twas an inestimable and
irreparable loss to the Commonwealth of Learning. In like manner we are told of
a vast Library of Books of all Arts and Sciences, in China, burnt by the
command or caprice of one of their Kings. Wherein, the Chinese, according to
their vanity, were used to say, greater riches were lost, than will be in the
last Conflagration.

We are told also of the Abyssine or Aethiopick Library as something very
extraordinary. 'Twas formerly in great reputation, but is now, I suppose,
embezil'd and lost. But I was extremely surpised by a Treatise brought to me
some few months since, wherein are mentioned some Aethiopick Antiquities
relating to the Primaeval Earth and the Deluge: To both which they give such
characters and properties, as are in effect the very same with those assigned
them in this Theory. They say the First Earth was much greater than the
present, higher and more advanced into the Air: That it was smooth and regular
in its surface, without Mountains or Valleys, but hollow within: and was
spontaneously fruitful, without plowing or sowing. This was its first state,
but when Mankind became degenerate and outrageous with Pride and Violence, The
angry Gods, as they say, by Earthquakes and Concussions broke the habitable Orb
of the Earth, and thereupon the Subterraneous Waters gushing out, drowned it in
a Deluge, and destroyed Mankind. Upon this fraction, it came into another Form,
with a Sea, Lakes and Rivers, as we now have. And those parts of the broken
Earth, that stood above the Waters, became Mountains, Rocks, Islands, and so
much of the Land as we now inhabit. This account is given us by Barnardinus
Ramazzinus, (in his Treatise De Fontium Mutinensium Seaturigine Page 41.
Franciscus Patricius, Vir eruditione sat clarus, in quodam libello suo de
Antiquorum Rhetorica, Italico idiomate conscripto, ac Venetiis impresso per
Franciscum Senensem, Dialogo primo satis lepidam narrationem habet, quam refert
Iulium Strozzam a Comite Balthasare Castilioneo audivisse, Illum vero a
Philosopho quodam Abyssi^o in Hispania accepisse. Narrabat ergo Sapiens Ille
Abyssinus in antiquissimis Aethiopia Annalibus descriptam esse historiam
perditionis humani generis and disr^^tionis totius Terrae. In Mundi scilicet
primordiis fuisse Terram multo ^^^pliovem qu^m nunc est, ac Coelo proximio^em,
perfect^ rotundam, sine Montibus, ac Vallibus, totam tamen intus cavernosam ad
instar sponglae, hominesque in illa habitantes, ac aethere purissimo gaudentes,
Iucundum avum duxisse, Terr^ inarot^ optimas fruges, and fructus ferente, Cum
autem post diuturnum sacculorum fluxum homines superbia etati a prisca ill^
bonitate descivissent, Deos iratos Terram adeo valide concussisse, ut major
illius pars intra proprias cave^nas decideri, atque hot pacto Aquam in
^itebrosis* recessibus ante conclusam, expressam violenter fuisse, atque ita
Fontes, ^^mra, Lacus and Mare ipsum ortum duxisse. Eam vero Terrae portionem
quae intra has cavernas non decidisset, sed reliqui elatior stetisset, Montium
formam exhibuisse. Insulas porro and scopulos in medio mari nil aliud esse nisi
segmenta Terrae cavernosae ab illo totius terrenae molis praecipiti casu
superstitis.
.) Taken from a Book Writ by Francisco Patricio, to whom this wonderful
Tradition was delivered by persons of credit, from an Ethiopian Philosopher
then in Spain. I have not yet had the good fortune to see that Book of
Francisco Patricio, it is writ in Italian* with this Title, Della Retorica degli
Antichi: Printed at Venice, 1562. This story indeed, deserves to be enquired
after, for we do not any where, amongst the Ancients, meet with such a full and
explicit narration of the state of the First and Second Earth. That which comes
nearest to it are those accounts we find in Plato, from the Egyptian
Antiquities, in his Timaeus, Politicus, and Phoedo, of another Earth and
another state of Nature and Mankind. But none of them are so full and distinct
as this Ethiopian Doctrine.

As for the Western Learning, we may remember what the Egyptian Priest says to
Solon in Plato's Timaeus, You Greeks are always Children, and know nothing of
Antiquity; And if the Greeks were so, much more the Romans, who came after them
in time, and for so great a People, and so much civilized, never any had less
Philosophy, and less of the Sciences amongst them than the Romans had; They
studied only the Art of Speaking, of Governing, and of Fighting: and left the
rest to the Greeks and Eastern Nations, as unprofitable. Yet we have reason to
believe, that the best Philosophical Antiquities that the Romans had, De Civ.
Dei lib. 6. Dion. Halic. Ant. Romans lib. 4.
perished with the Books of Varro, of Numa Pompilius, and of the ancient Sibyls.
Varro writ, as S. Austin tells us a multitude of Volumes, and of various sorts,
and I had rather retrieve his works, than the works of any other Roman Author;
not his Etymologies and Criticisms, where we see nothing admirable, but his
Theologia Physica, and his Antiquitates; which in all probability would have
given us more light into remote times, and the Natural History of the past
World, than all the Latin Authors besides have done. He has left the
forementioned distinction of three Periods of time; He had the doctrine of the
Mundane Egg, as we see in Probus Grammaticus; and he gave us that observation
of the Star Venus, concerning the great change she suffered about the time of
our Deluge.

Numa Pompilius was doubtless a contemplative Man, and it is thought that he
understood the true System of the World, and represented the Sun by his Vestal
Fire; though, methinks, Vesta does not so properly refer to the Sun, as to the
Earth, which has a Sacred fire too, that is not to be extinguished. He ordered
his Books to be buried with him, which were found in a Stone Chest by him, four
hundred years after his death; They were in all Twenty-four, whereof Twelve
contained Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, and the other Twelve the Philosophy and
Wisdom of the Greeks; The Romans gave them to the Praetor Petilius to peruse;
and to make his report to the Senate, whether they were fit to be published or
no: The Praetor made a wise politic report, that the Contents of them might be
of dangerous consequence to the established Laws and Religion; and thereupon
they were condemned to be burnt, and Posterity was deprived of that ancient
Treasure, whatsoever it was. What the Nine Books of the Sibyl contained, that
were offered to King Tarquin, we little know; She valued them high, and the
higher still, the more they seemed to slight or neglect them; which is a piece
of very natural indignation or contempt, when one is satisfied of the worth of
what they offer. It Is likely they respected, besides the fate of Rome, the fate
and several periods of the World, both past and to come, and the most mystical
passages of them. And in these Authors and Monuments are lost the greatest
hopes of Natural and Philosophic Antiquities, that we could have had from the
Romans.

And as to the Greeks, their best and Sacred Learning was not originally their
own; they enricht themselves with the spoils of the East, and the remains we
have of that Eastern Learning, is what we pick out of the Greeks; whose works,
I believe, if they were entirely extant, we should not need to go any further
for witnesses to confirm all the principal parts of this Theory. With what
regret does one read in Laertius, Suidas, and others, the promising titles of
Books writ by the Greek Philosophers, hundreds or thousands, whereof there is
not one now extant; and those that are extant are generally but fragments:
Those Authors also that have writ their Lives, or collected their Opinions,
have done it confusedly and injudiciously. I should hope for as much light and
instruction, as to the Original of the World, from Orpheus alone, if his Works
had been preserved, as from all that is extant now of the other Greek
Philosophers. We may see from what remains of him, that he understood in a good
measure, how the Earth rise from a Chaos, what was its external Figure, and
what the form of its inward structure; The opinion of the Oval Figure of the
Earth is ascribed to Orpheus and his Disciples; and the doctrine of the Mundane
Egg is so peculiarly his, that it is called by Proclus, The Orphick Egg; not
that he was the first Author of that doctrine, but the first that brought it
into Greece.

Thus much concerning the Heathen Learning, Eastern and Western, and the small
remains of it in things Philosophical; it is no wonder then if the account we
have left us from them of the Primitive Earth; and the Antiquities of the
Natural World be very imperfect. And yet we have traced (in the precedent
Chapter, and more largely in our Latin Treatise) the footsteps of several
parts of this Theory amongst the Writings and Traditions of the Ancients: and
even of those parts that seem the most strange and singular, and that are the
Basis upon which the rest stand. We have shown there, that their account of the
Chaos, though it seemed to many but a Poetical Rhapsody, contained the true
mystery of the formation of the Primitive Earth. Tell. Theor. lib. 2. c. 7.
We have also shown upon the same occasion, that both the External Figure and
Internal Form of that Earth was comprised and signified in their ancient
doctrine of the Mundane Egg, Ibid. Cap. 10.
which has been propagated through all the Learned Nations. And lastly, As to
the situation of that Earth, and the change of its posture since, that the
memory of that has been kept up, we have brought several testimonies and
indications from the Greek Philosophers. Ibid.
And these were the three great and fundamental properties of the Primitive
Earth, upon which all the other depend, and all its differences from the
present Order of Nature. You see then, though Providence has suffered the
ancient Heathen Learning and their Monuments, in a great part, to perish, yet
we are not left wholly without witnesses amongst them, in a speculation of this
great importance.

You will say, it may be, though this account, as to the Books and Learning of
the Heathen, may be looked upon as reasonable, yet we might expect however, from
the Jewish and Christian Authors, a more full and satisfactory account of that
Primitive Earth, and of the Old World. First, as to the Jews, it is well known
that they have no ancient Learning, unless by way of Tradition, amongst them.
There is not a Book extant in their Language, excepting the Canon of the Old
Testament, that has not been writ since our Savior's time. They are very bad
Masters of Antiquity, and they may in some measure be excused, because of their
several captivities, dispersions, and desolations. In the Babylonish captivity
their Temple was ransacked, and they did not preserve, as is thought, so much
as the Autograph or original Manuscript of the Law, nor the Books of those of
their Prophets that were then extant, and kept in the Temple; And at their
return from the Captivity after seventy years, they seem to have had forgot
their Native Language so much, that the Law was to be interpreted to them in
Chaldee, after it was read in Hebrew; for so I understand that interpretation
in Neh^miah. c. 8. 7, 8.
'Twas a great Providence, methinks, that they should any way preserve their
Law, and other Books of Scripture, in the Captivity, for so long a time; for
it is likely they had not the liberty of using them in any public worship,
seeing they returned so ignorant of their own Language, and, as it is thought,
of their Alphabet and Character too. And if their Sacred Books were hardly
preserved, we may easily Believe all others perished in that public desolation.

Yet there was another destruction of that Nation, and their Temple, greater
than this, by the Romans; and if there were any remains of Learning preserved
in the former ruin, or any recruits made since that time, this second
desolation would sweep them all away. And accordingly we see they have nothing
left in their Tongue, besides the Bible, so ancient as the destruction of
Jerusalem. These, and other public calamities of the Jewish Nation, may
reasonably be thought to have wasted their Records of ancient Learning, if they
had any; for, to speak truth, the Jews are a people of little curiosity, as to
Sciences and Philosophical enquiries: They were very tenacious of their own
customs, and careful of those Traditions that did respect them, but were not
remarkable, that I know of, or thought great Proficients in any other sort of
Learning. There has been a great fame, it is true, of the Jewish Gabala, and of
great mysteries contained in it; and, I believe, there was once a Traditional
doctrine amongst some of them, that had extraordinary Notions and Conclusions:
But where is this now to be found? The Essenes were the likeliest Sect, one
would think, to retain such doctrines, but it is probable they are now so mixed
with things fabulous and fantastical, that what one should allege from thence
would be of little or no authority. One Head in this Cabala was the doctrine of
the Sephiroth, and though the explication of them be uncertain, Vid. Men. ben
Isr. de Creat. probl. 28.
the Inferior Sephiroth in the Corporeal World cannot so well be applied to
any thing, as to those several Orbs and Regions, enfolding one another, whereof
the Primigenial Earth was composed. Yet such conjectures and applications, I
know, are of no validity, but in consort with better Arguments. I have often
thought also, that their first and second Temple represented the first and
second Earth or World; and that of Ezekiel's, which is the third, is still to
be erected, the most beautiful of all, when this second Temple of the World
shall be burnt down. If the Prophecies of Enoch had been preserved, and taken
into the Canon by E^ra, after their return from Babylon, when the Collection of
their Sacred Books is supposed to have been made, we might probably have had a
considerable account there, both of times past and to come, of Antiquities and
futuritions; for those Prophecies are generally suppos^d to have contain^d both
the first and second fate of this Earth, and all the periods of it. But as this
Book is lost to us, so I look upon all others that pretend to be Ante-Mosaical
or Patriarchal, as Spurious and Fabulous.

Thus much concerning the Jews. As for Christian Authors, their knowledge must
be from some of these forementioned, Jews or Heathens; or else by Apostolical
Tradition: For the Christian Fathers were not very speculative, so as to raise
a Theory from their own thoughts and contemplations, concerning the Origin of
the Earth. We have instanced, in the last Chapter, in a Christian Tradition
concerning Paradise, and the high situation of it, which is fully consonant to
the site of the Primitive Earth, where Paradise stood, and does seem plainly to
refer to it, being unintelligible upon any other supposition. And 'twas, I
believe, this elevation of Paradise, and the pensile structure of that
Paradisiacal Earth, that gave occasion to Celsus, as we see by Origen's answer,
to say, that the Christian Paradise was taken from the pensile Gardens of
Alcinous: But we may see now what was the ground of such expressions or
Traditions amongst the Ancients, which Providence left to keep men's minds
awake; not fully to instruct them, but to confirm them in the truth, when it
should come to be made known in other methods. We have noted also above, that
the ancient Books and Authors amongst the Christians, that were most likely to
inform us in this Argument, have perished, and are lost out of the World, such
as Ephrem Syrus de ortu rerum, and Tertul^ian de Paradiso; and that piece which
is extant, of Moses Bar Cepha's upon this subject, receives more light from our
Hypothesis, than from any other I know; for, correcting some mistakes about the
Figure of the Earth, which the Ancients were often guilty of, the obscurity or
confusion of that Discourse in other things, may be easily rectified, if
compared with this Theory.

Of this nature also is that Tradition that is common both to Jews and
Christians, and which we have often mentioned before, that there was a
perpetual serenity, and perpetual Equinox in Paradise; which cannot be upon
this Earth, not so much as under the Equinoctial; for they have a sort of
Winter and Summer there, a course of Rains at certain times of the Year, and
great inequalities of the Air, as to heat and cold, moisture and drought. They
had also Traditions amongst them, Lat. Treat. Lib. 2. c. 10.
That there was no Rain from the beginning of the World till the Deluge, and
that there were no Mountains till the Flood, and such like; These, you see,
point directly at such an Earth, as we have described. And I call these
Traditions, because we cannot find the Original Authors of them; The ancient
ordinary Gloss (upon Genesis) which some make Eight hundred years old, mentions
both these Opinions; so does Historia Scholastica, Alcuinus, Rabanus, Maurus,
Lyranus, and such Collectors of Antiquity. Bid also relates that of the
plainness or smoothness of the Antediluvian Earth. Yet these are reported
Traditionally, as it were, naming no Authors or Books from whence they were
taken; Nor can it be imagined that they feigned them themselves; to what end or
purpose? it served no interest; or upon what ground? Seeing they had no Theory
that could lead them to such Notions as these, or that could be strengthened
and confirmed by them. Those opinions also of the Fathers which we recited in
the seventh Chapter, placing Paradise beyond the Torrid Zone, and making it
therefore inaccessible, suit very well to the form, qualities, and bipartition
of the Primaeval Earth, and seem to be grounded upon them.

Thus much may serve for a short Survey of the ancient Learning, to give us a
reasonable account, why the memory and knowledge of the Primitive Earth should
be so much lost out of the World; and what we retain of it still; which would
be far more, I do not doubt, if all Manuscripts were brought to light, that are
yet extant in public or private Libraries. The Truth is, one cannot judge with
certainty, neither what things have been recorded and preserved in the
monuments of Learning, nor what are still; not what have been, because so many
of those Monuments are lost: The Alexandrian Library, which we spoke of before,
seems to have been the greatest Collection that ever was made before
Christianity, and the Constantinopolitan (begun by Constantine, and destroyed
in the Fifth Century, when it was raised to the number, as is said, of one
hundred twenty thousand Volumes) the most valuable that was ever since, and
both these have been permitted by Providence to perish in the merciless Flames.
Besides those devastations of Books and Libraries that have been made in
Christendom, by the Northern barbarous Nations overflowing Europe, and the
Saracens and Turks great parts of Asia and Africa. It is hard therefore to
pronounce what knowledge has been in the World, or what accounts of Antiquity;
Neither can we well judge what remain, or of what things the memory may be
still latently conserved; for besides those Manuscripts that are yet unexamin'd
in these parts of Christendom, there are many, doubtless, of good value in
other parts; Besides those that lie hid in the unchristianiz'd dominions. The
Library of Fez is said to contain thirty two thousand Volumes in Arabic; and
though the Arabic Learning was mostwhat Western, and therefore of less
account, yet they did deal in Eastern Learning too; for Avicenna writ a Book
with that Title, Philosophia Orientalis. There may be also in the East
thousands of Manuscripts unknown to us, of greater value than most Books we
have: And as to those subjects we are treating of, I should promise my self
more light and confirmation from the Syriack Authors than from any others.
These things being considered, we can make but a very imperfect estimate, what
evidences are left us, and what accounts of the Primitive Earth, and if these
deductions and defalcations be made, both for what Books are wholly lost, and
for what lie asleep or dead in Libraries, we have reason to be satisfied in a
Theory of this nature* to and so good attestations as we have produced for the
several parts of it; which we purpose to enlarge upon considerably at another
time and occasion.

But to carry this Objection as far as may be, let us suppose it to be urg^d
still in the last place, that though these Humane Writings have perished, or be
imperfect, yet in the Divine Writings at least, we might expect, that the
memory of the Old World, and of the Primitive Earth should have been preserved.
To this I answer in short, That we could not expect in the Scriptures any
Natural Theory of that Earth, nor any account of it, but what was general; and
this we have, both by the Tehom-Rabba of Moses, and the description of the same
Abyss in other places of Scripture, as we have shown at large in the First
Book, Chap. 7. And also by the description which S. Peter has given of the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and their different constitution from the
present: which is also proved by the Rainbow, not seen in the first World. You
will say, 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6, etc.
it may be, that that place of S. Peter is capable of another interpretation;
so are most places of Scripture, if you speak of a bare capacity; they are
capable of more than one interpretation; but that which is most natural, proper
and congruous, and suitable to the words, suitable to the Argument, and
suitable to the Context, wherein is nothing superfluous or impertinent, That we
prefer and accept of as the most reasonable interpretation. Besides, in such
Texts as relate to the Natural World, if of two interpretations proposed, one
agrees better with the Theory of Nature than the other, caeteris paribus, that
ought to be preferred. And by these two rules we are willing to be tried, in the
exposition of that remarkable Discourse of S. Peter's, and to stand to that
sense which is found most agreeable to them.

Give me leave to conclude the whole Discourse with this general Consideration;
It Is reasonable to suppose, that there is a Providence in the conduct of
Knowledge, as well as of other affairs on the Earth; and that it was not
designed that all the mysteries of Nature and Providence should be plainly and
clearly understood throughout all the Ages of the World; but that there is an
Order established for this, as for other things, and certain Periods and
Seasons; And what was made known to the Ancients only by broken Conclusions and
Traditions, will be known (in the latter Ages of the World) in a more perfect
way, by Principles and Theories. The increase of Knowledge being that which
changes so much the face of the World, and the state of Humane affairs, I do
not doubt but there is a particular care and superintendency for the conduct of
it; by what steps and degrees it should come to light, at what Seasons and in
what Ages; what evidence should be left, either in Scripture, Reason, or
Tradition, for the grounds of it; how clear or obscure, how dispersed or united;
all these things were weighed and considered, and such measures taken as best
suit the designs of Providence, and the general project and method proposed in
the government of the World. And I make no question but the state both of the
Old World, and of that which is to come, is exhibited to us in Scripture in
such a measure and proportion, as is fit for this forementioned purpose; not
as the Articles of our Faith, or the precepts of a good Life, which he that
runs may read: but to the attentive and reflexive, to those that are
unprejudiced, and to those that are inquisitive, and have their minds open and
prepared for the discernment of mysteries of such a nature.

Thus much in answer to that general Objection which might be made against this
Theory, That it is not founded in Antiquity. I do not doubt but there may be
many particular Objections against Parts and Sections of it, and the exposing
it thus in our own Tongue may excite some or other, it may be, to make them;
but if any be so minded, I desire (if they be Scholars) that it may rather be
in Latin, as being more proper for a subject of this nature; and also that they
would keep themselves close to the substance of the Theory, and wound that as
much as they can; but to make excursions upon things accidental or collateral,
that do not destory the Hypothesis, is but to trouble the World with
impertinencies. Now the substance of the Theory is this, THAT there was a
Primitive Earth of another form from the present, and inhabited by Mankind till
the Deluge; That it had those properties and conditions that we have ascribed
to it, namely, a perpetual Equinox or Spring, by reason of its right situation
to the Sun; Was of an Oval Figure, and the exterior face of it smooth and
uniform, without Mountains or a Sea. That in this Earth stood Paradise; the
doctrine whereof cannot be understood but upon supposition of this Primitive
Earth, and its properties. Then that the disruption and fall of this Earth into
the Abyss, which lay under it, was that which made the Universal Deluge, and
the destruction of the Old World; And that neither Noah's Flood, nor the
present form of the Earth can be explained in any other method that is
rational, nor by any other Causes that are intelligible: at least that have
been hitherto proposed to the World. These are the Vitals of the Theory, and
the primary Assertions, whereof I do freely profess my full belief: and
whosoever by solid reasons will show me in an Error, and undeceive me, I shall
be very much obliged to him. There are other lesser Conclusions which flow from
these, and may be called Secondary, as that the Longaevity of the
Ante-diluvians depended upon their perpetual Equinox, and the perpetual
equality and serenity of the Air; That the Torrid Zone in the Primitive Earth
was uninhabitable; And that all their Rivers flowed from the extreme parts of
the Earth toward the Equinoctial; there being neither Rain, nor Rainbow, in
the temperate and habitable Regions of it; And lastly, That the place of
Paradise, according to the opinion of Antiquity, (for I determine no place by
the Theory) was in the Southern Hemisphere. These, I think, are all truly
deduced and proved in their several ways, though they be not such essential
parts of the Theory, as the former. There are also besides, many particular
Explications that are to be considered with more liberty and latitude, and may
be perhaps upon better thoughts, or better observations, corrected, without any
prejudice to the General Theory. Those places of Scripture, which we have
cited, I think, are all truly applied; and I have not mentioned Moses's
C^smopoeia, because I thought it delivered by him as a Lawgiver, not as a
Philosopher; which I intend to show at large in another Treatise, not thinking
that discussion proper for the Vulgar Tongue. Upon the whole, we are to
remember, that some allowances are to be made for every Hypothesis that is new
proposed and untried: and that we ought not out of levity of wit, or any
private design, discountenance free and fair Essays: nor from any other motive,
but the only love and concern of Truth.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Author of Nature.
SEeing the Theory which we have proposed in this Work is of that extent and
comprehension, that it begins with the first foundation of this World, and is
to reach to the last Period of it, in one continued Series or chain of Nature;
It will not be improper, before we conclude, to make some reflections and
remarks what Nature is, and upon what superior Causes she depends in all her
Motions and Operations: And this will lead us to the discovery of the Author of
Nature, and to the true Notion and state of Natural Providence, which seems to
have been hitherto very much neglected, or little understood in the World. And
it is the more reasonable and fitting, that we should explain these Notions
before we shut up this Treatise, lest those Natural Explications which we have
given of the Deluge, and other things, should be mistaken or misapplied; Seeing
some are apt to run away with pieces of a Discourse, which they think
applicable to their purpose, or which they can maliciously represent, without
attending to the scope or just limitations of what is spoken.

By Nature in general is understood All the Powers of Finite Beings, with the
Laws established for their action and conduct according to the ordinary course
of things. And this extends both to Intellectual Beings and Corporeal; but
seeing it is only the Material World that has been the subject of our
Discourse, Nature, as to that, may be defined, the Powers of Matter, with the
Laws established for their action and conduct. Seeing also Matter has no
action, whether from it self, or impressed upon it, but Motion, as to the
Corporeal World Nature is no more than the powers and capacities of Matter,
with the Laws that govern the Motions of it. And this definition is so plain
and easy, that, I believe, all parties will agree in it; There will also be no
great controversy what these Laws are, As that one part of Matter cannot
penetrate another, nor be in several places at once; That the greater Body
overcomes the less, and the swifter the flower; That all motion is in a right
line, till something obstruct it or divert it; which are points little disputed
as to the matter of fact; but the points concerning which the controversy
arises, and which are to lead us to the Author of Nature, are these, Who or
what is the Author of these Laws? of this Motion) and even of Matter it self;
and of all those modes and forms of it which we see in Nature?

The Question uses chiefly to be put concerning Motion, how it came into the
World; what the first Source of it is, or how Matter came at first to be moved?
For the simple notion of Matter, not divided into parts, nor diversified, does
not imply Motion, but Extension only; It Is true, from Extension there
necessarily follows mobility, or a capacity of being moved by an External
Power, but not actual or necessary Motion springing from it self. For
dimensions, or length, breadth, and depth, which is the Idea of Matter, or of a
Body, do no way include local Motion, or translation of parts; on the contrary,
we do more easily and naturally conceive simple Extension as a thing steady and
fixed, and if we conceive Motion in it, or in its parts, we must superadd
something to our first thought, and something that does not flow from
Extension. As when we conceive a Figure, a Triangle, Square, or any other, we
naturally conceive it fixed or quiescent, and if afterward we imagine it in
Motion, that is purely accidental to the Figure; in like manner it is
accidental to Matter, that there should be Motion in it, it has no inward
principle from whence that can flow, and its Nature is complete without it;
Wherefore if we find Motion and Action in Matter, which is of it self a dead
in-active Mass, this should lead us immediately to the Author of Nature, or to
some External Power distinct from Matter, which is the Cause of all Motion in
the World.

In single Bodies, and single parts of Matter, we readily believe and conclude,
that they do not move, unless something move them, and why should we not
conclude the same thing of the whole mass? If a Rock or Mountain cannot move it
self, nor divide it self, either into great gobbets, or into small powder, why
should it not be as impossible for the whole mass of Matter to do so? It Is
true, Matter is capable both of motion and rest, yet to conceive it undivided,
undiversified and unmoved, is certainly a more simple Notion, than to conceive
it divided and moved; and this being first in order of Nature, and an adequate
conception too, we ought to enquire and give our selves an account how it came
out of this state, and by what Causes, or, as we said before, how Motion came
first into the World.

In the second place, That diversity which we see in Nature, both as to the
qualities of Matter, and the compositions of it, being one step further than
bare Motion, ought also to be a further indication of the Author of Nature, and
to put us upon enquiry into the Causes of this diversity. There is nothing more
uniform than simple Extension, nothing more the same throughout, all of a
piece, and all of a sort, similar, and like to it self every where, yet we find
the matter of the Universe diversified a thousand ways, into Heavens and Earth,
Air and Water, Stars, Meteors, Light, Darkness, Stones, Wood, Animals, and all
Terrestrial Bodies; These diversifications are still further removes from the
natural unity and identity of Matter, and a further argument of some external
and superior power that has given these different forms ^o the several
portions of Matter by the intervention of Motion. For if you exclude the Author
of Nature, and suppose nothing but Matter in the World, take whether Hypothesis
you will, either that Matter is without Motion of it self, or that it is of it
self in Motion, there could not arise this diversity, and these compositions in
it. If it was without Motion, then the case is plain, for it would be nothing
but an hard inflexible lump of impenetrable extension, without any diversity at
all. And if you suppose it moved of it self, or to have an innate Motion, that
would certainly hinder all sort of natural concretions and compositions, and in
effect destroy all Continuity. For Motion, if it be essential to Matter, it is
essential to every Atome of it, and equally diffused throughout all its parts;
and all those parts or Atoms would be equal to one another, and as little as
possible; for if Matter was divided into parts by its own innate Motion, that
would melt it down into parts as little as possible, and consequently all equal
to one another, there being no reason why you should stop those divisions, or
the effect of this innate impetus in any one part sooner than in another, or in
any part indeed till it was divided as much as was possible; Wherefore upon
this principle, or in this method, all the Matter of the Universe would be one
liquid or volatile mass, smaller than pin dust, nay, than Air or Ether: And
there would be no diversity of forms, only another sort of identity from the
former, when we supposed it wholly without motion. And so, upon the whole, you
see, that Matter, whether we allow it Motion, or no Motion, could not come into
that variety of tempers and compositions in which we find it in the World,
without the influence and direction of a Superior External Cause, which we
call the Author of Nature.

But there is still a further and stronger Argument from this Head, if we
consider not only the diversity of Bodies, that the mass of Matter is cut into,
but also that that diversity is regular, and in some parts of it admirably
artful and ingenious. This will not only lead us to an Author of Nature, but to
such an Author as has Wisdom as well as Power. Matter is a brute Being, stupid
and senseless, and though we should suppose it to have a force to move it self,
yet that it should be able to meditate and consult, and take its measures how
to frame a World, a regular and beautiful structure, consisting of such and
such parts and Regions, and adapted to such and such purposes, this would be
too extravagant to imagine; to allow it not only Motion from it self, but Wit
and Judgment too; and that before it came into any Organical or Animate
composition.

You Will say, it may be, The Frame of the World was not the result of counsel
and consultation, but of necessity; Matter being once in Motion under the
conduct of those Laws that are essential to it, it wrought it self by degrees
from one state into another, till at length it came into the present form which
we call the World. These are words thrown out at random, without any pretense
of ground, only to see if they can be confuted; And so they may easily be, for
we have shown already, that if Matter had innate Motion, it would be so far
from running into the orderly and well disposed frame of the World, that it
would run into no frame at all, into no forms, or compositions, or diversity of
Bodies; but would either be all fluid, or all solid; either every single
particle in a separate Motion, or all in one continued mass with an universal
tremor, or inclination to move without actual separation; and either of these
two states is far from the form of a World. Secondly, As to the Laws of Motion,
as some of them are essential to Matter, so others are not demonstrable, but
upon supposition of an Author of Nature. And thirdly, Though all the Laws of
Motion be admitted, they cannot bring Matter into the form of a World, unless
some measures be taken at first by an intelligent Being; I say some measures be
taken to determine the primary Motions upon which the rest depend, and to put
them in a way that leads to the formation of a World. The mass must be divided
into Regions, and Centers fixed, and Motions appropriated to them; and it must
be considered of what magnitude the first Bodies, or the first divisions of
Matter should be, and how moved: Besides, there must be a determinate
proportion, and certain degree of motion impressed upon the Universal Matter, to
qualify it for the production of a World; if the dose was either too strong or
too weak, the work would miscarry; and nothing but infinite Wisdom could see
thorough the effects of every proportion, or every new degree of Motion, and
discern which was best for the beginning, progress, and perfection of a World.
So you see the Author of Nature is no way excluded, or made useless by the Laws
of Motion; nor if Matter was promiscuously moved would these be sufficient
causes of themselves to produce a World, or that regular diversity of Bodies
that compose it.

But it is hard to satisfy Men against their inclinations, or their interest:
And as the regularity of the Universe was always a great stumbling-stone to the
Epicuraeans; so they have endeavored to make shifts of all sorts to give an
account and answer to it, without recourse to an Intelligent Principle; and for
their last refuge, they say, That Chance might bring that to pass, which Nature
and Necessity could not do; The Atoms might hit upon a lucky set of Motions,
which though it were casual and fortuitous, might happily lead them to the
forming of a World. A lucky hit indeed, for Chance to frame a World: But this
is a mere shuffle and collusion; for if there was nothing in Nature but Matter,
there could be no such thing as Chance, all would be pure Mechanical Necessity;
and so this answer, though it seem very different, is the same in effect with
the former, and Epicurus with his Atomists are obliged to give a just
mechanical account, how all the parts of Nature, the most compound and
elaborate parts not excepted, rise from their Atoms by pure necessity: There
could be no accidental concourse or coalition of them, every step, every
motion, every composition was fatal and necessary, and therefore it is nonsense
for an Epicuraean to talk of Chance, as Chance is opposed to Necessity; and if
they oppose it to Counsel and Wisdom, it is little better than nonsense, to say
the World and all its furniture rise by Chance, in that notion of it. But it
will deserve our patience a little to give a more full and distinct answer to
this, seeing it reaches all their pleas and evasions at once.

What proof or demonstration of Wisdom and Counsel can be given, or can be
desired, that is not found in some part of the World, Animate or Inanimate? We
know but a little portion of the Universe, a mere point in comparison, and a
broken point too, and yet in this broken point, or some small parcels of it,
there is more of Art, Counsel and Wisdom shown, than in all the works of Men
taken together, or than in all our Artificial World. In the construction of the
Body of an Animal, there is more of thought and contrivance, more of exquisite
invention, and fit disposition of parts, than is in all the Temples, Palaces,
Ships, Theaters, or any other pieces of Architecture the World ever yet see:
And not Architecture only, but all other Mechanism whatsoever, Engines,
Clock-work, or any other, is not comparable to the Body of a living Creature.
Seeing then we acknowledge these artificial works, wheresoever we meet with
them, to be the effects of Wit, Understanding and Reason, is it not manifest
partiality, or stupidity rather, to deny the Works of Nature, which excel these
in all degrees, to proceed from an Intelligent Principle? Let them take any
piece of Humane Art, or any Machine framed by the Wit of Man, and compare it
with the Body of an Animal, either for diversity and multiplicity of
Workmanship, or curiosity in the minute parts, or just connection and dependence
of one thing upon another, or fit subserviency to the ends proposed, of life,
motion, use and ornament to the Creature, and if in all these respects they
find it superior to any work of Humane production, (as they certainly must
do,) why should it be thought to proceed from inferior and senceless Causes;
ought we not in this, as well as in other things, to proportion the Causes to
the Effect? and to speak truth, and bring in an honest Verdict for Nature as
well as Art?

In the composition of a perfect Animal, there are four several frames or
compages joined together, The Natural, Vital, Animal, and Genital; Let them
examine any one of these apart, and try if they can find any thing defective or
superfluous, or any way inept, for matter or form. Let them view the whole
Compages of the Bones, and especially the admirable construction, texture, and
disposition of the Muscles, which are joined with them for moving the Body, or
its parts. Let them take an account of the little Pipes and Conduits for the
Juices and the Liquors, of their form and distribution; Or let them take any
single Organ to examine, as the Eye, or the Ear, the Hand or the Heart; In each
of these they may discover such arguments of Wisdom, and of Art, as will either
convince them, or confound them; though still they must leave greater
undiscovered. We know little the insensible form and contexture of the parts of
the Body, nor the just method of their Action; We know not yet the manner,
order and causes of the Motion of the Heart, which is the chief Spring of the
whole Machine: and with how little exactness do we understand the Brain, and
the parts belonging to it? Why of that temper and of that form? How Motions are
propagated there, and how conserved? How they answer the several operations of
the Mind? Why such little discomposures of it disturb our Senses, and upon what
little differences in this the great differences of Wits and Genius's depend.
Yet seeing in all these Organs, whose make and manner of action we cannot
discover, we see however by the Effects, that they are truly fitted for those
offices to which Nature has designed them, we ought in reason to admire that
Art which we cannot penetrate. At least we cannot but judge it a thing absurd,
that what we have not wit enough to find out or comprehend, we should not allow
to be an argument of wit and understanding in the Author, or Inventor of it.
This would be against all Logic, common Sense, and common Decorum. Neither do
I think it possible to the mind of Man, while we attend to evidence, to believe
that these, and such like works of Nature came by Chance, as they call it, or
without Providence, forecast and Wisdom, either in the first Causes, or in the
proximate; in the design, or in the execution; in the preparation to them, or
in the finishing of them.

Wherefore, in my judgment, if any be of this persuasion, it cannot be so much
the effect of their understanding, as of their disposition and inclination; and
in moral things, men's opinions do as often spring from the one, as from the
other. For my part, I do generally distinguish of two sorts of opinions in all
men, Inclination-opinions, and Reason'd-opinions; Opinions that grow upon Men's
Complexions, and Opinions that are the results of their Reason; and I meet with
very few that are of a temperament so equal, or a constitution so even poised,
but that they incline to one set of Opinions rather than another, antecedently
to all proofs of Reason: And when they have espoused their opinions from that
secret sympathy, then they find out as good Reasons as they can to maintain
them, and say, nay think sometimes, that 'twas for the sake of those Reasons
that they first embraced them. We may commonly distinguish these
Inclination-opinions from the Rational, because we find them accompanied with
more Heat than Light, a great deal of eagerness and impatience in defending of
them, and but slender arguments. One might give instances of this, both in
Sects of Religion and Philosophy, in Platonists, Stoics, and Epicureans, that
are so by their temper more than their reason, but to our purpose it will be
sufficient to instance in one hearty Epicurean, Lucretius, who is manifestly
such, more from his inclination, and the bent of his Spirit, than from the
force of Argument. For though his suppositions be very precarious, and his
reasonings all along very slight, he will many times strut and triumph, as if
he had wrested the Thunder out of Jove's right hand; and a Mathematician is not
more confident of his demonstration, than he seems to be of the truth of his
shallow Philosophy. From such a principle of natural Complexion as this, I
allow a man may be Atheistical, but never from the calm dictate of his Reason;
yet he may be as confident, and as tenacious of his Conclusion, as if he had a
clear and distinct evidence for it. For I take it to be a true Maxim in Humane
Nature, that A strong inclination, with a little evidence is equivalent to a
strong evidence. And therefore we are not to be surpris^d if we find Men
confident in their opinions many times far beyond the degree of their evidence,
seeing there are other things, besides evidence, that incline the Will to one
Conclusion rather than another. And as I have instanced in Natural Complexion,
so Interest has the same effect upon Humane Nature, because it always begets
an inclination to those opinions that favor our interest, and a disinclination
to the contrary; And this principle may be another ingredient, and secret
persuasive to Atheism; for when men have run themselves so deep into Vice and
Immorality, that they expect no benefit from a God, it is in a manner necessary
to their quiet, and the ease of their mind, that they should fancy there is
none; for they are afraid, if there be a God, that he will not stand neuter,
and let them alone in another World. This, I say, is necessary to the quiet of
their mind, unless they can attain that great Art, which many labor after, of
non-reflection, or an unthinking faculty, as to God and a World to come, but to
return to our Argument, after this short digression --

And as that regular diversity which we see in the forms of Nature, and
especially in the Bodies of Animals, could not be from any blind principle,
either of Necessity or of Chance; So, in the last place, that Subordination
which we see in the parts of Nature, and subserviency to one another, the less
Noble to the more Noble, the Inanimate to the Animate, and all things upon
Earth unto Man, must needs have been the effect of some Being higher than
Matter; that did wisely dispose all things so at first, and does still conserve
them in the same order. If Man had been born into the World, and a numerous
host of Creatures, without any provision or accommodation made for their
subsistence and conveniences, we might have suspected that they had come by
Chance, and therefore were so ill provided for: but which of them can complain?
through their various Kinds and Orders, what is there awanting? They are all
fitted to their several Elements, and their ways of living, Birds, Beasts, and
Fishes, both by the form and shape of their Bodies the manner of their
covering, and the quality of their food. Besides, They are instructed in little
Arts and Instincts for their conservation; and not only for their proper
conservation, but also to find a way to make and bring up young ones, and leave
behind them a Posterity; And all this in so fit a method, and by such a pretty
train of actions, as is really admirable.

Man is the Master of all, and of him a double care is taken; that he should
neither want what Nature can afford, nor what Art can supply. He could not be
provided of all conveniences by Nature only, especially to secure him against
the in^uries of the Air; but in recompense, Nature has provided materials for
all those Arts which she see would be needful in Humane Life, as Building,
Clothing, Navigation, Agriculture, etc. That so Mankind might have both
wherewithal to answer their occasions, and also to employ their time, and
exercise their ingenuity. This Economy of Nature, as I may call it, or well
ordering of the great Family of living Creatures, is an argument both of
Goodness and of Wisdom, and is every way far above the powers of brute Matter.
All regular administration we ascribe to conduct and judgment; If an Army of
Men be well provided for in things necessary both for Food, Clothes, Arms,
Lodging, Security and Defense, so as nothing is awanting in so great a
multitude, we suppose it the effect of care and forecast in those persons that
had the charge of it; they took their measures at first, computed and
proportioned one thing to another, made good regulations, and gave orders for
convenient supplies. And can we suppose the great Army of Creatures upon Earth
managed and provided for with less forethought and Providence, nay, with none
at all, by mere Chance? This is to recede from all rules and analogy of Reason,
only to serve a turn, and gratify an unreasonable humor.

To conclude this Argument; There are two general Heads of things, if I
recollect aright, which we make the marks and characters of Wisdom and Reason,
Works of Art, and the Conduct of affairs or direction of means to an end; and
wheresoever we meet, either with regular material works, or a regular
ordination of affairs, we think we have a good title and warrant to derive them
from an intelligent Author; Now these two being found in the Natural World, and
that in an eminent degree, the one in the Frame of it, and the other in the
Economy of it, we have all the evidence and ground that can be in arguing from
things visible to things invisible, that there is an Author of Nature,
Superior both to Humane Power and Humane Wisdom.

Before we proceed to give any further proofs or discoveries of the Author of
Nature, let us reflect a little upon those we have already insisted upon; which
have been taken wholly from the Material World, and from the common course of
Nature. The very existence of Matter is a proof of a Deity, for the Idea of it
has no connection with existence, as we shall show hereafter; however we will
take leave now to set it down with the rest, in order as they follow one
another.

1. The existence of Matter. 2. The Motion of Matter. 3. The just quantity and
degree of that Motion. 4. The first form of the Universe upon Motion impressed;
both as to the Divisions of Matter, and the Leading Motions. 5. The Laws for
communication and regulation of that Motion. 6. The regular effects of it,
especially in the Animate World. 7. The Economy of Nature, and fit
Subordination of one part of the World to another.
The five first of these Heads are prerequisites, and preparatives to the
formation of a World, and the two last are as the image and character of its
Maker, of his Power, Goodness and Wisdom, impressed upon it. Every one of them
might well deserve a Chapter to it self, if the subject was to be treated on at
large; but this is only an occasional dissertation, to state the Powers of
Matter, lest they should be thought boundless, and the Author of Nature
unnecessary, as the Epicuraeans pretend; but notwithstanding their vain
confidence and credulity, I defy them, or any man else, to make sense of the
Material World, without placing a God at the Center of it.

To these considerations taken wholly from the Corporeal World, give me leave
to add one of a mixed nature, concerning the Union of our Soul and Body. This
strange effect, if rightly understood, does as truly discover the Author of
Nature, as many Effects that are accounted more Supernatural. The Incarnation,
as I may so say, of a Spiritual Substance, is to me a kind of standing miracle;
That there should be such an union and connection reciprocally betwixt the
motions of the Body, and the actions and passions of the Soul: betwixt a
substance Intellectual, and a parcel of organized Matter: can be no effect of
either of those substances; being wholly distinct in themselves, and remote in
their natures from one another. For instance, When my Finger is cut, or when
it is burnt, that my Soul thereupon should feel such a smart and violent pain,
is no consequence of Nature, or does not follow from any connection there is
betwixt the Motion or Division of that piece of Matter, I call my Finger, and
the passion of that Spirit I call my Soul; for these are two distinct Essences,
and in themselves independent upon one another, as much as the Sun and my Body
are independent; and there is no more reason in strict Nature, or in the
essential chain of Causes and Effects, that my Soul should suffer, or be
affected with this Motion in the Finger, than that the Sun should be affected
with it; nay, there is less reason, if less can be, for the Sun being
Corporeal, as the finger is, there is some remote possibility that there might
be communication of Motion betwixt them; but Motion cannot beget a thought, or
a passion, by its own force; Motion can beget nothing but Motion, and if it
should produce a thought, the Effect would be more noble than the Cause.
Wherefore this Union is not by any necessity of Nature, but only from a
positive Institution, or Decree established by the Author of Nature, that there
should be such a communication betwixt these two substances for a time, viz.
during the Vitality of the Body.

It Is true indeed, if Thought, Apprehension, and Reason, was nothing but
Corporeal Motion, this Argument would be of no force; but to suppose this, is
to admit an absurdity to cure a difficulty; to make a Thought out of a local
Motion; is like making a God out of a Stock, or a Stone; for these two are as
remote in their Nature, and have as different Idea's in the Mind, as any two
disparate things we can propose or conceive; Number and Color, a Triangle and
Virtue, Free Will and a Pyramid are not more unlike, more distant, or of more
different forms, than Thought and local Motion. Motion is nothing but a Bodies
changing its place and situation amongst other Bodies, and what affinity or
resemblance has that to a Thought? How is that like to Pain, or to a doubt of
the Mind? to Hope or to Desire? to the Idea of God? to any act of the Will or
Understanding, as judging, consenting, reasoning, remembering, or any other?
These are things of several orders that have no similitude, nor any mixture of
one another. And as this is the nature of Motion, so, on the other hand, in a
Thought there are two things, Consciousness, and a ^epresentation;
Consciousness is in all Thoughts indifferently, whether distinct or confused,
for no Man thinks but he is conscious that he thinks, nor perceives any thing
but he is conscious that he perceives it; there is also in a Thought,
especially if it be distinct, a representation; it is the image of that we think
upon, and makes its Object present to the Mind. Now what has local Motion to
do with either of these two, Consciousness, or Representativeness? How does it
include either of them, or hold them any way affixt to its Nature? I think one
may with as good sense and reason ask of what color a Thought is, green or
scarlet, as what sort of Motion it is; for Motion of what sort soever, can
never be conscious, not represent things as our Thoughts do. I have noted thus
much in general, only to show the different nature of Motion and Cogitation,
that we may be the more sensible that they have no mutual connection in us, nor
in any other Creature, from their essence or essential properties, but by a
supervenient power from the Author of Nature, who has thus united the Soul and
the Body in their operations.

We have hitherto only considered the ordinary course of Nature, and what
indications and proofs of its Author, that affords us; There is another
remarkable Head of Arguments from effects extraordinary and supernatural, such
as Miracles, Prophecies, Inspirations, Prodigies, Apparitions, Witchcraft,
Sorceries, etc. These, at one step, lead us to something above Nature, and this
is the shortest way, and the most popular; several Arguments are suited to
several tempers, and God has not left himself without a proper witness to
every temper that is not wilfully blind. Of these witnesses we now speak of,
the most considerable are Miracles, and the most considerable Records of them
are the Books of Scripture; which if we consider only as an History, and as
having nothing Sacred in them more than other good Histories, that is, truth in
matter of fact, we cannot doubt but there have been Miracles in the World; That
Moses and the Prophets, our Savior and his Apostles, wrought Miracles, I can
no more question, than that Caesar and Alexander fought Battles, and took
Cities. So also that there were true Prophecies and Inspirations, we know from
Scripture, only considered as a true History. But as for other supernatural
effects that are not recorded there, we have reason to examine them more
strictly before we receive them, at least as to particular instances; for I am
apt to think they are like Lotteries, where there are ten or twenty Blanks for
one Prize; but yet if there were no Prizes at all, the Lottery would not have
credit to subsist, and would be cried down as a perfect Cheat; So if amongst
those many stories of Prodigies, Apparitions, and Witchcrafts, there were not
some true, the very fame and thought of them would die from amongst Men, and
the first broachers of them would be hooted at as Cheats. As a false Religion
that has nothing true and solid mixed with it, can scarce be fixed upon Mankind;
but where there is a mixture of true and false, the strength of the one
supports the weakness of the other. As for Sorcery, the instances and examples
of it are undeniable; not so much those few scattered instances that happen now
and then amongst us, but such as are more constant, and in a manner National,
in some Countries, and amongst barbarous people. Besides, the Oracles, and the
Magic that was so frequent amongst the Ancients, show us that there have been
always some Powers more than Humane tampering with the affairs of Mankind. But
this Topic from effects Extraordinary and Supernatural, being in a great
measure Historical, and respecting evil Spirits as well as the Author of
Nature, is not so proper for this place.

There is a third Set or Head of Arguments, that to some tempers are more
cogent and convictive than any of these, namely, Arguments abstract and
Metaphysical; And these do not only lead us to an Author of Nature in general,
but show us more of his properties and perfections; represent him to us as a
supreme Deity, infinitely perfect, the fountain of all Being, and the steady
Center of all things. But reasons of this order, being of a finer thread,
require more attention, and some preparation of Mind to make us discern them
well, and be duly sensible of them. When a Man has withdrawn himself from the
noise of this busy World, locked up his Senses and his Passions, and every
thing that would unite him with it: commanded a general silence in the Soul,
and suffers not a Thought to stir, but what looks inwards; Let him then reflect
seriously, and ask himself, What am I, and How came I into Being? If I was
Author and Original to my self, surely I ought to feel that mighty Power, and
enjoy the pleasure of it; but, alas, I am conscious of no such force or Virtue,
nor of any thing in my Nature, that should give me necessary existence; It has
no connection with any part of me, nor any faculty in me, that I can discern.
And now that I do exist, from what Causes soever, Can I secure my self in
Being? now that I am in possession, am I sure to keep it? am I certain that
three minutes hence I shall still exist? I may or I may not, for ought I see;
Either seems possible in it self, and either is contingent as to me; I find
nothing in my Nature that can warrant my subsistence for one day, for one hour,
for one moment longer. I am nothing but Thoughts, fleeting Thoughts, that chase
and extinguish one another; and my Being, for ought I know, is successive, and
as dying as they are, and renewed to me every moment. This I am sure of, that
so far as I know my self, and am conscious what I am, there is no principle of
immutability, or of necessary and indefectible existence in my Nature; and
therefore I ought in reason to believe, that I stand or fall at the mercy of
other Causes, and not by my own will, or my own sufficiency.

Besides, I am very sensible and in this I cannot be mistaken, that my Nature
is in several respects, weak and imperfect; both as to Will and Understanding.
I Will many things in vain, and without effect, and I Wish often what I have no
ability to execute or obtain. And as to my Understanding, how defective is it?
how little or nothing do I know in comparison of what I am ignorant of? Almost
all the Intellectual World is shut up to me, and the far greatest part of the
Corporeal; And in those things that fall under my cognizance, how often am I
mistaken? I am confined to a narrow sphere, and yet within that sphere I often
err; my conceptions of things are obscure and confused, my reason
short-sighted; I am forced often to correct my self, to acknowledge that I have
judged false, and consented to an error. In sum, all my powers I find are
limited, and I can easily conceive the same kind of perfections in higher
degrees than I possess them, and consequently there are Beings, (...). Arist.
or may be, greater and more excellent than my self, and more able to subsist
by their own power. Why should I not therefore believe that my Original is from
those Beings rather than from my self? For every Nature, the more great and
perfect it is, the nearer it approaches to necessity of existence, and to a
power of producing other things. Yet, the truth is, it must be acknowledged,
that so long as the perfections of those other Beings are limited and finite,
though they be far superior to us, there is no necessity arises from their
Nature that they should exist; and the same Arguments that we have used against
our selves, they may, in proportion, use against themselves; and therefore we
must still advance higher to find a self originated Being, whose existence must
fl^w immediately from his essence, or have a necessary connextion with it.

And indeed all these different degrees of higher and higher perfections lead
us directly to an highest, or Supreme degree, which is infinite and unlimited
Perfection. As subordinate causes lead to the first, so Natures more perfect
one than another lead us to a Nature infinitely perfect, which is the Fountain
of them all. Thither we must go, if we will follow the course of Reason, which
cannot stop at one more than another, till it arrive there; And being arrived
there, at that Sovereign and Original Perfection, it finds a firm and
immovable ground to stand upon; the steady Center of all Being, wherein the
Mind rests and is satisfied. All the scruples or objections that we moved
against our selves, or other Creatures, take no place here; This Being is
conscious of an All Sufficiency in it self, and of immutability as to any thing
else, including in it all the causes of existence, or, to speak more properly,
all necessity of existence. Besides, that we exist our selves, notwithstanding
the imperfection and insufficiency of our Nature, is a just, collateral proof
of the existence of this Supreme Being; for such an effect as this cannot be
without its Cause, and it can have no other competent Cause but that we
mention. And as this Being is its own Origin, so it must needs be capable of
producing all Creatures; for whatsoever is possible, must be possible to it;
and that Creatures or finite Beings are possible, we both see by experience,
and may also discern by Reason; for those several degrees of perfection, or
limitations of it, which we mentioned before, are all consistent Notions, and
consequently make consistent Natures, and such as may exist; but contingently
indeed, and in dependence upon the first Cause.

Thus we are come at length to a fair resolution of that great Question, Whence
we are, and how we continue in Being? And this has led us by an easy ascent
to the Supreme Author of Nature, and the first Cause of all things; and
presents us also with such a Scheme and Draught of the Universe, as is clear
and rational; every thing in its order, and in its place, according to the
dignity of its Nature, and the strength of its principles. When the Mind has
raised it self into this view of a Being infinitely perfect, it is in a Region
of Light, has a free prospect every way, and sees all things from top to
bottom, as pervious and transparent. Whereas without God and a First Cause,
there is nothing but darkness and confusion in the Mind, and in Nature; broken
views of things, short interrupted glimpses of Light, nothing certain or
demonstrative, no Basis of Truth, no extent of Thought, no Science, no
Contemplation.

You will say, it may be, It Is true, something must be Eternal, and of
necessary existence, but why may not Matter be this Eternal necessary Being?
Then our Souls and all other Intellectual things must be parts and parcels of
Matter; and what pretensions can Matter have to those properties and
perfections that we find in our Souls, how limited soever? much less to
necessary existence, and those perfections that are the foundation of it? What
exists Eternally, and from it self, its existence must flow immediately from
its essence, as its cause, reason or ground; for as Existence has always
something antecedent to it in order of Nature, so that which is antecedent to
it must infer it by a necessary connection, and so may be called the cause,
ground, or reason of it. And nothing can be such a ground, but what is a
perfection; nor every perfection neither, it must be Sovereign and Infinite
perfection; for from what else can necessary existence flow, or be inferred?
Besides, if that Being was not infinitely perfect, there might be another Being
more powerful than it, and consequently able to oppose and hinder its
Existence; and what may be hindered is contingent and arbitrary. Now Matter is
so far from being a Nature infinitely perfect, that it has no perfection at
all, but that of bare substance; neither Life, Sense, Will or Understanding;
nor so much as Motion, from it self; as we have showed before. And therefore
this brute inactive mass, which is but, as it were, the Drudge of Nature, can
have no right or title to that Sovereign prerogative of Self existence.

We noted before, as a thing agreed upon, That something or other must needs be
Eternal. For if ever there was a time or state, when there was no Being, there
never could be any. Seeing Nothing could not produce Something. Therefore it is
undeniably true on all hands, That there was some Being from Eternity. Now,
according to our understandings, Truth is Eternal: therefore, say we, some
intellect or Intelligent Being. So also the reasons of Goodness and Justice
appear to us Eternal, and therefore some Good and Just Being is Eternal. Thus
much is plain, that these perfections which bear the signatures of Eternity
upon them, are things that have no relation to Matter, but relate immediately
to an Intellectual Being: therefore some such Being, to whom they originally
belong, must be that Eternal. Besides, We cannot possibly but judge such a
Being more perfect than Matter; Now every Nature, the more perfect it is, the
more remote it is from Nothing: and the more remote it is from Nothing, the
more it approaches to necessity of existence, and consequently to Eternal
Existence.

Thus we have made a short Survey, so far as the bounds of a Chapter would
permit, of those evidences and assurances which we have, from abstract Reason,
and the External World, that there is an Author of Nature; and That, a Being
infinitely perfect, which we call God. We may add to these, in the last place,
that universal consent of Mankind, or natural instinct of Religion, which we
see, more or less, throughout all Nations, Barbarous or Civil. For though this
Argument, it is true, be more disputable than the rest, yet having set down just
grounds already from whence this Natural Judgment or persuasion might spring,
we have more reason to impute it to some of those, and their insensible
influence upon the Mind, than to the artifices of Men, or to make it a
weakness, prejudice, or error of our Nature. That there is such a propension
in Humane Nature, seems to be very plain; at least so far as to move us to
implore, and have recourse to invisible Powers in our extremities. Prayer is
natural in certain cases, and we do at the mere motion of our natural Spirit,
and indeliberately, invoke God and Heaven, either in case of extreme danger, to
help and assist us; or in case of injustice and oppression, to relieve or
avenge us; or in case of false accusation, to vindicate our innocence; and
generally in all cases desperate and remediless as to Humane Power, we seem to
appeal, and address our selves to something higher. And this we do by a sudden
impulse of Nature, without reflection or deliberation. Besides, as witnesses of
our Faith and Veracity, we use to invoke the Gods, or Superior Powers, by way
of imprecation upon our selves, if we be false and perjured; and this has been
used in most Nations and Ages, if not in all. These things also argue, that
there is a Natural Conscience in Man, and a distinction of moral Good and Evil;
and that we look upon those invisible Powers as the Guardians of Virtue and
Honesty. There are also few or no People upon the Earth but have something of
External Religion, true or false; and either of them is an argument of this
natural anticipation, or that they have an opinion that there is something
above them, and above visible Nature; though what that something was, they
seldom were able to make a good judgment. But to pursue this Argument
particularly, would require an Historical deduction of Times and Places, which
is not suitable to our present design.

To conclude this Chapter and this Subject; If we set Religion apart, and
consider the Deist and Atheist only as two Sects in Philosophy, or their
doctrine as two different Hypotheses proposed for the explication of Nature,
and in competition with one another, whether should give the more rational
account of the Universe, of its Origin and Phenomenon; I say, if we consider
them only thus, and make an impartial estimate, whether System is more
reasonable, more clear, and more satisfactory, to me there seems to be no more
comparison, than betwixt light and darkness. The Hypothesis of the Deist
reaches from top to bottom, both thorough the Intellectual and Material World,
with a clear and distinct light every where, is genuine, comprehensive, and
satisfactory; has nothing forced, nothing confused, nothing precarious;
whereas the Hypothesis of the Atheist is strained and broken, dark and uneasy
to the Mind, commonly precarious, often incongruous and irrational, and
sometimes plainly ridiculous. And this judgment I should make of them
abstractly from the interest of Religion, considering them only as matter of
Reason and Philosophy; And I dare affirm with assurance, if the faculties of
our Souls be true, that no Man can have a System of Thoughts reaching thorough
Nature, coherent and consistent in every part, without a Deity for the Basis of
it.

CHAP. XI. Concerning NATURAL PROVIDENCE. Several encroachments upon Natural
Providence, or misrepresentations of it, and false methods of Contemplation; A
true method proposed, and a true representation of the Universe. The Mundane
Idea, and the Universal System of Providence; Several subordinate Systems, That
of our Earth and Sublunary World; The Course and Periods of it; How much of
this is already treated of, and what remains. The Conclusion.
WE have set bounds to Nature in the foregoing Chapter, and placed her Author
and Governor upon his Throne, to give Laws to her Motions, and to direct and
limit her Power in such ways and methods as are most for his honor. Let us now
consider Nature under the conduct of Providence, or consider Natural
Providence, and the extent of it; And as we were cautious before not to give
too much power or greatness to Nature, considered apart from Providence, so we
must be careful now, under this second consideration, not to contract her
bounds too much; lest we should by too mean and narrow thoughts of the
Creation, Eclipse the glory of its Author, whom we have so lately owned as a
Being infinitely perfect.

And to use no further Introduction, In the first place, we must not by any
means admit or imagine, that all Nature, and this great Universe, was made only
for the sake of Man, the meanest of all Intelligent Creatures that we know of;
Nor that this little Planet where we sojourn for a few days, is the only
habitable part of the Universe; These are Thoughts so groundless and
unreasonable in themselves, and also so derogatory to the Infinite Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness of the First Cause, that as they are absurd in Reason, so
they deserve far better to be marked and censured for Heresies in Religion,
than many Opinions that have been censured for such, in former Ages. How is it
possible that it should enter into the thoughts of vain Man, to believe himself
the principal part of God's Creation: or that all the rest was ordained for
him, for his service or pleasure? Man, whose follies we laugh at every day, or
else complain of them; whose pleasures are vanity, and his Passions stronger
than his Reason; Who sees himself every way weak and impotent, has no power
over external Nature, little over himself; cannot execute so much as his own
good resolutions; mutable, irregular, prone to evil. Surely, if we made the
least reflection upon our selves with impartiality, we should be ashamed of
such an arrogant Thought. How few of these Sons of Men, for whom, they say, all
things were made, are the Sons of Wisdom? How few find the paths of Life? They
spend a few days in folly and sin, and then go down to the Regions of death and
misery. And is it possible to believe, that all Nature, and all Providence, are
only, or principally for their sake? Is it not a more reasonable character or
conclusion which the Prophet has made, Surely every Man is vanity? Man that
comes into the World at the pleasure of another, and goes out by an hundred
accidents; His Birth and Education generally determine his fate here, and
neither of those are in his own power; His wit also is as uncertain as his
fortune; He has not the moulding of his own Brain, however a knock on the Head
makes him a Fool, stupid as the Beasts of the Field; and a little excess of
passion or melancholy makes him worse, Mad and Frantic. In his best Senses, he
is shallow, and of little understanding: and in nothing more blind and ignorant
than in things Sacred and Divine; He falls down before a stock or a stone, and
says, Thou art my God; He can believe nonsense and contradictions, and make it
his Religion to do so. And is this the great Creature which God has made by
the might of his Power, and for the honor of his Majesty? Upon whom all things
must wait, to whom all things must be subservient? Methinks we have noted
weaknesses and sollies enough in the Nature of Man, this need not be added as
the top and accomplishment, That with all these he is so Vain, as to think that
all the rest of the World was made for his sake.

And as due humility and the consideration of our own meanness, ought to secure
us from any such vain opinion of our selves, so the perfection of other Beings
ought to give us more respect and honor for them. With what face can we
pretend, that Creatures far superior to us, and more excellent both in Nature
and condition, should be made for our sake and service? How preposterous would
it be to ascribe such a thing to our Maker, and how intolerable a vanity in us
to affect it? We that are next to the Brutes that perish by a sacrilegious
attempt, would make our selves more considerable than the highest Dignities. It
is thought to have been the crime of Lucifer, who was thrown down from Heaven
to Hell, that he affected an equality with the Almighty; and to affect to be
next to the Almighty is a crime next to that. We have no reason to believe, but
that there are, at least, as many orders of Beings above us, as there are ranks
of Creatures below us; there is a greater distance sure betwixt us and God
Almighty, than there is betwixt us and the meanest Worm: and yet we should take
it very ill, if the Worms of the Earth should pretend that we were made for
them. But to pass from the invisible World to the visible and Corporeal, -- Was
that made only for our sake? King David was more wise, and more just both to
God and Man, in his 8th Psalm; where he says, He wonders, when he considers the
Heavens, that the Maker of them could think on Man. He truly supposes the
Celestial Bodies and the Inhabitants of them, much more considerable than we
are, and reckons up only Terrestrial things as put in subjection to Man. Can we
then be so fond as to imagine all the Corporeal Universe made for our use? It Is
not the Millioneth part of it that is known to us, much less useful; We can
neither reach with our Eye, nor our imagination, those Armies of Stars that lie
far and deep in the boundless Heavens. If we take a good Glass, we discover
innumerably more Stars in the Firmament than we can with our single Eye; and
yet if you take a second Glass, better than the first, that carries the sight
to a greater distance, you see more still lying beyond the other; and a third
Glass that pierces further, still makes new discoveries of Stars; and so
forwards, indefinitely and inexhaustedly for any thing we know, according to
the immensity of the Divine Nature and Power. Who can reckon up the Stars of
the Galaxy, or direct us in the use of them? And can we believe that those and
all the rest were made for us? Of those few Stars that we enjoy, or that are
visible to the Eye, there is not a tenth part that is really useful to Man; and
no doubt if the principal end of them had been our pleasure or convenience,
they would have been put in some better order in respect of the Earth? They lie
carelessly scattered, as if they had been sown in the Heaven, like Seed, by
handfuls; and not by a skilful hand neither. What a beautiful Hemisphere they
would have made, if they had been placed in rank and order, if they had been
all disposed into regular figures and the little ones set with due regard to
the greater, then all finished and made up into one fair piece or great
Composition; according to the rules of Art and Symmetry. What a surprising
beauty this would have been to the Inhabitants of the Earth? What a lovely Roof
to our little World? This indeed might have given one some Temptation to have
thought that they had been all made for us; but lest any such vain imagination
should now enter into our thoughts, Providence (besides more important Reasons)
seems on purpose to have left them under that negligence or disorder which they
appear in to us.

The second part of this opinion supposes this Planet, where we live, to be
the only habitable part of the Universe; and this is a natural consequence of
the former; If all things were made to serve us, why should any more be made
than what is useful to us. But it is only our ignorance of the System of the
World, and of the grandeur of the Works of God, that betrays us to such narrow
thoughts. See the Lat. Treat. lib. 1. c. 10. p. 108, 109, etc.
If we do but consider what this Earth is, both for littleness and deformity,
and what its Inhabitants are, we shall not be apt to think that this miserable
Atome has engrossed and exhausted all the Divine Favors, and all the riches
of his goodness, and of his Providence. But we will not enlarge upon this part
of the opinion, lest it should carry us too far from the subject, and it will
fall, of its own accord, with the former. Upon the whole we may conclude, that
it was only the Sublunary World that was made for the sake of Man, and not the
Great Creation, either Material or Intellectual; and we cannot admit or affirm
any more, without manifest injury, depression, and misrepresentation of
Providence, as we may be easily convinced from these four Heads; The Meanness
of Man and of this Earth, The Excellency of other Beings, The Immensity of the
Universe, and The infinite perfection of the first Cause. Which I leave to your
further Meditation, and pass on to the second rule, concerning Natural
Providence.

In the second place then, if we would have a fair view and right apprehensions
of Natural Providence, we must not cut the chains of it too short, by having
recourse, without necessity, either to the First Cause, in explaining the
Origins of things: or to Miracles, in explaining particular effects. This, I
say, breaks the chains of Natural Providence, when it is done without
necessity, that is, when things are otherwise ntelligible from Second Causes.
Neither is any thing gained by it to God Almighty; for it is but, as the Proverb
says, to rob Peter to pay Paul, to take so much from his ordinary Providence,
and place it to his extraordinary. When a new Religion is brought into the
World, it is very reasonable and decorous that it should be ushered in with
Miracles, as both the Jewish and Christian were; but afterward things return
into their Chanel, and do not change or overflow again, but upon extraordinary
occasions or revolutions. The power Extraordinary of God is to be accounted
very Sacred, not to be touched or exposed for our pleasure or convenience; but
I am afraid we often make use of it only to conceal our own ignorance, or to
save us the trouble of inquiring into Natural Causes. Men are generally
unwilling to appear ignorant, especially those that make profession of
knowledge, and when they have not skill enough to explain some particular
effect in a way of Reason, they throw it upon the First Cause, as able to bear
all; and so placing it to that account, they excuse themselves, and save their
credit; for all Men are equally wise, if you take away Second Causes; as we are
all of the same color, if you take away the Light.

But to state this matter, See Book 1. c. 8. at the end.
and see the ground of this rule more distinctly, we must observe and consider,
that The Course of Nature is truly the Will of God; and, as I may so say, his
first Will; from which we are not to recede, but upon clear evidence and
necessity. And as in matter of Religion, we are to follow the known revealed
Will of God, and not to trust to every impulse or motion of Enthusiasm, as
coming from the Divine Spirit, unless there be evident marks that it is
Supernatural, and cannot come from our own; So neither are we, without
necessity, to quit the known and ordinary Will and Power of God established in
the course of Nature, and fly to Supernatural Causes, or his extraordinary
Will; for this is a kind of Enthusiasm or Fanaticism, as well as the other: And
no doubt that great prodigality and waste of Miracles which some make, is no
way to the honor of God or Religion. It Is true, the other extreme is worse
than this, for to deny all Miracles, is in effect to deny all revealed
Religion; therefore due measures are to be taken betwixt these two, so as
neither to make the Divine Power too mean and cheap, nor the Power of Nature
illimited and all-sufficient.

In the Third place, To make the Scenes of Natural Providence considerable, and
the knowledge of them satisfactory to the Mind; we must take a true Philosophy,
or the true principles that govern Nature, which are Geometrical and
Mechanical. By these you discover the footsteps of the Divine Art and Wisdom,
and trace the progress of Nature step by step, as distinctly as in Artificial
things, where we see how the Motions depend upon one another, in what order and
by what necessity. God made all things in Number, Wei^ht and Measure, which are
Geometrical and Mechanical Principles; He is not said to have made things by
Forms and Qualities, or any combination of Qualities, but by these three
principles, which may be conceived to express the subject of three Mathematical
Sciences, Number, of Arithmetic; Weight, of Staticks; and Measure and
Proportion, of Geometry; If then all things were made according to these
principles, to understand the manner of their construction and composition, we
must proceed in the search of them by the same principles, and resolve them
into these again. Besides, The nature of the subject does direct us
sufficiently; for when we contemplate or treat of Bodies, and the Material
World, we must proceed by the modes of Bodies, and their real properties, such
as can be represented, either to Sense or Imagination, for these faculties are
made for Corporeal Things; but Logical Notions, when applied to particular
Bodies, are mere shadows of them, without light or substance. No Man can raise
a Theory upon such grounds, nor calculate any revolutions of Nature; nor render
any service, or invent any thing useful in Humane Life: And accordingly we see,
that for these many Ages, that this dry Philosophy has governed Christendom,
it has brought forth no fruit, produced nothing good, to God or Man, to
Religion or Humane Society.

To these True Principles of Philosophy, we must join also the True System of
the World. That gives scope to our thoughts, and rational grounds to work upon;
but the Vulgar System, or that which Aristotle and others have proposed,
affords no matter of contemplation. All above the Moon, according to him, is
firm as Adamant, and as immutable; no change or variation in the Universe, but
in those little removes that happen here below, one quality or form shifting
into another; there would therefore be no great exercise of Reason or
Meditation in such a World; no long Series's of Providence; The Regions above
being made of a kind of immutable Matter, they would always remain in the same
form, structure, and qualities: So as we might lock up that part of the
Universe as to any further Inquiries, and we should find it ten thousand years
hence in the same form and state wherein we left it. Then in this Sublunary
World there would be but very small doings neither, things would lie in a
narrow compass, no great revolution of Nature, no new Form of the Earth, but a
few anniversary Corruptions and Generations, and that would be the short and
the long of Nature, and of Providence, according to Aristotle. But if we
consider the Earth, as one of those many Planets that move about the Sun, and
the Sun as one of those innumerable fixed Stars that adorn the Universe, and are
the Centers of its greatest Motions; and all this subject to fate and change,
to corruptions and renovations; This opens a large Field for our Thoughts; and
gives a large subject for the exercise and expansion of the Divine Wisdom and
Power, and for the glory of his Providence.

In the last place, Having thus prepared your Mind, and the subject, for the
Contemplation of Natural Providence, do not content your self to consider only
the present face of Nature, but look back into the first Sources of things,
into their more simple and original states; and observe the progress of Nature
from one form to another, through various modes and compositions. For there is
no single Effect, nor any single state of Nature, how perfect soever, that can
be such an argument and demonstration of Providence, as a Period of Nature, or
a revolution of several states consequential to one another; and in such an
order and dependence, that as they flow and succeed, they shall still be
adjusted to the periods of the Moral World; so as to be ready always to be
Ministers of the Divine Justice or beneficence to Mankind. This shows the
manifold riches of the Wisdom and Power of God in Nature. And this may give us
just occasion to reflect again upon Aristotle's System and method, which
destroys Natural Providence in this respect also; for he takes the World as it
is now, both for Matter and Form, and supposes it to have been in this posture
from all Eternity, and that it will continue to Eternity in the same; so as all
the great turns of Nature, and the principal scenes of Providence in the
Natural World are quite struck out; and we have but this one Scene for all, and
a pitiful one too, if compared with the Infinite Wisdom of God, and the depths
of Providence. We must take things in their full extent, and from their
Origins, to comprehend them well, and to discover the Mysteries of Providence,
both in the Causes and in the Conduct of them. That method which David followed
in the Contemplation of the Little World, or in the Body of Man, we should also
follow in the Great; take it in its first mass, in its tender principles and
rudiments, and observe the progress of it to a complete form; In these first
strokes of Nature are the secrets of her Art; The Eye must be placed in this
point to have a right prospect, and see her works in a true light. David
admires the Wisdom of God in the Origin and formation of his Body; Psalm. 139.
15. 16.
My Body, says He, was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, curiously
wrought in the lower parts of the Earth; Thine eyes did see my substance being
yet unperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written; which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, or being at
first in no form. How precious are thy Thoughts to me, O God, etc. This was the
subject of David's Meditations, how his Body was wrought from a shapeless mass
into that mavelous composition which it had when fully framed; and this, he
says, was under the Eye of God all along, and the model of it, as it were, was
designed and delineated in the Book of Providence, according to which it was by
degrees fashioned and wrought to perfection. Thine eyes did see my substance
yet being imperfect, in thy Book all my members were drawn, etc. Job also has
aptly expressed those first rudiments of the Body, or that little Chaos out of
which it rises, Job 10. 10, 11.
Have thou not poured me out as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese? Thou have
clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and fenced me with Bones and Sinews. Where he
notes the first Matter and the last Form of his Body, its complete and most
incomplete state. According to those examples we must likewise consider the
Greater Bodies of Nature, The Earth and the Sublunary World; we must go to the
Origin of them, the Seminal Mass, the Chaos out of which they rise; Look upon
the World first as an Embryo world, without form or shape, and then consider
how its Members were fashioned, how by degrees it was brought into that
diversity of Parts and Regions, which it consists of, with all their furniture,
and with all their ornaments. The Idea of all which was before hand, according
to David's expression, written in the Divine Mind; and we partake of that
wisdom, according to our capacity, in seeing and admiring the methods of it.

These seem to be necessary preparatives or directions to those that would
contemplate, with profit, Natural Providence, and the great Works of God in the
Visible Creation. We considered Nature in the precedent Chapter abstractly, and
in her self, and now we consider her under the Conduct of Providence, which we
therefore call Natural Providence; And as we have endeavored to remove those
false Notions and Suppositions that lay as Clouds upon her face, so we must now
endeavor to represent her in a better light, and in a fuller beauty. By
Natural Providence therefore we understand, The Form or Course of Universal
Nature, as actuated by the Divine Power: with all the Changes, Periods, and
Vicissitudes that attend it, according to the method and establishment made at
first, by the Author of it. I said of Universal Nature, through all the Orders
of Beings in the Intellectual World, and all the Regions and Systems of Matter
in the Corporeal. For, having proved in the foregoing Chapter, that there is an
Author of Nature, a Being Infinitely Perfect, by whose power and influence
alone all finite Natures exist and act, we have an assured ground to conclude,
that nothing can come to pass, throughout the whole Creation, without the
prescience and permission of its Author; and as it is necessary to suppose that
there is an Idea in the Divine Understanding of all the mass of Beings produced
or Created, according to the several ranks and orders wherein they stand; so
there is also an Idea there, according to which this great Frame moves, and all
the parts of it, in beauty and harmony.

And these two things, The Essences of all Beings, and the Series of their
Motions, compose the MUNDANE IDEA, as I may so call it; or that great
All-comprehensive Thought in the Divine Understanding, which contains the
System of Universal Providence, and the state of all things, past, present, or
to come. This glorious Idea is the express Image of the whole Creation, of all
the Works of God, and the disposition of them; here lie the mysteries of
Providence, as in their Original; The successive Forms of all Nature; and
herein as in a Glass, may be viewed all the Scenes of Time or Eternity. This is
an Abyss of Sacred Wisdom, The inexhausted Treasure of all Science, The Root of
Truth, and Fountain of Intellectual Light; and in the clear and full
contemplation of this is perfect happiness, and a truly Beatifick Vision.

But what concerns the Intellectual World in this Idea, and the Orders or
Natures that compose it, is not our present business to pursue; We are to speak
of the Corporeal Universe, whereof we will make now a short and general Survey,
as it lies under Providence. The Corporeal Universe, how immense soever it be,
and divided into innumerable Regions, may be considered all as one System, made
up of several subordinate Systems. And there is also one immense design of
Providence co-extended with it, that contains all the fate, and all the
revolutions of this great Mass. This, I say, is made up of several subordinate
Systems, involving one another, and comprehending one another, in greater and
greater Orbs and Compositions; and the Aggregate of all these is that which we
call the Universe. But what the form of these Compositions is, and what the
Design of Providence that runs thorough them all, and comprehends them all,
this is unsearchable, not only to Humane Understanding, but even to Angels and
Archangels.

Wherefore leaving those greater Systems and Compositions of the Universe, as
matter of our admiration, rather than of our knowledge, There are two or three
kinds of lesser Systems that are visible to us, and bring us nearer to our
subject, and nearer home. That of a Fixed Star, single; That of a Fixed Star with
its Planets, and That of a single Planet, Primary or Secondary. These three
Systems we see and enjoy more or less. No doubt there are Fixed Stars single, or
that have no Planets about them, as our Sun has; nay, it is probable, that at
first the whole Universe consisted only of such; Globes of liquid Fire, with
Spheres about them of pure Light and Ether: Earths are but the dirt and skum
of the Creation, and all things were pure as they came at first out of the
hands of God. But because we have nothing particular taught us, either by the
light of Nature or Revelation, concerning the Providence that governs these
single Stars, of what use they are to Intellectual Beings, how animated by
them, what diversity there is amongst those Ethereal Worlds, what Periods they
have, what Changes or Vicissitudes they are capable to undergo; because such
Inquiries would seem too remote, and carry us too far from our subject, we
leave these Heavenly Systems to the enjoyment and contemplation of higher and
more noble Creatures.

The Sun, with all the Planets that move about him, and depend upon him, make a
good sort of System; not considerable indeed, if compared with the whole
Universe, or some of the greater Compositions in it, but in respect of us, the
System of the Sun is of vast extent; We cannot measure the greatness of his
Kingdom, and his Dominion is without end. The distance from the highest Planet
to the nearest Fixed Star in the Firmament is unmeasurable, and all this belongs
to the Empire of the Sun; besides the several Planets and their Orbs, which
cast themselves closer about his Body, that they may receive a warmer and
stronger influence from him; for by him they may be said to live and move. But
those vast spaces that lie beyond these Opake Bodies, are Regions of perpetual
light; One Planet may Eclipse the Sun to another, and one Hemisphere of a
Planet to the other Hemisphere makes night and darkness, but nothing can
Eclipse the Sun, or intercept the course of his light to these remote Ethereal
Regions; They are always luminous, and always pure and serene. And if the worst
and Planetary parts of his Dominions be replenisht with Inhabitants, we cannot
suppose the better to lie as Deserts, uninjoy'd and uninhabited; his Subjects
then must be numerous, as well as his Dominions large; and in both respects,
this System of a Fixed Star, with its Planets (of which kind we may imagine
innumerable in the Universe, besides this of the Sun, which is near and visible
to us) is of a noble Character and Order, being the habitation of Angels and
glorified Spirits, as well as of Mortal Men.

A Planetary System is the last and lowest; and of these, no doubt, there is
great variety, and great differences; not only of Primary and Secondary, or of
the principal Planet, and its Moons or Attendants, but also amongst Planets of
the same rank; for they may differ both in their original constitution, and
according to the from and state they are under at present; of which sort of
differences we have noted Book 1. chap. last, p. 113, etc.
some amongst our Planets, though they seem to be all of much-what the same
original constitution. Besides, according to external circumstances, their
distance, manner of motion, and posture to the Sun, which is the Heart of the
whole System, they become different in many things. And we may observe, that
those leading differences, though they seem little, draw after them innumerable
others, and so make a distinct face of Nature, and a distinct World; which
still shows the riches and fecundity of Divine Providence, and gives new matter
of contemplation to those that take pleasure in studying the works and ways of
God. But leaving all other Planets or Planetary Systems to our meditations
only, we must particularly consider our own.

Having therefore made this general Survey of the great Universe, run thorough
the boundless Regions of it, and with much ado found our way home to that
little Planet where our concerns lie, This Earth or Sublunary World, we must
rest here as at the end of our course. And having undertaken to give the
general Theory of this Earth, to conclude the present Treatise, we'll reflect
upon the whole work, and observe what progress we have hitherto made in this
Theory, and what remains to be treated of hereafter. This Earth, though it be a
small part or particle of the Universe, has a distinct System of Providence
belonging to it, or an Order established by the Author of Nature for all its
Phenomenon (Natural or Moral) throughout the whole Period of its duration, and
every interval of it; for as there is nothing so great as to be above the
Divine care, so neither is there any thing so little as to be below it. All the
Changes of our World are fixed, How, or how often to be destroyed, and how
renewed; What different faces of Nature, and what of Mankind, in every part of
its Course; What new Scenes to adorn the Stage, and what new parts to be acted;
What the Entrance, and what the Consummation of all. Neither is there any sort
of knowledge more proper, or of more importance to us that are the Inhabitants
of this Earth, than to understand this its Natural and Sacred History, as I may
so call it, both as to what is past, and what is to come. And as those greater
Volumes and Compositions of the Universe are proportioned to the understanding
of Angels and Superior Beings, so these little Systems are Compendium's of the
Divine Wisdom, more fitted to our capacity and comprehension.

The Providence of the Earth, as of all other Systems consists of two parts,
Natural, and Sacred or Theological. I call that Sacred or Theological that
respects Religion, and the dispensations of it; the government of the Rational
World, or of Mankind whether under the Light of Nature only, or of a
Revelation; the method and terms of their happiness and unhappiness in a Future
Life; The State, Economy, and Conduct of this, with all the Mysteries
contained in it, we call Theological Providence; in the head whereof stands the
Soul of the Blessed Messiah, who is Lord of both Worlds, Intellectual and
Material. When we call the other part of Providence Natural, we use that word
in a restrained sense, as respecting only the Material World; and accordingly
this part of Providence others and superintends the state of the Earth, the
great Vicissitudes and Mutations of it; for we must not imagine, but that these
are under the Eye of Providence, as well as Humane Affairs, or any revolutions
of States and Empires. Now seeing both in the Intellectual and Corporeal World
there are certain Periods, Fulnesses of Time, and fixed Seasons, either for some
great Catastrophe, or some great Instauration, It Is Providence that makes a due
harmony or Synchronism betwixt these two, and measures out the concurrent fates
of both Worlds, so as Nature may be always a faithful minister of the Divine
Pleasure, whether for rewards or punishments, according as the state of Mankind
may require. But Theological Providence not being the subject of this work, we
shall only observe, as we said before, what account we have hitherto given of
the Natural state of the Earth, and what remains to be handled in another
Treatise, and so conclude.

I did not think it necessary to carry the story and original of the Earth,
higher than the Chaos, as Zoroaster and Orpheus seem to have done; but taking
that for our Foundation, which Antiquity Sacred and Profane does suppose, and
Natural Reason approve and confirm, we have formed the Earth from it. But when
we say the Earth rise from a Fluid Mass, it is not to be so crudely understood,
as if a rock of Marble, suppose, was fluid immediately before it became Marble;
no, Things had a gradual progression from one form to another, and came at
length to those more permanent forms they are now settled in: Stone was once
Earth, and Earth was once Mud, and Mud was once sluid. And so other things may
have another kind of progression from fluidity; but all was once fluid, at
least all the exterior Regions of this Earth. And even those Stones and Rocks
of Marble which we speak of, seem to confess they were once soft or liquid, by
those mixtures we find in them of Heterogeneous Bodies, and those spots and
Veins dispersed thorough their substance; for these things could not happen to
them after they were hard and impenetrable, in the form of Stone or Marble. And
if we can soften Rocks and Stones, and run them down into their first Liquors,
as these observations seem to do, we may easily believe that other Bodies also
that compose the Earth, were once in a Fluid Mass, which is that we call a
Chaos.

We therefore watched the motions of that Chaos, and the several
transformations of it, while it continued Fluid; and we found at length what
its first Concretion would be, and how it settled into the form of an habitable
Earth. But that form was very different from the present form of the Earth,
which is not immediately deducible from a Chaos, by any known Laws of Nature,
or by any Wit of Man; as every one, that will have patience to examine it, may
easily be satisfied. That First Earth was of a smooth regular surface, as the
Concretions of Liquors are, before they are disturbed or broken; under that
surface lay the Great Abyss, which was ready to swallow up the World that hung
over it, and about it, whenever God should give the command, and the Vault
should break; and this constitution of the Primaeval Earth gave occasion to the
first Catastrophe of this World, when it perished in a Deluge of Water. For that
Vault did break, as we have shown at large, and by the dissolution and fall of
it, the Great Deep was thrown out of its bed, forced upwards into the Air, and
overflowed, in that impetuous Commotion, the highest tops of the Fragments of
the ruined Earth, which now we call its Mountains. And as this was the first
great and fatal Period of Nature; so upon the issue of this, and the return of
the Waters into their Channels, the second face of Nature appeared, or the
present broken form of the Earth, as it is Terraqueous, Mountainous, and
Cavernous. These things we have explained fully in the First Book, and have
thereby settled two great Points, given a rational account of the Universal
Deluge, and shown the Causes of the irregular form of the present or
Post-diluvian Earth. This being done, we have applied our selves, in the Second
Book, to the description of the Primaeval Earth, and the examination of its
properties; and this has led us by an easy tract to the discovery of
Paradise, and of the true Notion and Mystery of it; which is not so much a spot
of ground where a fine Garden stood, as a course of Nature, or a peculiar state
of the Earth; Paradisiacal in many parts, but especially in one Region of it;
which place or Region we have also endeavored to determine, though not so much
from the Theory, as from the suffrages of Antiquity, if you will take their
judgment.

THUS much is finished, and this contains the Natural Theory of the Earth till
this present time; for since the Deluge all things have continued in the same
state, or without any remarkable change. We are next to enter upon new Matter
and new Thoughts, and not only so, but upon a Series of Things and Times to
come, which is to make the Second Part of this Theory. Dividing the duration of
the World into two parts, Past and Future, we have dispatched the first and far
greater part, and come better half of our way; And if we make a stand here, and
look both ways, backwards to the Chaos, and the beginning of the World, and
forwards to the End and Consummation of all Things, though the first be a
longer prospect, yet there are as many general Changes and Revolutions of
Nature in the remaining part as have already happened; and in the Evening of
this long Day the Scenes will change faster, and be more bright and
illustrious. From the Creation to this Age the Earth has undergone but one
Catastrophe, and Nature has had two different faces. The next Catastrophe is
the CONFLAGRATION, to which a new face of Nature will accordingly succeed, (...)
New Heavens and a New Earth, Paradise renewed, and so it is called the
Restitution of things, or Regeneration of the World. And that Period of Nature
and Providence being expired, then follows the Consummation of all things, or
the General Apotheosts; when Death and Hell shall be swallowed up in victory;
When the great Circle of Time and Fate is run; or according to the language of
Scripture, When the Heavens and the Earth shall pass away, and Time shall be no
more.

MAY we, in the mean time, by a true Love of God above all things, and a
contempt of this Vain World which passes away; By a careful use of the Gifts
of God and Nature, the Light of Reason and Revelation, prepare our selves, and
the state of things, for the great Coming of our Savior. To whom be Praise and
Honor for evermore.

FINIS.
THE THEORY OF THE EARTH: Containing an Account OF THE Original of the Earth,
AND OF ALL THE GENERAL CHANGES Which it has already undergone, OR IS TO
UNDERGO Till the CONSUMMATION of all Things.

THE TWO LAST BOOKS, Concerning the BURNING of the WORLD, AND Concerning the
NEW HEAVENS and NEW EARTH.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

TO THE QUEEN'S MOST Excellent Majesty.
MADAM,
HAVING had the honor to present the first part of this Theory to Your ROYAL
UNCLE, I presume to offer the Second to Your Majesty. This part of the Subject,
I hope, will be no less acceptable, for certainly it is of no less importance.
They both indeed agree in this, That there is a WORLD made and destroyed in
either Treatise. But we are more concerned in what is to come, than what is
past. And as the former Books represented to us the Rise and Fall of the First
World; so These give an account of the present Frame of Nature laboring under
the last Flames, and of the Resurrection of it in the New Heavens and New
Earth: which, according to the Divine Promises, we are to expect.

Cities that are burnt, are commonly rebuilt more beautiful and regular than
they were before. And when this World is demolished by the last Fire, He that
undertakes to rear it up again, will supply the defects, if there were any, of
the former Fabric. This Theory supposes the present Earth to be little better
than an Heap of Ruins: where yet there is room enough for Sea and Land, for
Islands and Continents, for several Countries and Dominions: But when these are
all melted down, and refined in the general Fire, they will be cast into a
better mould, and the Form and Qualities of the Earth will become Paradisi^cal*

But, I fear, it may be thought no very proper address, to show Your Majesty a
World laid in ashes, where You have so great an interest Your Self, and Such
fair Dominions; and then, to recompense the loss by giving a Reversion in a
Future Earth. But if that future Earth be a second Paradise, to be enjoyed for
a Thousand Years; with Peace, Innocence, and constant health: An Inheritance
there will be an happy exchange for the best Crown in this World.

I confess, I could never persuade my self that the Kingdom of Christ and of
his Saints, which the Scripture speaks of so frequently, was designed to be
upon this present Earth. But however, upon all suppositions, They that have
done some eminent Good in this Life, will be sharers in the happiness of that
State. To humble the Oppressors, and rescue the Oppressed, is a work of
Generosity and Charity that cannot want its reward; Yet, MADAM, They are the
greatest Benefactors to Mankind, that dispose the World to become Virtuous: and
by their example, Influence, and Authority, retrieve that TRUTH and JUSTICE,
that have been lost, amongst men, for many Ages. The School-Divines tell us,
Those that act or suffer great things for the Public Good, are distinguished
in Heaven by a Circle of Gold about their Heads. One would not willingly vouch
for that: but one may safely for what the Prophet says, which is far greater:
namely, that They shall shine like Stars in the Firmament, that turn many to
Righteousness. Which is not to be understood, so much, of the Conversion of
single Souls, as of the turning of Nations and People, the turning of the World
to Righteousness. They that lead on that great and happy Work, shall be
distinguished in Glory from the rest of Mankind.

We are sensible, MADAM, from Your Great Example, that Piety and Virtue seated
upon a Throne, draw many to imitation, whom ill Principles, or the course of
the World, might have led another way. These are the best, as well as easiest
Victories, that are gained without Contest. And as Princes are the Vicegerents
of God upon Earth, so when their Majesty is in Conjunction with Goodness, it
has a double Character of Divinity upon it: and we owe them a double Tribute,
of Fear and Love. Which, with constant Prayers for Your MAJESTY'S present and
future Happiness, shall be always Dutifully paid, by

Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble and most Obedient Subject, T. BVRNET.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
I HAVE not much to say to the Reader in this Preface to the Third Part of the
Theory: seeing it treats upon a Subject owned by all, and out of dispute: The
Conflagration of the World. The question will be only about the bounds and
limits of the Conflagration, the Causes and the Manner of it. These I have
fixed according to the truest measures I could take from Scripture, and from
Nature. I differ, I believe from the common Sentiment in this, that, in
following S. Peter's Philosophy, I suppose, that the burning of the Earth will
be a true Liquefaction or dissolution of it, as to the exterior Region. And
that this lays a foundation for New Heavens and a New Earth; which seems to me
as plain a doctrine in Christian Religion, as the Conflagration it self.

I have endeavored to propose an intelligible way, whereby the Earth may be
consumed by Fire. But if any one can propose another, more probable and more
consistent, I will be the First Man that shall give him thanks for his
discovery. He that loves Truth for its own sake, is willing to receive it from
any hand: as he that truly loves his Country, is glad of a Victory over the
Enemy, whether himself, or any other, has the glory of it. I need not repeat
here, what I have already said upon several occasions, That it is the substance
of this Theory, whether in this part or in other parts, that I mainly regard
and depend upon. Being willing to suppose that many single explications and
particularities may be rectified, upon further thoughts and clearer light. I
know our best writings, in this life, are but Essays, which we leave to
Posterity to review and correct.

As to the Style, I always endeavor to express my self, in a plain and
perspicuous manner: that the Reader may not lose time, nor wait too long, to
know my meaning. To give an Attendant quick dispatch, is a civility, whether
you do his business or no. I would not willingly give any one the trouble of
reading a period twice over, to know the sense of it: lest when he comes to
know it, he should not think it a recompense for his pains. Whereas, on the
contrary, if you are easy to your Reader, he will certainly make you an
allowance for it, in his censure.

You must not think it strange however, that the Author sometimes, in
meditating upon this subject is warm in his thoughts and expressions. For to
see a World perishing in Flames, Rocks melting, the Earth trembling, and an
Host of Angels in the clouds, one must be very much a Stoic, to be a cold and
unconcerned Spectator of all this. And when we are moved our selves, our words
will have a tincture of those passions which we feel. Besides, in moral
reflections which are designed for use, there must be some heat, as well as dry
reason, to inspire this cold clod of clay, this dull body of Earth, which we
carry about with us; and you must soften and pierce that crust, before you can
come at the Soul. But especially when things future are to be represented, you
cannot use too strong Colors, if you would give them life, and make them
appear present to the mind. Farewell.

CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction; with the Contents and Order of this Treatise. CHAP.
II. The true state of the Question is proposed. It Is the general doctrine of
the Ancients, That the present World, or the present Frame of Nature, is
mutable and perishable: To which the Sacred Books agree: And natural Reason can
allege nothing against it. CHAP. III. That the World will be destroyed by
Fire, is the doctrine of the Ancients, especially if the Stoics. That the same
doctrine is more ancient than the Greeks, and derived from the Barbarick
Philosophy, and That probably from Noah, the Father of all Traditionary
Learning. The same doctrine expressly authorized by Revelation, and enrolled
into the Sacred Canon. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Time of the Conflagration, and
the End of the World. What the Astronomers say upon this Subject, and upon what
they ground their Calculations. The true notion of the Great Year, or of the
Platonic Year, stated and explained. CHAP. V. Concerning Prophecies that
determine the End of the World; Of what order soever, Profane or Sacred:
Jewish or Christian. That no certain judgment can be made from any of them, at
what distance we are from the Conflagration. CHAP. VI. Concerning the Causes of
the Conflagration. The difficulty of conceiving how this Earth can be set on
fire. With a general answer to that difficulty. Two supposed Causes of the
Conflagration, by the Sun's drawing nearer to the Earth, or the Earth's
throwing out the Central Fire, examined and rejected. CHAP. VII. The true
bounds of the last Fire, and how far it is Fatal. The natural Causes and
Materials of it, cast into three ranks. First, such as are Exterior and
visible upon Earth. Where the Volcano's of this Earth, and their Effects are
considered. Secondly, such Materials as are within the Earth. Thirdly, such as
are in the Air. CHAP. VIII. Some new dispositions toward the Conflagration, as
to the Matter, Form, and Situation of the Earth. Concerning miraculous Causes,
and how far the ministry of Angels may be engaged in this work. CHAP. IX. How
the Sea will be diminished and consumed. How the Rocks and Mountains will be
thrown down and melted, and the whole exterior Frame of the Earth dissolved
into a Deluge of Fire. CHAP. X. Concerning the beginning and progress of the
Conflagration, what part of the Earth will first be burnt. The manner of the
future destruction of Rome, according to the Prophetical indications. The last
state and consummation of the general Fire. CHAP. XI. An Account of these
Extraordinary Phenomenon and Wonders in Nature, that, according to Scripture,
will precede the coming of Christ, and the Conflagration of the World. CHAP.
XII. An imperfect description of the coming of our Savi^ur, and of the World on
fire. The Conclusion.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction: That the World will not be annihilated in the last
fire. That we are to expect, according to Scripture, and the Christian
Doctrine, New Heavens and a New Earth, when these are dissolved or burnt up.
CHAP. II. The Birth of the New Heavens and the New Earth, from the second
Chaos, or the remains of the Old World. The form, order and qualities of the
New Earth, according to Reason and Scripture. CHAP. III. Concerning the
Inhabitants of the New Earth. That natural reason cannot determine this point.
That, according to Scripture, The Sons of the first Resurrection, or the heirs
of the Millennium, are to be the Inhabitants of the New Earth, The Testimony of
the Philosophers, and of the Christian Fathers, for the Renovation of the
World. The first Proposition laid down. CHAP. IV. The Proof of a Millennium, or
of a blessed Age to come, from Scripture. A view of the Apocalypse, and of the
Prophecies of Daniel, in reference to this Kingdom of Christ, and of his
Saints. CHAP. V. A view of other places of Scripture, concerning the
Millennium, or future Kingdom of Christ. In what sense all the Prophets have
born Testimony concerning it. CHAP. VI. The sense and testimony of the
Primitive Church, concerning the Millennium, or future Kingdom of Christ: from
the times of the Apostles to the Nicene Council. The second Proposition laid
down. When, by what means, and for what reasons, that doctrine was afterward
neglected or discountenanced. CHAP. VII. The true state of the Millennium,
according to Characters taken from Scripture. Some mistakes concerning it
rectified. CHAP. VIII. The Third Proposition laid down, concerning the Time and
Place of the Millennium. Several arguments used to prove, that it cannot be
till after the Conflagration: and that the New Heavens and New Earth are the
true Seat of the Blessed Millennium. CHAP. IX. The chief employment of the
Millennium DEVOTION and CONTEMPLATION. CHAP. X. Objections against the
Millenni^m, answered. With some conjectures concerning the state of things
after the Millennium: and what will be the final Consummation of this World.
The Review of the whole Theory.
THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
BOOK III. Concerning the Conflagration.
CHAP. I. The Introduction; With the Contents and Order of this Work.
SEEING Providence has planted in all Men a natural desire and curiosity of
knowing things to come; and such things especially as concern our particular
Happiness, or the general Fate of Mankind: This Treatise may, in both respects,
hope for a favorable reception amongst inquisitive persons; seeing the design
of it is, to give an account of the greatest revolutions of Nature that are
expected in future Ages: and in the first place, of the Conflagration of the
World. In which Universal Calamity, when all Nature suffers, every Man's
particular concern must needs be involved.

We see with what eagerness Men pry into the Stars, to see if they can read
there the Death of a King, or the fall of an Empire: It Is not the fate of any
single Prince or Potentate, that we Calculate, but of all Mankind: Nor of this
or that particular Kingdom or Empire, but of the whole Earth. Our enquiries
must reach to that great period of Nature, when all things are to be dissolved:
both humane affairs, and the Stage whereon they are acted. When the Heavens and
the Earth will pass away, and the Elements melt with fervent heat. We desire,
if possible, to know what will be the face of that Day, that great and terrible
Day, when the Regions of the Air will be nothing but mingled Flame and Smoke,
and the habitable Earth turned into a Sea of molten Fire.

But we must not leave the World in this disorder and confusion, without
examining what will be the Issue and consequences of it. Whether this will be
the End of all Things, and Nature by a sad fate, lie eternally dissolved and
desolate in this manner: or whether we may hope for a Restoration: New Heavens
and a New Earth, which the Holy Writings make mention of, more pure and perfect
than the former. As if this was but as a Refiner's fire, to purge out the dross
and courser parts, and then cast the Mass again into a new and better Mould.
These things, with God's assistance, shall be matt^r of our pre^ent enquiry;
These make the gen^ral ^^bject of thi^ Treatise, and of the remaining parts of
this Theory of ^he Earth. Which now, you see, begins to be a kind of Prophecy,
or Prognostication of things to come: as it has been hitherto an History of
things passed; of such states and changes as Nature has already undergone. And
if that account which we have given of the Origin of the Earth, its first and
Paradisiacal form, and the dissolution of it at the Universal Deluge, appear
fair and reasonable: The second dissolution by Fire, and the renovation of it
out of a Second Chaos, I hope will be deduced from as clear grounds and
suppositions. And Scripture it self will be a more visible Guide to us in these
following parts of the Theory, than it was in the former. In the mean time, I
take occasion to declare here again, as I have done heretofore, that neither
this, nor any other great revolutions of Nature, are brought to pass, by Causes
purely Natural, without the conduct of a particular Providence. And it is the
Sacred Books of Scripture that are the records of this Providence, both as to
times past, and times to come: as to all the signal Changes either of the
Natural World, or of Mankind, and the different Oeconomies of Religion. In
which respects, these Books, though they did not contain a Moral Law, would
notwithstanding be, as the most mystical, so also the most valuable Books in
the World.

This Treatise, you see, will consist of Two Parts: The former whereof is to
give an account of the Conflagration; and the latter, of the New Heavens and
New Earth following upon it; together with the state of Mankind in those New
Habitations. As to the Conflagration, we first enquire, what the Ancients
thought concerning the present frame of this World; whether it was to perish or
no: whether to be destroyed, or to stand eternally in this posture. Then in
what manner they thought it would be destroyed; by what force or violence;
whether by Fire or other ways. And with these opinions of the Ancients we will
compare the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, to discover and confirm the
truth of them. In the second place, We will examine what Calculations or
Conjectures have been made concerning the time of this great Catastrophe, or of
the end of this World. Whether that period be defineable or no: and whether by
Natural Arguments, or by Prophecies. Thirdly, We will consider the Signs of the
approaching Conflagration: Whether such as will be in Nature, or in the state
of Humane Affairs; but especially such as are taken notice of and recorded in
Scripture. Fourthly, Which is the principal point, and yet that wherein the
Ancients have been most silent, What Causes there are in Nature, what
preparations, for this Conflagration: Where are the Seeds of this Universal
Fire, or fuel sufficient for the nourishing of it? Lastly, In what order and
by what degrees the Conflagration will proceed: In what manner the frame of the
Earth will be dissolved: and what will be the dreadful countenance of a Burning
World.

These heads are set down more fully in the Argument of each Chapter; and seem
to be sufficient for the explication of this whole matter: Taking in some
additional discourses, which, in pursuing these heads, enter of their own
accord, and make the work more even and entire. In the Second Part, we restore
the World that we had destroyed: Build New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein
Righteousness shall dwell. Establish that new order of things, which is so
often celebrated by the Prophets: A Kingdom of Peace and of Justice, where the
Enemy of Mankind shall be bound, and the Prince of Peace shall rule. A Paradise
without a Serpent, and a Tree of Knowledge, not to wound, but to heal the
Nations. Where will be neither curse, nor pain, nor death, nor disease. Where
all things are new, all things are more perfect, both the World it self, and
its Inhabitants. Where the Firstborn from the Dead, have the First Fruits of
glory.

We dote upon this present World, and the enjoyments of it: and it is not
without pain, and fear, and reluctance, that we are torn from them: as if our
hopes lay all within the compass of this life. Yet, I know not by what good
fate, my thoughts have been always fixed upon things to come, more than upon
things present. These I know, by certain experience, to be but trifles; and if
there be nothing more considerable to come, the whole being of Man is no better
than a trifle. But there is room enough before us in that we call Eternity, for
great and Noble Scenes: and the Mind of Man feels it self lessened and
straightened in this low and narrow state: wishes and waits to see something
greater. And if it could discern another World a coming, on this side Eternal
Life; a beginning Glory, the best that Earth can bear, It would be a kind of
Immortality to en^oy that prospect beforehand; To see, when this Theater is
dissolved, where we shall act next, and what parts. What Saints and Hero's, if
I may so say, will appear upon that Stage; and with what luster and excellency.
How easy would it be, under a view of these futurities, to despise the little
pomps and honors, and the momentany pleasures of a Mortal Life. But I proceed
to our Subject.

CHAP. II. The true state of the Question is Proposed.
It Is the general doctrine of the Ancients, that the present World, or the
present frame of Nature, is mutable and perishable: To which the Sacred Books
agree: and Natural Reason can allege nothing against it.
WHen we speak of the End or destruction of the World, whether by Fire or
otherwise* ^Tis not to be imagined that we understand this of the Great
Universe; Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the Highest Heavens: as if these were to
perish or be destroyed some few years hence, whether by Fire or any other way.
This Question is only to be understood of the Sublunary World, of this Earth
and its Furniture; which had its original about six thousand years ago,
according to the History of Moses; and has once already been destroyed, when
the Exterior Region of it broke, and the Abyss issuing forth, Genesis 7. 11. Job
38. 8.
as out of a womb, overflowed all the habitable Earth. The next Deluge is that
of Fire; which will have the same bounds, and overflow the Surface of the Earth
much^what in the same manner. But the celestial Regions, where the Stars and
Angels inhabit, are not concerned in this fate: Those are not made of
combustible matter, nor, if they were, could our flames reach them. Possibly
those Bodies may have changes and revolutions peculiar to themselves, but in
ways unknown to us, and after long and unknown periods of time. Therefore when
we speak of ^he Conflagration of the World, These have no concern in the
question; nor any other part of the Universe, than the Earth and its
dependances. As will evidently appear when we come to explain the Manner and
Causes of the Conflagration.

And as this Conflagration can extend no further than to the Earth and its
Elements, so neither can it destroy the matter of the Earth; but only the form
and fashion of it, as it is an habitable World. Neither Fire, nor any other
Natural Agent can destroy Matter, that is, reduce it to nothing: It may alter
the modes and qualities of it, but the substance will always remain. And
accordingly the Apostle, when he speaks of the mutability of this World, says
only, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
The figure or fashion of this World passes away. This structure of the Earth
and disposition of the Elements: And all the works of the Earth, 2 Epist. 3.
as S. Peter says; All its natural productions, and all the works of art or
humane industry; these will perish, melted or torn in pieces by the Fire; but
without an annihilation of the Matter, any more than in the former Deluge. And
this will be further proved and illustrated in the beginning of the following
Book.

The question being thus stated, we are next to consider the sense of Antiquity
upon these two Points: First, Whether this Sublunary World is mutable and
perishable. Secondly, By the force and action of what causes, and in what
manner it will perish* whether by Fire or otherwise. Aristotle is very
irregular in his Sentiments about the state of the World; He allows it neither
beginning not ending* rise nor fall, but would have it eternal and immu^able.
And this he understand not only of the Great Universe* but of this Sublunary
World, this Earth which we inhabit: wherein he will not admit there ever have
been or over will be either general Deluges or Conflagrations. And as if he was
ambitious to be thought* singular in his opinion about the Eternity of the
World, He says, All the Ancients before him* gave some beginning or origin to
the World: But were not indeed so unanimous as ^o its (...) fate: Some
believing it immutable, or as the Philosophers call it, incorruptible; Others,
That it had its fatal times and Periods, as lesser Bodies have; and a term of
age prefixed to it, by Providence*

But before we examine this Point any further, it will be necessary to reflect
upon that which we noted before, an ambiguity in the use of the word World,
which gives frequent occasion of mistakes in reading the Ancients: when that
which they speak of the great Universe, we apply to the Sublunary World: or on
the contrary, what they speak of this Earth, we extend to the whole Universe.
And if some of them, besides Aristotle, made the World incorruptible, they
might mean that of the Great Universe, which they thought would never be
dissolved or perish as to its Mass and bulk: But single parts and points of it
(and our Earth is no more) may be variously transformed, and made habitable and
unhabitable, according to certain periods of time, without any pr^^udi^d to
their Philosophy. So Plato, for instance, thinks this World will have no
Dissolution: for, being a work so beautiful and noble, the goodness of God, he
says, will always preserve it. It is most reasonable to understand this of the
Great Universe; for, in our Earth, Plato himself admits such dissolutions, as
are made by general Delug^s and Conflagrations; and we contend for no other. So
likewise in other Authors, if they speak of the immortality of the World, you
must observe what World they apply it to: and whether to the Matter or the Form
of it: and if you remember that our Discourse proceeds only upon the Sublunary
World, and the Dissolution of its form, you will find little in antiquity
contrary to this doctrine. I always except Aristotle, (who allowed of no
Providence in this inferior World) and some Pythagoreans falsely so called,
being either fictitious Authors, or Apostates from the doctrine of their
Master. These being excepted, upon a view of the rest, you will find very few
dissenters from this general doctrine.

Plato's argument against the dissolution of the World, from the goodness and
wisdom of God, would not be altogether unreasonable, though applied to this
Earth, if it was so to be dissolved, as never to be restored again. But we
expect New Heavens and a New Earth upon the dissolution of these: Better in all
respects more commodious and more beautiful. And the several perfections of the
Divine Nature, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Justice, Sanctity, cannot be so well
displayed and exemplifi'd in any one single state of Nature, as in a succession
of States: fitted to receive one another according to the dispositions of the
Moral World, and the order of Divine Providence. Wherefore Plato's argument
from the Divine Attributes, all things considered, does rather prove a
succession of Worlds, than that one single World should remain the same
throughout all ages, without change or variation. Next to the Platonists, the
Stoics were most considerable in matters relating to Morality and Providence.
And their opinion, in this case, is well known; they being looked upon by the
Moderns, as the principal authors of the doctrine of the Conflagration. Nor is
it less known that the School of Democra^us and Epicurus made all their Worlds
subject to dissolution; and by a new concourse of Atoms restored them again.
Lastly, The Ionick Philosophers, who had Thales for their Master, and were the
first Naturalists amongst the Greeks, taught the same doctrine. We have indeed
but an imperfect account left us of this Sect, and it is great pity; for as it
was one of the most ancient, so it seems to have been one of the most
considerable amongst the Greeks for Natural Philosophy. In those remains which
Diogenes Laertius has preserved, of Anaxagoras, Anaximenes, Archelaus, etc.
All great men in their time, we find that they treated much of the Origin of
the World, and had many extraordinary Notions about it, which come lame and
defective to us. The doctrine of their Founder, Thales, which made all things
to consist of Water, seems to have a great resemblance to the doctrine of Moses
and S. Peter, Genesis 1. 2. Pet. 2. 5.
about the constitution of the First Heavens and Earth. But there is little in
Laertius what their opinion was about the Dissolution of the World. Ecl. Phys.
l. 1. c. 24.
Other Authors inform us more of that. Stobaeus joins them with Leucippus and
the Epicureans: Simplicius with Heraclitus and the Stoics, in this doctrine
about the corruptibility of the World. So that all the Schools of the Greek
Philosophers, as we noted before, were unanimous in this point, excepting the
Peripa^eticks; whose Master, Aristotle, had neither modesty enough to follow
the doctrine of his Predecessors, nor wit enough to invent any thing better.

Besides these Sects of Philosophers, there were Theologers amongst the Greeks,
more ancient than these Sects, and more mystical. Aristotle often
distinguishes the Naturalists and the Theologues. (...).
Such were Orpheus and his followers, who had more of the Ancient Oriental
Learning than the succeeding Philosophers. But they writ their Philosophy, or
Theology rather, Mythologically and Poetitically, in Parables and Allegories,
that needed an interpretation. All these Theologers supposed the Earth to rise
from a Chaos: and as they said that Love was the principle at first, that
united the loose and severed Elements, and formed them into an Habitable World:
So they supposed that if Strife or Contention prevailed, that would again
dissolve and disunite them, and reduce things into a Chaos: Such as the Earth
will be in, upon the Conflagration. And it further appears, that both these
Orders of the Learned in Greece supposed this present frame of Nature might
perish, by their doctrine of Periodical Revolutions, or of the Renovation of
the World after certain periods of time: which was a doctrine common amongst
the learned Greeks, and received by them from the ancient Barbarick Nations. As
will appear more at large in the following Book, Chapter 3. In the mean time we may
observe that Origin in answering Celsus, Lib. 5.
about the point of the Resurrection, tells him, That Doctrine ought not to
appear so strange or ridiculous to him, seeing their own Authors did believe
and teach the Renovation of the World, after certain Ages or Periods. And the
truth is, this Renovation of the World, rightly stated, is the same thing with
the First Resurrection of the Christians. And as to the Second and general
Resurrection, when the Righteous shall have Celestial Bodies; it is well known
that the Platonists and Pythagoreans clothed the Soul with a Celestial Body,
or, in their Language, an Ethereal Vehicle, as her last Beatitude or
Glorification. So that Origin might very justly tell his adversary, he had no
reason to ridicule the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection, seeing their own
Authors had the main strokes of it in their Traditionary Learning.

I will only add one remark more, before we leave this Subject, to prevent a
mistake in the word Immortal or Immortality, when applied to the World. As I
told you before, the equivocation that was in that term World, it being used
sometimes for the whole Universe, sometimes for this inferior part of it where
we live; so likewise we must observe, that when this Inferior World is said to
be Immortal, by the Philosophers, as sometimes it is, that commonly is not
meant of any single state of Nature, or any single World, but of a succession
of Worlds, consequent one upon another. As a family may be said immortal, not
in any single person, but in a succession of Heirs. So as, many times, when the
Ancients mention the immortality of the World, they do not thereby exclude the
Dissolution or Renovation of it: but suppose a vicissitude, or series of World
succeeding one another. This observation is not mine, but was long since made
by Simplicius, Stobaeus, and others, who tell us in what sense some of those
Philosophers who allowed the World to be perishable, did yet affirm it to be
immortal: namely, by successive renovations.

Thus much is sufficient to show the sense and judgment of Antiquity, as to the
chargeableness or perpetuity of the World. But Ancient Learning is like Ancient
Medals, more esteemed for their rarity, than their real use; unless the
Authority of a Prince make them current. So neither will these Testimonies be
of any great effect, unless they be made good and valuable by the Authority of
Scripture. We must therefore add the Testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles
to these of the Greeks and Barbarians, that the evidence may be full and
undeniable. That the Heavens and the Earth will perish or be changed into
another form, is, sometimes, plainly expressed, sometimes supposed and alluded to
in Scripture. The Prophet David's testimony is express, both for the beginning
and ending of the World: Ver. 25, 26, 27.
in the 102. Psalm, Of old have thou laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure:
yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy Years shall
have no end. The Prophet Esay's testimony is no less express, Chapter 51. 6.
to the same purpose. Lift up your Eyes to the heavens, and look upon the Earth
beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall was
old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner. These
Texts are plain and explicit; and in allusion to this day of the Lord, and
this destruction of the World, the same Prophet often uses phrases that relate
to it. Isa. 13. 13. c. 24. 18, 19. c. 34. 4.
As the Concussion of the Heavens and the Earth. The shaking of the foundations
of the World. The dissolution of the Host of Heaven. And our Sacred Writers
have expressions of the like force, and relating to the same effect. As the
Hills melting like wax, at the presence of the Lord: Psalm. 97. 5. Shattering
once more all the parts of the Creation: Hagg. 2. 6. Overturning the mountains,
and making the pillars of the Earth to tremble: Job 9. 5, 6. If you reflect
upon the explication given of the Deluge in the first part of this Theory, and
attend to the manner of the Conflagration, as it will be explained in the
sequel of this Discourse, you will see the justness and fitness of these
expressions: That they are not Poetical Hyperboles, or random expressions, of
great and terrible things in general, but a true account of what has been, or
will be, at that great day of the Lord. It Is true, the Prophets sometimes use
suchlike expressions figuratively, for commotions in States and Kingdoms, but
that is only by way of Metaphor and accommodation; the true basis they stand
upon, is that ruin, overthrow, and dissolution of the Natural World, which was
once at the Deluge, and will be again, after another manner, at the general
Conflagration.

As to the New Testament, our Savior says, Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but his words shall not pass away, Matthew. 24. 35. S. Paul says, the Scheme of
this World; the fashion, form, and composition of it, passes away, 1 Cor. 7.
31. And when mention is made of New Heavens and a New Earth, Isa. 65. 17 and
66. 22. Rev. 21. 1. 2. Pet. 3. 13.
which both the Prophet Isaiah, and the Apostles S. Peter and S. John, mention,
it is plainly implied that the old ones will be dissolved. The same thing is
also implied, when our Savior speaks of a Renascency or Regeneration, Matt.
19. 28. and S. Peter, of a Restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. For what is
now, must be abolished, before any former order of things can be restored or
reduced. In a word, If there was nothing in Scripture concerning this subject,
but that discourse of S. Peter's, in his 2d. Epistle and 3d. Chapter,
concerning the triple order and succession of the Heavens and the Earth; past,
present, and to come; that alone would be a conviction and demonstration to me,
that this present World will be dissolved.

You will say, it may be, in the last place, we want still the testimony of
Natural Reason and Philosophy to make the evidence complete. I answer, it is
enough, if They be silent, and have nothing to say to the contrary. Here are
witnesses, Humane and Divine, and if none appear against them, we have no
reason to refuse their testimony, or to distrust it. Philosophy will very
readily yield to this Doctrine, that All material compositions are dissolvable:
and she will not wonder to see that die, which she had seen born; I mean, this
Terrestrial World. She stood upon the Chaos, and see it row^ it self, with
difficulty and after many struglings, into the form of an habitable Earth: And
that form she see broken down again at the Deluge; and can as little hope or
expect now, as then, that it should be everlasting and immutable. There would
be nothing great or considerable in this Inferior World, if there were not
such revolutions of Nature. The Seasons of the Year, and the fresh Productions
of the Spring, Annus Magnus.
are pretty in their way; But when the Great Year comes about, with a new order
of all things, in the Heavens and on the Earth, and a new dress of Nature
throughout all her Regions, far more goodly and beautiful than the fairest
Spring; This gives a new Life to the Creation, and shows the greatness of its
Author. Besides, These Fatal Catastrophes are always a punishment to degenerate
Mankind, that are overwhelmed in the ruins of these perishing Worlds. And to
make Nature her self execute the Divine Vengeance against Rebellious Creatures,
argues both the Power and Wisdom of that Providence that governs all things
here below. These things Reason and Philosophy approve of; but if you further
require that they should show a Necessity of this future destruction of the
World, from Natural Causes, with the time and all other circumstances of this
effect; your demands are unreasonable, seeing these things do not depend solely
upon Nature. But if you will content your self to know what dispositions there
are in Nature toward such a change, how it may begin, proceed, and be
consummate, under the conduct of Providence, be pleased to read the following
Discourse for your further satisfaction.

CHAP. III. That the World will be destroyed by Fire, is the doctrine of the
Ancients, especially of the Stoics. That the same doctrine is more ancient
than the Greeks, and derived from the Barbarick Philosophy, and That probably
from Noah; the Father of all Traditionary Learning. The same doctrine expressly
authorized by Revelation, and enrolled into the Sacred Canon.
THAT the present World, or the present frame of Nature, will be destroyed, we
have already shown. In what manner this destruction will be, by what force or
what kind of fate, must be our next enquiry. The Philosophers have always
spoken of Fire and Water, those two unruly Elements, as the only Causes that
can destroy the World, and work our ruin; and accordingly they say, all the
great and fatal Revolutions of Nature, either past or to come, depend upon the
violence of these Two; when they get the mastery, and overwhelm all the rest
and the whole Earth, in a Deluge or Conflagration. But as they make these Two
the Destroying Elements, so they also make them the Purifying Elements. And
accordingly in their Lustrations, or their rites and ceremonies for purging
sin, Fire and Water were chiefly made use of, both amongst the Romans, Greeks
and Barbarians. And when these Elements over run the World, it is not, they
say, for a final destruction of it, but to purge Mankind and Nature from their
impurities. As for purgation by Fire and Water, the style of our Sacred
Writings does very much accommodate it self to that sense; and the Holy Ghost,
who is the great Purifier of Souls, is compared in his operation upon us, and
in our regeneration, 1 Ep. 3. 21.
to fire or water. And as for the external world, S. Peter makes the Flood to
have been a kind of Baptziing or renovation of the World. 1 Cor. 3. 13.
And S. Paul and the Prophet Malachy make the last Fire, Mal. 3. 2, 3.
to be a purging and re^ining ^ire. But to return to the Ancients.

The Stoics especially, of all other Sects amongst the Greeks, have preserved
the doctrine of the Conflagration, and made it a considerable part of their
Philosophy, and almost a character of their order. This is a thing so well
known that I need not use any Citations to prove it. But they cannot pretend to
have been the first Authors of it neither. For, besides that amongst the Greeks
themselves, Heraclitus and Empedocles, more ancient than Zeno, the Master of
the Stoics, taught this doctrine, it is plainly a branch of the Barbarick
Philosophy, and taken from thence by the Greeks. For it is well known that the
most ancient and mystic Learning amongst the Greeks, was not originally their
own, but borrowed of the more Eastern Nations, by Orpheus, Pythagoras, Plato,
and many more: who traveled thither, and traded with the Priests for knowledge
and Philosophy; and when they got a competent stock, returned home, and set up
a School, or a Sect, to instruct their Countrymen. But before we pass to the
Eastern Nations, let us, if you please, compare the Roman Philosophy upon this
subject, with that of the Greeks.

The Romans were a great people, that made a show of Learning, but had little
in reality, more than Words and Rhetoric. Their curiosity or emulation in
Philosophical Studies was so little, that it did not make different Sects and
Schools amongst them, as amongst the Greeks. I remember no Philosophers they
had but such as Tully, Seneca, and some of their Poets. And of these Lucretius,
Lucan and Ovid, have spoken openly of the Conflagration. Ovid's Verses are well
known, Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo Tellus, correptaque Regia Coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
A Time decreed by Fate, at length will come,
When Heavens and Earth and Seas shall have their do^m;
A fiery do^m: And Nature's mighty frame
Shall break, and be dissolved into a flame.


We see Tully's sense upon this matter in Scipio's Dream. When the old man
speaks to his Nephew Africanus, and shows him from the clouds, this spot of
Earth, where we live; He tells him, though our actions should be great, and
fortune favor them with success, yet there would be no room for any lasting
glory in this World; for the World it self is transient and fugitive. And a
Deluge or a Conflagration, which necessarily happen after certain periods of
time, sweep away all records of humane actions. As for Seneca, he being a
professed Stoic, we need not doubt of his opinion in this point. We may add
here, if you please, the Sibylline verses, which were kept with great Religion,
in the Capitol at Rome, and consulted with much ceremony upon solemn occasions.
These Sibyls were the Prophetesses of the Gentiles, and though their Writings now
have many spurious additions, yet none doubt but that the Conflagration of the
World was one of their original Prophecies.

Let us now proceed to the Eastern Nations. As the Romans receiev'd the small
skill they had in the Sciences, from the Greeks; so the Greeks received their
chief Mystic Learning from the Barbarians: that is, from the Egyptians,
Persians, Phoenicians, and other Eastern Nations: For it is not only the Western
or Northern people, that they called Barbarians, but indeed all Nations besides
themselves. For that is commonly the vanity of great Empires, to uncivilize in
a manner all the rest of the World; and to account all those People Barbarous,
that are not subject to their dominion. These however, whom they called so,
were the most ancient People, and had the first Learning that was ever heard of
after the Flood. And amongst these, the Egyptians were as famous as any: whose
Sentiment in this particular of the Conflagration is well known. For Plato, who
lived amongst them several years, tell us in his Timaeus, that it was the
doctrine of their Priests, that the fatal Catastrophes of the World were by
Fire and Water. In like manner the Persians made their beloved God, Fire, at
length to consume all things that are capable of being consumed. For that is
said to have been the doctrine of Hydaspes, Just. Mar. Apol. 2.
one of their great Magi or Wise Men. As to the Phoenicians, I suspect very
much that the Stoics had their Philosophy from them, and amongst other things
the Conflagration. We shall take notice of that hereafter.

But to comprehend the Arabians also, and Indians, give me leave to reflect a
little upon the story of the Phoenix. A story well known, and related by some
ancient Authors, and is in short this. The Phoenix, they say, is a Bird in
Arabia, India, and those Eastern parts, single in her kind, never more than one
at a time, and very longliv'd: appearing only at the expiration of the Great
Year, as they call it: And then she makes her self a Nest of Spices, which
being set on fire by the Sun, or some other secret power, she hovers upon it,
and consumes her self in the flames. But, which is most wonderful, out of these
ashes rises a second Phoenix; so that it is not so much a death as a
renovation. I do not doubt but the story is a fable, as to any such kind of
Bird, single in her species, living and dying, and reviving in that manner: But
it is an Apologue, or a Fable with an interpretation, and was intended as an
Emblem of the World: which, after a long age, will be consumed in the last
fire: and from its ashes or remains will arise another World, or a newform'd
Heavens and Earth. This, I think, is the true mystery of the Phoenix, under
which Symbol the Eastern Nations preserved the doctrine of the Conflagration
and Renovation of the World. They tell somewhat a like story of the Eagle,
soaring a-loft so near the Sun, that by his warmth and enlivening rays, she
renews her age and becomes young again. To this the Psalmist is thought to
allude, Psalm. 103. 5. Thy Youth shall be renewed like the Eagles: which the
Chaldee Paraphrast renders, In mundo venturo renovabis, sicut Aquilae,
juventutem tuam. These things to me seem plainly to be Symbolical, representing
that World to come, which the Paraphrast mentions, and the firing of this. And
this is after the manner of the Eastern Wisdom; which always loved to go fine,
cleath'd in figures and fancies.

And not only the Eastern Barbarians, but the Northern and Western also, had
this doctrine of the Conflagration amongst them. The Scythians, in their
dispute with the Egyptians about Antiquity, argue upon both suppositions, of
Fire or Water, destroying the Last World, or beginning This. And in the West,
the Celts, the most Ancient People there, had the same Tradition; for the
Druids, who were their Priests and Philosophers, derived, not from the Greeks,
but of the old race of Wise Men, that had their Learning traditionally, and, as
it were, hereditary from the First Ages: These, as Strabo tells us, L. 4.
gave the World a kind of Immortality by repeated renovations; and the
principle that destroyed it, according to them, was always Fire or Water. I had
forgot to mention in this List, the Chaldeans: Not. Quaest. 3. c. 29.
whose opinion we have from Berosus in Seneca. They did not only teach the
Conflagration, but also fixed it to a certain period of time, when there should
happen a great Conjunction of the Planets in Cancer. Lastly, We may add, to
close the account, the Modern Indian Philosophers, the relics of the old
Bragmans; These, L. 16. Hist. Ind.
as Maffeus tells us, declare, that the World will be renewed, after an
Universal Conflagration.

You see of what extent and universality throughout all Nations, this doctrine
of the Conflagration has been. Let us now consider what defects or excesses
there are in these ancient opinions, concerning this fate of the World, and how
they may be rectified: That we may admit them no further into our belief, than
they are warranted by reason, or by the authority of Christian Religion. The
first fault they seem to have committed about this point, is this, That they
made these revolutions and renovations of Nature, indefinite or endless: as if
there would be such a succession of Deluges and Conflagrations to all eternity.
This, the Stoics seem plainly to have asserted, as appears from Numenius,
Philo, Simplicius, and others, Epist. 60.
S. Jerome imputes this Opinion also to Origin: but he does not always hit the
ture sense of that Father, or is not fair and just in the representation of it.
Whosoever held this Opinion, it is a manifest error, and may be easily
rectified by the Christian Revelation; which teaches us plainly, that there is
a final period and consummation of all things that belong to this Sublunary or
Terrestrial World. When the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the Father: and
Time shall be no more.

Another Error they committed in this doctrine, is, the Identity, or sameness,
if I may so say, of the Worlds succeeding one another. They are made indeed of
the same Lump of Matter, but they supposed them to return also in the same
Form. And, which is worse, that there would be the same face of humane affairs;
The same Persons and the same actions over again; So as the Second World would
be but a bare repetition of the former, without any variety or diversity. Such
a revolution is commonly called the Platonic Year* A period, when all things
return to the same posture they had some thousands of years before; As a Play
acted over again, upon the same Stage, and to the Same Auditory. This is a
groundless and injudicious supposition. For, whether we consider the Nature of
things, The Earth after a dissolution, by Fire or by Water, could not return
into the same form and fashion it had before; Or whether we consider
Providence, it would no ways suit with the Divine Wisdom and Justice to bring
upon the stage again those very Scenes, and that very course of humane affairs,
which it had so lately condemned and destroyed. We may be assured therefore,
that, upon the dissolution of a World, a new order of things, both as to Nature
and Providence, always appears: And what that new order will be, in both
respects, after the Conflagration, I hope we shall, in the following Book, give
a satisfactory account.

These are the Opinions, true or false, of the Ancients; and chiefly of the
Stoics, concerning the mystery of the Conflagration. It will not be improper
to enquire in the last place, how the Stoics came by this doctrine: whether it
was their discovery and invention, or from whom they learned it. That it was
not their own invention, we have given sufficient ground to believe, by showing
the antiquity of it beyond the times of the Stoics. Besides, what a man
invents himself, he can give the reasons and causes of it, as things upon which
he founded his invention: But the Stoics do not this, but according to the
ancient traditional way, deliver the conclusion without proof or premises. We
named Heraclitus and Empedocles amongst the Greeks to have taught this doctrine
before the Stoics: De defec. Orac.
And, according to Plutarch, Hesiod and Hesiod and Orpheus, authors of the
highest antiquity, sung of this last Fire, in their Philosophic Poetry. But I
suspect the Stoics had this doctrine from the Phoenicians; for if we enquire
into the original of that Sect, we shall find that their Founder Zeno, was a
Barbarian or Semi-barbarian, derived from the Phoenicians, as Laertius and
Cicero give an account of him. And the Phoenicians had a great share in the
Oriental knowledge, as we see by Sanchoniathon's remains in Eusebius. And by
their mystical Books which Suidas mentions, from whence Pherecydes, Pythagoras
his Master, had his learning. We may therefore reasonably presume that it might
be from his Countrymen, the Phoenicians, that Zeno had the doctrine of the
Conflagration. Not that he brought it first into Greece, but strongly revived
it, and made it almost peculiar to his Sect.

So much for the Stoics in particular, and the Greeks in general. We have
also, you see, traced these Opinions higher, to the first Barbarick
Philosophers: who were the first race of Philosophers after the Flood. But
Josephus tells a formal story of Pillars set up by Seth, before the Flood;
implying the foreknowledge of this Fiery destruction of the World, even from
the beginning of it. His words are to this effect, give what credit to them you
think fit. Seth and his fellow students having found out the knowledge of the
caelestial Bodies, L. 1. c. 3.
and the order and disposition of the Universe; and having also received from
Adam a Prophecy, that the World should have a double destruction, one by Water,
another by Fire; To preserve and transmit their knowledge, in either case, to
posterity, They raised two Pillars, one of Brick, another of Stone, and
ingrav'd upon them their Philosophy and inventions. And one of these pillars,
the Author says, was standing in Syria, (...)
even to his time. I do not press the belief of this story; there being
nothing, that I know of, in Antiquity Sacred or profane, that gives a joint
testimony with it. And those that set up these Pillars, do not seem to me to
have understood the Nature of the Deluge or Conflagration; if they thought a
Pillar, either of Brick or Stone, would be secure, in those great dissolutions
of the Earth. But we have pursued this doctrine high enough without the help of
these ante-diluvian Antiquities: Namely, to the earliest people and the first
appearances of Wisdom after the Flood. So that, I think, we may justly look
upon it as the doctrine of Noah, and of his immediate posterity. And as that is
the highest source of learning to the present World; so we should endeavor to
carry our Philosophical Traditions to that Original: for I cannot persuade my
self but that they had amongst them, even in those early days, the main strokes
or conclusions of the best Philosophy: or, if I may so say, a form of sound
doctrine concerning Nature and Providence. Of which matter, if you will allow
me a short digression, I will speak my thoughts in a few words.

In those First Ages of the World after the Flood, when Noah and his Children
peopled the Earth again, as he gave them Precepts of Morality and Piety for the
conduct of their Manners; which are usually called Praecepta Noachidarum, the
Precepts of Noah, frequently mentioned both by the Jews and Christians: So also
he delivered to them, at least, if we judge aright, certain Maxims or
Conclusions about Providence, the state of Nature, and the fate of the World:
And these, in proportion, may be called Dogmata Noachidarum, the Doctrines of
Noah, and his Children. Which made a System of Philosophy or secret knowledge
amongst them, delivered by Tradition from Father to Son; but especially
preserved amongst their Priests and Sacred Persons, or such others as were
addicted to Contemplation. This I take to be more ancient than Moses himself,
or the Jewish Nation. But it would lead me too far out of my way, to set down
in this place, the reasons of my judgment. Let it be sufficient to have pointed
only at this Fountain head of knowledge, and so return to our Argument.

We have heard, as it were, a Cry of Fire, throughout all Antiquity, and
throughout all the People of the Earth. But those alarums are sometimes false,
or make a greater noise than the thing deserves. For my part, I never trust
Antiquity barely upon its own account, but always require a second witness
either from Nature, or from Scripture: What the voice of Nature is, we shall
hear all along in the following Treatise: Let us then examine at present, what
testimony the Prophets and Apostles give to this ancient doctrine of the
Conflagration of the World. The Prophets see the World a-fire at a distance and
more imperfectly, as a brightness in the Heavens, rather than a burning flame:
but S. Peter describes it, as if he had been standing by, and seen the Heavens
and Earth in a red fire: heard the cracking flames and the tumbling Mountains:
2 Pet. 3. 10. In the day of the Lord, The Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat: The Earth also, and the
works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Then, after a pious Ejaculation, he
adds, Ver. 12. Looking for and hastening the coming of the day of God, wherein
the Heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved; and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat. This is as lively, as a Man could express it, if he had the
dreadful spectacle before his Eyes. S. Peter had before taught the same
doctrine (ver. 5, 6, 7.) but in a more Philosophic way; describing the double
fate of the World, by Water and Fire, with relation to the Nature and
Constitution of either World, past or present. The Heavens and the Earth were
of old, consisting of water and by water: whereby, the World that then was,
being overflowed with water, perished. But the Heavens and the Earth which are
now, by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of
Judgment, and perdition of ungodly, or Atheistical men. This testimony of S.
Peter being full, direct, and explicit, will give light and strength to several
other passages of Scripture, where the same thing is expressed obscurely or by
allusion. 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
As when S. Paul says, The fire shall try every man's work in that day. Matt.
13. 40, 41, 42.
And our Savior says, The tares shall be burnt in the fire, at the end of the
World. Accordingly it is said, both by the Apostles and Prophets, that God will
come to judgment in Fire. S. Paul to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8.
promises the persecuted Righteous, rest and ease, When the Lord shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire: taking vengeance
on them that know not God, etc. And so to the Hebrews S. Paul says, chapter 10. 27.
that for wilful Apostates there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries, or enemies of God. ver. 26, 27, 28, 29.
And in the 12th. Chapter, he alludes to the same thing, when after he had
spoken of shaking the Heavens and the Earth once more, he exhorts, as S.
Peter does upon the same occasion, to reverence and godly fear, For our God is
a consuming Fire.

In like manner the Prophets, when they speak of destroying the wicked, and the
Enemies of God and Christ, at the end of the World, represent it as a
destruction by Fire. Psalm the 11th. 6. Upon the wicked the Lord shall rain
coals, fire, and brimstone, and a burning tempest: This shall be the portion of
their Cup. And Psalm. 50. 3. Our God shall come, and will not be slow: A fire
shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. And
in the beginning of those two triumphal Psalms, the sixty-eighth, and
ninety-seventh, we see plain allusions to this coming of the Lord in fire. The
other Prophets speak in the same style, of a fiery indignation against the
wicked, in the day of the Lord: As in Isaiah 66. 15. For behold the Lord will
come with fire, and chapter 34. 8, 9, 10.
and with his Chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and
his rebuke with flames of fire. And in Daniel, (c. 7. 9, 10.) The Ancient of
days is placed upon his Seat of Judgment, covered in flames. I beheld till the
Thrones were set, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as
snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: His Throne was like the
fiery flame, his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth
from before him: Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him: The judgment was set, and the Books were opened.
The Prophet Malachy (c. 4. 1.) describes the Day of the Lord to the same
effect, and in like colors; Behold the Day comes, that shall burn as an Oven:
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the
day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch. And that nature her self, and the Earth
shall suffer in that fire, the Prophet Zephany tells us, (c. 3. 8.) All the
Earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. Lastly, This consumption
of the Earth by fire, even to the foundations of it, is expressed livelily by
Moses in his Song, Deuteronomy. 32. 22. A fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn
unto the lowest Hell: and shall consume the Earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the Mountains.

If we reflect upon these Witnesses; and especially the first and last, Moses
and S. Peter: at what a great distance of time they writ their Prophecies, and
yet how well they agree, we must needs conclude that they were acted by the
same Spirit: and a Spirit that see thorough all the Ages of the World, from the
beginning to the end. These Sacred Writers were so remote in time from one
another, that they could not confer together, nor conspire, either in a false
testimony, or to make the same prediction. But being under one common influence
and inspiration, which is always consistent with it self, they have dictated
the same things, though at two thousand years distance sometimes from one
another. This, besides many other considerations, makes their authority
incontestable. And upon the whole account, you see, that the doctrine of the
future Conflagration of the World, having run through all Ages and Nations, is,
by the joint consent of the Prophets and Apostles, adopted into the Christian
Faith.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the time of the Conflagration, and the end of the World.
What the Astronomers say upon this Subject, and upon what they ground their
Calculations; The true notion of the Great Year, or of the Platonic Year,
stated and explained.
HAVING, in this First Section, laid a sure foundation as to the Subject of our
Discourse; the truth and certainty of the Conflagration whereof we are to
treat; we will now proceed to enquire after the Time, Causes, and Manner of it.
We are naturally more inquisitive after the End of the World, and the Time of
that Fatal Revolution, than after the Causes of it: For these, we know, are
irresistible, whenever they come, and therefore we are only sollicitous that
they should not overtake us, or our near posterity. The Romans thought they had
the fates of their Empire in the Books of the Sibyls, which were kept by the
Magistrates as a Sacred Treasure. We have also our Prophetical Books, more
sacred and more infallible than theirs, which contain the fate of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and of that glorious Kingdom that is to succeed. And of
all futurities, there is none can be of such importance to be enquired after,
as this last scene and close of all humane affairs.

If I thought it possible to determine the time of the Conflagration from the
bare intuition of Natural Causes, I would not treat of it in this place, but
reserve it to the last; after we had brought into view all those Causes,
weighed their force, and examined how and when they would concur to produce
this great effect. But I am satisfied that the excitation and concourse of
those Causes does not depend upon Nature only; and though the Causes may be
sufficient when all united, yet the union of them at such a time, and in such a
manner, I look upon as the effect of a particular Providence: and therefore no
foresight of ours, or inspection into Nature can discover to us the time of
this conjuncture. This method therefore of Prediction from Natural Causes being
laid aside as impracticable, all other methods may be treated of in this place,
as being independent upon any thing that is to follow in the Treatise; and it
will be an ease to the Argument to discharge it of this part, and clear the way
by degrees to the principal point, which is, the Causes and Manner of the
Conflagration.

Some have thought it a kind of impiety in a Christian to enquire after the End
of the World; because of that check which our Savior gave his Disciples, when,
after his Resurrection, enquiring of him about the time of his Kingdom, Act. 1.
7.
He answered, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power. And, before his death, when he was
discoursing of the Consummation of all things, He told them expressly, that though
there should be such and such previous Signs as he had mentioned, Matt. 24. 36.
yet, Of that day and hour knows no man. No, not the Angels that are in
Heaven, but my Father only. Be it so, that the Disciples deserved a reprimand,
for desiring to know, by a particular revelation from our Savior, the state of
future times; when many other things were more necessary for their instruction,
and for their ministry. Be it also admitted, that the Angels, at that distance
of time, could not see through all events to the End of the World; it does not
at all follow from thence that they do not know it now; when, in the course of
Sixteen Hundred Years, many things are come to pass, that may be marks and
directions to them to make a judgment of what remains, and of the last period
of all things. However there will be no danger in our enquiries about this
matter, seeing they are not so much to discover the certainty, as the
uncertainty of that period, as to humane knowledge. Let us therefore consider
what methods have been used, by those that have been curious and busy to
measure the duration of the World.

The Stoics tell us, When the Sun and the Stars have drunk up the Sea, then
the Earth shall be burnt. A very fair Prophecy: but how long will they be a
drinking? For unless we can determine that, we cannot determine when this
combustion will begin. Many of the Ancients thought that the Stars were
nourished by the vapors of the Ocean and of the moist Earth: Cicer. de Not. D.
l. 2.
and when that nourishment was spent, being of a fiery nature, they would prey
upon the Body of the Earth it self, and consume that, after they had consumed
the Water. This is old-fashioned Philosophy, and now, that the nature of those
Bodies is better known, will scarce pass for current. It Is true, we must expect
some dispositions toward the combustion of the World, from a great drought and
desiccation of the Earth: But this helps us nothing on our way; for the
question still returns, When will this immoderate drought or dryness happen?
and that is us ill to resolve as the former. Therefore, as I said before, I have
no hopes of deciding the question by Physiology or Natural Causes; let us then
look up from the Earth to the Heavens, To the Astronomers and the Prophets;
These think they can define the age and duration of the World; The one by their
Art, and the other by Inspiration,

We begin with the Astronomers: whose Calculations are founded either upon the
Aspects and Configurations of the Planets, or upon the Revolutions of the Fixed
Stars: Or lastly, upon that which they call Annus Magnus, or the Great Year,
whatsoever that Notion proves to be when it is rightly interpreted. As to the
Planets, Be^sus tells us, Sen. Not. qu. l. 3. c. 29.
The Chaldeans suppose Deluges to proceed from a great conjunction of the
Planets in Capricorn: and from a like conjunction in the opposite Sign of
Cancer, the Conflagration will ensue. So that if we compute by the Astronomical
Tables how long it will be to such a Conjunction, we find at the same time how
long it will be to the Conflagration. This doctrine of the Chaldeans some
Christian Authors have owned, and followed the same principles and method.

If these Authors would deal fairly with Mankind, they should show us some
connection betwixt these Causes and the Effects which they make consequent upon
them. For it is an unreasonable thing to require a man's assent to a
Proposition, where he sees no dependence or connection of Terms; unless it come
by Revelation, or from an infallible Authority. If you say, The Conflagration
will be at the first great Conjunction of the Planets in Cancer, and I say it
will be at the next Eclipse of the Moon, if you show no more reason for your
assertion than I for mine, and neither of us pretend to revelation or
infallibility, we may justly expect to be equally credited. Pray what reason
can you give why the Planets, when they meet, should plot together, to set on
Fire their Fellow-Planet, the Earth, who never did them any harm? But now there
is a plausible reason for my opinion; for the Moon, when Eclipsed may think
herself affronted by the Earth, interposing rudely betwixt her and the Sun, and
leaving her to grope her way in the dark; She therefore may justly take her
revenge as she can. But you will say, it is not in the power of the Moon to set
the Earth on Fire, if she had malice enough to do it. No, nor, say I, is it in
the power of the other Planets, that are far more distant from the Earth than
the Moon, and as stark dull lumps of Earth, as she is. The plain truth is, The
Planets are so many Earths; and our Earth is as much a Planet as the brightest
of them. It Is carried about the Sun with the same common stream, and shines
with as much luster to them, as they do to us: neither can they do any more
harm to it, than it can do to them. It Is now well known, that the Planets are
dark opake Bodies, generally made up of Earth and Water, as our Globe is; and
have no force or action, but that of reverberating the light which the Sun
casts upon them. This blind superstitious fear or reverence for the Stars, had
its original from the ancient Idolaters; They thought them Gods, and that they
had domination over humane affairs. We do not indeed worship them, as they did;
but some men retain still the same opinion of their virtues, of their rule and
influence upon us and our affairs, which was the ground of their worship. It Is
full time now to sweep away these cobwebs of superstition, these relics of
Paganism. I do not see how we are any more concerned in the postures of the
Planets, than in the postures of the Clouds; and you may as well build an art
of prediction or divination upon the one as the other. They must not know much
of the Philosophy of the Heavens, or little consider it, that think the fate,
either of single persons, or of the whole Earth, can depend upon the aspects or
figured dances of those Bodies.

But you will say, it may be, though no reason can be given for such effects, yet
experience does attest the truth of them. In the first place, I answer, no
experience can be produced for this effect we are speaking of, the
Conflagration of the World. Secondly, Experience fallaciously recorded, or
wholly in favor of one side, is no proof. If a public Register was kept of
all Astrological Predictions, and of all the Events that followed upon them,
right or wrong, agreeing or disagreeing, I could willingly refer the cause to
the determination of such a Register, and such experience. But that which they
call experience, is so stated, that if One Prediction of Ten, hits right or
near right, it shall make more noise, and be more taken notice of, than all the
Nine that are false. Just as in a Lottery, where many Blanks are drawn for one
Prize, yet these make all the noise, and those are forgotten. If any one be so
lucky as to draw a good Lot, then the Trumpet sounds, and his Name is
registered, and he tells his good fortune to every body he meets: whereas those
that lose, go silently away with empty Pockets, and are ashamed to tell their
losses. Such a thing is the Register of Astrological experiences; they record
what makes for their credit, but drop all blank instances, that would discover
the vanity or cheat of their Art.

So much for the Planets. They have also a pretended calculation of the End of
the World from the fixed Stars and the Firmament. Which in short is this: They
suppose these Bodies, besides the hurry of their Diurnal Motion from East to
West, quite round the Earth in four and twenty hours, to have another
retrograde Motion, from West to East; which is more slow and leisurely; And
when they have finished the Circle of this retrogradation, and come up again to
the same place from whence they started at the beginning of the World, then
this course of Nature will be at an end; and either the Heavens will cease from
all motion, or a new set of motions will be put a foot, and the World begin
again. This is a bundle of fictions tied up in a pretty knot* in the first
place, there is no such thing as a solid Firmament, in which the Stars are
fixed, as nails in a board. The Heavens are as fluid as our Air, and the higher
we go, the more thin and subtle is the ethereal matter. Then, the fixed Stars
are not all in one Surface, as they seem to us, nor at an equal distance from
the Earth, but are placed in several Orbs higher and higher; there being
infinite room in the great Deep of the Heavens, every way, for innumerable
Stars and Spheres behind one another, to fill and beautify the immense spaces
of the Universe. Lastly, The fixed Stars have no motion common to them all, nor
any motion singly, unless upon their own Centres; and therefore, never leaving
their stations, they can never return to any common station, which they would
suppose them to have had at the beginning of the World. So as this Period they
speak of, whereby they would measure the duration of the World, is merely
imaginary, and has no foundation in the true Nature or Motion of the Celestial
Bodies.

But in the third place, They speak of an ANNUS MAGNUS, a Great Year; A
revolution so called, whatsoever it is, that is of the same extent with the
length of the World. This Notion, I confess, is more Ancient and Universal, and
therefore I am the more apt to believe that it is not altogether groundless.
But the difficulty is, to find out the true notion of this Great Year, what is
to be understood by it, and then of what length it is. They all agree that it
is a time of some grand ins^auration of all things, or a Restitution of the
Heavens and the Earth to their former state; that is, to the state and posture
they had at the beginning of the World; such therefore as will reduce the
Golden Age, and that happy state of Nature wherein things were at first. If so,
if these be the marks and properties of this Revolution, which is called the
Great Year, we need not go so far to find the true notion and interpretation of
it. Those that have read the First Part of this Theory, Chap. 3.
may remember that in the Second Book we gave an account what the posture of
the Earth was at the beginning of the World, and what were the consequences of
that posture, A perpetual Spring and Equinox throughout all the Earth: And if
the Earth was restored again to that posture and situation, all that is imputed
to the Great Year, would immediately follow upon it, without ever disturbing or
moving the fixed Stars, Firmament, or Planets; and yet at the same time all
these three would return or be restored to the same posture they had at the
beginning of the World; so as the whole character of the Great Year would be
truly fulfilled, though not in that way which they imagined; but in another, more
compendious, and of easier conception. My meaning is this, If the Axis of the
Earth was rectified, and set parallel with the Axis of the Ecliptic, upon
which the Planets, Firmament and fixed Stars are supposed to move, all things
would be as they were at first; a general harmony and conformity of all the
motions of the Universe would presently appear, such, as they say, was in the
Golden Age, before any disorder came into the Natural or Moral World.

As this is an easy, so I do not doubt, but it is a true account of that which
was originally called the Great Year, or the Great Instauration; which Nature
will bring to pass in this simple method, by rectifying the Axis of the Earth,
without those operose revolutions, which some Astronomers have fansied. But
however, this account being admitted, how will it help us to define what the
Age and duration of the World will be? It Is true, many have undertaken to tell
us the length of this Great Year, and consequently of the World; but, besides
that their accounts are very different, and generally of an extravagant length,
if we had the true account, it would not assure us when the World would end;
because we do not know when it did begin, or what progress we have already made
in the line of Time. For I am satisfied, the Chronology of the World, whether
Sacred or Profane, is lost; till Providence shall please to retrieve it by
some new discovery. As to Profane Chronology, or that of the Heathens, the
Greeks and the Romans knew nothing above the Olympiads; which fell short many
Ages of the Deluge, much more of the beginning of the World. And the Eastern
Barbarous Nations, as they disagreed amongst themselves, so generally they run
the Origin of the World to such a prodigious height, as is neither agreeable to
Faith, nor Reason. As to Sacred Chronology, it is well known, that the
difference there is betwixt the Greek, Hebrew, and Samaritan Copies of the
Bible, makes the Age of the World altogether undetermined: And there is no way
yet found out, how we may certainly discover which of the three Copies is most
Authentic, and consequently what the Age of the World is, upon a true
computation. Seeing therefore we have no assurance how long the World has
stood already, neither could we be assured how long it has to stand, though,
by this Annus Magnus, or any other way, the total sum, or whole term of its
duration was truly known.

I am sorry to see the little success we have had in our first search after the
End of the World, from Astronomical Calculations. But it is an useful piece of
Knowledge to know the bounds of our Knowledge; that so we may not spend our
time and thoughts about things that lie out of our reach. I have little or no
hopes of resolving this point by the Light of Nature, and therefore it only
remains now to enquire, whether Providence has made it known by any sort of
Prophecy or Revelation. Which shall be the Subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. V. Concerning Prophecies that determine the end of the World; Of what
order soever, Profane or Sacred; Jewish or Christian. That no certain judgment
can be made from any of them, at what distance we are now from the
Conflagration.
THE bounds of humane knowledge are so narrow, and the desire of knowing so
vast and illimited, that it often puts Mankind upon irregular methods of
enlarging their knowledge. This has made them find out arts of commerce with
evil Spirits, to be instructed by them in such Events as they could not of
themselves discover. We meddle not with those mysteries of iniquity: but what
has appeared under the notion of Divine Prophecy, relating to the Chronology
of the World: giving either the whole extent of it, or certain marks of its
expiration: These we purpose to examine in this place. How far any thing may,
or may not, be concluded from them, as to the resolution of our Problem, How
long the World will last.

Amongst the Heathens I do not remember any Prophecies of this nature, except
the Sibylline Oracles, as they are usually called. The Ancient Eastern
Philosophers have left us no account that I can call to mind, about the time of
this fatality. They say when the Phoenix returns we must expect the
Conflagration to follow; but the age of the Phoenix they make as various and
uncertain, as they do the computation of their Great Year: Symbolum (...),
Phoenix. Hor. Apol. l. 2. c. 57.
which two things are indeed one and the same in effect. Some of them, I
confess, mention Six Thousand Years for the whole Age of the World: which being
the famous Prophecy of the Jews, we shall speak to it largely hereafter: and
reduce to that head what broken Traditions remain amongst the Heathens of the
same thing. As to the Sibyline Oracles, which were so much in reputation
amongst the Greeks and Romans, they have been tampered with so much, and
changed so often, that they are become now of little authority. They seem to
have divided the duration of the World into Ten Ages, and the last of these
they make a Golden Age, a state of Peace, Righteousness and Perfection: but
seeing they have not determined, in any definite numbers, what the length of
every Age will be, nor given us the sum of all, we cannot draw any conclusion
from this account as to the point in question before us. But must proceed to
the Jewish and Christian Oracles.

The Jews have a remarkable Prophecy, which expresses both the whole and the
parts of the World's duration. The World, they say, will stand Six Thousand
Years: Two Thousand before the Law, Two Thousand under the Law, and Two
Thousand under the Messiah. This Prophecy they derive from Elias; but there
were two of the Name, Elias the Thesbite, and Elias the Rabbin, or Cabbalist:
and it is supposed to belong immediately to the latter of these. Yet this does
not hinder in my opinion, but that it might come originally from the former
Elias, and was preserved in the School of this Elias the Rabbin, and first made
public by him. Or he added, it may be, that division of the time into three
parts, and so got a Title to the whole. I cannot easily imagine that a Doctor
that lived two hundred years or thereabouts, before Christ, when Prophecy had
ceased for some Ages amongst the Jews, should take upon him to dictate a
Prophecy about the duration of the World, unless he had been supported by some
antecedent Cabbalistical Tradition: which being kept more secret before, he
took the liberty to make public, and so was reputed the Author of the
Prophecy. As many Philosophers amongst the Greeks, were the reputed Authors of
such doctrines as were much more ancient than themselves: But they were the
publishers of them in their Country, or the revivers of them after a long
silence; and so, by forgetful posterity, got the honor of the first invention.

You will think, it may be, the time is too long and the distance too great
betwixt Elias the Thesbite, and this Elias the Rabbin, for a Tradition to
subsist all the while, or be preserved with any competent integrity. But it
appears from S. Iude's Epistle, that the Prophecies of Enoch, (who lived before
the Flood) relating to the day of judgment and the end of the World, were
extant in his time, either in Writing or by Tradition: And the distance betwixt
Enoch and S. Jude was vastly greater than betwixt the two Elias's. Nor was any
fitter to be inspired with that knowledge, or to tell the first news of that
fatal period, than the old Prophet Elias, who is to come again and bring the
alarm of the approaching Conflagration. But however this conjecture may prove
as to the original Author of this Prophecy, the Prophecy it self concerning the
Sexmillennial duration of the World, is very much insisted upon by the
Christian Fathers. Which yet I believe is not so much for the bare Authority of
the Tradition, as because they thought it was founded in the History of the Six
days Creation, and the Sabbath succeeding: as also in some other Typical
precepts and usages in the Law of Moses. But before we speak of that, give me
leave to name some of those Fathers to you, that were of this judgment, and
supposed the great Sabbatism would succeed after the World had stood Six
Thousand Years. Of this opinion was S. Barnabas in his Catholic Epistle, chapter
15. Where he argues that the Creation will be ended in Six Thousand Years, as
it was finished in Six Days: Every day according to the Sacred and mystical
account, being a Thousand Years. Of the same judgment is S. Irenaeus, both as
to the conclusion and the reason of it. He says, L. 5. c. 28, 29, 30.
the History of the Creation in six days, is a narration as to what is past,
and a Prophecy of what is to come. As the Work was said to be consummated in
six days, and the Sabbath to be the seventh; So the consummation of all things
will be in Six Thousand Years, and then the great Sabbatism to come on in the
blessed reign of Christ. Hippolitus Martyr, disciple of Irenaeus, is of the
same judgment, as you may see in Photius, chapter 202. Lactantius in his Divine
Institutions, l. 7. c. 14. gives the very same account of the state and
continuance of the World, and the same proofs for it. And so does S. Cyprian,
in his Exhortation to Martyrdom, chapter 11. S Jerome more than once declares
himself of the same opinion; and S. Austin, though he wavers and was doubtful as
to the Millennium, C. D. l. 20. c. 7.
or Reign of Christ upon Earth, yet he receives this computation without
hesitancy, and upon the forementioned grounds. So Johannes Damascenus de fide
Orthodoxa, takes seven Millennaries for the entire space of the World, from the
Creation to the general Resurrection, the Sabbatism being included. And that
this was a received and approved opinion in early times, we may collect from
the Author of the Questions and answers ad Orthodoxos in Justin Martyr. Who
giving an answer to that enquiry about the six thousand-years term of the
World, says, We may conjecture from many places of Scripture, that those are in
the right, that say six thousand years is the time prefixed for the duration of
this present frame of the World. These Authors I have examined my self: but
there are many others brought in confirmation of this opinion: as S. Hilary,
Anastasius Sinaita, Sanctus Gaudentius, Q. Julius Hilarion, Iunilius Africanus,
Isidorus Hispalensis, Cassiodorus, Gregorius Magnus, and others, which I leave
to be examined by those that have curiosity and leisure to do it.

In the mean time it must be confessed that many of these Fathers were under a
mistake in one respect, in that they generally thought the World was near an
end in their time. An error, which we need not take pains to confute now;
seeing we, who live twelve hundred or fourteen hundred years after them, find
the World still in being, and likely to continue so for some considerable time.
But it is easy to discern whence their mistake proceeded: not from this
Prophecy alone, but because they reckoned this Prophecy according to the
Chronology of the Septuagint: which setting back the beginning of the World
many Ages beyond the Hebrew, these six thousand years were very near expired in
the time of those Fathers; and that made them conclude that the World was very
near an end. We will make no reflections, in this place, upon that Chronology
of the Septuagint, lest it should too much interrupt the thread of our
discourse. But it is necessary to show how the Fathers grounded this
computation of Six Thousand Years, upon Scripture. 'Twas chiefly, as we
suggested before, upon the Hexameron, or the Creation finished in Six Days, and
the Sabbath ensuing. The Sabbath, they said, was a type of the Sabbatism, that
was to follow at the end of the World, Chapter 5.
according to S. Paul to the Hebrews; and then by analogy and consequence, the
six days preceding the Sabbath, must note the space and duration of the World.
If therefore (...) could discover how much a Day is reckoned for, in this
mystical computation, the sum of the six days would be easily found out. And
they think, that according to the Psalmist, (Psalm. 90. 4.) and S. Peter, (2
Epist. 3. 8.) a Day may be estimated a thousand years; and consequently six
days must be counted six thousand years, for the duration of the World. This is
their interpretation, and their inference: but it must be acknowledged, that
there is an essential weakness in all typical and allegorical argumentations,
in comparison of literal. And th^s being allowed in diminution of the proof, we
may be bold to say, that nothing yet appears, either in Nature, or Scripture,
or Humane Affairs, repugnant to this supposition of Six Thousand Years: which
has Antiquity, and the Authority of the Fathers, on its side.

We proceed now to the Christian Prophecies concerning the end of the World. I
do not mention those in Daniel, because I am not satisfied that any there
(excepting that of the Fifth Kingdom it self) extend so far. But in the
Apocalypse of S. John, which is the last Revelation we are to expect, there are
several Prophecies that reach to the Consummation of this World, and the First
Resurrection. The Seven Seals, the Seven Trumpets, the Seven Vials, do all
terminate upon that great Period. But they are rather Historical Prophecies
than Chronological; they tell us, in their Language, the Events, but do not
measure or express the time wherein they come to pass. Others there are that
may be called Chronological, as the treading under foot the holy City, forty
and two months, Apoc. 11. 2. The Witnesses opposing Antichrist, one thousand
two hundred and sixty days, Apoc. 11. 3. The flight of the Woman into the
Wilderness, for the same number of days, or for a Time, Times, and half a Time,
Apoc. 12. 6. and 14. And lastly, The War of the Beast against the Saints, forty
two months, Apoc. 13. 5. These all, you see, express a time for their
completion; and all the same time, if I be not mistaken: But they do not reach
to the End of the World. Or if some of them did reach so far, yet because we do
not certainly know where to fix their beginning, we must still be at a loss,
when, or in what year they will expire. As for instance, If the Reign of the
Beast, or the Preaching of the Witnesses be 1260 years, as is reasonably
supposed; yet if we do not know certainly when this Reign, or this Preaching
begun, neither can we tell when it will end. And the Epocha's or beginnings of
these Prophecies are so differently calculated, and are things of so long
debate, as makes the discussion of them altogether improper for this place. Yet
it must be confessed, that the best conjectures that can be made concerning the
approaching End of the World, must be taken from a judicious examination of
these points: and according as we gather up the Prophecies of the Apocalypse,
in a successive completion, we see how by degrees we draw nearer and nearer to
the conclusion of all. But till some of these enlightening Prophecies be
accomplished, we are as a Man that awakes in the Night, all is dark about him,
and he knows not how far the Night is spent: but if he watch till the light
appears, the first glimpses of that will resolve his doubts. We must have a
little patience and, I think, but a little; still eyeing those Prophecies of
the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the depression of Antichrist: till by
their accomplishment, the day dawn, and the Clouds begin to change their
color. Then we shall be able to make a near guess, when the Sun of
righteousness will arise.

So much for Prophecies. There are also Signs, which are looked upon us
forerunners of the coming of our Savior: and therefore may give us some
direction how to judge of the distance or approach of that great Day. Thus many
of the Fathers thought the coming of Antichrist would be a sign to give the
World notice of its approaching end. But we may easily see, by what has been
noted before, what it was that led the Fathers into that mistake. They thought
their six thousand years were near an end, as they truly were, according to
that Chronology they followed: and therefore they concluded the Reign of
Antichrist must be very short, whenever he came, and that he could not come
long before the end of the World. But we are very well assured from the
Revelation of Saint John, that the reign of Antichrist is not to be so short
and transient; and from the prospect and history of Christendom, that he has
been already upon his Throne many hundreds of Years. Therefore this Sign wholly
falls to the ground; unless you will take it from the fall of Antichrist,
rather than from his first entrance. Others expect the coming of Elias to give
warning of that day, and prepare the way of the Lord. I am very willing to
admit that Elias will come, Chapter 4. 5, 6.
according to the sense of the Prophet Malachi, but he will not come with
observation, no more than he did in the Person of John the Baptist; He will not
bear the name of Elias, nor tell us he is the Man that went to Heaven in a
fiery Chariot, and is now come down again to give us warning of the last Fire.
But some divine person may appear before the second coming of our Savior, as
there did before his first coming, and by giving a new light and life to the
Christian Doctrine, may dissipate the mists of error, and abolish all those
little controversies amongst good men, and the divisions and animosities that
spring from them; enlarging their Spirits by greater discoveries, and uniting
them all in the bonds of love and charity, and in the common study of truth and
perfection. Such an Elias, the Prophet seems to point at; And may be come, and
be the great Peacemaker and preparer of the ways of the Lord. But at present,
we cannot from this Sign make any judgment when the World will end.

Another Sign preceding the end of the World, is, The Conversion of the Jews;
and this is a wonderful sign indeed. S. Paul seems expressly to affirm it, Romans
11. 25, 26. But it is differently understood, either of their Conversion only,
or of their Restoration to their own Country, Liberties and Dominion. The
Prophets bear hard upon this sense sometimes, as you may see in Isaiah,
Ezekiel, Hosea, Amos. And to the same purpose the ancient promise of Moses is
interpreted, Deuteronomy. 30. Yet this seems to be a thing very unconceivable; unless
we suppose the Ten Tribes to be still in some hidden corner of the World, from
whence they may be conducted again into their own Country, as once out of
Egypt, by a miraculous Providence, and established there. Which being known,
will give the alarm to all the other Jews in the World, and make an universal
confluence to their old home. Ioh. 19. 37.
Then our Savior by an extraordinary appearance to them, Apoc. 1. 7.
as once to S. Paul: Mat. 23. 39.
and by Prophets raised up amongst them for that purpose, may convince them
that he is the true Messiah, and convert them to the Christian Faith; which
will be no more strange, than was the first Conversion of the Gentile World.
But if we be content with a Conversion of the Jews, without their restoration;
and of those Two Tribes only which are now dispersed throughout the Christian
World and other known parts of the Earth: That these should be Converted to the
Christian Faith, and incorporated into the Christian Commonwealth, losing their
national character and distinction. If this, I say, will satisfy the
Prophecies, it is not a thing very difficult to be conceived. For when the
World is reduced to a better and purer state of Christianity, and that Idolatry
in a great measure, removed, which gave the greatest scandal to the Jews, they
will begin to have better thoughts of our Religion, and be disposed to a more
ingenuous and unprejudiced examination of their Prophecies concerning the
Messiah: God raising up men amongst them of divine and enlarged Spirits, Lovers
of Truth more than of any particular Sect or Opinion; with light to discern it,
and courage to profess it. Lastly, it will be a cogent argument upon them, to
see the Age of the World so far spent, and no appearance yet of their long
expected Messiah. So far spent, I say, that there is no room left, upon any
computation whatsoever, for the Economy of a Messiah yet to come. This will
make them reflect more carefully and impartially upon him whom the Christians
propose, Jesus of Nazareth, whom their Fathers Crucified at Jerusalem. Upon the
Miracles he wrought, in his life and after his death: and upon the wonderful
propagation of his Doctrine throughout the World, after his Ascension. And
lastly, upon the desolation of Jerusalem, upon their own scattered and forlorn
condition, foretold by that Prophet, as a judgment of God upon an ungrateful
and wicked People.

This I have said to state the case of the Conversion of the Jews, which will
be a sign of the approaching reign of Christ. But alas, what appearance is
there of this Conversion in our days, or what judgment can we make from a sign
that is not yet come to pass? It Is ineffectual as to us, but may be of use to
posterity. Yet even to them it will not determine at what distance they are
from the end of the World, but be a mark only that they are not far from it.
There will be Signs also, in those last days, in the Heavens, and in the Earth,
and in the Sea, forerunners of the Conflagration; as the obscuration of the Sun
and Moon, Earthquakes, roarings of the troubled Sea, and such like disorders
in the natural World. It Is true, but these are the very pangs of death, and the
strugglings of Nature just before her dissolution, and it will be too late then
to be aware of our ruin when it is at the door. Yet these being Signs or
Prodigies taken notice of by Scripture, we intend, God willing* after we have
explained the causes and manner of the Conflagration, to give an account also
whence these unnatural commotions will proceed, that are the beginnings or
immediate introductions to the last Fire.

Thus we have gone through the Prophecies and Signs that concern the last day
and the last fate of the World. And how little have we learned from them as to
the time of that great revolution? Prophecies rise sometimes with an even
gradual light, as the day rises upon the Horizon: and sometimes break out
suddenly like a fire, and we are not aware of their approach till we see them
accomplished. Those that concern the end of the World are of this latter sort
to unobserving men; but even to the most observing, there will still be a
latitude; We must not expect to calculate the coming of our Savior like an
Eclipse, to minutes and half-minutes. There are Times and Seasons which the
Father has put in his own power. If it was designed to keep these things
secret, we must not think to out-wit Providence, and from the Prophecies that
are given us, pick out a discovery that was not intended we should ever make.
It is determined in the Councils of Heaven just how far we shall know these
events before hand, and with what degree of certainty: and with this we must be
content whatsoever it is. The Apocalypse of S. John is the last Prophetical
declaration of the Will of God, and contains the fate of the Christian Religion
to the end of the World, its purity, degeneracy, and reviviscency. The head of
this degeneracy is called The Beast, the false Prophet, the Whore of Babylon,
in Prophetical terms: and in an Ecclesiastical term is commonly called
Antichrist. Those that bear Testimony against this degeneracy, are called the
Witnesses: who, after they have been a long time, in a mean and persecuted
condition, are to have their Resurrection and Ascension: that is, be advanced
to power and Authority. And this Resurrection of the Witnesses and depression
of Antichrist, is that which will make the great turn of the World to
righteousness, and the great Crisis whereby we may judge of its drawing to an
end. It Is true, Apoc. c. 9.
there are other marks, as the passing away of the Second Woe: which is
commonly thought to be the Ottoman Empire: and the Effusion of the Vials. Apoc.
c. 16.
The first of these will be indeed a very conspicuous mark, chapter 11. 14.
if it follow upon the Resurrection of the Witnesses, as by the Prophecy it
seems to do. But as to the Vials, though they do plainly reach in a Series to the
end of the World, I am not satisfied with any exposition I have yet met with,
concerning their precise time on contents.

In a word, 'Tho the sum and general contents of a Prophecy be very
intelligible, yet the application of it to Time and Persons may be very
lubricous. There must be obscurity in a Prophecy, as well as shadow in a
Picture. All its lines must not stand in a full light. For if Prophecies were
open and barefaced as to all their parts and circumstances, they would check
and obstruct the course of humane affairs; and hinder, if it was possible,
their own accomplishment. Modesty and Sobriety are in all things commendable,
but in nothing more than in the explication of these Sacred Mysteries; and we
have seen so many miscarry by a too close and particular application of them,
that we ought to dread the Rock about which we see so many shipwrecks. He that
does not err above a Century in calculation the last period of Time, from what
evidence we have at present, has, in my opinion, cast up his accounts very
well. But the Scenes will change fast toward the Evening of this long day, and
when the Sun is near setting, they will more easily compute how far he has to
run.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Causes of the Conflagration.
The difficulty of conceiving how this Earth can be set on fire. With a general
answer to that difficulty. Two supposed causes of the Conflagration, by the
Sun's drawing nearer to the Earth, or the Earth's throwing out the central
fire, examined and rejected.
WE have now made our way clear to the principal point, The Causes of the
Conflagration: How the Heavens and the Earth will be set on fire, what
materials are prepared, or what train of Causes, for that purpose. The
Ancients, who have kept us company pretty well thus far, here quite desert us.
They deal more in Conclusions than Causes, as is usual in all Traditional
Learning. And the Stoics themselves, who inculcate so much the doctrine of the
Conflagration, and make the strength of it such as to dissolve the Earth into a
fiery Chaos, are yet very short and superficial in their explications, how this
shall come to pass. The latent seeds of fire, they say, shall every where be
let loose, and the Element will prevail over all the rest, and transform every
thing into its own nature. But these are general things that give little
satisfaction to inquisitive Persons. Neither do the modern Authors that treat
of the same subject, relieve us in this particular: They are willing to suppose
the Conflagration a superficial effect, that so they may excuse themselves the
trouble of enquiring after causes. It Is, no doubt, in a sort, supernatural: and
so the Deluge was: yet Moses sets down the Causes of the Deluge, the rains from
above, and the disruption of the Abyss. So there must be treasures of fire
provided against that day, by whose eruption this second Deluge will be brought
upon the Earth.

To state the case fairly, we must first represent the difficulty of setting
the Earth on Fire: Tie the knot, before we loose it; that so we may the better
judge whether the Causes that shall be brought into view, may be sufficient to
overcome so great opposition. The difficulty, no doubt, will be chiefly from
the great quantity of Water that is about our Globe; whereby Nature seems to
have made provision against any invasion by Fire, and secured us from that
enemy more than any other. We see half of the Surface of the Earth covered with
the Seas: whose Chanel is of a vast depth and capacity. Besides innumerable
Rivers, great and small, that water the face of the dry Land, and drench it
with perpetual moisture. Then within the bowels of the Earth, there are
Storehouses of subterraneous Waters: which are as a reserve, in case the Ocean
and the Rivers should be overcome. Neither is Water our only security, for the
hard Rocks and stony Mountains, which no Fire can bite upon, are set in long
ranges upon the Continents and Islands: and must needs give a stop to the
progress of that furious Enemy, in case he should attack us. Lastly, The Earth
it self is not combustible in all its parts. It Is not every Soil that is fit
fuel for the Fire. Clay, and Mire, and such like Soyls will rather choke and
stifle it, than help it on its way. By these means one would think the Body of
the Earth secured; and though there may be partial fires, or inu^^lations of
fire, here and there, in particular regions, yet there cannot be an Universal
Fire throughout the Earth. At least one would hope for a safe retreat toward
the Poles, where there is nothing but Snow, and Ice, and bitter cold. These
regions sure are in no danger to be burnt, whatsoever becomes of the other
climates of the Earth.

This being the state and condition of the present Earth, one would not imagine
by these preparations, 'twas ever intended that it should perish by an
Universal Fire. But such is often the method of Providence, that the exterior
face of things looks one way, and the design lies another; till at length,
touching a Spring, as it were, at a certain time, all those affairs change
posture and aspect, and show us which way Providence inclines. We must
therefore suppose, before the Conflagration begins, there will be dispositions
and preparatives suitable to so great a work: and all antiquity, sacred and
profane, does so far concur with us, as to admit and suppose that a great
drought will precede, and an extraordinary heat and dryness of the Air, to
usher in this fiery doom. And these being things which often happen in a course
of Nature, we cannot disallow such easy preparations, when Providence intends
so great a consequence. The Heavens will be shut up, and the Clouds yield no
rain; and by this, with an immoderate heat in the Air, the Springs of Water
will become dry, the Earth chap'd and parched, and the Woods and Trees made
ready fuel for the Fire. We have instances in History that there have been
droughts and heats of this Nature, to that degree, that the Woods and Forests
have taken fire, and the outward Turf and Surface of the Earth, without any
other cause than the dryness of the Season, and the vehemence of the Sun. And
which is more considerable, the Springs, and Fountains being dried up, the
greater Rivers have been sensibly lessened, and the lesser quite emptied and
exhaled. These things which happen frequently in particular Countries and
Climates, may at an appointed time, by the disposition of Providence, be more
universal throughout the Earth; and have the same effects every where, that we
see by experience they have had in certain places. And by this means we may
conceive it as feisible to set the whole Earth on fire in some little space of
time, as to burn up this or that Country after a great drought. But I mean
this, with exception still to the main Body of the Sea: which will indeed
receive a greater diminution from these Causes than we easily imagine, but the
final consumption of it will depend upon other reasons, whereof we must give an
account in the following Chapters.

As to the Mountains and Rocks, their lofty heads will sink when the
Earthquakes begin to roar, at the beginning of the Conflagration: as we shall
see hereafter. And as to the Earth it self, it is true there are several sorts
of Earth that are not proper fuel for fire; but those Soils that are not so
immediately, as clayey Soils, and such like, may by the strength of Fire be
converted into Brick, or Stone, or Earthen Metal, and so melted down and
vitrified. For, in conclusion there is no Terrestrial Body that does not
finally yield to the force of Fire, and may either be converted into flame,
incorporated fire, or into a liquor more ardent than either of them. Lastly, As
to the Polar Regions, which you think will be a safe retreat and inaccessible
to the fire; It Is true, unless Providence has laid subterraneous treasures of
fire there unknown to us, those parts of the Earth will be the last consumed.
But it is to be observed, that the cold of those regions proceeds from the
length of their Winter, and their distance from the Sun when he is beyond the
Equator; and both these causes will be removed at the Conflagration. For we
suppose the Earth will then return to its primitive situation, which we have
explained in the 2d, Chapter 3.
Book of this Theory; and will have the Sun always in its Equator; whereby the
several Climates of the Earth will have a perpetual Equinox, and those under
the Poles a perpetual day. And therefore all the excess of cold, and all the
consequences of it, will soon be abated. However, the Earth will not be burnt
in one day, and those parts of the Earth being uninhabited, there is no
inconvenience that they should be more slowly consumed than the rest.

This is a general answer to the difficulty proposed about the possibility of
the Conflagration; and being general only, the parts of it must be more fully
explained and confirmed in the sequel of this discourse. We should now proceed
directly to the causes of the Conflagration, and show in what manner they do
this great execution upon Nature. But to be just and impartial in this enquiry,
we ought first to separate the spurious and pretended Causes from those that
are real and genuine; to make no false musters, nor any show of being stronger
than we are; and if we can do our work with less force, it will be more to our
credit; as a Victory is more honorable that is gained with fewer Men.

There are two grand capital Causes which some Authors make use of, as the
chief Agents in this work, the Sun, and the Central Fire. These two great
Incendiaries, they say, will be let loose upon us at the Conflagration. The one
drawing nearer to the Earth, and the other breaking out of its bowels into
these upper regions. These are potent Causes indeed, more than enough to
destroy this Earth, if it was a thousand times* bigger than it is. But for that
very reason, I suspect they are not the true Causes; for God and Nature do not
use to employ unnecessary means to bring about their designs. Disproportion and
over-sufficiency is one sort of false measures, and it is a sign we do not
thoroughly understand our work, when we put more strength to it than the thing
requires. Men are forward to call in extraordinary powers, to rid their hands
of a troublesome argument, and so make a short dispatch to save themselves the
pains of further enquiries: but such methods, as they commonly have no proof,
so they give little satisfaction to an inquisitive mind. This supposition of
burning the Earth, by the Sun drawing nearer and nearer to it, seems to be made
in imitation of the story of Phaeton, who driving the Chariot of the Sun with
an unsteddy hand, came so near the Earth, that he set it on fire. But however
we will not reject any pretensions without a fair trial; Let us examine
therefore what grounds they can have for either of these suppositions, of the
Approximation of the Sun to the Earth, or the Eruption of the Central Fire.

As to the Sun, I desire first to be satisfied in present matter of Fact:
whether by any instrument or observation it has or can be discovered, that the
Sun is nearer to the Earth now, than he was in former ages? or if by any
reasoning or comparing calculations such a conclusion can be made? If not, this
is but an imaginary cause, and as easily denied as proposed. Astronomers do
very little agree in their opinions about the distance of the Sun, Ptolomy,
Albategnius, Copernious, Ticho, Kepler, and others more modern, differ all in
their calculations; but not in such a manner or proportion, as should make us
believe that the Sun comes nearer to the Earth, but rather goes further from
it. For the more modern of them make the distance greater than the more ancient
do Kepler says, the distance of the Sun from the Earth lies betwixt 700 and
2000 semidiameters of the Earth: but Ricciolus makes it betwixt 700 and 7000.
And Gottefrid Wendeline has taken 14656. semidiameters, for a middle
proportion of the Sun's distance; to which Kepler himself came very near in his
later years. So that you see how groundless our fears are from the approaches
of an enemy, that rather flies from us, if he change posture at all. And we
have more reason to believe the report of the modern Astronomers than of the
ancient, in this matter; both because the nature of the Heavens and of the
celestial Bodies is now better known, and also because they have found out
better instruments and better methods to make their observations.

If the Sun and Earth were come nearer to one another, either the circle of the
Suns diurnal arch would be less, and so the day shorter: or the Orbit of the
Earths annual course would be less, and so the Year shor^er: Neither of which
we have any experience of. And those that suppose us in the center of the
World, need not be afraid till they see Mercury and Venus in a combustion, for
they lie betwixt us and danger; and the Sun cannot come so readily at us with
his fiery darts, as at them, who stand in his way. Lastly, this languishing
death by the gradual approaches of the Sun, and that irreparable ruin of the
Earth which at last must follow from it, do neither of them agree with that
Idea of the Conflagration, which the Scripture has given us; for it is to come
suddenly and unexpectedly, and take us off like a violent Fever, not as a
lingering Consumption. And the Earth is also so to be destroyed by Fire, as not
to take away all hopes of a Resurrection or Renovation. For we are assured by
Scripture that there will be new Heavens and a new Earth after these are burnt
up. But if the Sun should come so near us as to make the heavens pass away with
a noise, and melt the Elements with fervent heat, and destroy the form and all
the works of the Earth, what hopes or possibility would there be of a
Renovation while the Sun continued in this posture? He would more and more
consume and prey upon the Carcass of the Earth, and convert it at length either
into an heap of Ashes, or a lump of vitrified metal.

So much for the Sun. As to the Central Fire, I am very well satisfied it is no
imaginary thing. All Antiquity has preserved some sacred Monument of it. The
Vestal fire of the Romans, which was so religiously attended: The Prytoneia of
the Greeks were to the same purpose, and dedicated to Vesta: and the Pyretheia
of the Persians, where fire was kept continually by the Magi. These all, in my
opinion, had the same origin and the same signification. And though I do not
know any particular observation, that does directly prove or demonstrate that
there is such a mass of fire in the middle of the Earth; yet the best accounts
we have of the generation of a Planet, do suppose it; and it is agreeable to the
whole Economy of Nature; as a fire in the heart, which gives life to her
motions and productions. But however the question is not at present, about the
existence of this fire, but the eruption of it, and the effect of that
Eruption: which cannot be, in my judgment, such a Conflagration as is described
in Scripture.

This Central Fire must be enclosed in a shell of great strength and firmness;
for being of it self the lightest and most active of all Bodies, it would not
be detained in that lowest prison without a strong guard upon it. It Is true, we
can make no certain judgment of what thickness this shell is, but if we suppose
this fire to have a twentieth part of the semidiameter of the Earth, on either
side the center, for its sphere, which seems to be a fair allowance; there
would still remain nineteen parts, for our safeguard and security. And these
nineteen parts of the semidiameter of the Earth will make 3268 miles, for a
partition wall betwixt us and this Central Fire. Who would be afraid of an
Enemy locked up in so strong a prison? But you will say, it may be, though the
Central Fire, at the beginning of the World, might have no more room or space
than what is mentioned: yet being of that activity that it is, and corrosive
nature, it may, in the space of some thousands of years, have eaten deep into
the sides of its prison; and so come nearer to the surface of the Earth, by
some hundreds or thousands of miles than it was at first. This would be a
material exception if it could be made out. But what Phenomenon is there in
Nature that proves this? How does it appear by any observation that the Central
Fire gains ground upon us? Or is increased in quantity, or come nearer to the
surface of the Earth? I know nothing that can be offered in proof of this: and
if there be no appearance of a change, nor any sensible effect of it, it is an
argument there is none, or none considerable. If the quantity of that fire was
considerably increased, it must needs, besides other effects, have made the
Body of the Earth considerably lighter. The Earth having, by this conversion of
its own substance into fire, lost so much of its heaviest matter, and got so
much of the lightest and most active Element in stead of it: and in both these
respects its gravity would be manifestly lessened. Which if it really was in
any considerable degree, it would discover it self by some change, either as to
the motion of the Earth, or as to its place or station in the Heavens. But
there being no external change observable, in this or any other respect, it is
reasonable to presume that there is no considerable inward change, or no great
consumption of its inward parts and substance: and consequently no great
increase of the Central Fire.

But if we should admit both an increase and eruption of this fire, it would
not have that effect which is pretended. It might cause some confusion and
disorder in those parts of the Earth where it broke out, but it would not make
an universal Conflagration, such as is represented to us in Scripture. Let us
suppose the Earth to be open or burst in any place, under the Pole, for
instance, or under the Equator: and let it gape as low as the Central Fire. At
this chasm or rupture we suppose the fire would gush out; and what then would
be the consequence of this when it came to the surface of the Earth? It would
either be dissipated and lost in the air, or fly still higher toward the
Heavens in a mass of flame. But what execution in the mean time would it do
upon the Body of the Earth? It Is but like a flash of lightning, or a flame
issuing out of a pit, that dies presently. Besides, this Central Fire is of
that subtilty and tenuity that it is not able to inflame gross Bodies: no
morethan those Meteors we call Lambent Fires, inflame the bodies to which they
stick. Lastly, in explaining the manner of the Conflagration, we must have
regard principally to Scripture; for the explications given there are more to
the purpose, than all that the Philosophers have said upon that subject. Now,
as we noted before, it is manifest in Scripture that after the Conflagration
there will be a Restoration, New Heavens and a New Earth. It Is the express
doctrine of S. Peter, besides other Prophets: We must therefore suppose the
Earth reduced to such a Chaos by this last fire, as will lay the foundation of
a new World. 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.
Which can never be, if the inward frame of it be broke, the Central Fire
exhausted, and the exterior region sucked into those central vacuities. This
must needs make it lose its former poise and libration, and it will thereupon
be thrown into some other part of the Universe, as the useless shell of a
broken Granado, or as a dead carcass and unprofitable matter.

These reasons may be sufficient why we should not depend upon those pretended
causes of the Conflagration, The Suns advance toward the Earth, or such a
rupture of the Earth as will let out the Central Fire. These Causes, I hope,
will appear superfluous, when we shall have given an account of the
Conflagration without them. But young Philosophers, like young Soldiers, think
they are never sufficiently armed; and often take more weapons, than they can
make use of, when they come to fight. Not that we altogether reject the
influence of the Sun, or of the Central Fire; especially the latter. For in
that great estuation of Nature, the Body of the Earth will be much opened and
relaxated; and when the pores are enlarged, the steams of that fire will sweat
out more plentifully into all its parts; but still without any rupture in the
vessels or in the skin. And whereas these Authors suppose the very Veins burst,
and the vital blood to gush out, as at openflood gates, we only allow a more
copious perspiration, and think that sufficient for all purposes in this case.

CHAP. VII. The true bounds of the Last Fire, and how far it is fatal. The
natural Causes and Materials of it, cast into three ranks: First, such as are
exterior and visible upon the Earth; where the Volcano's of the Earth, and
their effects, are considered. Secondly, such materials as are within the
Earth. Thirdly, such as are in the Air.
AS we have, in the preceding Chapter, laid aside those Causes of the
Conflagration, which we thought too great and cumbersome; so now we must, in
like manner, examine the Effect, and reduce that to its just measures and
proportions; that there may be nothing lest superfluous on either side: Then,
by comparing the real powers with the work they are to do, both being stated
within their due bounds* we may the better judge how they are proportioned to
one another.

We noted before, that the Conflagration had nothing to do with the Stars and
superior Heavens, but was wholly confined to this Sublunary World. And this
Deluge of Fire will have much what the same bounds, that the Deluge of Water
had formerly. This is according to St. Peter's. doctrine, for he makes the same
parts of the Universe to be the subject of both: namely, the inferior Heavens
and the Earth. The Heavens and the Earth which were then, perished in a Deluge
of Water: 2 Pet. 3. 5. 6. Ver. 7.
But the Heavens and the Earth that are now, are reserved to fire. The present
Heavens and Earth are substituted in the place of those that perished at the
Deluge, and these are to be overrun and destroyed by fire, as those were by
water. So that the Apostle takes the same Regions, and the same space and
compass for the one as for the other, and makes their fate different according
to their different constitution, and the different order of Providence. This is
the sense St. Austin gives us of the Apostle's words, and these are the bounds
he sets to the last Fire; whereof a modern Commentator is so well assured, that
he says, They neither understand Divinity, Estius in l^c.
nor Philosophy, that would make the Conflagration reach above the Elementary
Heavens.

Let these be then its limits upwards, the Clouds, Air, and Atmosphere of the
Earth. But the question seems more doubtful, How far it will extend downwards,
into the bowels of the Earth. I answer still, to the same depth that the Waters
of the Deluge reached: To the lowest Abysses and the deepest Caverns within the
ground. And seeing no Caverns are deeper or lower, at least according to our
Theory, than the bottom of the great Ocean, to that depth, I suppose, the rage
of this fire will pene^rate, and devour all before it. And therefore we must
not imagine, that only the outward turf and habitable surface of the Earth will
be put into a flame and laid wast; the whole exterior region of the Earth, to
the depth of the deepest part of the Sea, will suffer in this Fire; and suffer
to that degree, as to be melted down, and the frame of it dissolved. For we are
not to conceive that the Earth will be only scorcht or charkt in the last Fire*
there will be a sort of liquefaction and dissolution; Rev. 15. 2. 2* Pet. 3.
10. Psalm. 97. 5.
it will become a molten Sea mingled with fire, according to the expression of
Scripture. And this dissolution may reasonably be supposed to reach as low as
the Earth has any hollownesses, or can give (...) to smoke and flame.

Wherefore taking these for the bounds and limits of the last great Fire, the
next thing to be inquired into are the Natural Causes of it. How this strange
fate will seize upon the Sublunary World, and with an irresistible fury subdue
all things to it self. But when I say Natural Causes, I would not be so
understood, as if I thought the Conflagration was a pure Natural Fatality, as
the Stoics seem to do. No, it is a mixed Fatality* The Causes indeed are
Natural, but the administration of them is from an higher hand. Fire is the
Instrument, or the executive power, and has no more force given it, than what
it has naturally; but the concurrence of these Causes or of these fiery
powers, at such a time, and in such a manner, and the conduct of them to carry
on and complete the whole work without cessation or interruption, that I look
upon as more than what material Nature could effect of it self, or than could
be brought to pass by such a government of matter, as is the bare result of its
own laws and determinations. When a Ship fails gently before the Wind, the
Mariners may stand idle; but to guide her in a storm, all hands must be at
work. There are rules and measures to be observed, even in these tumults and
desolations of Nature, in destroying a World, as well as in making one, and
therefore in both it is reasonable to suppose a more than ordinary Providence
to superintend the work. Let us not therefore be too positive or presumptuous
in our conjectures about these things, for if there be an invisible hand,
Divine or Angelical, that touches the Springs and Wheels; it will not be easy
for us to determine, with certainty, the order of their motions. However it is
our duty to search into the ways and works of God, as far as we can: And we may
without offense look into the Magazines of Nature, see what provisions are
made, and what preparations for this great Day; and in what method it is most
likely the design will be executed.

But before we proceed to mark out Materials for this Fire, give me leave to
observe one condition or property in the Form of this present Earth, that makes
it capable of Inflammation. It Is the manner of its construction, in an hollow
eavernous form; By reason whereof, containing much Air in its cavities, and
having many inlets and outlets, it is in most places capable of ventilation,
pervious and passable to the Winds, and consequently to the Fire. Those that
have read the former part of this Theory, Book 1. chapter 6, ^
know how the Earth came into this hollow and broken form, from what causes and
at what time; namely, at the Universal Deluge; when there was a disruption of
the exterior Earth that fell into the Abyss, and so, for a time, was
overflowed with Water. These Ruins recovered from the Water, we inhabit, and
these Ruins only will be burnt up; For being not only unequal in their
Surface, but also hollow, loose, and incompact within, as ruins use to be,
they are made there^ by capable of a second fate, by inflammation. Thereby, I
say, they are made combustible; for if the exterior Regions of this Earth were
as close and compact in all their parts, as we have reason to believe the
interior Regions of it to be, the Fire could have little power over it, nor
ever reduce it to such a state as is required in a complete Conflagration, such
as ours is to be.

This being admitted, that the Exterior Region of the Earth stands hollow, as
a well set Fire, to receive Air freely into its parts, and has issues for
smoke and flame: It remains to enquire what fuel or Materials Nature has
fitted to kindle this Pile, and to continue it on Fire till it be consumed; or,
in plain words, What are the Natural Causes and preparatives for a
Conflagration. The first and most obvious preparations that we see in Nature
for this effect, are the Burning Mountains or Volcano's of the Earth. These are
lesser Essays or preludes to the general Fire; set on purpose by Providence to
keep us awake, and to mind us continually, and forewarn us of what we are to
expect at last. The Earth you see is already kindled, blow but the Coal, and
propagate the Fire, and the work will go on. Isa. 30. 33.
Tophet is prepared of old, and when the Day of Doom is come, and the Date of
the World expired, the breath of the Lord shall make it burn.

But besides these Burning Mountains, there are Lakes of pitch and brimstone
and oily Liquors dispersed in several parts of the Earth. These are in enrage
the Fire as it goes, and to fortify it against any resistance or opposition.
Then all the vegetable productions upon the Surface of the Earth, as Trees,
shrubs, grass, corn, and such like; Every thing that grows out of the ground,
is fuel for the Fire; and though they are now accommodated to our use and
service, they will then turn all against us; and with a mighty blaze, and rapid
course, make a devastation of the outward fumrniture of the Earth, whether
natural or artificial. But these things deserve some further consideration,
especially that strange Phenomenon of the Voleano's or Burning Mountains,
which we will now consider more particularly.

There is nothing certainly more terrible in all Nature than Fiery Mountains,
to those that live within the view or noise of them; but it is not easy for
us, who never see them nor heard them, to represent them to our selves with
such just and lively imaginations as shall excite in us the same passions, and
the same horror as they would excite, if present to our senses. The time of
their eruption and of their raging, is, of all others, the most dreadful; but,
many times, before their eruption, the symptoms of an approaching fit are very
frightful to the People. The Mountain begins to roar and bellow in its hollow
caverns; cries out, as it were, in pain to be delivered of some burden, too
heavy to be born, and too big to be easily discharged. The Earth shakes and
trembles, in apprehension of the pangs and convulsions that are coming upon
her; And the Sun often hides his head, or appears with a discolored face,
pale, or dusky, or bloody, as if all Nature was to suffer in this Agony. After
these forerunners or symptoms of an eruption, the wide jaws of the Mountain
open: And first, clouds of smoke issue out, then flames of fire, and after that
a mixture of all sorts of burning matter; red hot stones, lumps of metal,
half-dissolv'd minerals, with coals and fiery ashes. These fall in thick
showers round about the Mountain, and in all adjacent parts; and not only so,
but are carried, partly by the force of the expulsion, and partly by the winds,
when they are aloft in the Air, into far distant Countries. As from Italy to
Constantinople, and cross the Mediterranean Sea into Africa; as the best
Historians, Procopius, Ammianus Marc^llinus, and Dion Cassius, have attested.

These Volcano's are planted in several regions of the Earth, and in both
Continents, This of ours, and the other of America. For by report of those that
have viewed that newfound World, there are many Mountains in it that belch out
Smoke and Fire; some constantly, and others by fits and intervals. In our
Continent Providence has variously dispersed them, without any rule known to
us; but they are generally in Islands or near the Sea. In the Asiatick Oriental
Islands they are in great abundance, and Historians tell us of a Mountain in
the Island Iava, that in the year, 1586. at one eruption killed ten thousand
people in the neighboring Cities and Country. But we do not know so well the
History of those remote Volcano's, as of such as are in Europe and nearer home.
In Iseland, though it lie within the Polar Circle, and is scarce habitable by
reason of the extremity of cold, and abundance of Ice and Snow, yet there are
three burning Mountains in that Island; whereof the chief and most remarkable
is Hecla. This has its head always covered with Snow, and its belly always
filled with Fire; and these are both so strong in their kind, and equally
powerful, that they cannot destroy one another. It is said to cast out, when it
rages, besides Earth, stones and ashes, a sort of flaming water. As if all
contrarieties were to meet in this Mountain to make it the more perfect
resemblance of Hell, as the credulous inhabitants fancy it to be.

But there are no Volcano's in my opinion, that deserve our observation so
much, as those that are in and about the Mediterranean Sea; There is a knot of
them called the Vulcanian Islands, from their fiery eruptions, as if they were
the Forges of Vulcan; as Strombolo, Lipara, and others, which are not so
remarkable now as they have been formerly. However, without dispute, there are
none in the Christian World to be compared with Aetna and Vesuvius; one in the
Island of Sicily; and the other in Campanid, overlooking the Port and City of
Naples. These two, from all memory of Man and the most ancient Records of
History, have been famed for their Treasures of subterraneous Fires: which are
not yet exhausted, nor diminished, so far as is perceivable; for they rage
still, upon occasions, with as much fierceness and violence, as they ever did
in former Ages; as if they had a continual supply to answer their expenses, and
were to stand till the last Fire, as a type and prefiguration of it, throughout
all generations.

Let us therefore take these two Volcano's as a pattern for the rest; seeing
they are well known, and stand in the heart of the Christian World, where, it is
likely, the last fire will make its first assault. Aetna, of the two, is more
spoken of by the ancients, both Poets and Historians; and we should scarce give
credit to their relations concerning it, if some later eruptions did not equal
or exceed the same of all that has been reported from former ages. That it
heated the Waters of the Sea, and covered them over with ashes; cracked or
dissolved the neighboring Rocks; darkened the Sun and the Air; and cast out,
not only mighty streams of flame, but a flood of melted Ore and other
Materials; These things we can now believe, having had experience of greater,
or an account of them from such as have been eyewitnesses of these fires, or
of the fresh ruins and sad effects of them.

There are two things especially, in these Eruptions of Aetna, that are most
prodigious in themselves and most remarkable for our purpose. The Rivers of
fiery matter that break out of its bowels, or are spewed out of its mouth; and
the vast burning stones which it slings into the Air, at a strange height and
distance. As to these fiery Rivers or Torrents, and the matter whereof they are
compounded, we have a full account of them by Alphonsus Borellus, a learned
Mathematician at Pisa; who, after the last great Eruption in the year 1669.
went into Sicily, while the fact was fresh, to view and survey what Aetna had
done or suffered. And he says the quantity of matter thrown out of the Mountain
at that time, upon survey amounted to Ninety three millions, eight hundred
thirty eight thousand, seven hundred and fifty cubical paces. So that if it had
been extended in length upon the surface of the Earth, at the breadth and depth
of 3 foot, it would have reached further than ninety three millions of paces*
which is more than four times the Circuit of the whole Earth, taking a thousand
paces to a mile. This is strange to our imagination and almost incredible, that
one Mountain should throw out so much fiery matter, besides all the ashes that
were dispersed through the Air, far and near, and could be brought to no account.

It Is true, all this matter was not actually inflamed or liquid fire. But the
rest that was sand, stone and gravel, might have run into glass or some melted
liquor like to it, is it had not been thrown out before the heat fully reached
it. However, sixty million paces of this matter, as the same Author computes,
were liquid fire, or came out of the mouth of the pit in that form. This made a
River of fire, sometimes two miles broad, according to his computation; but
according to the observation of others who also viewed it, the Torrent of fire
was six or seven miles broad, and sometimes ten or fifteen fathoms deep; and
forced its way into the Sea near a mile, preserving it self alive in the midst
of the waters.

This is beyond all the infernal Lakes and Rivers, Acheron, Phlegeton, Cocytus*
all that the Poets have talked of. Their greatest fictions about He I have not
come up to the reality of one of our burning Mountains upon Earth. Imagine then
all our Volcano's raging at once in this manner. -- But I will not pursue that
supposition yet; Give me leave only to add here what I mentioned in the second
place, The vast Burning Stones which this Mountain, in the time of its rage and
estuation, threw in^o the Air with an incredible force. This same Author tells
us of a stone fifteen foot long, that was slung out of the mouth of the pit, to
a miles distance. And when it fell, it came from such an height and with such a
violence, that it buried it self in the ground eight foot deep. What trifles
are our Mortar-pieces and Bombes, when compared with these Engines of Nature?
When she flings out of the wide throat of a Volcano, a broken Rock, and twirles
it in the air like a little bullet; then lets it fall to do execution here
below, as Providence shall point and direct it. It would be hard to give an
account how so great an impulse can be given to a Body so ponderous. But
there is no disputing against matter of fact; and as the thoughts of God are not
like our thoughts, so neither are his works like our works.

Thus much for Aetna. Let us now give an instance in Vesuvius, another Burning
Mountain upon the coast of the Mediterranean, which has as frequent Eruptions,
and some as terrible as those of Aetna. Lib. ^6.
Dion Cassius (one of the best writers of the Roman History) has given us an
account of one that happened in the time of Titus Vespatian; and though he has
not set down particulars, as the former Author did, of the quantity of fiery
matter thrown out at that time: yet supposing that proportionable to its
fierceness in other respects, this seems to me as dreadful an Eruption as any
we read of; and was accompanied with such Prodigies and commotions in the
Heavens and the Earth, as made it look like the beginning of the last
Conflagration. As a prelude to this Tragedy, He says there were strange sights
in the air, and after that followed an extraordinary drought, Then the Earth
begun to tremble and quake, and the Concussions were so great that the ground
seemed to rise and boil up in some places, and in others the tops of the
mountains sunk in or tumbled down. At the same time were great noises and
sounds heard, some were subterraneous, like thunder within the Earth; others
above ground, like groans or bellowings. The Sea roared, The heavens ratled
with a fearful noise, and then came a sudden and mighty crack, as if the frame
of Nature had broke, or all the mountains of the Earth had fallen down at once.
At length Vesuvius burst, and threw out of its womb, first, huge stones, then a
vast quantity of fire and smoke, so as the air was ^all darkened, and the Sun
was hid, as if he had been under a great Eclipse. The day was turned into
night, and light into darkness; and the frighted people thought the Giants were
making war against heaven, and fansied they see the shapes and images of Giants
in the smoke, and heard the sound of their trumpets. Others thought the World
was returning to its first Chaos, or going to be all consumed with fire. In
this general confusion and consternation they knew not where to be safe, some
run out of the fields into the houses, others out of the house into the fields;
Those that were at Sea hastened to Land, and those that were at Land
endeavored to get to Sea; still thinking every place safer than that where
they were. Besides grosser lumps of matter, there was thrown out of the
Mountain such a prodigious quantity of ashes, as covered the Land and Sea, and
filled the Air, so as, besides other damages, the Birds, Beasts, and Fishes,
with Men, Women and Children, were destroyed, within such a compass; and two
entire Cities, Herculanium and Pompeios, were overwhelmed with a shower of
ashes, as the People were sitting in the Theater. Nay, these ashes were carried
by the winds over the Mediterranean into Africa, and into Egypt and Syria. And
at Rome they choked the Air on a sudden, so as to hid the face of the Sun.
Whereupon the People, not knowing the cause, as not having yet got the News
from Campania of the Eruption of Vesuius, could not imagine what the reason
should be; but thought the Heavens and the Earth were coming together, The Sun
coming down, and the Earth going to take its place above. Thus far the
Historian.

You see what disorders in Nature, and what an alarm, the Eruption of one
fiery Mountain is capable to make; These things, no doubt, would have made
strong impressions upon us, if we had been eyewitnesses of them; But I know,
representations made from dead history, and at a distance, though the testimony
be never so credible, have a much less effect upon us than what we see our
selves, and what our senses immediately inform us of. I have only given you an
account of two Volcano's, and of a single Eruption in either of them; These
Mountains are not very far distant from one another: Let us suppose two such
Eruptions, as I have mentioned, to happen at the same time, and both these
Moutains to be raging at once, in this manner; By that violence you have seen
in each of them singly, you will easily imagine what a terror and desolation
they would carry round about, by a conjunction of their fury and all their
effects, in the Air and on the Earth. Then, if to these two, you should join
two more, the Sphere of their activity would still be enlarged, and the Scenes
become more dreadful. But, to complete the supposition, Let us imagine all the
Volcano's of the whole Earth, to be prepared and set to a certain time; which
time being come, and a signal given by Providence, all these Mines begin to
play at once; I mean, All these Fiery Mountains burst out, and discharge
themselves in flames of fire, tear up the roots of the Earth, throw hot burning
stones, send out streams of flowing Metals and Minerals, and all other sorts of
ardent matter, which Nature has lodged in those Treasuries. If all these
Engines, I say, were to play at once, the Heavens and the Earth would seem to
be in a flame, and the World in an universal combustion. But we may reasonably
presume, that against that great Day of vengeance and execution, not only all
these will be employed, but also new Volcano's will be opened, and new
Mountains in every Region will break out into smoke and flame; just as at the
Deluge, the Abyss broke out from the Womb of the Earth, and from those hidden
stores sent an immense quantity of water, which, it may be, the Inhabitants of
that World never thought of before. So we must expect new Eruptions, and also
new sulphurous Lakes and Fountains of Oil, to boil out of the ground; And
these all united with that Fuel that naturally grows upon the Surface of the
Earth, will be sufficient to give the first onset, and to lay wast all the
habitable World, and the Furniture of it.

But we suppose the Conflagration will go lower, pierce underground, and
dissolve the substance of the Earth to some considerable depth; therefore
besides these outward and visible preparations, we must consider all the hidden
invisible Materials within the Veins of the Earth; Such are all Minerals or
Mineral juices and concretions that are igniferous, or capable of inflammation;
And these cannot easily be reckoned up or estimated. Some of the most common
are, Sulphur, and all sulphurous bodies, and Earths impregnated with Sulphur,
Bitumen and bituminous concretions; inflammable Salts, Coal and other fossiles
that are ardent, with innumerable mixtures and compositions of these kinds,
which being opened by heat, are unctuous and inflammable; or by attrition
discover the latent seeds of fire. But besides consistent Bodies, there is also
much volatile fire within the Earth, in fumes, steams, and exudations, which
will all contribute to this effect. From these stores underground all Plants
and Vegetables are fed and supplied, as to their oily and sulphurous parts;
And all hot Waters in Baths or Fountains, must have their original from some of
these, some mixture or participation of them. And as to the British Soil, there
is so much Coal incorporated with it, that when the Earth shall burn, we have
reason to apprehend no small danger from that subterraneous Enemy.

These dispositions, and this Fuel we find, in and upon the Earth, toward the
last Fire. The third sort of Provision is in the Air; All fiery Meteors and
Exhalations engendered and formed in those Regions above, and discharged upon
the Earth in several ways. I believe there were no fiery Meteors in the
ante-diluvian Heavens; which therefore St. Peter says, were constituted of
water; had nothing in them but what was watery. But he says, the Heavens that
are now have treasures of fire, or are reserved for fire, as things laid up in
a store house for that purpose. We have thunder and lightning, and fiery
tempests, and there is nothing more vehement, impetuous, and irresistible,
where their force is directed. It seems to me very remarkable, that the Holy
Writers describe the coming of the Lord, and the destruction of the wicked, in
the nature of a tempest, or a storm of fire. Psalm. 11. 6.
Upon the wicked the Lord shall rain coals, fire and brimstone, and a burning
tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. And in the lofty Song of David
(Psalm. 18.) which, in my judgment, respects both the past Deluge and the future
Conflagration, it is said, The Lord also thundered in the heavens, ver. 13, 14,
15.
and the Highest gave his voice, hailstones and coals of fire. Yea, he sent
forth his arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightnings and discomfited
them. Then the Channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the World
were discovered; at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils. And a like fiery coming is described in the ninety seventh Psalm,
Isa. 66. 15.
as also by Isaiah, Daniel, Dan. 7. 9, 10.
and S. Paul. And lastly, in the Apocalypse, when the World draws to a
conclusion, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
as in the seventh Trumpet (chapter 11. 19.) and the seventh Vial (chapter 16. 18.) we
have still mention made of this Fiery Tempest of Lightnings and Thunderings.

We may therefore reasonably suppose, that, before the Conflagration, the Air
will be surcharged every where, (by a precedent drought) with hot and fiery
exhalations; And as against the Deluge, those regions were burdened with water
and moist vapors, which were poured upon the Earth, not in gentle showers, but
like rivers and cataracts from Heaven; so they will now be filled with hot
fumes and sulphurous clouds, which will sometimes flow in streams and fiery
impressions through the Air, sometimes make Thunder and Lightnings, and
sometimes fall down upon the Earth in floods of Fire. In general, there is a
great analogy to be observed betwixt the two Deluges, of Water and of Fire; not
only as to the bounds of them, which were noted before; but as to the general
causes and sources upon which they depend, from above and from below. At the
Flood the Windows of Heaven were opened above, and the Abyss was opened below;
and the Waters of these two joined together to overflow the World. In like
manner, at the Conflagration, God will rain down Fire from Heaven, as he did
once upon Sodom; and at the same time the subterraneous storehouses of Fire
will be broken open, which answers to the disruption of the Abyss: And these
two meeting and mingling together, will involve all the Heaven and Earth in
flames.

This is a short account of the ordinary stores of Nature, and the ordinary
preparations for a general Fire; And in contemplation of these, Pliny the
Naturalist, said boldly, It was one of the greatest wonders of the World, that
the World was not every day set on fire. We will conclude this Chapter with his
words, in the second Book of his Natural History; chapter 106, 107.
having given an account of some fiery Mountains, and other parts of the Earth
that are the seats and sources of Fire, He makes this reflection; Seeing this
Element is so fruitful that it brings forth it self, and multiplies and
increases from the least sparks, what are we to expect from so many fires
already kindled on the Earth? How does nature feed and satisfy so devouring an
Element, and such a great voracity throughout all the World, without loss or
diminution of her self? Add to these fires we have mentioned, the Stars and the
Great Sun, then all the fires made for humane uses; fire in stones, in wood, in
the clouds and in thunder; IT EXCEEDS ALL MIRACLES, IN MY OPINION, THAT ONE DAY
SHOULD PASS WITHOUT SETTING THE WORLD ALL ON FIRE.

CHAP. VIII. Some new dispositions toward the Conflagration, as to the matter,
form, and situation of the Earth. Concerning miraculous Causes, and how far the
ministry of Angels may be engaged in this Work.
WE have given an account, in the preceding Chapter, of the ordinary
preparatious of Nature for a general fire; We now are to give an account of the
extraordinary, or of any new dispositions, which toward the End of the World,
may be superadded to the ordinary state of Nature. I do not, by these, mean
things openly miraculous, and supernatural, but such a change wrought in Nature
as shall still have the face of Natural Causes, and yet have a greater tendency
to the Conflagration. As for example, suppose a great Drought, as we noted
before, to precede this fate, or a general heat and dryness of the Air and of
the Earth; because this happens sometimes in a course of Nature, it will not be
looked upon as prodigious. It Is true, some of the Ancients speak of a Drought of
Forty Years, that will be a forerunner of the Conflagration, so that there will
not be a watery Cloud, nor a Rainbow seen in the Heavens, for so long time. And
this they impute to Elias, who, at his coming, will stop the Rain and shut up
the Heavens to make way for the last Fire. But these are excessive and
ill-grounded suppositions, for half forty years drought will bring an universal
sterility upon the Earth, and thereupon an Universal Famine, with innumerable
diseases; so that all mankind would be destroyed before the Conflagration could
overtake them.

But we will readily admit an extraordinary drought and desiccation of all
bodies to usher in this great fatality. And therefore whatsoever we read in
Natural History, concerning former droughts, of their drying up Fountains and
Rivers, parching the Earth and making the outward Turf take fire in several
places; filling the Air with fiery impressions, making the Woods and Forests
ready Fuel, and sometimes to kindle by the heat of the Sun or a flash of
Lightning: These and what other effects have come to pass in former droughts,
may come to pass again; and that in an higher measure, and so as to be of more
general extent. And we must also allow, that by this means, a great degree of
inflammability, or easiness to be set on Fire, will be superinduced, both into
the body of the Earth, and of all things that grow upon it. The heat of the Sun
will pierce deeper into its bowels, when it gapes to receive his beams, and by
chinks and widened pores makes way for their passage to its very heart. And, on
the other hand, it is not improbable, but that upon this general relaxation and
incalescency of the Body of the Earth, the General Fire may have a freer
efflux, and diffuse it self in greater abundance every way; so as to affect
even these exterior Regions of the Earth, so far as to make them still more
catching and more combustible.

From this external and internal heat acting upon the Body of the Earth, all
Minerals that have the seeds of fire in them, will be opened, and exhale their
effluvium's more copiously: as Spices, when warmed, are more odoriferous, and
fill the Air with their perfumes; so the particles of fire, that are shut up in
several bodies, will easily fly abroad, when by a further degree of relaxation
you shake off their chains, and open the Prison-doors. We cannot doubt, but
there are many sorts of Minerals, and many sorts of Fire-stones, and of Trees
and Vegetables of this nature, which will sweat out their oily and sulphurous
atoms, when by a general heat and dryness their parts are loosened and
agitated.

We have no experience that will reach so far, as to give us a full account
what the state of Nature will be at that time; I mean, after this drought,
toward the end of the world; But we may help our imagination, by comparing it
with other seasons and temperaments of the Air. As therefore in the Spring the
Earth is fragrant, and the Fields and Gardens are filled with the sweet
breathings of Herbs and Flowers; especially after a gentle rain, when their
Bodies are softened, and the warmth of the Sun makes them evaporate more freely;
So a greater degree of heat acting upon all the bodies of the Earth, like a
stronger fire in the Alembick, will extract another sort of parts or particles,
more deeply incorporated and more difficult to be disintangled; I mean oily
parts, and such undiscovered parcels of fire, as lie fixed and imprisoned in
hard bodies. These, I imagine, will be in a great measure set a float, on drawn
out into the Air; which will abound with hot and dry Exhalations, more than
with vapors and moisture in a wet season; and by this means, all Elements and
elementary Bodies will stand ready, and in a proximate disposition to be
inflamed.

Thus much concerning the last drought, and the general effects of it. In the
next place, we must consider the Earthquakes that will precede the
Conflagration, and the consequences of them. I noted before, that the cavernous
and broken construction of the present Earth, was that which made it obnoxious
to be destroyed by fire; as its former construction over the Abyss, made it
obnoxious to be destroyed with Water. This hollowness of the Earth is most
sensible in mountainous and hilly Countries, which therefore I look upon as
most subject to burning; but the plain Countries may also be made hollow and
hilly by Earthquakes, when the vapors not finding an easy vent* raise the
ground and make a forcible eruption, as at the springing of a Mine. And though
plain Countries are not so subject to Earthquakes as Mountainous, because they
have not so many cavities and subterraneous Vaults to lodge the vapors in; yet
every Region has more or less of them: And after this drought the vacuities of
the Earth being every where enlarged, the quantity of exhalations much
increased, and the motion of them more strong and violent, they will have their
effects in many places where they never had any before. Yet I do not suppose
that this will raise new ridges of Mountains, like the Alps or Pyreneans, in
those Countries that are now plain, but that they will break and loosen the
ground, make greater inequalities in the surface, and greater cavities within,
than what are at present in those places; And by this means, the fire will
creep under them, and find a passage through them, with more ease, than if they
were compact, and every where continued and unbroken.

But you will say, it may be, how does it appear, that there will be more
frequent Earthquakes toward the end of the World? If this precedent drought
be admitted, it is plain that fiery exhalations will abound every where within
the Earth, and will have a greater agitation than ordinary; and these being the
causes of Earthquakes, when they are rarefied or inflamed, it is reasonable to
suppose that in such a state of Nature, they will more frequently happen, than
at other times. Besides, Earthquakes are taken notice of in Scripture, as
signs and forerunners of the last day, as they usually are of all great changes
and calamities. The destruction of Jerusalem was a type of the destruction of
the World, and the Evangelists always mention Earthquakes amongst the ominous
Prodigies that were to attend it. But these Earthquakes we are speaking of at
present, are but the beginnings of sorrow, and not to be compared with those
that will follow afterward, when Nature is convulst in her last agony, just as
the flames are seizing on her. Of which we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter.

These changes will happen as to the matter and form of the Earth, before it is
attacked by the last fire; There will be also another change as to the
situation of it; for that will be rectified, and the Earth restored to the
posture it had at first, namely, of a right aspect and conversion to the Sun.
But because I cannot determine at what time this restitution will be, whether
at the beginning, middle, or end of the Conflagration, I will not presume to
lay any stress upon it. Plato seems to have imputed the Conflagration to this
only; which is so far true, that the Revolution called The Great Year, is this
very Revolution, or the return of the Earth and the Heavens to their first
posture. But though this may be contemporary with the last fire, or some way
concomitant; yet it does not follow that it is the cause of it, much less the
only cause. It may be an occasion of making the fire reach more easily toward
the Poles, when by this change of situation their long Nights and long Winters
shall be taken away.

These new dispositions in our Earth which we expect before that great day, may
be looked upon as extraordinary, but not as Miraculous, because they may
proceed from Natural Causes. But now in the last place, we are to consider
miraculous causes: What influence they may have, or what part they may bear, in
this great revolution of Nature. By miraculous causes we understand either
God's immediate Omnipotency, or the Ministry of Angels; and what may be
performed by the latter, is very improperly and undecently thrown upon the
former. It Is a great step to Omnipotency: and it is hard to define what
Miracles, on this side Creation, require an infinite power. We are sure that
the Angels are Ministering Spirits, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand
about the Throne of the Almighty, to receive his commands and execute his
judgments. That perfect knowledge they have of the powers of nature, and of
conducting those powers to the best advantage, by adjusting causes in a fit
subordination one to another, makes them capable of performing, not only things
far above our force, but even above our imagination. Besides, they have a
radical inherent power, belonging to the excellency of their nature, of
determining the motions of matter, within a far greater sphere than humane
Souls can pretend to. We can only command our spirits, and determine their
motions within the compass of our own Bodies; but their activity and empire is
of far greater extent, and the outward World is much more subject to their
dominion than to ours. From these considerations it is reasonable to conclude,
that the generality of miracles may be and are performed by Angels; It being
less decorous to employ a Sovereign power, where a subaltern is sufficient, and
when we hastily cast things upon God, for quick dispatch, we consult our own
ease more than the honouor of our Maker.

I take it for granted here, that what is done by an Angelical hand, is truly
providential, and of divine administration; and also justly bears the character
of a miracle. Whatsoever may be done by pure material causes, or humane
strength, we account Natural; and whatsoever is above these we call
supernatural and miraculous. Now what is supernatural and miraculous is either
the effect of an Angelical power, or of a Sovereign and Infinite power. And we
ought not to confound these two, no more than Natural and Supernatural; for
there is a greater difference betwixt the highest Angelical power and
Omnipotency, than betwixt an Humane power and Angelical. Therefore as the first
Rule concerning miracles is this, That we must not fly to miracles, where Man
and Nature are sufficient; so the second Rule is this, that we must not fly to
a sovereign infinite power, where an Angelical is sufficient. And the reason in
both Rules is the same, namely, because it argues a defect of Wisdom in all
Oeconomiles to employ more and greater means than are sufficient.

Now to make application of this to our present purpose, I think it reasonable,
and also sufficient, to admit the ministry of Angels in the future
Conflagration of the World. If Nature will not lay violent hands upon her self,
or is not sufficient to work her own destruction, Let us allow Destroying
Angels to interest themselves in the work, as the Executioners of the Divine
Justice and Vengeance upon a degenerate World. We have examples of this so
frequently in Sacred History, how the Angels have executed God's Judgments upon
a Nation or a People, that it cannot seem new or strange, that in this last
judgment, which by all the Prophets is represented as the Great Day of the
Lord, the day of his Wrath and of his Fury, the same Angels should bear their
parts, and conclude the last scene of that Tragedy which they had acted in all
along. We read of the Destroying Angel in Egypt; Genesis 12. 23.
of Angels that presided at the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19. 13.
which was a Type of the future destrution of the World, ^ Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
(Jude 7.) and of Angels that will accompany our Savior when he comes in
flames of Fire: Not, we suppose, to be Spectators only, but Actors and
Superintendants in this great Catastrophe.

This ministry of Angels may be either in ordering and conducting such Natural
Causes as we have already given an account of, or in adding new ones, if
occasion be; I mean, increasing the quantity of Fire, or of fiery materials, in
and about the Earth. So as that Element, shall be more abundant and more
predominant, and overbear all opposition that either Water, or any other Body,
can make against it. It is not material whether of these two Suppositions we
follow, provided we allow that the Conflagration is a work of Providence, and
not a pure Natural Fatality. If it be necessary that there should be an
augmentation made of Fiery Matter, it is not hard to conceive how that may be
done, either from the Heavens or from the Earth. Isa. 30. 26.
The Prophets sometimes speak of multiplying or strengthening the Light of the
Sun, and it may as easily be conceived of his heat as of his light; as if the
Vial that was to be poured upon it, Rev. 26. 8.
and gave it a power to scorch men with fire, had something of a Natural sense
as well as Moral. But there is another stream of Ethereal matter that flows
from the Heavens, and recruits the Central Fire with continual supplies; This
may be increased and strengthened, and its effects conveyed throughout the whole
Body of the Earth.

But if an augmentation is to be made of Terrestrial Fire, or of such
terrestrial principles as contain it most, as Sulphur, Oil, and such like, I am
apt to believe, these will increase of their own accord, upon a general drought
and desiccation of the Earth. For I am far from the opinion of some Chemists,
that think these principles immutable, and incapable of diminution or
augmentation. I willingly admit that all such particles may be broken and
disfigured, and thereby lose their proper and specific virtue, and new ones
may be generated to supply the places of the former. Which supplies, or new
productions being made in a less or greater measure, according to the general
dispositions of Nature; when Nature is heightened into a kind of Fever and
Ebullition of all her juices and humors, as she will be at that time, we must
expect that more parts than ordinary, should be made inflammable, and those
that are inflamed should become more violent. Under these circumstances, when
all Causes lean that way, a little help from a superior power will have a great
effect, and make a great change in the state of the World. And as to the power
of Angels, I am of opinion that it is very great as to the Changes and
Modifications of Natural Bodies; that they can dissolve a Marble as easily as
we can crumble Earth and Moulds, or fix any liquor, in a moment, into a
substance as hard as Crystal. That they can either make flames more vehement
and irresistible to all sorts of Bodies; or as harmless as Lambent Fires, and
as soft as Oil. We see an instance of this last, in Nebuchadnezzar's fiery
Furnace, Dan. 3. 28.
where the three Children walked unconcerned in the midst of the Flames, under
the charge and protection of an Angel. And the same Angel, if he had pleased,
could have made the same Furnace seven times hotter than the wrath of the
Tyrant had made it.

We will therefore leave it to their ministry to manage this great Furnace,
when the Heavens and the Earth are on Fire. To conserve, increase, direct, or
temper the flames, according to instructions given them, as they are to be
Tutelary or Destroying. Neither let any body think it a diminution of
Providence to put things into the hands of Angels; It Is the true rule and
method of it; For to employ an Almighty power where it is not necessary* is to
debase (...) and give it a task fit for lower Beings. Some think it devotion
and piety to have recourse immediately to the arm of God to salve all things;
This may be done sometimes with a good intention, but commonly with little
judgment. God is as jealous of the glory of his Wisdom, as of his Power; and
Wisdom consists in the conduct and subordination of several causes to bring our
purposes to effect; but what is dispatched by an immediate Supreme Power,
leaves no room for the exercise of Wisdom. To conclude this point, which I have
touched upon more than once, We must not be partial to any of God's Attributes,
and Providence being a complexion of many, Power, Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness, when we give due place and honor to all these, then we most honor
DIVINE PROVIDENCE.

CHAP. IX. How the Sea will be diminished and consumed. How the Rocks and
Mountains will be thrown down and melted, and the whole exterior frame of the
Earth dissolved into a Deluge of Fire.
WE have now taken a view of the Causes of the Conflagration, both ordinary and
extraordinary: It remains to consider the manner of it; How these Causes will
operate, and bring to pass an effect so great and so prodigious. We took notice
before, that the grand obstruction would be from the Sea, and from the
Mountains; we must therefore take these to task in the first place; and if we
can remove them out of our way, or overcome what resistance and opposition they
are capable to make, the rest of the work will not be uneasy to us.

The Ocean indeed is a vast Body of Waters; and we must use all our art and
skill to dry it up, or consume it in a good measure, before we can compass our
design. I remember the advice a Philosopher gave Amasis King of Egypt, when he
had a command sent him from the King of Aethiopia, That he should drink up the
Sea. Amasis being very anxious and sollicitous what answer he should make to
this strange command, the Philosopher Bias advised him to make this round
answer to the King; That he was ready to perform his command and to drink up
the Sea, provided he would stop the rivers from flowing into his cup while he
was drinking. This answer baffled the King, for he could not stop the rivers;
but this we must do, or we shall never be able to drink up the Sea, or burn up
the Earth.

Neither will this be so impossible as it seems at first sight, if we reflect
upon those preparations we have made toward it, by a general drought all over
the Earth. This we suppose will precede ^he Conflagration, and by drying up the
Fountains and Rivers, which daily feed the Sea, will by degrees starve that
Monster, or reduce it to such a degree of weakness, that it shall not be able
to make any great resistance. More than half an Ocean of Water flows into the
Sea every day, from the Rivers of the Earth, if you take them all together.
This I speak upon a moderate computation. Aristotle says the Rivers carry more
water into the Sea, in the space of a year* th^n would equal in bulk the whole
Globe of the Earth. Nay, some have ventured to affirm this of one single River,
The Volga, that runs into the Caspian Sea. It Is a great River indeed, and has
seventy mouths; and so it had need have, to disgorge a mass of Water equal to
the Body of the Earth, in a years time. But we need not take such high
measures; There are at least an hundred great Rivers that flow into the Sea,
from several parts of the Earth, Islands and Continents, besides several
thousands of lesser ones; Let us suppose these, all together, to pour as much
water into the Sea-chanel, every day, as is equal to half the Ocean. And we
shall be easily convinced of the reasonableness of this supposition, if we do
but examine the daily expense of one River, and by that make an estimate of the
rest. This we find calculated to our hands in the River Po in Italy; a River of
much what the same bigness with our Thames, and disburthens it self into the
Gulf of Venice. Baptista Riccioli has computed how much water this River
discharges in an hour, viz. 18000000. cubical paces of Water, and consequently
432000000. in a day; which is scarce credible to those that do not distinctly
compute it. Suppose then an hundred Rivers as great as this or greater, to fall
into the Sea from the Land; besides thousands of lesser, that pay their tribute
at the same time into the great Receipt of the Ocean; These all taken together,
are capable to renew the Sea every twice four and twenty hours. Which
suppositions being admitted, if by a great and lasting drought these Rivers
were dried up, or the Fountains from whence they flow, what would then become
of that vast Ocean, that before was so formidable to us?

It Is likely you will say, These great Rivers cannot be dried up, though the
little ones may; and therefore we must not suppose such an Universal stop of
waters, or that they will all fail, by any drought whatsoever. But great Rivers
being made up of little ones, if these fail, those must be diminished, if not
quite drained and exhausted. It may be all Fountains and Springs do not proceed
from the same causes, or the same original; and some are much more copious than
others; for such differences we will allow what is due; but still the dryness
of the Air and of the Earth continuing, and all the sources and supplies of
moisture, both from above and from below, being lessened or wholly
discontinued, a general decay of all Fountains and Rivers must necessarily
follow, and consequently of the Sea, and of its fullness that depends upon them.
And that is enough for our present purpose.

The first step therefore toward the Consumption of the Ocean will be the
diminution or suspension of the Rivers that run into it. The next will be an
Evacuation by Subterraneous passages; and the last, by Eruptions of Fires in
the very Chanel of it, and in the midst of the Waters. As for Subterraneous
Evacutions, we cannot doubt but that the Sea has out-lets at the bottom of it;
whereby it discharges that vast quantity of Water that flows into it every day,
and that could not be discharged so fast as it comes from the wide mouths of
the Rivers, by percolation or straining thorough the Sands. Seas also
communicate with one another by these internal passages; as is manifest from
those particular Seas that have no external outlet or issue, though they receive
into them many great Rivers, and sometimes the influx of other Seas. So the
Caspian Sea receives not only Volga, which we mentioned before, but several
other Rivers, and yet has no visible issue for its Waters. The Mediterranean
Sea, besides all the Rivers it receives, has a current flowing into it, at
either end, from other Seas; from the Atlantic Ocean at the streights of
Gibralter, and from the Black Sea, above Constantinople: and yet there is no
passage above-ground, or visible derivation of the Mediterranean waters out of
their Chanel; which seeing they do not overfil, nor overflow the Banks, it is
certain they must have some secret conveyances into the bowels of the Earth, or
subterraneous communication with other Seas. Lastly, From the Whirl-pools of
the Sea, that suck in Bodies that come within their reach, it seems plainly to
appear, by that attraction and absorption, that there is a descent of waters in
those places.

Wherefore when the current of the Rivers into the Sea is stopped, or in a great
measure diminished; The Sea continuing to empty it self by these subterraneous
passages, and having little or none of those supplies that it used to have from
the Land, it must needs be sensibly lessened; and both contract its Chanel into
a narrower compass, and also have less depth in the waters that remain. And in
the last place, we must expect fiery eruptions in several parts of the
Sea-chanel, which will help to suck up or evaporate the remaining Waters. In
the present state of Nature there have been several instances of such eruptions
of Fire from the bottom of the Sea; and in that last state of Nature, when all
things are in a tendency to inflammation, and when Earthquakes and Eruptions
will be more frequent every where, we must expect them also more frequently by
Sea, as well as by Land. It Is true, neither Earthquakes nor Eruptions can
happen in the middle of the Great Ocean, or in the deepest Abyss, because there
are no cavities, or mines below it, for the vapors and exhalations to lodge
in; But it is not much of the Sea-chanel that is so deep, and in other parts,
especially in streights and near Islands, such Eruptions, like Sea-Volcano's,
have frequently happened, and new Islands have been made by such fiery matter
thrown up from the bottom of the Sea. Thus, they say, those Islands in the
Mediterranean called the Vulcanian Islands, had their original; being matter
cast up from the bottom of the Sea, by the force of Fire; as new Mountains
sometimes are raised upon the Earth. Another Island in the Archipelago had the
same original, whereof Strabo gives an account. Lib. 1.
The flames, he says, sprung up through the waters, four days togeth^r, so as
the whole Sea was hot and burning; and they raised by degrees, as with Engines,
a mass of Earth, which made a new Island, twelve furlongs in compass. And in
the same Archipelago, flames and smoke have several times (particularly in the
year 1650.) rise out of the Sea, and filled the Air with sulphurous scents and
vapors. In like manner, in the Island of S. Michel, one of the Tercera's,
there have been, of later years, such eructations of fire and flames; so strong
and violent, that, at the depth of an hundred and sixty fathoms, they forced
their way through the midst of the Waters, from the bottom of the Sea into the
open Air. As has been related by those that were eyewitnesses.

In these three ways I conceive, the great force of the Sea will be broken, and
the mighty Ocean reduced to a standing Pool of putrid waters, without vent and
without recruits. But there will still remain in the midst of the Chanel a
great mass of troubled liquors, like dregs in the bottom of the vessel; which
will not be drunk up till the Earth be all on fire, and torrents of melted and
sulphurous matter flow from the Land, and mingle with this Dead Sea. But let
us now leave the Sea in this humble posture, and go on to attack the Rocks and
Mountains which stand next in our way.

See how scornfully they look down upon us, and bid defiance to all the
Elements. They have born the Thunder and Lightning of Heaven, and all the
Artillery of the Skies, for innumerable Ages; and do not fear the crackling of
thorns and of shrubs that burn at their feet. Let the Towns and Cities of the
Earth, say they, be laid in ashes; Let the Woods and Forests blaze away; and
the fat Soil of the Earth fry in its own greafe; These things will not affect
us; We can stand naked in the midst of a Sea of Fire, with our roots as deep as
the foundations of the Earth, and our heads above the Clouds of the Air. Thus
they proudly defy Nature; and it must be confessed, that these, being, as it
were, the Bones of the Earth, when the Body is burning, will be the last
consumed; And I am apt to think, if they could keep in the same posture they
stand in now, and preserve themselves from falling, the fire could never get an
entire power over them. But Mountains are generally hollow, and that makes them
subject to a double casualty; First, Of Earthquakes, Secondly, Of having their
roots eaten away by Water or by Fire; but by Fire especially in this case: For
we suppose there will be innumerable subterraneous Fires smothering under
ground, before the general Fire breaks out; and these by corroding the bowels
of the Earth, will make it more hollow and more ruinous; And when the Earth is
so far dissolved, that the cavities within the Mountains are filled with Lakes
of Fire, then the Mountains will sink, and fall into those boiling Caldrons;
which, in time, will dissolve them, though they were as hard as Adamant.

There is another Engine that will tear the Earth with great violence, and rend
in pieces whatsoever is above or about those parts of it. And that is the
Element of Water, so gentle in it self, when undisturbed. But it is found by
experience, that when Water falls into liquid Metals, it flies about with an
incredible impetuosity, and breaks or bears down every thing that would stop
its motion and expansion. This force I take to come from the sudden and strong
rarefaction of its parts: which make a kind of explosion, when it is sudden and
vehement: And this is one of the greatest forces we know in Nature. Accordingly
I am apt to think, that the mavelous force of Volcano's, when they throw out
lumps of Rocks, great fragments of Earth, and other heavy Bodies, to such a
vast height and distance, that it is done by this way of explosion: And that
explosion made by the sudden rarefaction of Sea-waters, that fall into Pans or
receptacles of molten Ore and ardent Liquors within the cavities of the
Mountain: and thereupon follow the noises, roarings, and eruptions of those
places. It Is observed that Volcano's are in Mountains, and generally, if not
always, near the Sea: And when its waters by subterraneous passages, are driven
under the Mountain, either by a particular Wind, or by a great agitation of the
Waves, they meet there with Metals and fiery Minerals dissolved, and are
immediately, according to our supposition, rarefied, and by way of explosion
fly out at the mouth or funnel of the Mountain, bearing before then whatsoever
stands in their way. Whether this be a true account or no, of the present
Volcano's and their Eruptions, it is manifest that such cases as we have
mentioned, will happen in the Conflagration of the Earth, and that such
eruptions or disruptions of the Earth will follow thereupon: and that these
will contribute very much to the sinking of Mountains, the splitting of Rocks,
and the bringing of all strong Holds of Nature under the power of the General
Fire.

To conclude this point, the Mountains will all be brought low, in that state
of Nature, either by Earthquakes or subterraneous fires; Isa. 40. 4*
Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low.
Which will be literally true at the second coming of our Savior, Luke 3. 5.
as it was figuratively applied to his first coming. Now, being once levelled
with the rest of the Earth, the question will only be, how they shall be
dissolved. But there is no Terrestrial Body indissolvable to Fire, if it have a
due strength and continuance; and this last Fire will have both, in the highest
degrees; So that it cannot but be capable of dissolving all Elementary
compositions, how hard or solid soever they be.

It Is true, these Mountains and Rocks, as I said before, will have the
privilege to be the last destroyed. These, with the deep parts of the Sea, and
the Polar Regions of the Earth, will undergo a flower fate, and be consumed
more leisurely. The action of the last Fire may be distinguished into two
Times, or two assaults; The first assault will carry off all Mankind, and all
the works of the Earth that are easily combustible; and this will be done with
a quick and sudden motion. But the second assault, being employed about the
consumption of such Bodies or such Materials as are not so easily subjected to
fire, will be of long continuance, and the work of some years. And it is fit it
should be so; that this Flaming World may be viewed and considered by the
neighboring Worlds about it, as a dreadful spectacle, and monument of God's
wrath against disloyal and disobedient Creatures. That by this example, now
before their eyes, they may think of their own fate, and what may befall them,
as well as another Planet of the same Elements and composition.

Thus much for the Rocks and Mountains; which, you see, according to our
Hypothesis, will be levelled, and the whole face of the Earth reduced to
plainness and equality; nay, which is more, melted and dissolved into a Sea of
liquid Fire. And because this may seem a Paradox, being more than is usually
supposed, or taken notice of, in the doctrine of the Conflagration, it will not
be improper in this place to give an account, wherein our Idea of the
Conflagration and its effects, differs from the common opinion and the usual
representation of it. It Is commonly supposed, that the Conflagration of the
World is like the burning of a City, where the Walls and materials of the
Houses are not melted down, but scorched, inflamed, demolished, and made
unhabitable. So they think in the Burning of the World, such Bodies, or such
parts of Nature, as are sit Fuel for the Fire, will be inflamed, and, it may
be, consumed, or reduced to smoke and ashes; But other Bodies that are not
capable of Inflammation, will only be scorched and defaced, the beauty and
furniture of the Earth spoiled, and by that means, say they, it will be laid
wast and become unhabitable. This seems to me a very short and imperfect Idea
of the Conflagration; neither agreeable to Scripture, nor to the deductions
that may be made from Scripture. We therefore suppose that this is but half the
work, this destroying of the outward garniture of the Earth is but the first
onset, and that the Conflagration will end in a dissolution and liquefaction of
the Elements and all the exterior region of the Earth: so as to become a true
Deluge of Fire, or a Sea of Fire overspreading, the whole Globe of the Earth.
This state of the Conflagration, I think, may be plainly proved, partly by the
expressions of Scripture concerning it, and partly from the Renovation of the
Earth that is to follow upon it. S. Peter, who is our chief Guide in the
doctrine of the Conflagration, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11.
says, The Elements will be melted with fervent heat besides burning up the
works of the Earth. Then adds, Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, etc.
These terms of Liquefaction and Dissolution cannot, without violence, be
restrained to simple devastation and superficial scorching. Such expressions
carry the work a great deal further, even to that full sense which we propose.
Besides, Isa. 34. 3, 4. and 44. 1, 2.
the Prophets often speak of the melting of the Earth, or of the Hills and
Mountains, Nah. 1. 5.
at the presence of the Lord, in the day of his wrath. Ps. 97. 5.
And S. John (Apoc. 15. 2.) tells us of a Sea of Glass, mingled with Fire;
where the Saints stood, singing the song of Moses, and triumphing over their
enemies, the Spiritual Pharaoh and his host, that were swallowed up in it. The
Sea of Glass must be a Sea of molten glass; it must be fluid, not solid, if a
Sea; neither can a solid substance be said to be mingled with Fire, as this
was. And to this answers the Lake of fire and brimstone, which the Beast and
false Prophet were thrown into alive, Apoc. 19. 20. These all refer to the end
of the World and the last Fire, and also plainly imply, or express rather, that
state of Liquefaction which we suppose and assert.

Furthermore, The Renovation of the World, or The New Heaven^ and New Earth,
which S. Peter, out of the Prophets, tells us shall spring out of these that
are burnt and dissolved, do suppose this Earth reduced into a fluid Chaos, that
it may lay a foundation for a second World. If you take such a Skeleton of an
Earth, as your scorching Fire would leave behind it; where the flesh is ^orn
from the bones, and the Rocks and Mountains stand naked and staring upon you;
the Sea, half empty, gaping at the Sun, and the Cities all in ruins and in
rubbish* How would you raise a New World from this? and a World fit to be an
habitation for the Righteous; for so S. Peter makes that to be, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
which is to succeed after the Conflagration. Apoc. 21. 1.
And a World also without a Sea, so S. John describes the New Earth he saw. As
these characters do not agree to the present Earth, so neither would they agree
to your Future one; for if that dead lump could revive and become habitable
again, it would however retain all the imperfections of the former Earth,
besides some scars and deformities of its own. Wherefore if you would cast the
Earth into a new and better mould, you must first melt it down; and the last
Fire, being as a (...) fire, will make an improvement in it, both as to matter
and form. To conclude, it must be reduced into a fluid Mass, in the nature of a
Chaos, as it was at first; but this last will be a Fiery Chaos, as that was
Watery; and from this state it will emerge again into a Paradisiacal World. But
this being the Subject of the following Book, we will discourse no more of it
in this place.

CHAP. X. Concerning the beginning and progress of the Conflagration, what part
of the Earth will first be Burnt. The manner of the future destruction of Rome,
according to Prophetical Indications. The last state and consummation of the
general Fire.
HAving removed the chief obstructions to our design, and showed a method for
weakening the strength of Nature, by draining the Trench, and beating down those
Bulwarks, wherein she seems to place her greatest confidence: we must now go to
work; making choice of the weakest part of Nature for our first attack, where
the fire may be the easiest admitted, and the best maintained and preserved.

And for our better direction, it will be of use to consider what we noted
before, viz. That the Conflagration is not a pure Natural Fatality, but a mi^t
Fatality; or a Divine Judgment supported by Natural Causes. And if we can find
some part of the Earth, or of the Christian World, that has more of these
natural dispositions to Inflammation than the rest; and is also represented by
Scripture as a more peculiar object of God's Judgments at the coming of our
Savior, we may justly pitch upon that part of the World as first to be
destroyed. Nature and Providence conspiring to make that the first Sacrifice to
this Fiery Vengeance.

Now as to Natural dispositions, (...) any Country or Region of the Earth, to
be set on Fire, They seem to be chiefly these two, Sulphureousness of the Soil,
and an hollow, mountainous construction of the ground. Where these two
dispositions meet in the same tract or territory, (the one as to the quality of
the matter, and the other as to the form) it stands like a Pile of fit
materials, ready set to have the Fire put to it. And as to Divine Indications
where this General Fire will (...), the Scripture points to the Seat of
Antichrist wheresoever that is, for the beginning of it. The Scripture, I say,
points at this, two ways, First, in telling us that our Savior at his coming
in flames of Fire shall consume the wicked One. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. chapter 2. 8.
The Man of sin, the Son of perdition, with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy him with the brightness of his presence. Secondly, under the name of
Mystical Babylon; which is allowed by all to be the Seat of Antichrist, and by
Scripture always condemned to the Fire. This we find in plain words asserted by
S. John in the 18th Chap. of his Revelations, v. 8. and ver. 19.
and in the 19th. (ver. 3.) under the name of the Great Whore; which is the
same City and the same Seat, according to the interpretation of Scripture it
self. chapter 17. 18.
And the Prophet Daniel when he had set the Ancient of Days upon his fiery
Throne, Dan. 7. 9, 10, 11.
says, The Body of the Beast was given to the burning flame. Which I take to be
the same thing with what S. John says afterward, (Apoc. 19. 20.) The Beast and
the false Prophet were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone.
By these places of Scripture it seems manifest, that Antichrist, and the Seat
of Antichrist, will be consumed with Fire, at the coming of our Savior. And
it is very reasonable and decorous, that the Grand Traitor and Head of the
Apostasy should be made the first example of the divine vengeance.

Thus much being allowed from Scripture, let us now return to Nature again; to
seek out that part of the Christian World, that from its own constitution is
most subject to burning; by the Sulphureousness of its Soil, and its fiery
Mountains and Caverns. This we shall easily find to be the Roman Territory, or
the Country of Italy: which, by all accounts, ancient and modern, is a
storehouse of fire; as if it was condemned to that fate by God and Nature, and
to be an Incendiary, as it were, to the rest of the World. And seeing Mystical
Babylon, the Seat of Antichrist, is the same Rome, and its Territory; as it is
understood by most Interpreters, of former and later Ages; you see both our
lines meet in this point; And that there is a fairness, on both hands, to
conclude, that, at the glorious appearance of our Savior, the Conflagration
will begin at the City of Rome and the Roman Territory.

Nature has saved us the pains of kindling a fire in those parts of the Earth,
for, since the memory of man, there have always been subterraneous fires in
Italy. And the Romans did not preserve their Vestal fire with more constancy,
than Nature has done her fiery Mountains in some part or other of that
Territory. Let us then suppose, when the fatal time draws near, all these
Burning Mountains to be filled and replenished with fit materials for such a
design; and when our Savior appears in the Clouds, with an Host of Angels,
that they all begin to play, as Fireworks at the Triumphal Entry of a Prince.
Let Vesuvius, Aetna, Strongyle, and all the Vulcanian Islands, break out into
flames; and by the Earthquakes, which then will rage, let us suppose new
Eruptions, or new Mountains opened, in the Apennines, and near to Rome; and to
vomit out fire in the same manner as the old Volcano's. Then let the
sulphurous ground take fire; and seeing the Soil of that Country, in several
places, is so full of brimstone, that the steams and smoke of it visibly rise
out of the Earth; we may reasonably suppose, that it will burn openly, and be
inflamed, at that time. Lastly, the Lightnings of the Air, and the flaming
streams of the melting Skies, will mingle and join with these burnings of the
Earth. And these three Causes meeting together, as they cannot but make a
dreadful Scene, so they will easily destroy and consume whatsoever lies within
the compass of their fury.

Thus you may suppose the beginning of the General Fire; And it will be carried
on by like causes, though in lesser degrees, in other parts of the Earth. But as
to Rome, there is still, in my opinion, a more dreadful fate that will attend
it; namely, to be absorpt or swallowed up in a Lake of fire and brimstone,
after the manner of Sodom and Gomorrha. This, in my judgment, will be the fare
and final conclusion of Mystical Babylon, to sink as a great Millstone into the
Sea, and never to appear more. Hear what the Prophet says, A mighty Angel took
up a stone, Apoc. 18. 21.
like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, thus, with violence,
shall that great City Babylon be thrown down; and shall be found no more at
all. Simply to be burnt, does not at all answer to this description of its
perishing, by sinking like a Millstone into the Sea, and never appearing more,
nor of, not having its place ever more found; that is, leaving no remains or
marks of it. A City that is only burnt, cannot be said to fall like a Millstone
into the Sea; or that it can never more be found: For after the burning of a
City, the ruins stand, and its place is well known. Wherefore, in both
respects, besides this exterior burning, there must be an absorption of this
Mystical Babylon, the Seat of the Beast; and thereupon a total disappearance of
it. This also agrees with the suddenness of the judgment, which is a repeated
character of it. Chap. 18. 8, 10, 17, 19. Now what kind of absorption this will
be, into what, and in what manner, we may learn from what St. John says
afterward, (chapter 19. 20.) The Beast and the false Prophets were cast alive into
a Lake of fire and brimstone. You must not imagine that they were bound, hand
and foot, and so thrown headlong into this Lake, but they were swallowed up
alive, they and theirs, as Corah and his company. Or, to use a plainer example,
after the manner of Sodom and Gomorrha; which perished by fire, and at the same
time sunk into a Dead Sea, or a Lake of brimstone.

This was a lively type of the fate of Rome, or Mystical Babylon; and it is fit
it should resemble Sodom, as well in its punishment, as in its crimes. Neither
is it a hard thing to conceive how such an absorption may come to pass; That
being a thing so usual in Earthquakes, and Earthquakes being so frequent in
that Region. And lastly, that this should be after the manner of Sodom, turned
into a Lake of fire, will not be at all strange, if we consider, that there
will be many subterraneous Lakes of fire at that time, when the bowels of the
Earth begin to melt, and the Mountains spew out streams of liquid fire. The
ground therefore being hollow and rotten in those parts, when it comes to be
shaken with a mighty Earthquake, the foundations will sink, and the whole
frame fall into an Abyss of fire below, as a Millstone into the Sea. And this
will give occasion to that Cry, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, and
shall never more be found.

This seems to be a probable account, according to Scripture and reason, of the
beginning of the general fire, and of the particular fate of Rome. But it may
be proposed here as an objection against this Hypothesis, that the
Mediterranean Sea, lying all along the Coast of Italy, must needs be a
sufficient guard to that Country against the invasion of fire; or at least must
needs extinguish it, before it can do much mischief there, or propagate it self
into other Countries. I thought we had in a good measure prevented this
objection before, by showing how the Ocean would be diminished before the
Conflagration, and especially the Arms and Sinus's of the Ocean; and of these
none would be more subject to this diminution than the Mediterranean; For,
receiving its supplies from the Ocean and the Black Sea, if these came to sink
in their channels, they would not rise so high, as to be capable to flow into
the Mediterranean, at either end. And these supplies being cut off, it would
soon empty it self so far, partly by evaporation, and partly by subterraneous
passages, as to shrink from all its shores, and become only a standing Pool of
water in the middle of the Chanel. Nay, it is possible, by floods of fire
descending from the many Volcano's upon its shores, it might it self be
converted into a Lake of fire, and rather help than obstruct the progress of
the Conflagration.

It may indeed be made a question, whether this fiery Vengeance upon the seat
of Antichrist, will not precede the general Conflagration, at some distance of
time, as a forerunner and forewarner to the World, that the rest of the People
may have space to repent; And particularly the Jews, being Spectators of this
Tragedy, and of the miraculous appearance of our Savior, may see the hand of
God in it, and be convinced of the truth and divine authority of the Christian
Religion. I say, this supposition would leave room for these and some other
prophetic Scenes, which we know not well where to place; But seeing The Day of
the Lord is represented in Scripture as one entire thing, without interruption
or discontinuation, and that it is to begin with the destruction of Antichrist,
we have warrant enough to pursue the rest of the Conflagration from this
beginning and introduction.

Let us then suppose the same preparations made in the other parts of the Earth
to continue the Fire; for the Conflagration of the World being a work of
Providence, we may be sure such measures are taken, as will effectually carry
it on, when once begun. The Body of the Earth will be loosened and broken by
Earthquakes, the more solid parts impregnated with sulphur, and the cavities
filled with unctuous fumes and exhalations; so as the whole Mass will be but as
one great funeral Pile, ready built, and wanting nothing but the hand of a
destroying Angel, to give it fire. I will not take upon me to determine which
way this devouring Enemy will steer his course from Italy, or in what order he
will advance and enter the several Regions of our Continent; that would be an
undertaking, as uncertain, as useless. But we cannot doubt of his success,
which way soever he goes: unless where the Chanel of the Ocean may chance to
stop him. But as to that, we allow, that different Continents may have
different Fires; not propagated from one another, but of distinct sources and
originals; and so likewise in remote Islands; and therefore no long passage or
trajection will be required from shore to shore. And even the Ocean it self,
will at length be as Fiery as any part of the Land; But that, with its Rocks,
like Death, will be the last thing subdued.

As to the Animate World, the Fire will overrun it with a swift and rapid
course, and all living Creatures will be suffocated or consumed, at the first
assault. And at the same time, the beauty of the Fields and the external
decorations of Nature will be defaced. Then the Cities and the Towns, and all
the works of man's hands, will burn like stubble before the wind. These will be
soon dispatched; but the great burden of the Work still remains; which is that
L^quefaction we mentioned before, or a melting fire, much more strong and
vehement than these transient blazes, which do but sweep the surface of the
Earth. This Liquefaction, I say, we proved before out of Scripture, chapter 9.
as the last state of the fiery Deluge. And it is this, which at length, will
make the Sea it self a Lake of fire and brimstone. When instead of Rivers of
Waters which used to flow into it from the Land, there come streams and
rivulets of Sulphurous Liquors, and purulent melted matter, which following
the tract of their natural gravity will fall into this great drain of the
Earth. Upon which mixture, the remaining parts of sweet water will soon
evaporate, and the salt mingling with the Sulphur will make a Dead Sea* an
Asphaltites, a Lake of Sodom, a Cup of the dregs of the Wine of the fierceness
of God's Wrath.

We noted before two remarkable effects of the Burning Mountains; which would
contribute to the Conflagration of the World; and gave instances of both in
former Eruptions of Aetna and Vesuvius. One was, of those Balls or lumps of
Fire, which they throw about in the time of their rage; and the other, of those
torrents of liquid Fire, which roll down their sides to the next Seas or
Valleys. In the first respect these Mountains are as so many Batteries, planted
by Providence in several parts of the Earth, to fling those fiery Bombs into
such places, or such Cities, as are marked out for destruction. And in the
second respect, they are to dry up the Waters, and the Rivers, Annal. Sic. dec.
1. l. 2. c. 4.
and the Sea it self, when they fall into its Chanel. T. Fazellus, a Sicilian,
who writ the History of that Island, tells us of such a River of fire (upon an
eruption of Aetna) near twenty eight miles long; reaching from the Mountain to
Port Longina; and might have been much longer if it had not been stopped by the
Sea. Many such as these, and far greater, we ought in reason to imagine, when
all the Earth begins to melt, and to ripen toward a dissolution. It will then
be full of these Sulphurous juices, as Grapes with Wine; and these will be
squeezed out of the Earth into the Sea, as out of a wine press into the
Receiver; to fill up that Cup, as we said before, with the wine of the
fierceness of God's wrath.

If we may be allowed to bring Prophetical passages of Scripture to a natural
sense, as doubtless some of those must that respect the end of the World, these
phrases which we have now suggested, of the Wine Press of the wrath of God.
Apoc. 14. 10, 19.
Drinking the fierceness of his wine, chapter 16. 19.
poured, without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, with expressions of
the like nature that occur sometimes in the old Prophets, chapter 19. 15.
but especially in the Apocalypse; These, I say, might receive a full and
emphatical explication from this state of things which now lies before us. I
would not exclude any other explication of less force, as that of alluding to
the bitter cup or mixed potion that used to be given to malefactors: but that
methinks, is a low sense when applied to these places in the Apocalypse. That
these phrases signify God's remarkable judgments, all allow, and here they
plainly relate to the end of the World, to the last Plagues, and the last of
the last Plagues, chap. 16. 19. Besides, The Angel that presided over this
judgment, is said to be an Angel that had power over fire; And those who are to
drink this potion, are said to be tormented with fire and brimstone, chapter 14.
10. This presiding Angel seems to be our Savior himself (^. 19. 15.) who when
he comes to execute Divine Vengeance upon the Earth, gives his orders in these
words, Gather the clusters of the Vine of the Earth, chapter 14. 18, 19.
for her grapes are fully ripe. And thereupon the Destroying Angel thrust in
his sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into
the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God. And this made a potion compounded of
several ingredients, (...)
but not diluted with water; (chapter 14. 10.) and was indeed a potion of fire and
brimstone and all burning materials mixed together. The similitudes of Scripture
are seldom nice and exact, but rather bold, noble and great; and according to
the circumstances which we have observed, This Vineyard seems to be the Earth,
and this Vintage the end of the World; The pressing of the Grapes into the cup
or vessel that receives them, the distillation of burning liquors from all
parts of the Earth into the trough of the Sea; and that lake of red Fire, the
blood of those Grapes so flowing into it.

It Is true, This judgment of the Vintage and Wine Press, and the effects of it,
seem to aim more especially at some particular region of the Earth, ^h. 14. 20.
And I am not against that, provided the substance of the explication be still
retained, and the universal Sea of Fire be that which follows in the next
Chapter, under the name of a Sea of Glass, chapter 16. 2.
mingled with Fire; This I think expresses the highest and complete state of
the Conflagration; when the Mountains are fled away, and not only so, but the
exterior region of the Earth quite dissolved, like wax before the Sun; The
Chanel of the Sea filled with a mass of fluid fire, and the same fire
overflowing all the Globe, and covering the whole Earth, as the Deluge, or the
first Abyss. Then will the Triumphal Songs and Hallelujah's be sung for the
Victories of the Lamb over all his Enemies and over Nature it self. Apoc. 15.
3, 4.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorisie thy
name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before
thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.

CHAP. XI. An account of those extraordinary Phenomenon and Wonders in Nature,
that, according to Scripture, will precede the coming of Christ, and the
Conflagration of the World.
IF we reflect upon the History of Burning Mountains, we cannot but observe,
that, before their Eruptions, there are usually some changes in the Earth or in
the Air, in the Sea or in the Sun it self; as signs and forerunners of the
ensuing storm. We may then easily conclude that when the last great Storm is a
coming, and all the Volcano's of the Earth ready to burst, and the frame of the
World to be dissolved, there will be prevlous signs, in the Heavens and on the
Earth, to introduce this Tragical fate. Nature cannot come to that extremity,
without some symptoms of her illness, nor die silently, without pangs or
complaint. But we are naturally heavy of belief as to Futurities, and can
scarce fancy any other Scenes, or other state of Nature, than what is present,
and continually before our eyes; we will therefore, to cure our unbelief, take
Scripture for our guide, and keep within the limits of its Predictions.

The Scripture plainly tells us of Signs or Prodigies that will precede the
coming of our Savior, and the end of the World; both in the Heavens and on the
Earth. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, will be disturbed in their motion or aspect;
The Earth and the Sea will roar and tremble, and the Mountains fall at his
Presence. These things both the Prophets and Evangelists have told us; But what
we do not understand, we are flow to believe; and therefore those that cannot
apprehend how such Changes should come to pass in the Natural World, choose
rather to allegorize all these expressions of Scripture, and to make them
signify no more than political changes of Governments and Empires, and the
great confusions that will be amongst the People and Princes of the Earth
toward the end of the World. So that darkning of the Sun, shaking of the
Earth, and such like phrases of Scripture, according to these Interpreters, are
to be understood only in a moral sense.

And they think they have a warrant for this interpretation from the Prophetic
style of the Old Testament, where the destruction of Cities, and Empires, and
great Princes, is often described by such Figures, taken from the Natural
World. So much is true indeed as to the phrase of the old Prophets in some
places; but I take the true reason and design of that, to be a typical
adumbration of what was intended should literally come to pass in the great and
universal destruction of the World; whereof these partial destructions were
only shadows and prefigurations. But to determine this case, Let us take the
known and approved rule for interpreting Scripture, Not to recede from the
literal sense without necessity, or where the nature of the subject will admit
of a literal interpretation. Now as to those cases in the Old Testament,
History and matter of fact do show that they did not come to pass literally,
therefore must not be so understood; But as for those that concern the end of
the World, as they cannot be determined in that way, seeing they are yet
future; So neither is there any Natural repugnancy or improbability that they
should come literally to pass: On the contrary, from the intuition of that
state of Nature, one would rather conclude the probability or necessity of
them; That there may and must be such disorders in the external World before
the general dissolution. Besides, If we admit Prodigies in any case, or
Providential indications of God's judgments to come, there can be no case
supposed, wherein it will be more reasonable or proper to admit them, than when
they are to be the Messengers of an universal Vengeance and Destruction.

Let us therefore consider what signs Scripture has taken notice of, as
destined to appear at that time, to publish, as it were, and proclaim the
approaching end of the World; and how far they will admit of a natural
explication, according to those grounds we have already given, in explaining
the causes and manner of the Conflagration. These Signs are chiefly,
Earthquakes, and extraordinary commotions of the Seas. Then the darkness or
bloody color of the Sun and Moon; The shaking of the Powers of Heaven, the
fulgurations of the Air and the falling of Stars. As to Earthquakes, we have
upon several occasions shown, that these will necessarily be multiplied toward
the end of the World; when, by an excess of drought and heat, exhalations will
more abound within the Earth; and, from the same causes, their inflammation
also will be more frequent, than in the ordinary state of Nature. And as all
Bodies, when dried, become more porous and full of Vacuities; so the Body of
the Earth will be at that time: And the Mines or Cavities wherein the fumes and
exhalations lodge, will accordingly be of greater extent, open into one
another, and continued through long tracts and regions; By which means, when an
Earthquake comes, as the shock will be more strong and violent, so it may
reach to a vast compass of ground, and whole Islands or Continents be shaken at
once, when these trains have taken fire. The effects also of such concussions,
will not only affect Mankind, but all the Elements and the Inhabitants of them.

I do not wonder therefore that frequent and great Earthquakes should be made
a sign of an approaching Conflagration; and the highest expressions of the
Prophets concerning the Day of the Lord, may be understood in a literal sense,
if they be finally referred to the general destruction of the World, and not
terminated solely upon those particular Countries or People, to whom they are
at first directed. Chapter 38. 19, 20, 22.
Hear what Ezekiel says upon this subject: For in my Iealousy and in the fire
of my wrath have I spoken; surely in that Day there shall be a great shaking in
the Land of Israel. So that the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Heaven,
and the Beasts of the Field, and all creeping things that creep upon the Earth;
and all the Men that are upon the face of the Earth, shall shake at my
presence; and the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the s^eep places shall
fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground. -- And I will rain an
overflowing rain, and great hailstones, Chapter 24. 18, 19, 20.
fire and brimstone. The Prophet Isaias describes these judgments in terms as
high, and relating to the Natural World: The Windows from on high are open, and
the foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken down, the
Earth is clean dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly. The Earth shall reel
to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the
transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise
again.

To restrain all these things to Iudaea, as their adequate and final object, is
to force both the words and the sense. Here are manifest allusions and
footsteps of the destruction of the World, and the dissolution of the Earth;
partly as it was in the Deluge, and partly as it will be in its last ruin;
torn, broken, and shattered. But most Men have fallen into that error, To
fancy both the destructions of the World, by Water and by Fire, quiet,
noiseless things; executed without any ruins or ruptures in Nature; That the
Deluge was but a great Pool of still Waters, made by the rains and inundation
of the Sea: and the Conflagration will be only a superficial scorching of the
Earth, with a running fire. These are false Idea's, and unsuitable to
Scripture: for as the Deluge is there represented a Disruption of the Abyss,
and consequently of the then habitable Earth; so the future combustion of it,
according to the representations of Scripture, is to be ushered in and
accompanied with all sorts of violent impressions upon Nature; and the chief
instrument of these violences will be Earthquakes. These will tear the Body of
the Earth, and shake its foundations; rend the Rocks, and pull down the tall
Mountains, sometimes overturn, and sometimes swallow up Towns and Cities;
disturb and disorder the Elements, and make a general confusion in Nature.

Next to Earthquakes, we may consider the roarings of a troubled Sea. Chapter 21.
25, 26, 27.
This is another sign of a dying World. S. Luke has set down a great many of
them together; Let us hear his words: And there shall be signs in the Sun, and
in the Moon, and in the Stars; and upon the Earth distress of Nations, with
perplexity; The Sea and the Waves roaring. Men's hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the Earth: for the
powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of Man coming
in a cloud, with power and great glory, etc. As some would allegorize these
Signs, which we noted before; so others would confine them to the destruction
of Jerusalem. Ver. 28.
But it is plain, by this coming of the Son of man in the clouds, and the
redemption of the faithful, and at the same time, Matt. 24. 31.
the sound of the last trumpet, which all relate to the end of the World, that
something further is intended than the destruction of Jerusalem. And though
there were Prodigies at the destruction of that City and State, yet not of this
force, nor with these circumstances. It Is true, those partial destructions and
calamities, as we observed before, of Babylon, Jerusalem, and the Roman Empire,
being types of an universal and final destruction of all God^s Enemies, have,
in the pictures of them, some of the same strokes, to show they are all from
the same hand; decreed by the same wisdom, foretold by the same Spirit; and the
same power and Providence that have already wrought the one, will also work the
other, in due time; the former being still pledges, as well as prefigurations,
of the latter.

Let us then proceed in our explication of this sign, The roaring of the Sea,
and the Waves, applying it to the end of the World. I do not look upon this
ominous noise of the Sea, as the effect of a tempest, for then it would not
strike such a terror into the Inhabitants of the Earth, nor make them
apprehensive of some great evil coming upon the World, as this will do; what
proceeds from visible causes, and such as may happen in a common course of
Nature, does not so much amaze us, nor affright us. Therefore it is more likely
these disturbances of the Sea proceed from below, partly by sympathy and
revulsions from the Land; by Earthquakes there, and exhausting the
subterraneous cavities of Waters, which will draw again from the Seas what
supplies they can: And partly by Earthquakes in the very Sea it self; with
exhalations and fiery Eruptions from the bottom of it. Things indeed that
happen at other times, more or less, but at this conjuncture, all causes
conspiring, they will break out with more violence, and put the whole Body of
the Waters into a tumultuary motion. I do not see any occasion, at this time,
for high Winds; neither can think a superficial agitation of the Waves would
answer this Phenomenon; but it is rather from Contorsions in the bowels of the
Ocean, which make it roar, as it were, for pain. Some Causes impelling the
Waters one way, and some another, make intestine struglings and contrary
motions; from whence proceed unusual noises, and such a troubled state of the
Waters, as does not only make the Sea innavigable, but also strikes terror into
all the Maritime Inhabitants, that live within the view or sound of it.

So much for the Earth and the Sea. The face of the Heavens also will be
changed in diverse respects. The Sun and the Moon darkened, or of a bloody, or
pale countenance; The Celestial Powers shaken, and the Stars unsettled in their
Orbs. As to the Sun and Moon, their obscuration or change of color is no more
than what happens commonly before the Eruption of a fiery Mountain; Dion
Cassius, you see, has taken notice of it in that Eruption of Aetna which he
describes; and others upon the like occasions in Vesuvius. And it is a thing of
easy explication; for according as the Atmosphere is more or less clear or
turbid, the Luminaries are more or less conspicuous; and according to the
nature of those fumes or exhalations that swim in the Air, the face of the Sun
is discolored sometimes one way, sometimes another. You see, in an ordinary
Experiment, when we look upon one another through the fumes of Sulphur, we
appear pale like so many Ghosts; and in some foggy days the Sun hangs in the
Firmament as a lump of Blood. And botl^ the Sun and Moon at their rising, when
their light comes to us through the thick vapors of the Earth, are red and
fiery. These are not changes wrought in the substance of the Luminaries, but in
the modifications of their light as it flows to us. For colors are but Light
in a sort of disguise; as it passes through Mediums of diff^rent qualities, it
takes different forms; but the matter is still the same, and returns to its
simplicity when it comes again into a pure air.

Now the air may be changed and corrupted to a great degree, though there appear
no visible change to our eye. This is manifest from infectious airs, and the
changes of the air before storms and rains; which we feel commonly sooner than
we see, and some other creatures perceive much sooner than we do It Is no wonder
then if before this mighty storm the dispositions of the Air be quite altered;
especially if we consider, what we have so often noted before, that there will
be a great abundance of fumes and exhalations through the whole Atmosphere of
the Earth, before the last Fire breaks out; whereby the Light of the Sun may be
tinctured in several ways. And lastly, it may be so ordered providentially,
that the Body of the Sun may contract at that time some Spots or Maculae far
greater than usual, and by that means be really darkened; not to us only, but
to all the neighboring Planets. And this will have a proportionable effect
upon the Moon too, for the diminution of her light. So that upon all
suppositions these Phenomenon are very intelligible, if not necessary
forerunners of the Conflagration.

The next Sign given us, is, that the powers of heaven will be shaken. By the
Heavens in this place is either understood the Planetary Heavens, or that of
the Fixed Stars; but this latter being vastly distant from the Earth, cannot be
really affected by the Conflagration. Nor the powers of it, that is, its
motions or the Bodies contained in it, any way shaken or disordered. But in
appearance these celestial Bodies may seem to be shaken, and their motions
disordered; as in a tempest by night, when the ship is tossed with contrary and
uncertain motions, the Heavens seem to fluctuate over our heads, and the Stars
to reel to and fro, when the motion is only in our own Vessel. So possibly the
uncertain motions of the Atmosphere, and sometimes of the Earth it self, may so
vary the sight and aspect of this starry Canopy, that it may seem to shake and
tremble.

But if we understand this of the Planetary Heavens, They may really be shaken.
Providence either ordering some great changes in the other Planets previously
to the Conflagration of our Planet; as it is probable there was a great change
in Venus, at the time of our Deluge. Or the great shakings and concussions of
our Globe at that time, affecting some of the neighboring Orbs, at least that
of the Moon, may cause Anomalies and irregularities in their motions. But the
sense that I should pitch upon chiefly for explaining this phrase of shaking
the powers of heaven, comprehends, in a good measure, both these Heavens, of
the Fixed Stars and of the Planets; It Is that change of situation in the Axis
of the Earth, which we have formerly mentioned; whereby the Stars will seem to
change their places, and the whole Universe to take another posture. This is
sufficiently known to those that know the different consequences of a strait or
oblique posture of the Earth. And as the heavens and the earth were, in this
sense, once shaken before; namely at the Deluge, when they lost their first
situation; so now they will be shaken again, and thereby return to the posture
they had before that first concussion. And this I take to be the true literal
sense of the Prophet Haggai, Chapter 2. 6. Heb. 12. 26.
repeated by S. Paul, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also heaven.

The last Sign we shall take notice of, is that of Falling Stars. And the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, says our Savior, Matt. 24. 29. We are sure, from the
nature of the thing, that this cannot be understood either of fixed Stars or
Planets; for if either of these should tumble from the Skies, and reach the
Earth, they would break it all in pieces, or swallow it up, as the Sea does a
sinking ship; and at the same time would put all the inferior universe into
confusion. It is necessary therefore by these Stars to understand either ^iery
Meteors falling from the middle Region of the Air, or Comets and Blazing Stars.
No doubt there will be all sorts of fiery Meteors at that time; and amongst
others, those that are called Falling Stars; which, though they are not
considerable singly, yet if they were multiplied in great numbers, Isa. 34. 4.
falling, as the Prophet says, as leafs from the Vine, or figs from the
fig tree, they would make an astonishing fight. But I think this expression
does chiefly refer to Comets; which are dead Stars, and may truly be said to
fall from heaven, when they leave their seats above, and those ethereal regions
wherein they were fixed, and sink into this lower World; where they wander about
with a blaze in their tail, or a flame about their head, as if they came on
purpose to be the Messengers of some fiery Vengeance. If numbers of these
blazing Stars should fall into our heaven together, they would make a dreadful
and formidable appearance; And I am apt to think that Providence has so
contrived the periods of their motion, that there will be an unusual concourse
of them at that time, within the view of the Earth, to be a prelude to this
last and most Tragical Scene of the Sublunary World.

I do not know any more in Scripture relating to the last Fire, that, upon the
grounds laid down in this discourse, may not receive a satisfactory
explication. It reaches, beyond the Signs before mentioned, to the highest
expressions of Scripture, As Lakes of fire and brimstone, a molten Sea mingled
with fire, the Liquefaction of Mountains, and of the Earth it self. We need not
now look upon these things as Hyperbolical and Poetical strains, but as
barefaced Prophecies, and things that will literally come to pass as they are
predicted. One thing more will be expected in a just hypothesis or Theory of
the Conflagration, namely, that it should answer, not only all the conditions
and characters belonging to the last Fire, but should also make way and lay the
foundation of another World to succeed this, or of New Heavens and a New Earth.
For S. Peter has taught this doctrine of the Renovation of the World, as
positively and expressly as that of its Conflagration. And therefore they that
so explain the destruction of the present World, as to leave it afterward in
an eternal rubbish, without any hopes of restoration, do not answer the
Christian Doctrine concerning it. But as to our Hypothesis, we are willing to
stand this far there trial, and be accountable for the consequences of the
Conflagration, as well as the Antecedents and manner of it. And we have
accordingly in the following Book, from the Ashes of this, raised a New Earth;
which we leave to the enjoyment of the Readers. In the mean time, to close our
discourse, we will bid farewell to the present World, in a short review of its
last flames.

CHAP. XII. An imperfect description of the Coming of our Savior, and of the
World on Fire.
CErtainly there is nothing in the whole course of Nature, or of Humane
Affairs, so great and so extraordinary, as the two last Scenes of them, THE
COMING OF OUR SAVIOR, and the BURNING OF THE WORLD. If we could draw in our
minds the Pictures of these, in true and lively colors, we should scarce be
able to attend to any thing else, or ever divert our imagination from these two
objects. For what can more affect us than the greatest Glory that ever was
visible upon Earth, and at the same time the greatest Terror. A God descending
in the Head of an Army of Angels, and a Burning World under his feet.

These are things truly above expression; and not only so, but so different and
remote from our ordinary thoughts and conceptions, that he that comes nearest
to a true description of them, shall be looked upon as the most extravagant.
It Is our unhappiness to be so much used to little trifling things in this life,
that when any thing great is represented to us, it appears fantastical: An
Idea, made by some contemplative or melancholy person. I will not venture
therefore, without premising some grounds out of Scripture, to say any thing
concerning This Glorious Appearance. As to the Burning of the World, I think we
have already laid a foundation sufficient to support the highest description
that can be made of it; But the coming of our Savior being wholly out of the
way of Natural Causes, it is reasonable we should take all directions we can
from Scripture, that we may give a more fitting and just account of that Sacred
Pomp.

I need not mention those places of Scripture that prove the second coming of
our Savior in general, Matt. 24. 30, 31. Act. 1. 11. and 3. 20, 21. Apoc. 1.
7. Heb. 9. 28.
or his return to the Earth again at the end of the World: no Christian can
doubt of this, it is so often repeated in those Sacred Writings. But the manner
and circumstances of this Coming, or of this Appearance, are the things we now
enquire into. And in the first place, we may observe that Scripture tells us
our Savior will come in Flaming Fire, and with an Host of mighty Angels; 1 Ep.
1. 7.
so says S. Paul to the Thessalonians, The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with mighty Angels; in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. In the second place,
our Savior says himself, Matt. 16. 27.
The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels. From
which two places we may learn, first, that the appearance of our Savior will
be with flames of Fire. Secondly, With an Host of Angels. Thirdly, In the glory
of his Father. By which Glory of the Father I think is understood that Throne
of Glory represented by Daniel for the Ancient of Days. For our Savior speaks
here to the Jews, and probably in a way intelligible to them; And the Glory of
the Father which they were most likely to understand, would be either the Glory
wherein God appeared at Mount Sinai, upon the^ giving of the Law, whereof the
Apostle speaks largely to the Hebrews; chapter 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
or that which Daniel represents Him in at the day of Judgment. And this latter
being more proper to the subject of our Savior's discourse, it is more likely
this expression refers to it. Give me leave therefore to set down that
description of the Glory of the Father upon his Throne, from the Prophet
Daniel, chapter 7. 9. And I beheld (...) the Thrones were It Is ill rendered in the
English, cast down.
set, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the
hair of his head like the pure wool: His Throne was like the fiery flame, and
his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before
him, thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him, With this Throne of the Glory of the Father, let us if you
please, compare the Throne of the Son of God, as it was seen by S. John in the
Apocalypse, chapter 4. 2, etc. And immediately I was in the Spirit: and behold a
throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the Throne. And he that fat, was to
look upon like a Jasper, and a Sardine Stone: and there was a Rainbow round
about the Throne, in appearance like unto an Emerald. And out of the Throne
proceeded Lightnings, and Thunderings, and Voices, etc. and before the Throne
was a Sea of glass like unto Crystal.

In those representations you have some beams of the Glory of the Father and of
the Son; which may be partly a direction to us, in conceiving the (...) of our
Savior's appearance. Let us further observe, if you please, how external
Nature will be affected at the sight of God, or of this approaching Glory. The
Scripture often takes notice of this, and in terms very high and eloquent. The
Psalmist seems to have loved that subject above others; to set out the
greatness of the day of the Lord, and the consternation of all Nature at that
time. He throws about his thunder and lightning, makes the Hills to melt like
wax at the presence of the Lord, and the very foundations of the Earth to
tremble, as you may see in the 18th. Psalm, and the 97. and the 104. and
several others, which are too long to be here inserted. So the Prophet
Habakkuk, in his Prophetic Prayer, Chap. 3d. has many Ejaculations to the
like purpose. And the Prophet Nahum says, The mountains quake at him, and the
hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his presence: yea, the world, and all
that dwell therein.

But more particularly, as to the face of Nature just before the coming of our
Savior, that may be best collected from the signs of his coming mentioned in
the precedent Chapter. Those all meeting together, help to prepare and make
ready a Theater, fit for an angry God to come down upon. The countenance of the
Heavens will be dark and gloomy; and a Veil drawn over the face of the Sun. The
Earth in a disposition every where to break into open flames. The tops of the
Mountains smoking; the Rivers dry; Earthquakes in several places; the Sea sunk
and retired into its deepest Chanel, and roaring, as against some mighty storm.
These things will make the day dead and melancholy, but the Night-Scenes will
have more of horror in them. When the Blazing Stars appear, like so many
Furies, with their lighted Torches, threatening to set all on fire. For I do not
doubt but the Comets will bear a part in this Tragedy, and have something
extraordinary in them, at that time; either as to number, or bigness, or
nearness to the Earth. Besides, the Air will be full of flaming Meteors, of
unusual forms and magnitudes; Balls of fire rolling in the Sky, and pointed
lightnings darted against the Earth; mixed with claps of thunder, and unusual
noises from the Clouds. The Moon and the Stars will be confused and irregular,
both in their light and motions; as if the whole frame of the Heavens was out
of order, and all the laws of Nature were broken or expired.

When all things are in this languishing or dying posture, and the Inhabitants
of the Earth under the fears of their last end; The Heavens will open on a
sudden, and the Glory of God will appear. A Glory surpassing the Sun in its
greatest radiancy; which, though we cannot describe, we may suppose it will bear
some resemblance or proportion with those representations that are made in
Scripture, of God upon his Throne. This wonder in the Heavens, whatsoever its
form may be, will presently attract the eyes of all the Christian World.
Nothing can more affect them than an object so unusual and so illustrious; and
that, (probably) brings along with it their last destiny, and will put a period
to all humane affairs.

Some of the Ancients have thought that this coming of our Savior would be in
the dead of the night, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
and his first glorious appearance in the midst of darkness. God is often
described in Scripture as Light or Fire, Psalm. 18. 9, 11, 12.
with darkness round about him. He bowed the Heavens and came down, and
darkness was under his feet. He made darkness his secret place: Psalm. 97.
His pavilion round about him were dark Waters and thick Clouds of the Skies.
At the brightness that was before him, the thick Clouds passed. Deuteronomy. 4. 11.
And when God appeared upon Mount Sinai, the Mountain burnt with fire unto the
midst of Heaven with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness: Hebr. 12. 18.
Or, as the Apostle expresses it, with blackness and darkness, and tempest.
Light is never more glorious than when surrounded with darkness; and it may be
the Sun, at that time, will be so obscure, as to make little distinction of Day
and Night. But however this Divine Light over-bears and distinguishes it self
from common Light, though it be at Midday. 'Twas about Noon that the Light
shined from Heaven and surrounded St. Panl. Act. 22. 6.
And 'twas on the Daytime that St. Stephen saw the Heavens opened; Act. 7. 55,
56.
saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. This light,
which flows from a more vital source, be it Day or Night, will always be
predominant.

That appearance of God upon Mount Sinai, which we mentioned, if we reflect
upon it, will help us a little to form an Idea of this last appearance. When
God had declared, that he would come down in the sight of the People; The Text
says, There were thunders and lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and
the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the
Camp trembled. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
descended upon it in fire. And the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. If we look upon this Mount as an
Epitome of the Earth, this appearance gives us an imperfect resemblance of that
which is to come. Here are the several parts or main strokes of it; first, the
Heavens and the Earth in smoke and fire, then the appearance of a Divine Glory,
and the sound of a Trumpet in the presence of Angels. But as the second coming
of our Savior is a Triumph over his Enemies, and an entrance into his Kingdom,
and is acted upon the Theater of the whole Earth; so we are to suppose, in
proportion, all the parts and circumstances of it, more great and magnificent.

When therefore this mighty God returns again to that Earth, where he had once
been ill treated, not Mount Sinai only, but all the Mountains of the Earth, and
all the Inhabitants of the World, will tremble at his presence. At the first
opening of the Heavens, the brightness of his Person will scatter the dark
Clouds, and shoot streams of light throughout all the Air. But that first
appearance, being far from the Earth, will seem to be only a great mass of
light, without any distinct form; till, by nearer approaches, this bright Body
shows it self to be an Army of Angels, with this King of kings for their
Leader. Then you may imagine how guilty Mankind will tremble and be astonished;
and while they are gazing at this heavenly Host, the Voice of the Archangel is
heard, the shrill sound of the Trumpet reaches their ears. And this gives the
general Alarm to all the World. For he comes, for he comes, they cry, to
judge the Earth. The crucified God is returned in Glory, to take Vengeance upon
his Enemies: Not only upon those that pierced his Sacred Body, with Nails and
with a Spear, as Jerusalem; but those also that pierce him every day by their
profaneness and hard speeches, concerning his Person and his Religion. Now
they see that God whom they have mocked, or blasphemed, laugh't at his
meanness, or at his vain threats; They see Him, and are confounded with shame
and fear; and in the bitterness of their anguish and despair call for the
Mountains to fall upon them. Fly into the clefts of the Rocks, Isa. 2. 19.
and into the Caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, Rev. 6. 16, 17.
and the glory of his Majes^y, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth.

As it is not possible for us to express or conceive the dread and majesty of
this appearance; so neither can we, on the other hand, express the passions and
consternation of the People that behold it. These things exceed the measures of
humane affairs, and of humane thoughts; we have neither words, nor comparisons,
to make them known by. The greatest pomp and magnificence of the Emperors of
the East, in their Armies, in their Triumphs, in their Inaugurations, is but
like the sport and entertainment of Children, if compared with this Solemnity.
When God condescends to an external glory, with a visible Train and Equipage:
When, from all the Provinces of his vast and boundless Empire, he summons his
Nobles, as I may so say: The several orders of Angels and Archangels, to
attend his Person; though we cannot tell the form or manner of this Appearance,
we know there is nothing in our experience, or in the whole History of this
World, that can be a just representation of the least part of it. No Armies so
numerous as the Host of Heaven: and in the midst of those bright Legions, in a
flaming Chariot, will sit the Son of Man, when he comes to be glorified in his
Saints, and triumph over his Enemies. And instead of the wild noises of the
rabble, which makes a great part of our worldly state: This blessed company
will breath their Halleluiahs into the open Air; and repeated acclamations of
Salvation to God, Apoc. 7. 10. and 12. 10.
which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. Now is come salvation and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.

But I leave the rest to our silent devotion and admiration. Only give me
leave, whilst this object is before our eyes, to make a short reflection upon
the wonderful history of our Savior; and the different states, which that
Sacred Person, within the compass of our knowledge, has undergone. We now see
him coming in the Clouds in glory and triumph, surrounded with innumerable
Angels. This is the same Person, who, so many hundred years ago, entered
Jerusalem, with another sort of Equipage: mounted upon an Ass's Colt, while the
little people and the multitude cried, Hosanna to the Son of David. Nay, This
is the same Person, that, at his first comeing into this World, was laid in a
Manger instead of a Cradle; A naked Babe dropped in a Crib at Bethlehem: Luke 2.
12.
His poor Mother not having wherewithal to get her a better Lodging, when she
was to be delivered of this Sacred Burden. This helpless Infant, that often
wanted a little Milk to refresh it, and support its weakness: That has often
cried for the Breast, with hunger and tears: now appears to be the Lord of
Heaven and Earth. If this Divine Person had fallen from the Clouds in a mortal
Body, clothed with Flesh and Blood, and spent his life here amongst sinners;
That alone had been an infinite condescension. But as if it had not been enough
to take upon him Humane Nature, he was content, for many months, to live the
life of an Animal, or of a Plant, in the dark Cell of a Woman's Womb. This is
the Lord's doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

Neither is this all that is wonderful in the story of our Savior. If the
manner of his death be compared with his present glory, we shall think, either
the one, or the other, incredible. Look up, first, into the Heavens: see how
they bow under him, and receive a new light from the Glory of his Presence.
Then look down upon the Earth, and see a naked Body hanging upon a cursed Tree
in Golgotha ^ Crucified betwixt Two Thieves: wounded, spit upon, mocked,
abused. Is it possible to believe that one and the same person can act or
suffer such different parts? That he, that is now Lord and Master of all
Nature: not only of Death and Hell, and the powers of darkness: but of all
Principalities in heavenly places: is the same Infant Jesus, the same crucified
Jesus, of whose life and death the Christian records give us an account? The
History of this Person is the Wonder of this World; 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12.
and not of this World only, but of the Angels above, that desire to look into
it.

Let us now return to our Subject. We left the Earth in a languishing
condition, ready to be made a Burnt-offering, to appease the wrath of its
offended Lord. When Sodom was to be destroyed, Abraham interceded with God that
he would spare it for the Righteous sake: Genesis 18.
And David interceded to save his guiltless People from God's Judgments and the
Destroying Angel. 2 Samuel 24. 17.
But here is no Intercessor for Mankind in this last extremity: None to
interpose where the Mediator of our Peace is the party offended. Shall then the
righteous perish with the wicked? Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? Or if the Righteous be translated and delivered from This Fire, what
shall become of innocent Children and Infants? Must these all be given up to
the merciless flames, as a Sacrifice to Moloch? and their tender flesh, like
burnt incense, send up fumes to feed the nostrils of evil Spirits? Can the God
of Israel smell a sweet favor from such Sacrifices? The greater half of
Mankind is made up of Infants and Children: and if the wicked be destroyed, yet
these Lambs, what have they done? Are there no bowels of compassion for such an
harmless multitude? But we leave them to their Guardian Angels, Matt. 18. 10.
and to that Providence which watches over all things.

It only remains therefore, to let fall that Fire from Heaven, which is to
consume this Holocaust. Imagine all Nature now standing in a silent expectation
to receive its last doom: The Tutelary and Destroying Angels to have their
instructions: Every thing to be ready for the fatal hour: And then, after a
little silence, all the Host of Heaven to raise their voice and sing aloud, LET
GOD ARISE: Let his enemies be scattered. As smoke is driven away, so drive them
away, As wax melts before the fire, so LET the wicked perish at the presence
of God. And upon this, as upon a signal given, all the sublunary World breaks
into Flames, and all the Treasuries of Fire are opened, in Heaven and in Earth.

Thus the Conflagration begins. If one should now go about to represent the
World on Fire, with all the confusions that necessarily must be, in Nature and
in Mankind, upon that occasion, it would seem to most Men a Romantic Scene.
yet we are sure there must be such a Scene. The heavens will pass away with a
noise, and the Elements will melt with fervent heat, and all the works of the
Earth will be burm up. And these things cannot come to pass without the
greatest disorders imaginable, both in the minds of Men and in external Nature:
and the ^addest spectacles that eye can behold. We think it a great matter to
see a single person burnt alive: here are Millions, shrieking in the flames at
once. It Is frightful to us to look upon a great City in flames, and to see the
distractions and misery of the people: here is an Universal Fire through all
the Cities of the Earth, and an Universal Massacre of their Inhabitants.
Whatsoever the Prophets foretold of the desolations of Judea, Isa. 24.
Jerusalem, Ier. 51.
or Babylon, in the highest strains, is more than literally accomplinsn'd in
this last and general Calamity: Lament.
And those only that are Spectators of it, can make i^s History.

The disorders in Nature and the inanimate World will be no less, nor less
strange and unaccountable, than those in Mankind. Every Element, and every
Region, so far as the bounds of this Fire extend, will be in a tumult and a
fury, and the whole habitable World running into confusion. A World is sooner
destroyed than made, and Nature relapses hastily into that Chaos-state, ou^ of
which she came by slow and leisurely motions. As an Army advances into the
field by just and regular marches, but when it is broken and routed, it flies
with precipitation, and one cannot describe its posture. Fire is a barbarous
Enemy, it gives no mercy; there is nothing but fury, and rage, and ruin, and
destruction, wheresoever it prevails. A storm or Hurricano, though it be but the
force of Air, makes a strange havoc where it comes; but devouring ^lames, or
exhalations set on Fire, have still a far greater violence and carry more
terror along with them ^ Thunder and Earthquakes are the Sons of Fire: and we
know nothing in all Nature, more impetuous, or more irresistibly destructive
than these two. And accordingly in this last war of the Elements, we may be
sure, they will bear the^^ parts, and do great execution in the several regions
of the World. Earthquakes and Subterraneous Eruptions will tear the body and
bowels of the Earth; and Thunders and convulsive motions of the Air, rend the
Skies. The waters of the Sea will boil and struggle with streams of Sulphur
that ^un into them; which will make them fume, and smoke, and roar, beyond all
storms and tempests. And these noises of the Sea will be answered again from
the Land by falling Rocks and Mountains. This is a small part of the disorders
of that day.

But it is not possible, from any station, to have a full prospect of this last
Scene of the Earth: for it is a mixture of fire and darkness. This New Temple is
filled with smoke, while it is consecrating, and none can enter into it. But I
am apt to think, if we could look down upon this burning World from above the
Clouds, and have a full view of it, in all its parts, we should think it a
lively representation of Hell it self. For, Fire and darkness are the two chief
things by which that state, or that place, uses to be described* and they are
both here mingled together: with all other ingredients that make that Tophet
that is prepared of old. Isa. 30.
Here are Lakes of fire and brimstone: Rivers of melted glowing matter: Ten
thousand Volcano's vomiting flames all at once. Thick darkness, and Pillars of
smoke twisted about with wreaths of flame, like fiery Snakes. Mountains of
Earth thrown up into the Air, and the Heavens dropping down in lumps of fire.
These things will all be literally true, concerning that day, and that state of
the Earth. And if we suppose Beelzebub, and his Apostate crew, in the midst of
this fiery furnace: (and I know not where they can be else.) It will be hard to
find any part of the Universe, or any state of things, that answers to so many
of the properties and characters of Hell, as this which is now before us.

But if we suppose the storm over, and that the fire has got an entire victory
over all other bodies, and subdued every thing to it self, the Conflagration
will end in a Deluge of fire: Or, in a Sea of fire, covering the whole Globe of
the Earth. For, when the exterior region of the Earth is melted into a fluor,
like molten glass, or running metal* it will, according to the nature of other
Fluids, fill all vacuities and depressions, and fall into a regular surface, at
an equal distance, every where, from its center. This Sea of fire, like the
first Abyss, will cover the face of the whole Earth: make a kind of second
Chaos: and leave a capacity for another World to rise from it. But that is not
our present business. Let us only, if you please to take leave of this subject*
reflect upon this occasion, on the transient and (...) glory of all this
habitable World. How, by the force of one Element, breaking loose upon the
rest, all the Varieties of Nature all the works of Art, all the labors of Men
are reduced to nothing. All that we admired and adored before, as great and
magnificent, is obliterated or vanished. And another form and face of things,
plain, simple, and every where the same, overspreads the whole Earth. Where are
now the great Empires of the World, and their great Imperial Cities? Their
Pillars, Trophe^s, and Monuments of glory? Show me where they stood: read the
Inscription, tell me the Victor^s name. What remains, what impressions, what
difference or distinction do you see in this mass of fire? Rome it self,
Eternal Rome, the Great City, the Empress of the World, whose domination and
superstition, ancient and modern, make a great part of the History of this
Earth: What is become of her now* She laid her foundations deep, and her
Palaces were strong and sumptuous: She glorified her self, and lived
deliciously: and said in her heart, I sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow. But
her hour is come, she is wiped away from the face of the Earth, and buried in
perpetual oblivion. But it is not Cities only, and works of Men's hands, but the
everlasting Hills, the Mountains and Rocks of the Earth, are melted as Wax
before the Sun; and their place is no where found. Here stood the Alps, a
prodigious range of Stone, the Load of the Earth* that covered many Countries,
and reached their arms from the Ocean to the Black Sea; This huge mass of Stone
is softened and dissolved, as a tender Cloud into rain. Here stood the African
Mountains, and Atlas with his top above the Clouds. There was frozen Caucasus,
and Taurus, and Imaus, and the Mountains of Asia. And yonder toward the North
stood the Riphaean Hills, clothed in Ice and Snow. All these are vanished,
dropped away as the Snow upon their heads: and swallowed up in a red Sea of fire.
Great and mavelous are thy Works, Revel. 15. 3.
Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy ways, Thou King of Saints. Hallelujah.

The CONCLUSION.
IF the Conflagration of the World be a reality, as, both by Scripture and
Antiquity, we are assured it is; If we be fully persuaded and convinced of
this: It Is a thing of that nature, that we cannot keep it long in our thoughts,
without making some moral reflections upon it. It Is both great in it self, and
of universal concern to all Mankind. Who can look upon such an Object, A World
in Flames, without thinking with himself, Whether shall I be in the midst of
these ^lames, or no? What is my security that I shall not fall under this fiery
vengeance, which is the wrath of an angry God? St. Peter, when he had delivered
the doctrine of the Conflagration, 2 Epist. 3. 11.
makes this pious reflection upon it: Seeing then that all these things shall
be dissolved* what manner of persons ought you to be, in holy conversation and
godliness? The strength of his argument depends chiefly upon what he had said
before in the 7th. Verse, where he told us, that the present Heavens and Earth
were reserved unto fire, against the Day of Judgment, and the perdition of
irreligious men. We must avoid the crime then, if we would escape the
punishment. But this expression of irreligious or ungodly men, is still very
general* St. Paul* when he speaks of this fiery indignation, and the Persons it
is to fall upon, is more distinct in their characters. He seems to mark out for
this destruction, three sorts of men chiefly, The Atheists, Infidels, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, 8.
and the Tribe of Antichrist. These are his words: When the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God: and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Then as for Antichrist and his adherents, he says, in the 2d. Chapt.
and 8th. Verse, The Lord shall consume that Wicked one with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming, or of his
Presence. These, you see, all refer to the same time with St. Peter: namely, to
the coming of our Savior, at the Conflagration; and three sorts of Persons are
uncharacterized as his Enemies, and set out for destruction at that time. First,
those that know not God: that is, that acknowledge not God, that will not own
the Deity. Secondly, those that hearken not to the Gospel; that is, that reject
the Gospel and Christian Religion, when they are preached and made known to
them. For you must not think that it is the poor barbarous and ignorant
Heathens, that scarce ever heard of God, or the Gospel, that are threatened
with this fiery vengeance. No, it is the Heathens, that live amongst Christians;
those that are Infidels, as to the existence of God, or the truth of Christian
Religion, though they have had a full manifestation of both. These are properly
the Adversaries of God and Christ. And such adversaries, St. Paul says in
another place, Heb. 10* 27.]
A fearful judgment, and fiery indignation shall devour: which still refers to
the same time, and the same Persons we are speaking of. Then as to the third
sort of Men, Antichrist and his Followers, besides this Text of St. Paul to the
Thessalonians, it is plain to me in the Apocalypse, that Mystical Babylon is to
be consumed by fire: and the Beast and False Prophet to be thrown into the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone: Which Lake is no where to be found till the
Conflagration.

You see then for whom Tophet is prepared of old. For Atheists, isfidels, and
Antichristian Persecutors. And they will have for their Companions, the Devil
and his Angels, the heads of the Apostasy. These are all in open rebellion
against God and Christ, and at defiance, as it were, with Heaven. Excepting
Antichrist, who is rather in a secret conspiracy, than an open rebellion. For,
under a pretended Commission from Jesus Christ, He persecutes his Servants,
dishonours his Person, corrupts his Laws and his Government, and makes War
against his Saints. And this is a greater affront and provocation, if possible,
than a bare faced opposition would be.

There are other Men, besides these, that are unacceptable to God: All sorts of
sinners and wicked persons: but they are not so properly the Enemies of God, as
these we have mentioned. An intemperate Man is an Enemy to himself, and an
injust Man is an Enemy to his Neighbor* But those that deny God, or Christ, or
persecute their Servants, are directly and immediately Enemies to God. And
therefore when the Lord comes in flames of fire to triumph over his Enemies: To
take vengeance upon all that are Rebels or Conspirators against him and his
Christ, these Monsters of Men will be the first and most exemplary Objects of
the divine wrath and indignation.

To under take to speak to these three Orders of men, and convince them of
their error, and the danger of it, would be too much for the Conclusion of a
short Treatise. And as for the third sort, the Subjects of Antichrist, none but
the Learned amongst them are allowed to be inqulsitive, or to read such things
as condemn their Church, or the Governors of it. Therefore I do not expect
that this English Translation should fall into many of their hands. But those
of them, that are pleased to look into the Latin, will find, in the Conclusion
of it, a full and fair warning to come out of Babylon: which is there proved to
be the Church of Rome. Then as to those that are Atheistically inclined, which
I am willing to believe are not many, I desire them to consider, How mean a
thing it is, to have hopes only in this Life: and how uneasy a thing, to have
nothing but fears as to the Future. Those, sure, must be little narrow Souls,
that can make themselves a portion and a sufficiency out of what they enjoy
here: That think of no more, that desire no more. For what is this life, but a
circulation of little mean actions? We lie down and rise again: dress and
undress: feed and wax hungry: work, or play, and are weary: and then we lie
down again, and the circle returns. We spend the day in trifles, and when the
Night comes, we throw our selves into the Bed of folly, amongst dreams and
broken thoughts and wild imaginations. Our reason lies asleep by us; and we
are, for the time, as arrant Brutes, as those that sleep in the Stalls, or in
the Field. Are not the Capacities of Man higher than these? and ought not his
ambition and expectations to be greater? Let us be Adventurers for another
World: It Is, at least, a fair and noble Chance: and there is nothing in this,
worth our thoughts or our passions. If we should be disappointed, we are still
no worse than the rest of our fellow mortals: and if we succeed in our
expectations, we are eternally happy.

For my part, I cannot be persuaded, that any man of Atheistical inclinations
can have a great and generous Soul. For there is nothing great in the World, if
you take God out of it. Therefore such a person can have no great thought, can
have no great aims, or expectations, or designs; for all must lie within the
compass of this Life, and of this dull Body. Neither can he have any great
instincts or noble passions: For if he had, they would naturally excite in him
greater Idea, inspire him with higher notions, and open the Scenes of the
Intellectual World. Lastly, He cannot have any great sefice of Order, Wisdom,
Goodness, Providence, or any of the Divine Perfections. And these are the
greatest things that can enter into the thoughts of man, and that do most
enlarge and ennoble his mind. And therefore I say again, That, He that is
naturally inclined to Atheism, being also naturally destitute of all these,
must have a little and narrow soul.

But you will say, it may be, This is to expostulate rather than to prove: or to
upbraid us with our make and temper, rather than to convince us of an error in
speculation. It Is an error it may be in practice, or in point of prudence; but
we seek Truth, whether it make for us or against us; convince us therefore by
just reasoning and direct arguments, That there is a God, and then we will
endeavor to correct these defects in our natural complexion. You say well; and
therefore I have endeavored to do this before, in another part of this Theory,
in the Second Book, chapter 11. Concerning the Author of Nature: where you may see,
that the Powers of Nature, or of the Material World, cannot answer all the
Phanomena of the Universe, which are there represented. This you may consult at
leisure. But, in the mean time, it is a good persuasive why we should not easily
give our selves up to such inclinations or opinions, as have neither
generosity, nor prudence on their side. And it cannot be amiss, that these
persons should often take into their thoughts, this last scene of things, The
Conflagration of the World. Seeing if there be a God, they will certainly be
found in the number of his Enemies, and of those that will have their portion
in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

The Third sort of persons that we are to speak to, are the Incredulous, or
such as do not believe the truth of Christian Religion, though they believe there
is a God. These are commonly men of Wit and Pleasure, that have not patience
enough to consider, coolely and in due order, the grounds upon which it
appears, that Christian Religion is from Heaven, and of Divine Authority. They
ought, in the first place, to examine matter of Fact, and the History of our
Savior: That there was such a Person, in the Reigns of Augustus and Tiherius,
that wrought such and such Miracles in Iudaea; taught such a Doctrine: was
Crucified at Jerusalem: rise from the dead the Third Day, and visibly ascended
into Heaven. If these matters of Fact be denied, then the controversy turns
only to an Historical question, Whether the Evangelical History be a fabulous,
or true History: which it would not be proper to examine in this place. But if
matter of Fact recorded there; and in the Acts of the Apostles, and the first
Ages of Christianity, be acknowledged, as I suppose it is, then the Question
that remains is this, Whether such matter of Fact does not sufficiently prove
the divine authority of Jesus Christ and of his Doctrine. We suppose it
possible, for a person to have such Testimonials of divine authority, as may be
sufficient to convince Mankind, or the more reasonable part of Mankind; And if
that be possible, what, pray, is a wanting in the Testimonies of Jesus Christ?
The Prophecies of the Old Testament bear witness to him: His Birth was a
miracle, and his Life a train of Miracles: not wrought out of levity and vain
ostentation, but for useful and charitable purposes. His Doctrine and Morality
not only blameless, but Noble: designed to remove out of the World the
imperfect Religion of the Jews, and the false Religion of the Gentiles: All
Idolatry and Superstition: and thereby to improve Mankind, under a better and
more perfect dispensation. He gave an example of a spotless innocence in all
his Conversation, free from Vice or any evil; and lived in a neglect of all the
Pomp or Pleasures of this Life, referring his happiness wholly to another
World. He Prophesied concerning his own Death, and his Resurrection: and
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem: which all came to pass in a signal
manner. He also Prophesied of the Success of his Gospel: which, after his
Death, immediately took root, and spread it self every way throughout the
World: maugre all opposition or persecution, from Jews or Heathens. It was not
supported by any temporal power for above three hundred Years: nor were any
arts used, or measures taken, according to humane prudence, for the
conservation of it. But, to omit other things, That grand article of his Rising
from the Dead, Ascending visibly into Heaven, and pouring down the miraculous
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, (according as he had promised) upon his Apostles and
their followers: This alone is to me a Demonstration of his Divine Authority.
To conquer Death: To mount, like an Eagle, into the Skies: and to inspire his
followers with inimitable gifts and faculties, are things, without
controversy, beyond all humane power: and may and ought be esteemed sure
Credentials of a person sent from Heaven.

From these matters of Fact we have all possible assurance, that Jesus Christ
was no Impostor or deluded person: (one of which two Characters all unbelievers
must fix upon him) but Commissioned by Heaven to introduce a New Religion: to
reform the World, to remove Judaism and Idolatry; The beloved Son of God, the
great Prophet of the later Ages, the True Messiah that was to come.

It may be, you will confess, that these are great arguments that the Author of
our Religion was a Divine Person, and had supernatural powers: but withal, that
there are so many difficulties in Christian Religion, and so many things
unintelligible, that a rational man knows not how to believe it, though he be
inclined to admire the person of Jesus Christ. I answer, If they be such
difficulties as are made only by the Schools and disputacious Doctors, you are
not to trouble your self about them, for they are of no Authority. But if they
be in the very words of Scripture, then it is either in things practical, or in
things merely speculative. As to the Rules of Practice in Christian Religion, I
do not know any thing in Scripture, obscure or unintelligible. And as to
Speculations, great discretion and moderation is to be used in the conduct of
them. If these matters of Fact, which we have alleged, prove the Divinity of
the Revelation, keep close to the Words of that Revelation, asserting no more
than it asserts, and you cannot err. But if you will expatiate, and determine
modes, and forms, and consequences; you may easily be puzzled by your own
forwardness. For besides some things that are in their own nature, Infinite and
Incomprehensible, there are many other things in Christian Religion that are
incompleatly revealed; the full knowledge whereof, it has pleased God to
reserve to another life, and to give us only a summary account of them at
present. We have so much deference for any Government, as not to expect that
all their Councels and secrets should be made known to us, nor to censure every
action whose reasons we do not fully comprehend; much more in the Providential
administration of a World, we must be content to know so much of the Councels
of Heaven and of supernatural Truths, as God has thought fit to reveal to us.
And if these Truths be no otherwise than in a general manner, summarlly and
incompleatly revealed in this life, as commonly they are, we must not therefore
throw off the Government, or reject the whole Dispensation: of whose Divine
Authority we have otherways full proof and satisfactory evidence. For this
would be, To lose the Substance in catching at a Shadow.

But Men that live continually in the noise of the World, amidst business and
pleasures, their time is commonly shared betwixt those two. So that little or
nothing is left for Meditation, at least, not enough for such Meditations as
require length, justness, and order. They should retire from the crowd for one
Month or two, to study the truth of Christian Religion, if they have any doubt
of it. They retire sometimes to cure a Gout, or other Diseases, and diet
themselves according to rule: but they will not be at that pains, to cure a
disease of the Mind, which is of far greater and more fatal consequence. If
they perish by their own negligence or obstinacy, the Physician is not to
blame. Burning is the last remedy in some distempers: and they would do well to
remember, that the World will flame about their heads one of these days: and
whether they be amongst the Living, or amongst the Dead, at that time, the
Apostle makes them a part of the Fuel, which that fiery vengeance will prey
upon. Our Savior has been true to his Word hitherto: whether in his Promises,
or in his Threatenings; He promised the Apostles to send down the Holy Ghost
upon them after his Ascension, and that was fully accomplished. He foretold and
threatened the destruction of Jerusalem: and that came to pass accordingly,
soon after he had left the World. And he has told us also, Matt. 24. 30. and
25. 32, etc.
that he will come again in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory;
and that will be to judge the World. When the Son of Man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of
his glory. And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he will separate
the good from the bad; and to the wicked and unbelievers he will say, Ver. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. This is the same Coming, and the same Fire, with that which we
mentioned before out of S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.
As you will plainly see, if you compare S. Matthew's words with S. Paul's,
which are these, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels: In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that hearken not to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from, or by the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power. This, me thinks, should be an awakening thought, that there
is such a threatening upon record, (by one who never yet failed in his word)
against those that do not believe his Testimony. Those that reject him now as a
Dupe, or an Impostor, run a hazard of seeing him hereafter coming in the Clouds
to be their Judge. And it will be too late then to correct their error, when
the bright Armies of Angels fill the Air, and the Earth begins to melt at the
Presence of the Lord.

Thus much concerning those three ranks of Men, whom the Apostle S. Paul seems
to point at principally, and condemn to the flames. But, as I said before, the
rest of sinners and vicious Persons amongst the Professors of Christianity,
though they are not so directly the Enemies of God, as these are; yet being
transgressors of his Law, they must expect to be brought to Justice. In every
well-governed State, not only Traitors and Rebels, that offend more immediately
against the Person of the Prince, but all others, that notoriously violate the
Laws, are brought to condign punishment, according to the nature and degree of
their crime. So in this case, The fire shall try every man's work, of what sort
it is. It Is therefore the concern of every man to reflect often upon that Day,
and to consider what his fate and sentence is likely to be, at that last Trial.
The Jews have a Tradition that Elias sits in Heaven, and keeps a Register of
all Men's actions, good or bad. He has his Under Secretaries for the several
Nations of the World, that take minutes of all that passes: and so has the
History of every Man's life before him, ready to be produced at the Day of
Judgment. I will not vouch for the literal truth of this, but it is true in
effect. Every Man's fate shall be determined that Day, according to the history
of his Life: according to the works done in the flesh, whether good or bad. And
therefore it ought to have as much influence upon us, as if every single action
was formally registered in Heaven.

If Men would learn to contemn this World, it would cure a great many Vices at
once. And, methinks, S. Peter's argument, from the approaching dissolution of
all things, should put us out of conceit with such perishing vanities. Lust and
Ambition are the two reigning Vices of great Men: and those little fires might
be soon extinguished, if they would frequently and seriously meditate on this
last and Universal Fire; which will put an end to all Passions and all
Contentions. As to Ambition, the Heathens themselves made use of this argument,
to abate and repress the vain affectation of glory and greatness in this World.
I told you before the lesson that was given to Scipio Africanus, by his Uncle's
Ghost, upon this Subject. And upon a like occasion and consideration, Caesar
has a lesson given him by Lucan, after the Battle of Pharsalia; where Pompey
lost the day, and Rome its liberty. The Poet says, Caesar took pleasure in
looking upon the dead Bodies, and would not suffer them to be buried, or, which
was their manner of burying, to be burnt. Whereupon he speaks to him in these
words: Hos, Caesar, populos si nunc non usserit Ignis,
Uret cum Terris, uret cum gurgite Ponti.
Communis mundo superest Rogus, Ossibus astra
Misturus. Quocunque Tuam Fortuna vocabit,
Hae quoque eunt Animae; non altius ibis in auras,
Non meliore loco Stygia sub nocte jacebis.
Libera fortuna Mors est: Capit omnia Tellus
Quae genuit; Coelo tegitur Qui non habet urnam.
Caesar, If now these Bodies want their pile and urn,
At last, with the whole Globe, they are sure to burn.
The World expects one general Fire: and Thou
Must go where these poor Sculs are wandering now.
Thou'l reach no higher, in the Ethereal Plain,
Nor amongst the Shades a better place obtain.
Death levels all: And He that has not room
To make a Grave, Heaven's Vault shall be his Tomb.


These are mortifying thoughts to ambitious Spirits. And surely our own
Mortality, and the Mortality of the World it self, may be enough to convince
all considering Men, That, Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity under the Sun: any
otherwise than as they relate to a better Life.

FINIS.
THE THEORY OF THE EARTH: Containing an Account OF THE Original of the Earth,
AND OF ALL THE GENERAL CHANGES Which it has already undergone, OR IS TO
UNDERGO Till the CONSUMMATION of all Things.

THE FOURTH BOOK, Concerning the NEW HEAVENS and NEW EARTH, AND Concerning the
CONSUMMATION of all Things.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
YOU see it is still my lot, to travel into New Worlds: having never found any
great satisfaction in this. As an active people leaves their habitations in a
barren soil, to try if they can make their fortune better elsewhere. I first
looked backwards, and waded through the Deluge, into the Primaeval World: to see
how they lived there, and how Nature stood in that original constitution. Now I
am going forwards, to view the New Heavens and New Earth, that will be after
the Conflagration. But, Gentle Reader, let me not take you any further, if you
be weary. I do not love a querulous Companion. Unless your Genius therefore
press you forwards, choose rather to rest here, and be content with that part of
the Theory which you have seen already. Is it not fair, to have followed Nature
so far as to have seen her twice in her ruins? Why should we still pursue her,
even after death and dissolution, into dark and remote Futurities? To whom
therefore such disquisitions seem needless, or overcurious, let them rest
here; and leave the remainder of this Work, which is a kind of PROPHECY
concerning the STATE of things after the Conflagration, to those that are of a
disposition suited to such studies and enquiries.

Not that any part of this Theory requires much Learning, Art, or Science, to
be Master of it; But a love and thirst after Truth, freedom of Judgment, and a
resignation of our Understanding to clear Evidence, let it carry us which way
it will. An honest English Reader that looks only at the Sense as it lies
before him, and neither considers nor cares whether it be New or Old, so it be
true, may be a more competent Judge than a great Scholar fall of his own
Notions, and puffed up with the opinion of his mighty knowledge. For such men
think they cannot in honor own any thing to be true, which they did not know
before. To be taught any new knowledge, is to confess their former ignorance;
and that lessens them in their own opinion, and, as they think, in the opinion
of the World; which are both uneasy reflections to them. Neither must we
depend upon age only for soundness of Judgment. Men in discovering and owning
truth seldom change their Opinions after threescore: especially if they be
leading Opinions. It is then too late, we think, to begin the World again; and
as we grow old, the Heart contracts; and cannot open wide enough to take in a
great thought.

The Spheres of men's Understandings are as different, as Prospects upon the
Earth. Some stand upon a Rock or a Mountain, and see far round about; Others
are in an hollow, or in a Cave, and have no prospect at all. Some men consider
nothing but what is present to their Senses: Others extend their thoughts both
to what is past and what is future. And yet the fairest prospect in this Life
is not to be compared to the least we shall have in another. (...) clearest day
here, is ^^irty and hazy: We see not far, and what we do see is in a had light.
But when we have got better Bodies in the first Resurrection, whereof we are
going to Treat; better Senses and a better Understanding, a clearer light and
an higher station, our Horizon will be enlarged every way, both as to the
Natural World and as to the Intellecual.

Two of the greatest Speculations that we are capable of in this Life, are, in
my Opinion, The REVOLUTION OF WORLDS, and the REVOLUTION OF SOULS; one for the
Material World, and the other for the Intellectual. Toward the former of these
Our Theory is an Essay: and in this our Planet, (which I hope to conduct into a
Fixed Star, before I have done with it) we give an instance of what may be in
other Planets. It Is true, we took our rise no higher than the Chaos: because
that was a known principle, and we were not willing to amuse the Reader with
too many strange Stories: as that, I am sure, would have been thought one, TO
HAVE brought this Earth from a Fixed Star, and then carried it up again into
the same Sphere. Which yet I believe, is the true circle of Natural Providence.

As to the Revolution of Souls, the footsteps of that Speculation are more
obscure than of the former. For though we are assured by Scripture, that all good
Souls will at length have Celestial Bodies; yet, that this is a returning to a
Primitive State, or to what they had at their first Creation, that, Scripture
has not acquainted us with. It tells us indeed that Angels fell from their
Primitive Celestial Glory; and consequently we might be capable of a lapse as
well as they, if we had been in that high condition with them. But that we ever
were there, is not declared to us by any revelation. Reason and Morality would
indeed suggest to us, that an innocent Soul, fresh and pure from the hands of
its Maker, could not be immediately cast into Prison, before it had, by any act
of its own Will, or any use of its own Understanding, committed either error or
sin. I call this Body a Prison, both because it is a confinement and restraint
upon our best Faculties and Capacities, and is also the seat of diseases and
loathsomness; and; as prisons use to do, commonly tends more to debauch men's
Natures, than to improve them.

But though we cannot certainly tell under what circumstances humane Souls were
placed at first, yet all Antiquity agrees, Oriental and Occidental, concerning
their pre existence in general, in respect of these mortal Bodies. And our
Savior never reproaches or corrects the Jews, when they speak upon that
supposition, Luke 9. 18, 19. Joh. 9. 2. Besides, it seems to me beyond all
controversy, Joh. 3. 13. and 6. 38. and 62. and 17. 5.
that the Soul of the Messiah did exist before the Incarnation, and voluntarily
descended from Heaven to take upon it a Mortal Body. And though it does not
appear that all humane Souls were at first placed in Glory, yet, from the
example of our Savior, we see something greater in them: Namely, a capacity to
be united to the Godhead. And what is possible to one, is possible to more. But
these thoughts are too high for us: while we find our selves united to nothing,
but diseased bodies and houses of clay.

The greatest fault we can commit in such Speculations, is to be over-positive
and Dogmatical. To be inquisitive into the ways of Providence and the works of
God, is so far from being a fault, that it is our greatest perfection; We
cultivate the highest principles and best inclinations of our Nature, while we
are thus employed: and it is littleness or secularity of Spirit, that is the
greatest Enemy to Contemplation. Those that would have a true contempt of this
World, must suffer the Soul to be sometimes upon the Wing, and to raise her
self above the sight of this little dark Point, which we now inhabit. Give her
a large and free prospect of the immensity of God's works, and of his
inexhausted wisdom and goodness, if you would make her Great and Good. As the
warm Philosopher says, Give me a Soul so great, so high,
Let her dimensions stretch the Sky:
That comprehends within a thought,
The whole extent 'twixt God and Naught.
And from the World's first birth and date,
Its Life and Death can calculate:
With all the adventures that shall pass,
To every Atome of the Mass.
But let her be as GOOD as GREAT,
Her highest Throne a Mercy-Seat.
Soft and dissolving like a Cloud,
Losing her self in doing good.
A Cloud that leaves its place above,
Rather than dry, and useless move:
Falls in a shower upon the Earth,
And gives ten thousand Seeds a birth.
Hangs on the Flowers, and infant Plants,
Sucks not their Sweets, but feeds their Wants.
So let this mighty Mind diffuse
All that is her own to others use;
And free from private ends, retain
Nothing of SELF, but a bare Name.


THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
BOOK IV. Concerning the new Heavens and new Earth, AND Concerning the
Consummation of all things.
CHAP. I. THE INTRODVCTION.
That the World will not be annihilated in the last Fire. That we are to
expect, according to Scripture and the Christian Doctrine, New Heavens and a
New Earth, when these are dissolved or burnt up.
WE are now so far advanced in the Theory of the Earth, as to have seen the End
of Two Worlds: One destroyed by Water, and another by Fire. It remains only to
consider, whether we be yet come to the final period of Nature: The last Scene
of all things, and consequently the utmost bound of our enquiries. Or, whether
Providence, which is inexhausted in Wisdom and Goodness, will raise up, from
this dead Mass, New Heavens and a New Earth. Another habitable World, better
and more perfect than that which was destroyed. That, as the first World began
with a Paradise, and a state of Innocence, so the last may be a kind of
Renovation of that happy state; whose Inhabitants shall not die, but be
translated to a blessed Immortality.

I know it is the opinion of some, that this World will be annihilated, or
reduced to nothing, at the Conflagration: and that would put an end to all
further enquiries. But whence do they learn this? from Scripture, or Reason, or
their own imagination? What instance or example can they give us, of this they
call Annihilation? Or what place of Scripture can they produce, that says the
World, in the last Fire, shall be reduced to nothing? If they have neither
instance, nor proof of what they affirm, it is an empty Imagination of their
own: neither agreeable to Philosophy, nor Divinity. Fire does not consume any
substance: It changes the form and qualities of it, but the matter remains. And
if the design had been Annihilation, the employing of fire would have been of
no use or effect. For smoke and ashes are at as great a distance from Nothing,
as the bodies themselves out of which they are made. But these Authors seem to
have but a small tincture of Philosophy, and therefore it will be more proper
to confute their opinion from the words of Scripture; which has left us
sufficient evidence, that another World will succeed after the Conflagration of
that we now inhabit.

The Prophets, both of the Old and New Testament, have left us their
predictions concerning New Heavens and a New Earth. So says the Prophet Isaiah,
chapter 65. 17. Behold I create New Heavens and a New Earth, and the former shall
not be remembered, or come into mind. As not worthy our thoughts, in comparison
of those that will arise when these pass away. So the Prophet S. John, in his
Apocalypse, when he was come to the End of this World, Apoc. 21. 1.
says, And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. For the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. Where he does not only
give us an account of a New Heaven and a New Earth, in general: but also gives
a distinctive character of the New Earth: that it shall have no Sea. And in the
5th ver. He that sat upon the Throne, says, Behold I make all things New;
which, considered with the antecedents and consequents, cannot be otherwise
understood than of a New World.

But some Men make evasions here as to the words of the Prophets, and say they
are to be understood in a figurate and allegorical sense: and to be applied to
the times of the Gospel, either at first or toward the latter end of the
World. So as this New Heaven and New Earth signify only a great change in the
moral World. But how can that be, seeing S. John places them after the end of
the World. Chapter 65.
And the Prophet Isaiah connects such things with his New Heavens and New
Earth, as are not competible to the present state of Nature? However to avoid
all shuffling and tergiversation in this point, let us appeal to S. Peter, who
uses a plain literal style, and discourses downright concerning the Natural
World. In his 2d. Epist. and 3d. Chap: when he had foretold and explained the
Future Conflagration, he adds, But we expect New Heavens and a New Earth
according to his promises. These Promises were made by the Prophets: and this
gives us full authority to interpret their New Heavens and New Earth to be
after the Conflagration. S. Peter, when he had described the Dissolution of the
World in the last Fire, in full and emphatical terms, as the passing away of
the Heavens with a noise: the melting of the Elements, and burning up all the
works of the Earth: he subjoyns, Nevertheless, notwithstanding this total
dissolution of the present World, We, according to his promises, look for new
heavens and a new earth: wherein dwells Righteousness. As if the Apostle
should have said, Notwithstanding this strange and violent dissolution of the
present Heavens and Earth, which I have described to you, we do not at all
distrust God's Promises concerning New Heavens and a New Earth, that are to
succeed these, and to be the seat of the Righteous.

Here Is no room for Allegories or allegorical expositions: unless you will make
the Conflagration of the World an Allegory. For, as Heavens and Earth were
destroyed, so Heavens and Earth are restored: and if in the first place you
understand the natural material World, you must also understand it in the
second place: They are both Allegories, or neither. But to make the
Conflagration an Allegory, is not only to contradict S. Peter, but all
Antiquity, Sacred or Profane. And I desire no more assurance that we shall
have New Heavens and a New Earth, in a literal Sense, than we have that the
present Heavens and Earth shall be destroyed in a literal Sense, and by
material Fire. Let it therefore rest upon that issue as to this first evidence
and argument from Scripture.

Some will fancy, it may be, that we shall have New Heavens and Earth, and yet
that these shall be annihilated; They would have These first reduced to
nothing, and then others created, spick and span New, out of nothing. But why
so, pray, what is the humor of that? Lest Omnipotency should want employment,
you would have it do, and undo, and do again. As if new-made Matter, like new
Clothes, or new Furniture, had a better Gloss, and was more creditable. Matter
never wears: as fine Gold, melt it down never so often, it loses nothing of its
quantity. The substance of the World is the same, burnt or unburnt: and is of
the same Value and Virtue, New or Old: and we must not multiply the actions of
Omnipotency without necessity. God does not make, or unmake things, to try
experiments: He knows before hand the utmost capacities of every thing, and
does no vain or superfluous work. Such imaginations as these proceed only from
want of true Philosophy, or the true knowledge of the Nature of God and of his
Works; which should always be carefully attended to, in such Speculations as
concern the Natural World. But to proceed in our Subject.

If they suppose part of the World to be annihilated, and to continue so, they
Philosophize still worse and worse. How high shall this Annihilation reach?
Shall the Sun, Moon, and Stars be reduced to nothing? but what have They done,
that they should undergo so hard a fate? must they be turned out of Being for
our faults? The whole material Universe will not be Annihilated at this bout,
for we are to have Bodies after the Resurrection, and to live in Heaven. How
much of the Universe then will you leave standing: or how shall it subsist with
this great Vacuum in the heart of it? This shell of a World is but the fiction
of an empty Brain: For God and Nature in their works, never admit of such
gaping vacuities and emptinesses.

If we consult Scripture again, we shall find that that makes mention of a
Restitution and Reviviscency of all things: At the End of the World, Act. 3.
or at the Coming of our Savior. S. Peter, whose doctrine we have hitherto
followed, in his Sermon to the Jews after our Savior's Ascension, tells them
that He will come again, and that there will be then a Restitution of all
things: such as was promised by the Prophets. ver. 21.
The Heavens, says he, must receive him until the time of Restitution of all
things: which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, since the
world began. If we compare this passage of S. Peter's, with that which we
alleged before out of his second Epistle, it can scarce be doubted but that he
refers to the same Promises in both places: and what he there calls a New
Heaven and a New Earth, he calls here a Restitution of all things. For the
Heavens and the Earth comprehend all, and both these are but different phrases
for the Renovation of the World. This gives us also light how to understand
what our Savior calls the Regeneration or Reviviscency, Matt. 19. 28, 29.
when he shall sit upon his Throne of Glory, and will reward his followers an
hundred fold, for all their Losses in this World: Besides Everlasting Life as
the Crown of all. I know, in our English Translation, we separate the
Regeneration from sitting upon his Throne: but without any warrant from the
Original. And seeing our Savior speaks here of Bodily goods, and seems to
distinguish them from everlasting life, which is to be the final reward of his
Followers, This Regeneration seems to belong to his Second Coming, when the
World shall be renewed or regenerated: and the Righteous shall possess the
Earth.

Other places of Scripture that foretell the fate of this Material World,
represent it always as a Change, not as an Annihilation. S. Paul says, The
Figure of this World passes away: 1 Cor. 7. 31. The form, fashion and
disposition of its parts: But the substance still remains. As a Body that is
melted down and dissolved, the Form perishes, Psalm. 102. 26.
but the Matter is not destroyed. And the Psalmist says, The Heavens and the
Earth shall be changed: which answers to this Transformation we speak of. The
same Apostle, in the Eighth Chapter to the Romans, Ver. 21, 22, 23, 24.
shows also that this change shall be, and shall be for the better: and calls
it a Deliverance of the Creation from vanity and corruption: and a
participation of the glorious liberty of the Children of God. Being a sort of
Redemption, as they have a Redemption of their Bodies.

But, seeing, the Renovation of the World is a Doctrine generally received,
both by ancient and modern Authors, as we shall have occasion to show
hereafter: We need add no more, in this place, for confirmation of it. Some Men
are willing to throw all things into a state of Nothing at the Conflagration,
and bury them there, that they may not be obliged to give an account of that
state of things, that is to succeed it. Those who think themselves bound in
honor, to know every thing in Theology that is knowable: and find it uneasy
to answer such questions and speculations, as would arise upon their admitting
a New World, think it more advisable to stifle it in the birth, and so to
bound all knowledge at the Conflagration. But surely, so far as Reason or
Scripture lead us, we may and ought to follow: otherwise we should be
ungrateful to Providence, that sent us those Guides. Provided, we be always
duly sensible of our own weakness: and, according to the difficulty of the
subject, and the measure of light that falls upon it, proceed with that modesty
and ingenuity, that becomes such fallible enquirers after Truth, as we are. And
this rule I desire to prescribe to my self, as in all other Writings, so
especially in this: where, though I look upon the principal Conclusions as fully
proved, there are several particulars, that are rather proposed to examination,
than positively asserted.

CHAP. II. The Birth of the new Heavens and the new Earth, from the second
Chaos, or the remains of the old World. The form, order, and qualities of the
new Earth, according to Reason and Scripture.
HAving proved from Scripture, that we are to expect New Heavens, and a New
Earth, after the Conflagration; it would be some pleasure and satisfaction to
see how this new Frame will arise: and what foundation there is in Nature for
the accomplishment of these promises. For, though the Divine Power be not bound
to all the Laws of Nature, but may dispense with them when there is a
necessity; yet it is an ease to us in our belief, when we see them both
conspire in the same effect. And in order to this, we must consider in what
posture we left the demolished World: what hopes there is of a Restoration.
And we are not to be discouraged, because we see things at present wrapped up in
a confused Mass: for, according to the methods of Nature and Providence, in
that dark Womb usually are the seeds and rudiments of an Embryo World.

Neither is there, possibly, so great a confusion in this Mass, as we imagine.
The Heart and interior Body of the Earth is still entire: and that part of it
that is consumed by the fire, will be divided, of its own accord, into two
Regions. What is dissolved and melted, being the heaviest, will descend as low
as it can: and cover and enclose the kernel of the Earth round about, as a
molten Sea or Abyss: according as is explained and set down in the precedent
Book. But what is more light and volatile, will float in the Air: as fumes,
smoke, exhalations, vapors of Water, and whatsoever terrestrial parts can be
elevated, and supported by the strength of fire. These all mingled together, of
different sizes, figures, and motions, will constitute an opake Cloud, or thick
region of darkness round the Earth: So as the Globe of the Earth, with its
Atmosphere, after the Conflagration is finished, will stand much what in the
form represented in this Scheme.

Now as to the lower of these two regions, the region of melted matter, A. A.
we shall have little occasion to take notice of it: seeing it will contribute
nothing to the formation of the new World. But the upper region, or all above
that Orb of fire, is the true draught of a Chaos: or a mixture and confusion of
all the Elements, without order or distinction. Here are particles of Earth,
and of Air, and of Water, all promiscuously jumbled together, by the force and
agitation of the fire. But when that force ceases, and every one is left to its
own inclination, they will, according to their different degrees of gravity,
separate and sort themselves after this manner. First, the heaviest and
grossest parts of the Earth will subside; then the watery parts will follow;
then a lighter sort of Earth; which will stop and rest upon the Surface of the
Water, and compose there a thin film or membrane; this membrane or tender Orb
is the first rudiment or foundation of a new habitable Earth. For according as
terrestrial parts fall upon it, from all the regions and heighths of the
Atmosphere, or of the Chaos, this Orb will grow more firm, strong, and
immovable: able to support it self and Inhabitants too. And having in it all
the Principles of a fruitful Soil, whether for the production of Plants or of
Animals, it will want no property or character of an habitable Earth. And
particularly, will become such an Earth, and of such a form, as the first
Paradisiacal Earth was. Which has been fully described in the first and second
Books of this Theory.

There is no occasion of examining more accurately the formation of this Second
Earth, seeing it is so much the same with that of the First; which is set down
fully and distinctly in the Fifth Chapter of the first Book of this Theory.
Nature here repeats the same work, and in the same method; only the materials
are now a little more refined and purged by the fire. They both rise out of a
Chaos, and That, in effect, the same in both cases; For though in forming the
first Earth, I supposed the Chaos or confused Mass to reach down to the Center,
I did that only for the ease of our imagination; that so the whole Mass might
appear more simple and uniform. But in reality, that Chaos had a solid kernel
of Earth within, as this has; and that matter which fluctuated above in the
regions of the Air, was the true Chaos, whose parts, when they came to a
separation, made the several Elements, and the form of an habitable Earth
betwixt the Air and Water. This Chaos upon separation, will fall into the same
form and Elements: and so in like manner create or constitute a second
Paradisiacal World.

I say a Paradisiacal World: for it appears plainly, that this new-form'd Earth
must agree with that Primigenial Earth, in the two principal and fundamental
properties. First, It is of an even, entire, uniform and regular Surface,
without Mountains or Sea. Secondly. That it has a straight and regular
situation to the Sun, and the Axis of the Ecliptic. From the manner of its
formation, it appears manifestly, that it must be of an even and regular
Surface. For the Orb of liquid fire, upon which the first descent was made,
being smooth and uniform every where, the matter that fell upon it would take
the same form and mould. And so the second or third Region, that were
superinduced, would still imitate the fashion of the first: there being no
cause or occasion of any inequality. Then as to the situation of its Axis, this
uniformity of figure would determine the center of its gravity to be exactly in
the middle, and consequently there would be no inclination of one Pole more
than another to the general center of its motion; But, upon a free libration in
the liquid Air, its Axis would lie parallel with the Axis of the Ecliptic
where it moves. But these things having been deduced more fully in the second
Book about Paradise and the Primigenial Earth, they need no further explication
in this place.

If Scripture had left us several distinct Characters of the New Heavens, and
the New Earth, we might, by compare with those, have made a full proof of our
Hypothesis. One indeed St. John has left us in very express terms, There was
no Sea there, He says. His words are these: And I saw a New Heaven, and a New
Earth: for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away; AND THERE WAS
NO MORE SEA. This character is very particular, and you see it exactly answers
to our Hypothesis: for in the new-form'd Earth, the Sea is covered and
inconspicuous: being an Abyss, not a Sea; and wholly lodged in the Womb of the
Earth. And this one Character, being inexplicable upon any other supposition,
and very different from the present Earth, makes it a strong presumption that
we have hit upon the true model of the New Heavens and New Earth which S. John
saw.

To this sight of the New Heavens and New Earth, S. John immediately subjoyns
the sight of the New Jerusalem, ver. 2. as being contemporary, and in some
respects the same thing. It Is true, the Characters of the New Jerusalem in
these two last Chapters of the Apo^alypse, are very hard to be understood: some
of them being incompetible to a Terrestrial state, and some of them to a
Celestial; so as it seems to me very reasonable to suppose, that the New
Jerusalem spoken of by S. John, is twofold: That which he saw himself, ver. 2.
and that which the Angel showed him afterward, ver. 9. For I do not see what
need there was of an Angel, and of taking him up into a great and high
mountain, only to show him that which he had seen before, at the foot of the
Mountain. But however that be, we are to consider in this place the Terrestrial
New Jerusalem only, or that which is in the New Heavens and New Earth. And as
St. John has joined these two together, Chapter 65. 17, 18.
so the Prophet Isaiah had done the same thing before; when he had promised New
Heavens and a New Earth, he calls them, under another name, Jerusalem: and they
both use the same character in effect, in the description of their Jerusalem.
Isaiah says, Ver. 19.
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of
weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. S. John says
also in his Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 3, 4.
God shall dwell with them, and they shall be his people: And he shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain. Now in both these
Prophets, when they treat upon this subject, we find they make frequent
allusions to Paradise and a Paradisiacal state; so as that may be justly taken
as a Scripture-Character of the New Heavens and the New Earth. The Prophet
Isaiah seems plainly to point at a Paradisiacal state, throughout that Chapter,
by an universal innocence, and harmlesness of animals; and peace, plenty,
health, longaevity or immortality of the inhabitants. S. John also has several
allusions to Paradise, in those two Chapters where he describes the New
Jerusalem. Chapter 21. and chapter 23.
And in his discourse to the seven Churches, in one place (chapter 2. 7.) To him
that overcomes is promised to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God. And in another place (chapter 3. 12.) to him that
overcomes is promised, to have the name of the New Jerusalem writ upon him.
These I take to be the same thing, and the same reward of Christian Victors,
The New Jerusalem or the New Heavens and New Earth, and the Paradise of God.
Now this being the general Character of the New Earth, That it is
Paradifiacals: and the particular Character, That it has no Sea: and both
these agreeing with our Hypothesis, as apparently deducible from those
principles and that manner of its formation which we have set down: We cannot
but allow, that the Holy Scriptures and the Natural Theory agree in their
Testimony, as to the conditions and properties of the New Heavens and New Earth.

From what has been said in this and the precedent Chapter, it will not be
hard to interpret what S. Paul meant by his Habitable Earth to come: TO(...)
Isa. 9. 6.
which is to be subjected to our Savior, and not to the Angels. In the second
chapter to the Hebrews, ver. 5. he says, For unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the WORLD TO COME: So we read it, but, according to the strictest
and plainest Translation, it should be The habitable Earth to come. Now what
Earth is this, where our Savior is absolute Sovereign: and where the
Government is neither Humane, nor Angelical, but peculiarly Theocratical? In
the first place, this cannot be the present World or the present Earth, because
the Apostle calls it Future, or the Earth to come. Nor can it be understood of
the days of the Gospel: seeing the Apostle acknowledges, ver. 8. That this
subjection, whereof he speaks, is not yet made. And seeing Antichrist will not
finally be destroyed till the appearance of our Savior, (2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.) nor
Satan bound, while Antichrist is in power: during the reign of these two,
Ephesians. 6. 12.
(who are the Rulers of the darkness of the World) our Savior cannot properly
be said to begin his reign here. It Is true, He exercises his Providence over
his Church, and secures it from being destroyed* He can, by a power paramount,
stop the rage either of Satan or Antichrist; Hitherto shall you go and no
further. As sometimes when he was upon Earth, he exerted a Divine Power, which
yet did not destroy his state of Humiliation; so he interposes now when he
thinks fit, but he does not finally take the power out of the hands of his
Enemies, nor out of the hands of the Kings of the Earth. The Kingdom is not
delivered up to him, and all dominion, and power; chapter 7. 13. 25, 26.
That all Tongues and Nations should serve him. For S. Paul can mean no less in
this place than that Kingdom in Daniel: Seeing he calls it putting all things
in subjection under his feet, Hebr. 2. 8.
and says that it is not yet done. Upon this account also, as well as others,
our Savior might truly say to Pilate (Ioh. 18: 36.) my kingdom is not of this
World. And to his Disciples, The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, Matt. 20. 28. When he comes to receive his Kingdom, he comes in
the clouds of Heaven (Dan. 7. 13, 14.) not in the womb of a Virgin. He comes
with the equipage of a King and Conquer or; with thousands and ten thousands of
Angels: not in the form of a Servant, or of a weak Infant; as he did at his
first coming.

I allow the phrase (...), or in the Hebrew (...)* The World to come, is
sometimes used in a large sense, as comprehending all the days of the Messiah,
whether at his First or Second Coming, (for these two Comings are often
undistinguished in Scripture) and respect the Moral World as well as the
Natural. But the word (...), Orbis habitabilis, which S. Paul here uses, does
primarily signify the Natural World, or the Habitable Earth, in the proper use
of the word amongst the Greeks, and frequently in Scripture* Luke 4. 5. and 21.
26. Romans 10. 18. Heb. 1. 6. Apoc. 3. 10. Neither do we here exclude the Moral
World, or the Inhabitants of the Earth, but rather necessarily include them.
Both the Natural and Moral World to come, will be the seat and subject of our
Savior's Kingdom and Empire, in a peculiar manner. But when you understand
nothing by this phrase but the present moral World, it neither answers the
proper signification of (...) nor of (...), of the first or second part of the
expression; And tho such like phrases may be used for the Dispensation of the
Messiah in opposition to that of the Law, yet the height of that distinction or
opposition, and the fulfilling of the expression, depends upon the second,
coming of our Savior; and upon the Future Earth or habitable World, where he
shall Reign, and which does peculiarly belong to Him and His Saints.

Neither can this World to come, or this Earth to come, be understood of the
Kingdom of Heaven. For the Greek word will not bear that sense, nor is it ever
used in Scripture for Heaven. Besides, the Kingdom of Heaven, when spoken of as
future, is not properly till the last resurrection and final judgment. Whereas
This World to come, which our Savior is to govern, must be before that time,
and will then expire. For all his Government, as to this World, expires at the
day of Judgment, 1 Cor. ^5. 24, etc.
and he will then deliver up the kingdom into the hands of his father: that he
may be all in all. Having reigned first himself, and put down all rule and all
authority and power. So that S. Paul, in these two places of his Epistles,
refers plainly to the same time and the same reign of Christ: which must be in
a future World, and before the last day of Judgment: and therefore according to
our deductions, in the New Heavens and the New Earth.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Inhabitants of the New Earth. That Natural Reason
cannot determine this point. That according to Scripture; The Sons of the first
Resurrection, or the Heirs of the Millennium, are to be the Inhabitants of the
New Earth. The Testimony of the Philosophers, and of the Christian Fathers, for
the Renovation of the World. The first Proposition laid down.
THUS we have settled the True Notion, according to Reason and Scripture, of the
New Heavens and New Earth. But where are the Inhabitants, you will say? You have
taken the pains to make us a New World, and now that it is made, it must stand
empty. When the first World was destroyed, there were Eight Persons preserved,
with a Set of Living Creatures of every Kind, as a Seminary or foundation of
another World: But the Fire, it seems, is more merciless than the Water; for in
this destruction of the World, it does not appear that there is one living Soul
left, of any sort, upon the face of the Earth. No hopes of posterity, nor of
any continuation of Mankind, in the usual way of propagation. And Fire is a
barren Element, that breeds no living Creatures in it, nor has any nourishment
proper for their food or sustenance.

We are perfectly at a loss, therefore, so far as I see, for a new race of
Mankind, or how to People this new-form'd World. The Inhabitants, if ever there
be any, must either come from Heaven, or spring from the Earth: There are but
these two ways. But Natural Reason can determine neither of these: sees no
tract to follow in these unbeaten paths, nor can advance one step further.
Farewell then, dear Friend, I must take another Guide: and leave you here, as
Moses upon Mount Pisgah, only to look into that Land, which you cannot enter. I
acknowledge the good service you have done, and what a faithful Companion you
have been, in a long journey; from the beginning of the World to this hour, in
a tract of time of six thousand years. We have traveled together through the
dark regions of a First and Second Chaos: seen the World twice shipwrackt.
Neither Water, nor Fire, could separate us. But now you must give place to
other Guides.

Welcome, Holy Scriptures, The Oracles of God, a Light shining in darkness, a
Treasury of hidden Knowledge, and, where humane faculties cannot reach, a
seasonable help and supply to their defects. We are now come to the utmost
bounds of their dominion: They have made us a New World, but, how it shall be
inhabited, they cannot tell: know nothing of the History or affairs of it. This
we must learn from other Masters, inspired with the knowledge of things to
come. And such Masters we know none, but the holy Prophets and Apostles. We
must therefore now put our selves wholly under their conduct and instruction,
and from them only receive our information concerning the moral state of the
future habitable Earth.

In the first place therefore, Isa. 45. 18.
The Prophet Isaiah tells us, as a preparation to our further enquiries, The
Lord God created the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth, He created it
not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited. This is true, both of the present
Earth and the Future, and of every habitable World whatsoever. For to what
purpose is it made habitable, if not to be inhabited? That would be, as if a
man should manure, and plough, and every way prepare his ground for seed, but
never sow it. We do not build houses that they should stand empty, but look out
for Tenants as fast as we can; as soon as they are made ready, and become
Tenantable. But if man could do things in vain and without use or design, yet
God and Nature never do any thing in vain; much less so great a work as the
making of a World. Which if it were in vain, would comprehend ten thousand
vanities or useless preparations in it. We may therefore in the first place,
safely conclude, That the New Earth will be inhabited.

But by whom will it be inhabited? This makes the second enquiry. S. Peter
answers this question for us, and with a particular application to this very
subject of the New Heavens and New Earth. They shall be inhabited, he says, by
the Just or the Righteous. His words, which we cited before, are these. When he
had described the Conflagration of the World, he adds, But we expect New
Heavens and a New Earth, WHEREIN DWELLS RIGHTEOUSNESS. By Righteousness here,
it is generally agreed must be understood Righteous Persons. For Righteousness
cannot be without Righteous Persons: It cannot hang upon Trees, or grow out of
the ground; It Is the endowment of reasonable Creatures. And these Righteous
Persons are eminently such, and therefore called Righteousness in the abstract,
or purely Righteous without mixture of Vice.

So we have found Inhabitants for the New Earth: Persons of an high and noble
Character. Like those described by S. Peter, (1 Ep. 2. 9.) A chosen generation,
a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People. Apoc 21. 27.
As if into that World, as into S. John's New Jerusalem, nothing impure or
unrighteous was to be admitted. These being then the happy and holy
Inhabitants: The next enquiry is, Whence do they come? From what offspring, or
from what Original? We noted before, that there was no remnant of Mankind left
at the Conflgration, as there was at the Deluge: nor any hopes of a
Restoration that way. Shall we then imagine that these New Inhabitants are a
Colony wafted over from some neighboring World: as from the Moon, or Mercury,
or some of the higher Planets. You may imagine what you please, but that seems
to me not imaginary only but impracticable; And that the Inhabitants of those
Planets are Persons of so great accomplishments, is more than I know: but I am
sure they are not the Persons here understood. For these must be such as
inhabited this Earth before. WE look for New Heavens and New Earth, says the
Apostle: Surely to have some share and interest in them; otherwise there would
be no comfort in that expectation. And the Prophet Isaiah said before, I create
New Heavens and a New Earth, and the former shall come no more into
remembrance: But be YOU glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create. The
truth is, none can have so good pretensions to this spot of ground we call the
Earth, as the Sons of Men, seeing they once possessed it. And if it be restored
again, it is their propriety and inheritance. But it is not Mankind in general
that must possess this New World, but the Israel of God, according to the
Prophet Isaiah; or the Just, according to S. Peter. And especially those that
have suffered for the sake of their Religion. For this is that Palingenesia, as
we noted before, that Renovation, or Regeneration of all things, where our
Savior says, Those, that suffer loss for his sake, shall be recompensed: Matt.
19. 28, 29.

But they must then be raised from the Dead. For all Mankind was destroyed at
the Conflagration: and there is no resource for them any other way, Ap^c. 20.
than by a Resurrection. It Is true: and S. John gives us a fair occasion to
make this supposition, That there will be some raised from the Dead, before the
General Day of Judgment. For he plainly distinguishes of a First and Second
Resurrection, and makes the First to be a Thousand Years before the Second, and
before the general Day of Judgment. Now, If there be truly and really a
twofold Resurrection, as St. John tells us; and at a thousand Years distance
from one another: It may be very rationally presumed, that, Those that are
raised in the first Resurrection, are those Just that will inhabit the New
Heavens and new Earth. Or whom our Savior promised to reward in the Renovation
of the World.

For otherwise, who are those Just that shall inhabit the New Earth, and whence
do they come? Or when is that Restoration which our Savior speaks of, wherein
those that suffered for the sake of the Gospel shall be rewarded? St. John
says, the Martyrs, at this first Resurrection, shall live again and reign with
Christ. Which seems to be the reward promised by our Savior, to those that
suffered for his sake: and the same Persons in both places. And I saw the Souls
of them, Apoc. 20. 4.
says St. John, that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word
of God: and which had not worshipped the Beast, etc. and They lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years. These, I say, seem to be the same Persons to whom
Christ had before promised and appropriated a particular reward. And this
rewa^d of theirs, or this Reign of theirs, is upon Earth: upon some Earth, new
or old: not in Heaven. For, besides that we read nothing of their Ascension
into Heaven after their Resurrection: There are several marks that show it must
necessarily be understood of a state upon Earth. For Gog and Magog came from
the four quarters of the Earth, Ver. 9.
and besieged the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City. That Camp and that
City therefore were upon the Earth. And fire came down from Heaven and devoured
them. If it came down from Heaven, it came upon the Earth. Furthermore, those
Persons that are raised from the Dead, are said to be Priests of God and of
Christ, and to reign with him a thousand years. Ver. 6.
Now these must be the same Persons with the Priests and Kings, mentioned in
the Fifth Chapter: Ver. 1^.
which are there said expressly to reign upon Earth, or that they should reign
upon Earth. It remains therefore only to determine, What Earth this is, where
the Sons of the first Resurrection will live and reign. It cannot be the
present Earth, in the same state, and under the same circumstances it is now.
For what happiness or privilege would that be, to be called back into a mortal
life, under the necessities and inconveniences of sickly Bodies, and an
incommodious World? such as the present state of mortality is, and must
continue to be, till some change be made in Nature. We may be sure therefore,
that a change will be made in Nature before that time, and that the state they
are raised into, and the Earth they are to inhabit, will be, at least,
Paradisiacal: And consequently can be no other than the New Heavens and New
Earth, which we are to expect after the Conflagration.

From these Considerations, there is a great fairness to conclude, both as to
the Characters of the Perons, and of the place or state, that the Sons of the
first Resurrection, will be Inhabitants of the New Earth, and reign there with
Christ a thousand years. But seeing this is one of the principal and peculiar
Conclusions of this Discourse, and bears a great part in this last Book of the
Theory of the Earth, it will deserve a more full explication, and a more ample
proof, to make it out. We must therefore take a greater compass in our
discourse, and give a full account of that State which is usually called the
Millennium: The Reign of the Saints a thousand years, or the Kingdom of Christ
upon Earth. But before we enter upon this new Subject, give me leave to close
our present Argument, about the Renovation of the World, with some Testimonies
of the Ancient Philosophers, to that purpose. It Is plain to me, that there were
amongst the Ancients several Traditions, or traditionary conclusions, which
they did not raise themselves, by reason and observation, but received them
from an unknown Antiquity. An instance of this is the Conflagration of the
World: A Doctrine, as ancient, for any thing I know, as the World it self. At
least as ancient as we have any Records. And yet none of those Ancients that
tell us of it, give any argument to prove it. Neither is it any wonder, for
they did not invent it themselves, but received it from others without proof,
by the sole authority of Tradition. In like manner the Renovation of the World,
which we are now speaking of, is an ancient Doctrine: both amongst the Greeks
and Eastern Philosophers: But they show us no method how the World may be
renewed, nor make any proof of its future Renovation; For it was not a
discovery which they first made, but received it, with an implicit faith, from
their Masters and Ancestors. And these Traditionary Doctrines were all
forerunners of that Light that was to shine more clearly at the opening of the
Christian dispensation; to give a more full account of the fate and revolutions
of the Natural World, as well as of the Moral.

The Jews, it is well known, held the Renovation of the World, and a Sabbath
after six thousand years: according to the Prophecy that was current amongst
them, whereof we have given a larger account in the precedent Book, chapter 5. And
that future state they called Olam Hava,.(...)
or the World to come, which is the very same with St. Paul's Habitable Earth
to come, Heb. 2. 6. Neither can I easily believe, that those constitutions of
Moses that proceed so much upon a Septenary, or the number Seven, and have no
ground or reason, in the nature of the thing, for that particular number: I
cannot easily believe, I say, that they are either accidental or humoursome:
without design or signification. But that they are typical, or representative
of some Septenary state, that does eminently deserve and bear that Character.
Moses, in the History of the Creation, makes six days work, and then a Sabbath.
Then, after six years, he makes a Sabbath-year: and after a Sabbath of years a
year of Jubilee, Levit. 25. All these lesser revolutions seem to me to point at
the grand Revolution, the great Sabbath or Iubilee, after six Millenaries,
which as it answers the type in point of time, so likewise in the nature and
contents of it: Being a state of Rest from all labor and trouble and
servitude: a state of joy and triumph: and a state of Renovation, when things
are to return to their first condition and pristine order. So much for the Jews.

The Heathen Philosophers, both Greeks and Barbarians, had the same doctrine of
the Renovation of the World, current amongst them. And that under several names
and phrases; as of the Great Year, the Restoration, the Mundane periods, and
such like. They supposed stated and fixed periods of time, upon expiration
whereof there would always follow some great, revolution of the World, and the
face of Nature would be renewed. Particularly after the Conflagration, the
Stoics always supposed a new World to succeed, or another frame of Nature to
be erected in the room of that which was destroyed. And they use the same words
and phrases upon this occasion that Scripture uses; Lact. l. 7. c. 23.
Chrysippus calls it Apocatastalis, as St. Peter does, Act. 3. 21. Marcus
Antoninus in his Meditations* several times calls it Palingenesia, as our
Savior does, Mat. 19. 28. And Numenius has two Scripture-words, Eusebius. prap.
Resurrection and Restitution, Ev. l. 7. c. 23.
to express this renovation of the World. Then as to the Platonicks, that
Revolution of all things, has commonly been called the Platonic year, as if
Plato had been the first author of that opinion; But that is a great mistake; he
received it from the Barbarick Philosophers, and particularly from the
Egyptian Priests, amongst whom he lived several years, to be instructed in
their learning. But I do not take Plato neither to be the first that brought
this doctrine into Greece: for, besides that the Sibylls, whose antiquity we do
not well know, sung this Song of o^d, as we see it copyed from them by Virgil
in his fourth Eclogue; Pythagoras taught it before Plato: and Orpheus before
them both. And that is as high as the Greek Philosophy reaches.

The Barbarick Philosophers were more ancient: namely the Egyptians, Persians,
Chaldeans, Indian Brackmans, and other Eastern Nations. Their Monuments indeed
are in a great measure lost, yet from the remains of them which the Greeks have
transcribed, and so preserved, in their writings, we see plainly they all had
this doctrine of the Future Renovation. And to this day the posterity of the
Brackmans in the East Indies, retain the same notion, That the World will be
renewed after the last Fire. You may see the citations, if you please, for all
these Nations, in the Latin Treatise, Chapter 5. Which I thought would be too dry
and tedious to be rendered into English.

To these Testimonies of the Philosophers of all Ages, for the Future
Renovation of the World, we might add the Testimonies of the Christian Fathers:
Greek and Latin, ancient and modern. I will only give you a bare List of them,
and refer you to the Latin Treatise for the words or the places. Chap. 9.
Amongst the Greek Fathers, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origin; The Fathers of the
Council of Nice, Eusebius, Basil; The two Cyrils, of Jerusalem and Alexandria;
The two Gregorys, Nazianzen and Nyssen; S. Chrysostom, Zacharias Mitylenensis;
and of later date, Damascen, Oecumenius, Euthymius, and others. These have all
set their hands and Seals to this Doctrine. Of the Latin Fathers, Tertullian,
Lactantius, S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, S. Jerome; and many later
Ecclesiastical Authors. These, with the Philosophers before mentioned, I count
good authority, Sacred and Profane: which I place here as an out-guard upon
Scripture, where our principal force lies. And these three united and acting in
conjunction, will be sufficient to secure this first post, and to prove our
first Proposition, Propos. ^.
which is this: That after the Conflagration of this World, there will be New
Heavens and a New Earth: and that Earth will be inhabited.

CHAP. IV. The proof of a Millennium, or of a blessed Age to come, from
Scripture. A view of the Apocalypse, and of the Prophecies of Daniel, in
reference to this Kingdom of Christ and of his Saints.
WE have given fair presumptions, if not proofs, in the precedent Chapter, That
the Sons of the first Resurrection will be the persons that shall inhabit the
New Earth, or the World to come. But to make that proof complete and
unexceptionable, I told you it would be necessary to take a larger compass in
our discourse, and to examine what is meant by That Reign with Christ a
thousand years, which is promised to the Sons of the First Resurrection; by St.
John in the Apocalypse; and in other places of Scripture is usually called the
Kingdom of Christ, and the reign of the Saints. And by Ecclesiastical Authors,
in imitation of S. John, it is commonly styled the Millennium. We shall
indifferently use any of these words or phrases; and examine, First, the truth
of the Notion and Opinion; whether in Scripture there be such an happy state
promised to the Saints, under the conduct of Christ. And then we will proceed
to examine the nature, characters, place and time of it. And I am in hopes when
these things are duly discussed and stated, you will be satisfied that we have
found out the true Inhabitants of the New Heavens and New Earth: and the true
mystery of that state which is called the Millennium, or the Reign of Christ
and of his Saints.

We begin with S. John; whose words, in the twentieth Chapter of the
Apocalypse, are express, both as to the first Resurrection, and as to the reign
of those Saints, that rise, with Christ, for a thousand years. Satan in the
mean time being bound, or disabled from doing mischief and seducing mankind.
The words of the Prophet are these, Ver. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6.
And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old
Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan; and bound him a thousand years. And I
saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I
saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not
again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first Resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the
second death has no power, but they shall be priests of God, and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years. These words do fully express a
Resurrection, and a reign with Christ a thousand years. As for that particular
space of time, of a thousand years, it is not much material to our present
purpose: but the Resurrection here spoken of, and the reign with Christ, make
the substance of the controversy, and in effect prove all that we enquire
after at present. This Resurrection, you see, is called the First Resurrection,
by way of distinction from the Second and general Resurrection; which is to be
placed a thousand years after the First. And both this First Resurrection and
the Reign of Christ, seem to be appropriated to the Martyrs in this place. For
the Prophet says, The Souls of those that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, etc. They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. From which
words, if you please, we will raise this Doctrine: That, Those that have
suffered for the sake of Christ and a good Conscience, shall be raised from the
dead a thousand years before the general Resurrection, and reign with Christ in
an happy state. This Proposition seems to be plainly included in the words of
S. John, and to be the intended sense of this Vision; but you must have
patience a little as to your enquiry into particulars, till, in the progress of
our discourse, we have brought all the parts of this conclusion into a fuller
light.

In the mean time* there is but one way, that I know of, to evade the force of
these words, and of the conclusion drawn from them; and that is by supposing
that the First Resurrection here mentioned, is not to be understood in a
literal sense, but is Allegorical and mystical; signifying only a Resurrection
from sin to a Spiritual Life. As we are said to be dead in sin, and to be risen
with Christ, by Faith and Regeneration. This is a manner of Speech which S.
Paul does sometimes use: as Ephesians. 2. 6. and 5. 14. and Col. 3. 1. But how can
this be applied to the present case? Were the Martyrs dead in sin? It Is they
that are here raised from the dead. Or, after they were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, naturally dead and laid in their graves, were they then
regenerate by Faith? There is no congruitiy in allegories so applied. Besides,
Why should they be said to be regenerate a thousand years before the day of
Judgment: Or, to reign with Christ, after this Spiritual Resurrection, such a
limited time, a Thousand Years? Why not to Eternity? For in this allegorical
sense of rising and reigning, they will reign with him for everlasting. Then,
after a Thousand Years must all the wicked be regenerate, and rise into a
Spiritual Life? It Is said here, The rest of the Dead lived not again, ver. 5.
until the thousand years were finished. That implies, that at the end of these
thousand years, the rest of the dead did live again; which, according to the
Allegory must be, that, after a thousand years, all the wicked will be
regenerate, and raised into a Spiritual Life. These absurdities arise upon an
allegorical exposition of this Resurrection, if applied to single Persons.

But Dr. Hammond, a Learned and worthy Divine, (but one that loves to contract
and cramp the sense of Prophecies) making this First Resurrection allegorical,
applies it not to single Persons, but to the state of the Church in general;
The Christian Church, he says, shall have a Resurrection for a thousand years:
that is, shall rise out of Persecution, be in a prosperous condition, and an
undisturbed profession of the true Religion, for so long a time. But this
agrees with the Prophecy as little as the former; If it be a state of the
Church in general, and of the Church then in being, why is this Resurrection
applied to the Martyrs? Why are they said to rise? seeing the state they lived
in, was a troublesome state of the Church, and it would be no happiness to have
that revived again. Then as to the Time of this Resurrection of the Church,
where will you fix it? The Prophet Daniel places this Reign of Christ, at, or
after the dissolution of the fourth Monarchy and S. John places it a thousand
years before the last Day of Judgment: How will you adjust the Allegorical
Resurrection of the Church to these limits? Or if, in point of time, you was
free, as to Prophecy; yet how would you adjust it to History? Where will you
take these thousand years of happiness and prosperity to the Church? These
Authors suppose them past, and therefore must begin them either from the first
times of the Gospel, or from the time of Constantine. Under the first Ages of
the Gospel, were, you know, the great Persecutions by the Heathen Emperors:
Could those be called the Reign of Christ and of His Saints? Was Satan then
bound? or was this Epocl^a but a thousand years before the Day of Judgment? And
if you begin this Resurrection of the Church from the days of Constantine, when
the Empire became Christian, how will you reckon a thousand years from that
time, for the continuance of the Church in peace and purity? for the reign of
Christ and of his Saints must necessarily imply both those Characters. Besides,
who are the rest of the Dead, ver. 5.
that lived after the expiration of those thousand years, if they begun at
Constantine? And why is not the Second Resurrection and the Day of Judgment yet
come? Lastly, You ought to be tender of interpreting the First Resurrection in
an Allegorical sense, left you expose the second Resurrection to be made an
allegory also.

To conclude, The words of the Text are plain and express for a literal
Resurrection, as to the First, as well as the Second; and there is no
Allegorical interpretation that I know of, that will hold through all the
particulars of the Text, consistently with it self and with History. And when
we shall have proved this future Kingdom of Christ from other places of the
Apocalypse, and of Holy Writ, you will the more easily admit the literal sense
of this place: Which, you know, according to the received rule of Interpreters,
is never to be quitted or forsaken, without necessity. But when I speak of
confirming this Doctrine from other passages of Scripture, I do not mean as to
that definite time of a thousand years, for that is no where else mentioned in
the Apocalypse or in Scripture, that I know of; and seems to be mentioned here,
in this close of all things, to mind us of that type that was proposed in the
beginning of all things, Of Six days and a Sabbath. Whereof each Day
Comprehends a thousand years, and the Sabbath, which is the Millennial state,
has its thousand. According to the known Prophecy of Elias, Book 3. chapter 5.
which, as I told you before, was not only received amongst the Jews, but also
owned by very many of the Christian Fathers.

To proceed therefore to other parts of S. Iohn' s Prophecies, that set forth
this Kingdom of Christ. The Vision of the Seven Trumpets is one of the most
remarkable in the Apocalypse; and the Seventh Trumpet, which plainly reaches to
the end of the World, and the Resurrection of the Dead, opens the Scene to the
Millennium. Chapter 11. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Hear the sound of it. The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices
in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ^ver. And the four and
twenty Elders, which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon their faces, and
worshipped God: Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art,
and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power and
have reigned. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time
of the Dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward
unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name,
small and great, and should destroy them that destroy the Earth, etc. This
is manifestly the Kingdom of Christ: and with this is joined the Resurrection
of the Dead, and the rewarding of the suffering Prophets and Saints; as in the
20th. Chapter. This is that mystery of God that was to be finished in the days
of the voice of the seventh Angel: as is said in the 20th. Chap. ver. 7. As he
has declared to his servants the Prophets. Namely, the mystery of this
Kingdom, which was foretold by the Prophets of the Old Testament: and more
especially by Daniel, as we shall see hereafter.

The New Jerusalem, (as it is set down, Apoc. 21. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.) is another
instance or image of this Kingdom of Christ. And the Palm-bearing Company,
Chap. 7. 9, etc. are some of the Martyrs that shall enjoy it. They are plainly
described there as Christian Martyrs; (ver. 14.) And their reward, or the state
of happiness they are to enjoy, (ver. 15, 16, 17.) is the same with that of the
Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem: Chapter 21. 2, 3, 4, etc. as, upon comparing
those two places, will easily appear. Furthermore, at the opening of the Seals,
Chap. 5. which is another principal Vision, and reaches to the end of the
World, there is a prospect given us of this Kingdom of Christ, and of that
reward of his Saints. For when they sing the new Song to the Lamb, (ver. 9,
10.) they say, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof:
For thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood. And have made us
unto our God Kings and Priests: and we shall reign on the Earth. This must be
the same state, and the same thousand-years-reign mentioned in the 20th.
Chapter. Where it is said, (ver. 6.) the partakers of it shall be Priests of
God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

Another completory Vision, that extends it self to the end of the World, is
that of the seven Vials, Chapter 15, and 16. And as at the opening of the Seals, so
at the pouring out of the Vials, a triumphal Song is sung, chapter 15. 3.
and it is called the Song of Moses and of the Lamb. It Is plainly a Song of
Thanksgiving for a Deliverance: but I do not look upon this deliverance as
already wrought, before the pouring out of the Vials, though it be placed
before them: as often the grand design and issue of a Vision is placed at the
beginning. It is wrought by the Vials themselves, and by their effusion, and
therefore upon the pouring out of the last Vial. The Voice came out of the
Temple of Heaven, chapter 16. 17.
from the Throne, saying, Consummatum est: It is done. Now the Deliverance is
wrought, now the work is at an end: or, The mystery of God is finished, as the
phrase was before, concerning the 7th. Trumpet: Chapter 10. 7. You see therefore
this terminates upon the same time, and consequently upon the same state, of
the Millennium. And that they are the same Persons that triumph here, and reign
there, Chapter 20. You may see by the same Characters given to both of them. chapter
15. 2.
Here, those that triumph, are said to have gotten the victory over the Beast,
and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name. chapter 20.
4.
And there, Those that reign with Christ, are said to be those that had not
worshipped the Beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands. These are the same Persons therefore,
triumphing over the same Enemies, and enjoying the same reward.

And you shall seldom find any Doxology or Hallelujah in the Apocalypse, but
it is in prospect of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Millennial state. That is
still the burden of the Sacred Song: The complement of every grand Vision, and
the life and strength of the whole Systeme of Prophecies in that Book. Even
those Halleluja's that are sung at the destruction of Babylon, chapter 19. 6, 7.
in the 19th. Chapter, are raised upon the view of the succeeding state, the
Reign of Christ. For the Text says, And I heard as it were a voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunders, saying, Hallelujah. FOR THE LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNS. Let us be
glad and rejoice and give honor to him: FOR THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME,
AND HIS WIFE HAS MADE HER SELF READY. This appears plainly to be the New
Jerusalem, if you consult the 21th. chapter ver. 2. And I John saw the Holy City,
New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven, PREPARED AS A BRIDE ADORNED
FOR HER HUSBAND. It Is, no doubt, the same Bride and Bridegroom, in both places;
the same marriage or preparations for marriage; which are completed in the
Millennial bliss, in the Kingdom of Christ and of his Saints.

I must still beg your patience a little longer, in pursuing this argument
throughout the Apocalypse. As toward the latter end of S. John's Revelation
this Kingdom of Christ shines out in a more full glory, so there are the
dawnings of it in the very beginning and entrance into his Prophecies. As at
the beginning of a Poem, we have commonly in a few words the design of the
Work, in like manner S. John makes this Preface to his Prophecies, chapter 1. 5, 6.
From Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the first begotten of the
dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood: And has made us Kings and Priests
unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.
Behold, he comes in the clouds, etc. In this Prologue the grand argument is
pointed at, and that happy Catastrophe and last Scene which is to crown the
Work: The Reign of Christ and of his Saints at his second coming. He has made
us Kings and Priests unto God: This is always the Characteristick of those that
are to enjoy the Millennial Happiness, as you may see at the opening of the
Seals, chapter 5. 10. and in the Sons of the First Resurrection, chapter 20. 6. And
this being joined to the coming of our Savior, puts it still more out of
doubt. That expression also, of being washed from our sins in his blood, is
repeated again both at the opening of the Seals, Chap. 5. 9. and in the
Palm-bearing Company, Chap. 7. 14. both which places we have cited before as
referring to the Millennial State.

Give me leave to add further, that as in this general Preface, so also in the
Introductory visions of the Seven Churches, there are, covertly or expressly, in
the conclusion of each, glances upon the Millennium. Chapter 2. 7.
As in the first to Ephesus, the Prophet concludes, He that has an ear, let
him hear, what the Spirit says to the Churches: TO HIM THAT OVERCOMES WILL I
GIVE TO FAT OF THE TREE OF LIFE, WHICH IS IN THE MIDST OF THE PARADISE OF GOD.
This is the Millennial happiness which is promised to the Conqueror; as we
noted before concerning that phrase. In like manner in the second to Smyrna,
Chapter 2. 11.
He concludes: He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death. This
implies, he shall be partaker of the first Resurrection, for that is the thing
understood; as you may see plainly by their being joined in the 20th. Chapter ver.
6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the
second death has no power: but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years. Chapter 2. 17.
In the 3d to Pergamus, the Promise is, to eat of the hidden Manna, to have a
white stone, and a new name written in it. But seeing the Prophet adds, which
no man knows saving he that receives it, we will not presume to interpret
that new state, Chapter 2. 26, 27.
whatsoever it is. In Thyatira, the reward is, To have power over the Nations,
and to have the Morning Star. Which is to reign with Christ, who is the Morning
Star, in his Millennial Empire: both these phrases being used in that sense in
the close of this Book. Chapter 3. 5.
In Sardis the promise is, To be clothed in white raiment, and not to be
blotted out of the Book of Life. And you see afterward the Palm-bearing
Company are clothed in white robes; Chapter 7. 9, 14.
and those that are admitted into the New Jerusalem, Chapter 3. 12.
are such as are written in the Lamb's book of life, Chapter 21. 27. Then as to
Philadelphia, the reward promised there does openly mark the Millennial state,
by the City of God, New Jerusalem which comes down out of Heaven from God:
compared with Chap. 21. 2. Lastly, Chapter 3. 21.
to the Church of Laodicea is said, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne. And that is the usual phrase to express the dignity of
those that reign with Christ, in his Millennial Kingdom: as you may see, Apoc.
20. 4. Mat. 19. 28. Dan. 7. 9, 13, 14. So all these promises to the Churches
aim at one and the same thing, and terminate upon the same point; It Is the same
reward expressed in different ways; and seeing it is still fixed upon a victory,
and appropriated to those that overcome, it does the more easily carry our
thoughts to the Millennium, which is the proper reward of Victors, that is, of
Martyrs and Confessors.

Thus you see how this notion and mystery of the Millennial Kingdom of Christ,
does both begin and end the Apocalypse, and run thorough all its parts: As the
Soul of that Body of Prophecies: A Spirit or ferment that actuates the whole
mass. And if we could thoroughly understand that illustrious Scene at the
opening of this Apocalyptical Theater in the 4th. and 5th. Chap. I do not doubt
but we should find it a Representation of the Majesty of our Savior in the
Glory of his future Kingdom. But I dare not venture upon the explication of it,
there are so many things of difficult and dubious interpretation, coucht under
those Schemes. Wherefore having made these observations upon the Prophecies of
St. John, we will now add to them some reflections upon the Prophecies of
Daniel. That by the agreement and concurrence of these two great Witnesses, the
Conclusion we pretend to prove, may be fully established.

In the Prophecies of Daniel there are two grand Visions, that of the Statue or
Image, Chap. 2. and that of the four Beats, Chap. 7. And both these Visions
terminate upon the Millennium, or the Kingdom of Christ. In the Vision of the
Statue, representing to us the four great Monarchies of the World successively,
(whereof, by the general consent of Interpreters, The Roman is the fourth and
last) after the dissolution of the last of them, a fifth Monarchy, the Kingdom
of Christ, is openly introduced, in these words: And in the days of these
kingdoms, Chapter 2. v. 44.
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and
the kingdom shall be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces, and
consume all those kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. This may be verified,
in some measure, by the first coming of our Savior in the days of the 4th.
Kingdom; when his Religion from small beginnings, in a short time overspread
the greatest part of the known World. Ver. 34, 35.
As the stone cut out without hands, became a great mountain and filled the
whole Earth. But the full and final accomplishment of this Prophecy cannot be
till the second coming of our Savior. For not till then, will he break in
pieces and consume all those kingdoms; Ver. 35.
and that in such a manner, that they shall become like the chaff of the Summer
threshing floor, carried away by the wind: so as no place shall be found for
them. This, I say, will not be done, nor an everlasting Kingdom erected in
their place, over all the Nations of the Earth, till his Second Coming, and his
Millennial Reign.

But this Reign is declared more expressly, in the Vision of the four Beasts,
Chap. 7. For after the destruction of the fourth Beast, the Prophet says, Chapter
7. 13.
I saw in the night, Visions, and behold one like the Son of man, came with the
clouds of heaven* and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him: And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that
all people, nations, and languages should serve him: His dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away: and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed. Accordingly he says, ver. 21, 22. The last Beast and
the little Horn made war against the Saints, until the Ancient of days came,
and judgment was given to the Saints of the most High; and the time came that
the Saints possessed the kingdom. And lastly, in pursuit still of the same
argument, he concludes to the same effect in fuller words, ver. 26, 27. But the
Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to
destroy it unto the end. And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most High: whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.

Here is the end of the matter: Chapter 7. 28.
says the Prophet. Here is the upshot and result of all. Chapter 12. 13.
Here terminate both the Prophecies of Daniel and St. John: and all the affairs
of the Terrestrial World. Daniel brings in this kingdom of Christ, in the
conclusion of two or three Visions; but St. John has interwoven it every where
with his Prophecies, from first to last. And you may as well open a Lock
without a Key, as interpret the Apocalypse without the Millennium. But after
these two great Witnesses, the one for the Old Testament, the other for the
New, we must look into the rest of the Sacred Writers; for though every single
Author there, is an Oracle, yet the concurrence of Oracles is still a further
demonstration, and takes away all remains of doubt or incredulity.

CHAP. V. A View of other places of Scripture concerning the Millennium or
future Kingdom of Christ. In what sense all the Prophets have born Testimony
concerning it.
THE Wife of Zebedee came to our Savior, Mat. 20. 21.
and begged of him, like a fond Mother, that her two Sons might sit, one at his
right hand, the other at his left, when he came into his Kingdom. Our Savior
does not deny the supposition, or general ground of her request, that he was to
have a Kingdom; but tells her, The honors of that Kingdom were not then in his
disposal. He had not drunk his Cup, nor been baptized with his last Baptism:
which were conditions, both to him and others, of entering into that Kingdom.
Yet, Mat. 19. 28.
in another place, our Savior is so well assured of his interest and authority
there, by the good will of his Father, that he promises to his Disciples and
followers, that for the losses they should sustain here, upon his account, and
for the sake of his Gospel, they should receive there an hundred fold; and sit
upon Thrones with him, judging the Tribes of Israel. The words are these: And
Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me, in
the Regeneration or Renovation, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. These Thrones, in all reason, must be understood to be the same with
those which we mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, Dan. 7. 9.
out of Daniel and the Apocalypse: and therefore mark the same time and the
same state. Apoc. 20. 4.
And seeing, in those places, they plainly signified the Millennial state, or
the Kingdom of Christ and of his Saints, they must here signify the same, in
this promise of our Savior to his suffering Followers. And as to the word
Palingenesia, which is here translated Regeneration, it is very well known,
that, both the Greek Philosophers, and Greek Fathers, use that very word for
the Renovation of the World. Which is to be, as we shall hereafter make appear,
at or before the Millennial state.

Our Savior also, in his Divine Sermon upon the Mount, makes this one of his
Beatitudes, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. But how, I
pray, or where, or when, do the Meek inherit the Earth? neither at present, I
am sure, nor in any past Ages. It Is the Great Ones of the World, ambitious
Princes and Tyrants, that slice the Barth amongst them: and those that can
flatter them best, or serve them in their interests or pleasures, have the next
best shares. But a meek, modest, and humble Spirit, is the most unqualified
Person that can be for a Court, or a Camp: to scramble for Preferment, or
Plund^r. Both He, and his self-denying notions, are ridiculed, as things of no
use, and proceeding from meanness and poorness of Spirit. David, who was a
Person of an admirable devotion, but of an unequal Spirit; subject to great
dejections, as well as elevations of mind; was so much affected with the
prosperity of the wicked in this World, that he could scarce forbear charging
Providence with injustice. You may see several touches of a repining Spirit in
his Psalms: and in the Seventy-third Psalm, composed upon that Subject, you
have both the wound and the cure. Now this Bea^it^de pronounced here by our
Savior, was spoken before by David, psalm. 37. 11. The same David that was
always so sensible of the hard usage of the Just in this life. Our Savior
also, and his Apostles, preach the Doctrine of the Cross every where, and
foretell the sufferings that shall attend the Righteous, in this World.
Therefore neither David, nor our Savior, could understand this inheritance of
the Earth, otherwise than of some future state, or of a state yet to come. But
as it must be a future state, so it must be a Terrestrial state; for it could
not be called the inheritance of the Earth, if it was not so. And it is to be a
state of peace, as well as plenty, according to the words of the Psalmist, But
the meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance
of peace. It follows therefore from these premises, that, both our Savior,
and David, must understand some future state of the Earth, wherein the Meek
will enjoy both peace and plenty. And this will appear to be the future Kingdom
of Christ, when, upon a fuller description, we shall have given you the marks
and characters of it.

In the mean time, why should we not suppose, this Earth, which the Meek are to
inherit, to be that habitable Earth to come, which St. Paul mentions (Hebr. 2.
6.) and represents as subject to our Savior in a pecuilar manner: at his
disposal and under his Government, as his Kingdom: Why should not that Earth be
the subject of this Beatitude: The promised Land, the Lot of the Righ^eous?
This I am sure of, that both this Text and the former deserve our serious
thoughts; and though they do not expressly, and in terms, prove the future Kingdom
of our Savior, yet upon the fairest interpretations they imply such a state.
And it will be very uneasy to give a satisfactory account, either of the
Regeneration or Renovation, when our Savior and his Disciples shall sit upon
Thrones: Or of that Earth which the Meek shall inherit: Or lastly, of that
Habitable World, which is peculiarly subject to the dominion of Jesus Christ,
without supposing, on this side Heaven, some other reign of Christ and his
Saints, than what we see, or what they enjoy, at present.

But to proceed in this argument. It will be necessary, as I told you, to set
down some notes and characters of this Reign of Christ and of his Saints,
whereby it may be distinguished from the present state, and present Kingdoms of
the World. And these characters are chiefly three, Justice, Peace, and Divine
Presence or Conduct, which uses to be called Theocrasie. By these characters it
is sufficiently distinguished from the Kingdoms of this World; which are
generally unjust in their titles or exercise: stained with blood: and so far
from being under a particular Divine Conduct, that humane passions and humane
vices* are the Springs that commonly give motion to their greatest designs. But
more particularly and restrainedly, the Government of Christ, is opposed to the
Kingdom and Government of Antichrist, whose characters are diametrically
opposite to these, being Injustice, cruelty, and humane or diabolical artifices.

Upon this short view of the Kingdom of Christ, let us make enquiry after it
amongst the Prophets of the Old Testament. And we shall find, upon examination,
that there is scarce any of them, greater or lesser, but take notice of this
mystical kingdom; either expressly, or under the types of Israel, Sion,
Jerusalem, and such like. And therefore I am apt to think, that, when S. Peter
in his Sermon to the Jews, Act. 3. says, All the holy Prophets spoke of The
Restitution of all things, he does not mean the Renovation of the World
separately from the Kingdom of Christ, but complexly, as it may imply both.
For there are not many of the old Prophets that have spoken of the Renovation
of the Natural World; but a great many have spoken of the Renovation of the
Moral, in the Kingdom of Christ. These are S. Peter's words: Act. 3. 19, 20,
21. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he
shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto ye: whom the heavens
must receive until the times of RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS. The Apostle here
mentions three things, The Times of refreshing, The Second Coming of our
Savior, And the Times of Restitution of all things. And to the last of these
he immediately subjoyns, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets, since the world began. This Restitution of all things, I say, must
not be understood abstractly from the reign of Christ, but as in conjunction
with it; and in that sense, and no other, it is the general subject of the
Prophets.

To enter therefore into the Schools of the Prophets, and enquire their sense
concerning this Mystery, let us first address our selves to the Prophet Isaiah,
and the Royal Prophet David; who seem to have had many noble thoughts, or
inspirations, upon this subject. Isaiah in the 65th chap. from the 17th ver. to
the end, treats upon this argument: and joins together the Renovation of the
Natural and Moral World; as S. Peter, in the place forementioned, seems to do.
And accordingly the Prophet, having set down several natural characters of that
State, as indolency and joy, longevity, ease, and plenty, from ver. 18. to the
24th. He there begins the moral characters, of divine favor, and such a
particular protection, that they are heard and answered before they pray. And
lastly, He represents it as a state of universal peace and innocence, ver. 23.
The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, etc.

This last character, which comprehends Peace, Justice, and Innocence, is more
fully displayed by the same Prophet, in the 11th. chap. where he treats also of
the Kingdom of Christ. Give me leave to set down his words, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. But with Righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for
the meek of the Earth: and he shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness
shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. The
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid: and the Calf and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones
shall lie down together: and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. And the
suckling ohbild shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the Cockatrice-den. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my
holy mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea. Thus far the Prophet: Now if we join this to what we
noted before, from his 65th. chap. concerning the same state, 'twill be
impossible to understand it of any order of things, that is now, or has been
hitherto in the World. And consequently it must be the Idea of some state to
come, and particularly of that which we call the Future Kingdom of Christ.

The same pacifick temper, Innocence and Justice, are celebrated by this
Prophet when the Mountain of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, chap. 2. 2, 4. And he shall judge amongst the nations, and shall
rebuke many people; and they shall heat their swords into plow-shares, and
their spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn war any more. And as to righteousness, he says in the
23. chap. Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
judgment, etc. These places, I know, usually are applied to the first coming of
our Savior; the peaceableness of his doctrine, and the propagation of it
through all the World. I willingly allow this to be a true sense, so far as it
will go. But it is one thing to be a true sense, to such a degree; and another
thing to be the final sense and accomplishment of a Prophecy. The affairs of
the first and second coming of our Savior are often mingled together in the
Prophecies of the Old Testament; but in that mixture there are some characters
whereby you may distinguish what belongs to his first, and what to his second
coming; what to the time when he came to suffer, and what to the time when he
shall come to reign. For instance, In these Prophecies recited, though there
are many things very applicable to his first coming, yet that Regality which is
often spoken of, and that universal Peace and Innocence that will accompany it,
cannot be verified of his coming in the flesh. Seeing it is plain, that in his
state of humiliation he did not come as a King, to rule over the Nations of the
Earth. Mat^. 20. 21.
And he says himself expressly, That his Kingdom is not of this World, Luke 23.
42.
John 18. 36. And the Prayer of Salome, and of the good Thief upon the Cross,
suppose it not then present, but to come. Then as to the establishment of Peace
in his Kingdom, it does not at all appear to me that there is more Peace in the
World now than there was before our Savior came into it; or that the Christian
parts of the World are more peaceable than the unchristian. Therefore these
great promises of a Pacifick Kingdom, which are expressed in terms as high and
emphatical as can be imagined, must belong to some other days, and some other
ages, than what we have seen hitherto.

You Will say, it may be, it is not the fault of the Gospel that the World is not
peaceable, but of those that profess it, and do not practice it. This is true,
but it does not answer the Prophecy; for that makes no such exception. And by
such a reserve as this, you may elude any Prophecy. So the Jews say, Their
Messiah defers his coming beyond the time appointed by Prophecy, because of
their sins: but we do not allow this for a good reason. The Israelites had
their promised Canaan, though they had rendered themselves unworthy of it; and by
this method of interpreting Prophecies, all the happiness and glory promised in
the Millennial Kingdom of Christ may come to nothing, upon a pretended
forfeiture. Threatenings indeed may have a tacit condition; God may be better
than his word, and, upon repentance, divert his judgments; but he cannot be
worse than his word, or fail of performance, when, without any condition
expressed, he promises or prophesies good things to come. This would destroy all
assurance of Hope or Faith. Lastly, This Prophecy concerning Pacifick times or
a Pacifick Kingdom, Isa. 65.
is in the 65th. chap. subjoined to the Renovation of the Heavens and the
Earth, and several marks of a change in the Natural World; which things we know
did not come to pass at the first coming of our Savior: there was no change of
Nature then, nor has been ever since. And therefore this happy change, both in
the Natural and Moral World, is yet to come.

But, as we said before, we do not speak this exclusively of the first coming
of our Savior, as to other parts of these Prophecies; for no doubt that was
one great design of them. And in the Prophecies of the Old Testament, there are
often three gradations, or gradual accomplishments; The first, in some King of
Israel, or some Person or affair relating to Israel, as National only. The
second, in the Messiah at his first coming. And the last, in the Messiah, and
his Kingdom at his second coming. And that which we affirm and contend for, is,
that the Prophecies forementioned have not a final and total accomplishment,
either in the Nation of the Jews, or at the first coming of our Savior. And
this we bide by.

The next Prophet that we mentioned as a witness of the future Kingdom of
Christ, is David. Who, in his Psalms, seems to be pleased with this subject
above all others; And when he is most exalted in his thoughts and Prophetical
raptures, the Spirit carries him into the Kingdom of the Messiah, to
contemplate its glory, to sing praises to its King, and triumph over his
Enemies: Psalm. 68. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: Let them also
that hate him fly before him. As Smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as
wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
But let the Righteous be glad, etc. The plain ground he goes upon in this
Psalm, is the Deliverance out of Egypt, and bringing the Israelites unto the
Land of Canaan; Ver. 18.
But when he is once upon the wing, he soars to an higher pitch: from the type
to the Antitype: To the days of the Messiah, Ver. 32, etc.
the Ascension of our Savior; and, at length, to his Kingdom and Dominion over
all the Earth. The 45th. Psalm is an Epithalamium to Christ and the Church, or
to the Lamb and his Spouse. And when that will be, and in what state, we may
learn from S. John, Apoc. 19. 7, 8. and chapter 21. 2, 9. Namely, after the
destruction of Babylon, in the New Jerusalem glory. The words and matter of the
two Prophets answer to one another; Here, in this Psalm, there is a Fight and
Victory celebrated as well as a Marriage: and so there is in that 19th. Chapter
of S. John. Ps. 45. 3, 4, 6.
Here, the Prophet says, G^rd thy sword upon thy thigh, O most Mighty, with thy
glory and thy Majesty. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of truth
and meekness and righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; The Scepter of thy Kingdom is
a right Scepter, Apoc. 19. 15, 16.
etc. There S. John says, having described a Conqueror on a white Horse, Out
of his mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the Nations: and
he shall rule them with a rod of Iron: and he treads the Wine Press of the
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he has on his vesture, and on his
thigh a Name written KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS. This is the same
glorious Conqueror and Bridegroom in both places: and this Victory is not
gained, nor these Nuptials completed till the second coming of our Savior.

In many other Psalms, there are reflections upon this happy Kingdom, and the
triumph of Christ over his Enemies: as Psalm. 2. Psalm. 9. Psalm. 21. and 24. and
47. and 85. and 110. and others. In these, and such like Psalms, there are
lineaments and colors of a fairer state, than any we have yet seen upon Earth.
Not but that in their first instan^es and grounds they may sometimes respect
the state of Israel, or the Evangelical state: but the eye of the Prophet goes
further, this does not terminate his sight: His Divine Enthusiasm reaches into
another World: A World of Peace and Justice, and Holiness: of Joy, and Victory,
and Trumph over all the wicked: and consequently such a World, as neither we,
nor our Fathers, have yet seen.

This is an account of Two Prophets, David and Isaiah: and of what they have
more openly declared concerning the future Kingdom of Christ. But to verify S.
Peter's words, in that forementioned place, Act. 3. 21. viz. That all the Holy
Prophets since the World began, have spoken of the Restoration of all things
at the second coming of Christ. I say, to verify this assertion of S. Peter's,
we must suppose, that, where the Prophets speak of the Restoration and future
glory of Judah and Jerusalem, they do, under those Types, represent to us the
glory and happiness of the Church in the future Kingdom of Christ. And most of
the Prophets, in this sense, and under these forms, have spoken of this
Kingdom: In foretelling the Restoration of Jerusalem and Sion; and happy days,
peace, plenty, and prosperity to the People of Israel.

Most of the Prophets, I say, from Moses to Malachy, have spoken of this
Restoration. Moses in the 30th. of Deuteronomy. ver. 4, 5, 9. David, in many of those
Psalms we have cited. Isaiah, besides the places forementioned, treats amply of
this subject, Chap. 51. and in several other places. Isaiah chapter 11. chapter 43. chapter
49. 13, etc. chapter 66. Ezekiel, chapter 28. chapter 37. Hos. chapter 3. and chapter 14. Joel 3.
18. Amos, chapter 9. Obad. ver. 17, etc. Mich. chapter 4. chapter 5.
So likewise the Prophet Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Micab,
Zephany, Haggai, Zachary, Malachy. All these have, either expressly, or under
the Types of Jerusalem and Sion, foretold happy days, and a glorious triumph to
the Church of God. And seeing in the New Testament, and in the Prophecies of
St. John, the Christian Church is still represented, as under persecution and
distress, till the fall of Antichrist, and the Millennial Kingdom; Zeph. 3. 14,
etc. Hag. chapter 2. Zac. 2. 10, etc. and chapter 9. 9, etc. and chapter 14. Mal. chapter 3.
chapter 4.
It Is then, and not till then, that we must expect the full accomplishment of
these Prophecies; The Restoration that St. Peter says was spoken of, by all
the Prophets: and the mystery, which St. John says, (Apoc. 10. 7.) was declared
by his Servants the Prophets* and would be finished under the Seventh Trumpet,
which ushers in the Kingdom of Christ.

It would be too long to examine all these places in the Prophets, which you
may consult at leisure. However it cannot seem strange that Jerusalem should be
used in a typical or allegorical sense, seeing we often find such applications
of it in the New Testament: as Gal. 4. 26. Heb. 12. 22. Apoc. 3. 12. And it is
very natural that Jerusalem restored, should signify the same thing as New
Jerusalem; and therefore that S. John, by his New Jerusalem, intended the same
thing, or the same state, that the ancient Prophets did by their Restoration
of Jerusalem. And if neither can be understood in a literal sense, which, I
believe, you will not contend for; they must both be interpreted of the future
happiness and glory of the Church in the Kingdom of Christ.

But to conclude this point wholly as to Scripture; If we make reflection upon
all the passages alleged in this and the foregoing Chapter, whether out of the
Old or New Testament, we must at least acknowledge thus much; That there are
happy days, at one time or other: Days of Peace and Righteousness: of Joy and
Triumph: of external Prosperity and internal Sanctity: when Virtue and
Innocence shall be in the Throne, and Vice and vicious Men out of power or
credit. That there are such happy days Prophesied of in Scripture, and promised
to the Church of God. Whether you call this the Reign of Christ and of his
Saints, or by any other name, it is not material at present to determine; let
the title be what you will, as to the substance it cannot be denied to be a
general Doctrine of Prophetical Scripture. And we must not imagine, that the
Prophets writ like the Poets: feigned an Idea of a Romantic state, that never
was, nor ever will be; only to please their own fancies, or the credulous
people. Neither is it the state of Heaven and eternal life that is here meant
or intended: For, besides that they had little or no light concerning those
Notions, in the Old Testament* The Prophets generally in their description of
this happiness, either express the Earth, or at least give plain marks of a
Terrestrial state. Wherefore the only question that remains, is this, Whether
these happy Days are past already, or to come: Whether this blessed state of
the Church is behind us, or before us: whether our Predecessors have enjoyed
it, or our posterity is to expect it? For we are very sure that it is not
present; The World is full of Wars, and rumors of Wars: of Vice and Knavery,
of Oppression and Persecution: and these are things directly contrary to the
genius and characters of the state which we look after.

And if we look for it in times past, we can go no further back than the
beginning of Christianity. For S. John, the last of the Apostles, Prophesied of
these times, as to come: and placed them at the end of his systeme of
Prophecies; whereby one might conclude that they are not only within the
compass of the Christian ages, but far advanced into them. But however, not to
insist upon that at present, where will you find a thousand years, from the
birth of Christianity to this present age, that deserves the name, or answers
to the characters of this Pure and Pacifick state of the Church. The first ages
of Christianity, as they were the most pure, so likewise were they the least
peaceable. Continually, more or less, under the Persecution of the Heathen
Emperors; and so far from being the Reign and Empire of Christ and his Saints
over the Nations, that Christians were then, every where, in subjection or
slavery; A poor, feeble, helpless people, thrust into Prisons, or thrown to the
Lions, at the pleasure of their Princes or Rulers. It Is true, when the Empire
became Christian under Constantine, in the fourth Century, there was, for a
time, peace and prosperity in the Church, and a good degree of Purity and
Piety. But that peace was soon disturbed, and that piety soon corrupted. The
growing pride and ambition of the Ecclesiastics, and their easiness to admit
or introduce Superstitious Practices, destroyed the purity of the Church. And
as to the peace of it, Their contests about Opinions and Doctrines, tore the
Christians themselves into pieces; and, soon after, an inundation of Barbarous
People fell into Christendom, and put it all into flames and confusion. After
this Eruption of the Northern Nations, Mahometanism rose in the East; and
swarms of Saracens, like armies of Locusts, invaded, conquered, and planted
their Religion in several parts of the Roman Empire, and of the Christianiz'd
World. And can we call such times the Reign of Christ, or the imprisonment of
Satan? In the following ages, the Turks overrun the Eastern Empire and the
Greek Church, and still hold that miserable people in slavery. Providence seems
to have so ordered affairs, that the Christian World should never be without a
WOE upon it, lest it should fancy it self already in those happy days of Peace
and Prosperity, which are reserved for future times. Lastly, whosoever is
sensible of the corruptions and persecutions of the Church of Rome, since she
came to her greatness; whosoever allows her to be mystical Babylon, which must
fall before the Kingdom of Christ comes on; will think that Kingdom duly placed
by S. John at the end of his Prophecies, concerning the Christian Church: and
that there still remains, according to the words of St. Paul, (Hebr. 4. 9.) a
Sabbatism to the people of God.

CHAP. VI. The sense and testimony of the Primitive Church concerning the
Millennium, or future Kingdom of Christ: from the times of the Apostles to the
Nicene Council. The second Proposition laid down. When, by what means, and for
what reasons, that doctrine was afterward neglected or discountenanced.
YOU have heard the voice of the Prophets and Apostles, declaring the future
Kingdom of Christ. Next to these, the Primitive Fathers are accounted of good
authority; Let us therefore now enquire into their Sense concerning this
Doctrine, that we may give satisfaction to all parties; And both those that are
guided by Scripture alone, and those that have a Veneration for Antiquity, may
find proofs suitable ^o their inclinations and judgment.

And to make few words of it, we will lay down this Conclusion, That the
Millennial Kingdom of Christ was the general Doctrine of the Primitive Church,
from the times of the Apostles to the Nicene Council; inclusively. S. John
outlived all the rest of the Apostles, and toward the latter end of his life,
being banished into the Isle of Pathmos, he writ his Apocalypse; wherein he
has given us a more full and distinct account of the Millennial Kingdom of
Christ, than any of the Prophets or Apostles before him. Papias, Bishop of
Hierapolis, Iren. Lib. 5. c. 33.
and Martyr; one of S. I^hn's Audito^s, as Irenaeus testifies; taught the same
Doctrine after S. John. He was the familiar friend of Polycarp, another of S.
John's Disciples; and either from him, or immediately from S. John's mouth, he
might receive this Doctrine. That he taught it in the Church, is agreed on by
all hands; both by those that are his followers, as Irenaeus; and those that
are not well-wishers to this Doctrine, as E^sebius and Jerome.

There is also another chanel wherein this Doctrine is Traditionally derived
from S. John, namely by the Clergy of Asia; as Irenaeus tells us in the same
Chapter. For, arguing the point, he shows that the Blessing promised to Jacob
from his Father Isaac, was not made good to him in this life, and therefore he
says, without doubt those words had a further aim and prospect upon the times
of the Kingdom: (so they used to call the Millennial state) when the Just
rising from the dead, shall reign: and when Nature renewed and set at liberty,
shall yield plenty and abundance of all things; being blessed with the dew of
Heaven, and a great fertility of the Earth. According as has been related by
those Ecclesiastics or Clergy, who sce. St. John, the Disciple of Christ; and
heard of him WHAT OUR LORD HAD TAUGHT CONCERNING THOSE TIMES. This, you see,
goes to the Fountainhead. The Christian Clergy receive it from St. John, and
St. John relates it from the mouth of our Savior.

So much for the Original authority of this Doctrine, as a Tradition: that it
was from St. John, and by him from Christ. And as to the propagation and
prevailing of it in the Primitive Church, we can bring a witness beyond all
exception, Dial. with Tryphon the Jew.
Justin Martyr, Contemporary with Irenaeus, and his Senior. He says, that
himself, and all the Orthodox Christians of his time, did acknowledge the
Resurrection of the flesh (suppose the first Resurrection) and a thousand years
reign in Jerusalem restored, or in the New Jerusalem. According as the
Prophets, Ezekiel, and Isaiah, and Others, attest with common consent. As St.
Peter had said before, Act. 3. 21. That all the Prophets had spoken of it. Then
he quotes the 65th. Chapter of Isaiah, which is a bulwark for this Doctrine,
that never can be broken. And to show the Jew, with whom he had this discourse,
that it was the sense of our Prophets, as well as of theirs, He tells him, that
a certain Man amongst us Christians, by name John, one of the Apostles of
Christ, in a Revelation made to him did prophecy, that the faithful believers
in Christ should live a thousand years in the New Jerusalem; and after that
should be the general Resurrection and day of Judgment. Thus you have the
thoughts and sentiment of Justin Martyr, as to himself: as to all the reputed
Orthodox of his time; As to the sense of the Prophets in the Old Testament, and
as to the sense of St. John in the Apocalypse. All conspiring in confirmation
of the Millenary Doctrine.

To these three Witnesses, Papias, Irenaeus, and Justin Martyr, we may add two
more within the second Age of the Church: Melito, Bishop of Sardis, and St.
Barnabas, or whosoever was the Author of the Epistle under his name. This
Melito, by some is thought to be the Angel of the Church of Sardis, to whom St.
John directs the Epistle to that Church: Apoc. 3. 1. But I do not take him to
be so ancient; However he was Bishop of that place, at least in the second
Century, and a Person of great Sanctity and Learning. He writ many Books, as
you may see in St. Jerome: and, as He notes out of Tertullian, De Script.
Eccles.
was by Christians reputed a Prophet. He was also a declared Millenary, and is
recorded as such, both by Jerome and Gennadius. Dogm. Eccl. c. 55.
As to the Epistle of Barnabas, which we mentioned, it must be very ancient,
whosoever is the Author of it, and before the third Century; seeing it is often
cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, who was himself within the second Century. The
genius of it is very much Millenarian, in the interpretation of the Sabbath,
the promised Land, a Day for a thousand years, and concerning the Renovation of
the World. In all which, He follows the footsteps of the Orthodox of those
times: that is, of the Millenarians.

So much for the first and second Centuries of the Church. By which short
account it appears, that the Millenary Doctrine was Orthodox and Catholic in
those early days. For these Authors do not set it down as a private opinion of
their own, but as a Christian Doctrine, or an Apostolical Tradition. It Is
remarkable what Papias says of himself, and his way of Learning, in his Book
called, The Explanation of the Words of the Lord, De Script. Eccles.
as St. Jerome gives us an account of it: He says in his Preface, He did not
follow various opinions, but had the Apostles for his Authors. And that he
considered what Andrew, what Peter said; what Philip, what Thomas, and other
Disciples of the Lord. As also what Aristion, and John the Senior, Disciples of
the Lord, what they spoke. And that he did not profit so much by reading Books,
as by the living voice of these persons which resounded from them to that day.
This has very much the air of Truth and Sincerity, and of a Man, that, in good
earnest, sought after the Christian Doctrine, from those that were the most
Authentic Teachers of it. I know Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, gives
a double Character of this Papias; in one place, Vide Hieron. Epist. 28. ad
Lucinium.
he calls him, A very eloquent Man in all things, and skilful in Scripture; and
in another, he makes him a Man of a small understanding. But what reason there
is to suspect Eusebius of partiality in this point of the Millennium; we shall
make appear hereafter. However, We do not depend upon the Learning of Papias,
or the depth of his understanding: allow him but to be an honest Man, and a
fair Witness, and it is all we desire. And we have little reason to question his
testimony in this point, seeing it is backed by others of good credit; and also
because there is no counter-evidence, nor any witness that appears against him.
For there is not extant, either the Writing, Name, or Memory, of any Person,
that contested this doctrine in the first or second Century. I say, that called
in question this Millenary Doctrine, proposed after a Christian manner; unless
such Heretics as denied the Resurrection wholly: or such Christians as denied
the Divine Authority of the Apocalypse.

We proceed now to the Third Century. Where you find Tertullian, Origin,
Victorinus, Bishop and Martyr: Nepos Aegyptius, Cyprian, and, at the end of it,
Lactantius: All openly, prosessing, or implicitly favoring the Millenary
Doctrine. We do not mention Clemens Alexandrinus, contemporary with Tertullian,
because he has not any thing, that I know of, expressly either for, or against
the Millennium. But he takes notice that the Seventh Day has been accounted
Sacred, both by the Hebrews and Greeks, because of the Revolution of the World,
and the Renovation of all things. And giving this as a reason why they kept
that day Holy, seeing there is not a Revolution of the World every seven days,
it can be in no other sense than as the Seventh Day represents the seventh
Millenary, in which the Renovation of the World and the Kingdom of Christ, is
to be. As to Tertullian, S. Jerome reckons him, in the first place, amongst the
Latin Millenaries. And though his Book, about the Hope of the Faithful, as also
that about Paradise, which should have given us the greatest light in this
affair, be both lost or suppressed; yet there are sufficient indications of his
Millenary opinion in his Tracts against Marcion, and against Hermogenes. S.
Cyprian was Tertullian's admirer, and inclines to the same opinion, so far as
one can judge, in this particular; for his period of Six Thousand Years, and
making the Seventh Millenary the Consummation of all, is wholly according to
the Analogy of the Millenary Doctrine. As to the Two Bishops, Victorinus and
Nepos, S. Jerome vouches for them. The Writings of the one are lost, and of the
other so changed, that the sense of the Author does not appear there now. But
Lactantius, whom we named in the last place, does openly and profusely teach
this doctrine, in his Divine Institutions: Book 7.
and with the same assurance that he does other parts of the Christian
Doctrine. For he concludes thus, speaking of the Millennium, This is the
doctrine of the Holy Prophets, which we Christians follow. This is our wisdom,
etc. Yet he acknowledges there that it was kept as a mystery or secret amongst
the Christians, lest the Heathens should make any perverse or odious
interpretation of it. And for the same or like reason, I believe, The Book of
the Apocalypse was kept out of the hands of the Vulgar for some time, and not
read publicly, lest it should be found to have spoken too openly of the fate
of the Roman Empire, or of this Millennial State.

So much for the First, Second, and Third Century of the Church. But, by our
conclusion, we engaged to make out this proof as far as the Nicene Council,
inclusively, The Nicene Council was about the year of Christ 325. and we may
reasonably suppose, Lactantius was then living; at least he came within the
time of Constantine's Empire. But however the Fathers of that Council are
themselves our witnesses in this point. For, in their Ecclesiastical Forms or
Constitutions, in the chapter about the Providence of God, and about the World,
They speak thus; The World was made meaner or less perfect, providentially; for
God foresee that man would sin. Wherefore we expect New Heavens and a New
Earth, according to the Holy Scriptures: at the appearance and Kingdom of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And then, as Daniel says (chapter 7. 18.)
The Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom. And the Earth shall be
Pure, Holy, the Land of the Living, not of the dead. Which David foreseeing by
the eye of Faith, cries out (Ps. 27. 13.) I believe to see the good things of
the Lord, in the Land of the Living. Our Savior says, Happy are the meek, for
they shall inherit the Earth, Matt. 5. 5. and the Prophet Isaiuh says, (chap.
26. 6.) the feet of the meek and lowly shall tread upon it. So you see,
according to the judgment of these Fathers, there will be a Kingdom of Christ
upon Earth; and moreover, that it will be in the New Heavens and the New Earth.
And, in both these points, they cite the Prophets and our Savior in
confirmation of them.

Thus we have discharged our promise, and given you an account of the doctrine
of the Millennium, or future Kingdom of Christ, throughout the Three First Ages
of the Church, before any considerable corruptions were crept into the
Christian Religion. And those Authorities of single and successive Fathers, we
have sealed up all together, with the declaration of the Nicene Fathers, in a
Body. Those that think Tradition a Rule of Faith, or a considerable motive to
it, will find it hard to turn off the force of these Testimonies. And those
that do not go so far, but yet have a reverence for Antiquity and the Primitive
Church, will not easily produce better Authorities, more early, more numerous,
or more uncontradicted, for any Article that is not Fundamental. Yet these are
but Seconds to the Prophets and Apostles, who are truly the Principals in this
Cause. I will leave them altogether, to be examined and weighed by the
Impartial Reader. And because they seem to me to make a full and undeniable
proof, I will now at the foot of the account set down our second Proposition,
which is this, That there is a Millennial State, Propos. 2.
or a Future Kingdom of Christ and his Saints, Prophesied of and Promised, in
the Old and New Testament; and received by the Primitive Church as a Christian
and Catholic Doctrine.

HAVING dispatched this main point. To conclude the Chapter and this Head of
our Discourse, it will be some satisfaction possibly to see, How a Doctrine so
generally received and approved, came to decay and almost wear out of the
Church, in following Ages. The Christian Millenary Doctrine was not called into
question, so far as appears from History, before the middle of the third
Century; when Dionysius Alexandrinus writ against Nepos, an Egyptian Bishop,
who had declared himself upon that subject. But we do not find that this Book
had any great effect; for the declaration or constitution of the Nicene Fathers
was after: and in S. Ierome's time, who writ toward the end of the fourth
Century, this Doctrine had so much Credit, that, He, who was its greatest
adversary, yet durst not condemn it, as he says himself. Quae licet non
sequamur, tamen damnare non possumus; quia multi Ecclesiasticorum virorum and
Martyrs ista dixerunt. Which things, or doctrines, speaking of the Millennium,
though we do not follow, yet we cannot condemn. Because many of our Churchmen,
and Martyrs, have affirmed these things. And when Apollinarius replied to that
Book of Dionysius, S. Jerome says, that, not only those of his own Sect, but a
great multitude of other Christians did agree with Apollinarius in that
particular. Ut praesaga mente jam cernam, quantorum in me rabies concitanda
sit. That I now foresee, how many will be enraged against me, for what I have
spoken against the Millenary Doctrine.

We may therefore conclude that in S. Ierome's time the Millenaries made the
greater party in the Church; for a little matter would not have frighted him
from censuring their opinion. S. Jerome was a rough and rugged Saint, and an
unfair adversary, that usually run down, with heat and violence, what stood in
his way. As to his unfairness, he shows it sufficiently in this very cause, for
he generally represents the Millenary Doctrine after a Judaical rather than a
Christian manner. And in reckoning up the chief Patrons of it, he always skips
Justin Martyr. Who was not a Man so obscure as to be over^look'd: and he was a
Man that had declared himself sufficiently upon this point, for he says, both
himself and all the Orthodox of his time, were of that judgment, and applies
both the Apocalypse of S. John, and the 65th chap. of Isaiah, for the proof of
it. As we noted before.

As S. Jerome was an open enemy to this Doctrine, so Eusebius was a back friend
to it; and represented every thing to its disadvantage, so far as was tolerably
consistent with the fairness of an Historian. He gives a slight character of
Papias, without any authority for it; Eccles. Hist. 3. 22. (...).
and brings in one Gaius that makes Cerinthus to be the Author of the
Apocalypse and of the Millennium: and calls the Visions there monstrous
stories. He himself is willing to shuffle off that Book from John the
Evangelist to another John a Presbyter: and to show his skill in the
interpretation of it, l. 3. 32. de vit. Constan.
he makes the New Jerusalem in the 21th chap. to be Constantine's Jerusalem,
when he turned the Heathen Temples there into Christian. A wonderful invention.
As S. Jerome by his flouts, so Eusebius by sinister insinuations, endeavored
to lessen the reputation of this Doctrine; and the Art they both used, was, to
misrepresent^^^ as Iudaical. But we must not cast off every doctrine which the
Jews believed, only for that reason; for we have the same Oracles which they
had, and the same Prophets: and they have collected from them same general
doctrine that we have, namely, that There will be an happy and pacifick state
of the Church, in future times. But as to the circumstances of this state we
differ very much; They suppose the Mosaical Law will be restored, with all its
pomp, rites, and ceremonies: whereas we suppose the Christian Worship, or
something more perfect, will then take place. Yet S. Jerome has the confidence,
even there where he speaks of the many Christian Clergy, and Martyrs that held
this doctrine: has the confidence, I say, to represent it, as if they held that
Circumcision, Sacrifices, and all the Judaical rites, should then be restored.
Which seems to me to be a great slander, and a great instance how far men's
passions will carry them, in misrepresenting an opinion which they have a mind
to disagrace.

But as, we have reason to blame the partiality of those that opposed this
doctrine, so, on the other hand, we cannot excuse the Patrons of it from all
indiscretions. I believe they might partly themselves make it obnoxious; by
mixing some things with it, from pretended Traditions, or the Books of the
Sibylls, or other private Authorities, that had so sufficient warrant from
Scripture; and things, sometimes, that Nature would not easily bear. Besides,
in later ages, they seem to have dropped one half of the doctrine, namely, the
Renovation of Nature, which Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, and the Ancients, join
inseparably with the Millennium. And by this omission, the doctrine has been
made less intelligible, and one part of it inconsistent with another. And when
their pretensions were to reign upon this present Earth, and in this present
state of Nature, it gave a jealousy to Temporal Princes, and gave occasion
likewise to many of Eanatical Spirits, under the notion of Saints, to aspire to
dominion, after a violent and tumultuary manner. This I reckon as one great
cause that brought the doctrine into discredit. But I hope by reducing of it to
the true state, we shall cure this and other abuses, for the future.

Lastly, It never pleased the Church of Rome; and so far as the influence and
authority of that would go, you may be sure it would be deprest and
discountenanced. I never yet met with a Popish Doctor that held the Millennium;
and Baron us would have it pass for an Heresy, and Papias for the Inventor of
it; whereas, if Irenaeus may be credited, it was received from S. John, and by
him from the mouth of our Savior. And neither S. Jerome, nor his friend Pope
Damasus, durst ever condemnoit for an heresy. It was always indeed uneasy,
and gave offense, to the Church of Rome* because it does not suit to that
Scheme of Christianity, which they have drawn. They suppose Christ reigns
already, by his Vicar, the Pope: and treads upon the Necks of Emperors and
Kings. And if they could but suppress the Northern Heresy, as they call it,
they do not know what a Millennium would signify, or how the Church could be
in an happier condition than she is. The Apocalypse of St. John does suppose
the true Church under hardship and persecution, more or less, for the greatest
part of the Christian Ages: namely for 1260 years, while the Witnesses are in
Sack cloth. But the Church of Rome has been in prosperity and greatness, and
the commanding Church in Christendom, for so long or longer, and has ruled the
Nations with a Rod of Iron; so as that mark of the true Church; does not favor
her at all. And the Millennium being properly a reward and triumph for those
that come out of Persecution, such as have lived always in pomp and prosperity
can pretend to no share in it, or benefit by it. This has made the Church of
Rome have always an ill eye upon this Doctrine, because it seemed to have an
ill eye upon her. And as she grew in splendour and greatness, she eclipsed and
obscured it more and more: so that it would have been lost out of the World as
an obsolete error, if it had not been revived by some of the Reformation.

CHAP. VII. The true state of the Millennium, according to Characters taken
from Scripture; some mistakes concerning it, examined.
WE have made sufficient proof of a Millennial state, from Scripture and
Antiquity; and upon that firm Basis have settled our second Proposition. We
should now determine the Time and Place of this future Kingdom of Christ: Not
whether it is to be in Heaven, or upon Earth: for that we suppose determined
already; but whether it is to be in the present Earth, and under the present
constitution of Nature, or in the New Heavens, and New Earth, which are
promised after the Conflagration. This is to make our Third Proposition: and I
should have proceeded immediately to the examination of it, but that I imagine
it will give us some light in this affair, if we enquire further into the true
state of the Millennium, before we determine its Time and Place.

We have already noted some moral Characters of the Millennial state; And the
great Natural Character of it, is this in general, That it will be
Paradisiacal. Free from all inconveniences, either of external Nature, or of
our own Bodies. For my part, I do not understand how there can be any
considerable degree of happiness without Indolency: nor how there can be
Indolency, while we have such Bodies as we have now, and such an external
constitution of Nature. And as there must be Indolency, where there is
happiness; so there must not be Indigency, or want of any due comforts of life*
For where there is Indigency, there is solicitude, and distraction, and
uneasiness, and fear: Passions, that do as naturally disquiet the Soul, as pain
does the Body. Therefore Indolency and Plenty seem to be two essential
Ingredients of every happy state; and these two in conjunction make that state
we call Paradisiacal.

Now the Scripture seems plainly to exempt the Sons of the New Jerusalem, or of
the Millennium, from all pain or want, in those words, Apoc. 21. 4. And God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying: neither shall there be any more pain: for the
former things are passed away. And the Lord of that Kingdom, He that sat upon
the Throne, said, Behold I make all things new, ver. 5. This Renovation is a
restoration to some former state: and I hope not to that state of indigency,
and misery, and diseasedness, which we languish under at present. But to that
pristine Paradisiacal state, which was the blessing of the first Heavens and
the first Earth.

As Health and Plenty are the Blessings of Nature, so, in Civil affairs, Peace
is the greatest blessing. And this is inseparably annexed to the Millennium: an
indelible character of the Kingdom of Christ. And by Peace we understand, not
only freedom from Persecution upon religious accounts, but that Nation shall
not rise up against Nation, upon any account whatsoever. That bloody Monster,
War, that has devoured so many Millions of the Sons of Adam, is now at length
to be chained up: and the Furies, that run throughout the Earth, with their
Snakes and Torches, shall be thrown into the Abyss, to sting and prey upon one
another. All evil and mischievous passions shall be extinguished: and that not
in men only, but even in Brute creatures, according to the Prophets. The Lamb
and the Lion shall lie down together, and the sucking Child shall play with the
Basilisk. Happy days, when not only the Temple of Ianus shall be shut up for a
thousand years, and the Nations shall beat their swords into plowshares: but
all enmities and antipathies shall cease, all acts of hostility, throughout all
nature. And this Universal Peace is a demonstration also of the former
character, Universal Plenty: for where there is want and necessitousness, there
will be quarrelling.

Fourthly, It Is a Kingdom of Righteousness, as well as of Peace. These also
must go together; for unrighteous Persons will not live long in peace, no more
than indigent Persons. The Psalmist therefore joins them together: and Plenty
also, as their necessary preservative: in his description of the Kingdom of
Christ: Psalm. 85. 10, 11, 12. Mercy and truth are met together: Righteousness
and peace have kissed each other. Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and
righteousness shall look down from Heaven. Yea the Lord shall give good, and
our Land shall yield her increase. This will not be a medley-state, as the
present World is, good and bad mingled together; but a chosen generation, a
royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people. Those that have a part in
the first Resurrection, the Scripture pronounces them Holy and Blessed: and
says, the second death shall have no power over them. Satan also is bound and
shut up in the bottomless Pit, and has no liberty of tempting or seducing this
People, for a thousand years: but at the end of that time, he will meet with a
degenerate crew, separate and aliens to the Holy City, that will make war
against it, and perish in the attempt. Apoc. 5. 9,
In a word, those that are to enjoy this state, are always distinguished from
the multitude, as People redeemed from the Earth; Chapter 7. 14.
That have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb;
Chapter 14. 3, 4.
and are represented as Victors over the World; Chapter 21. 27.
with such other Characters as are incompetible to any but the righteous.

Fifthly, This will be a state under a peculiar divine presence and conduct. It
is not easy indeed to determine the manner of this presence, but the Scripture
plainly implies some extraordinary divine presence to enligh^en and enliven
that state. When the New Jerusalem was come down, Apoc. 21. 3.
St. John says, And I heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men: and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people: and God himself shall be with them and be their God. And the like
is promised to the Palmbearing Company, Chap. 7. 15. where they are admitted to
the privileges of the New Jerusalem. When our Savior was incarnate, and
vouchsafed to dwell amongst the Children of Men, the same phrase is used by
this same Author, (...).
Ioh. 1. 14. The Word was made flesh, and Tabernacled amongst us: and we beheld
his glory, etc. We read it, He dwelt amongst us, but rendered more closely, it
is, He set his Tabernacle amongst us. (...) Maimon. Mor. Nev. par. 1. c. 25.
And that which the Hebrews call the Shekinah, o^ divine presence, comes from a
word of the like signification and sound with the Greek word here used.
Therefore there will be a Shekinah in that Kingdom of Christ; but as to the
mode of it, I am very willing to confess my ignorance.

The last Character that belongs to this state, or rather to those that enjoy
it, is, that they are Kings and Priests unto God. This is a character often
repeated in Scripture, and therefore the more to be regarded. It occurs thrice
in the Apocalypse in formal terms, Chapter 1. 6. Chapter 5. 10. Chapter 20. 6. And as to
the Regal dignity apart, that is further expressed, either by the Donation of a
Kingdom, as in Daniel's phrase, Chap. 7. 18, 22, 27. Or by placing upon
Thrones, with a judicial power; which is the New Testament style, Mat. 19. 28.
Luke 22. 29, 30. Revel. 20. 4. These two Titles, no doubt, are intended to
comprehend the highest honors that we are capable of: these being the highest
dignities in every Kingdom; and such as were by the Ancients, both in the East
and in the West, commonly united in one and the same Person. Their Kings being
Priests, like Melchisedeck: or as the Roman Emperor was Pontifex Maximus. But
as to the Sacerdotal character, that seems chiefly to respect the temper of the
mind; to signife a People dedicated to God and his Service: Separate from the
World, and from secular affairs: Spending their time in devotion and
contemplation, which will be the great employments of that happy state. For
where there is ease, peace, and plenty of all things; refined Bodies, and
purified Minds, there will be more inclination to intellectual exercises and
entertainments: which they may attend upon, without any distraction, having
neither want, pain, nor worldly business.

The Title of King implies a confluence of all things that constitute temporal
happiness. It Is the highest thing we can wish any in this World, to be a King.
So as the Regal dignity seems to comprehend all the Goods of Fortune, or
external felicity: And the Sacerdotal, the Goods of the Mind, or internal: Both
which concur in the constitution of true happiness. There is also a further
force and emphasis in this notion, of the Saints being made Kings, if we
consider it comparatively, with respect to what they were before in this World;
where they were not only mean and despicable, in subjection and servility, but
often under persecution, abused and trampled upon, by the secular and
Ecclesiastical Powers. But now the Scene is changed, and you see the reverse of
Providence, according as Abraham said to the Rich man, Son, remember that thou
in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things.
But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Now they are set upon Thrones
and Tribunals, who were before arraigned as Criminals, and brought before
tyrannical Judicatures. They are now Laws and Lawgivers to themselves: in a
true state of Royal Liberty, neither under the domination of evil men, nor of
their own evil passions.

Some possibly may think, that this high character of being made Priests and
Kings to God, is not general to all that enjoy the M^llennium, but a
prerogative belonging to the Apostles and some of the chief Martyrs, who are
eminently rewarded for their eminent services. But Scripture, as far as I
perceive, applies it to all that inherit that Kingdom. The redeemed out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, are made Kings and Priests
to God, and shall reign on the earth, Apoc. 5. 9, 10. And in the 20th chap.
ver. 6. all the Sons of the first Resurrection are made Priests of God and
shall reign with him a thousand years. Here is no distinction or discrimination
thus far. Not that we suppose an universal equality of conditions in the
Millennial state, but as to all these characters which we have given of it, I
do not perceive that they are restrained or confined by Scripture to single
persons, but make the general happiness of that state, and are the portion of
every one that is admitted into the New Jerusalem.

Others possibly may think that this privilege of the first Resurrection is
not common to all that enjoy the Millennial State. For though S. John, who is the
only person that has made express mention of the first Resurrection, and of
the thousand years reign of Christ, does join these two as the same thing, and
common to the same persons; yet I know there are some that would distinguish
them as things of a different extent, and also of a different nature. They
suppose the Martyrs only will rise from the dead; and will be immediately
translated into Heaven, and there pass their Millennium in celestial glory.
While the Church is still here below, in her Millennium, such as it is; a state
indeed better than ordinary, and free from persecution: but obnoxious to all
the inconveniences of our present mortal life, and a medly of good and bad
people, without separation. This is such an Idea of the Millennium, as, to my
eye, has neither beauty in it, nor foundation in Scripture. That the Citizens
of the New Jerusalem are not a miscellaneous company, but a Community of
righteous persons, we have noted before: and that the state of nature will be
better than it is at present. But, besides this, what warrant have they for
this Ascension of the Martyrs into Heaven at that time? Where do we read of
that in Scripture? And in those things that are not matters of Natural Order,
but of Divine Economy, we ought to be very careful how we add to Scripture.

The Scripture speaks only of the Resurrection of the Martyrs, Apoc. 20. 45.
But not a word concerning their Ascension into Heaven. Will that be visible? We
read of our Savior's Resurrection and Ascension, and therefore we have reason
to affirm them both. We read also of the Resurrection and Ascension of the
Witnesses, (Apoc. 11.) in a figurate sense, and in that sense we may assert
them upon good grounds. But as to the Martyrs, we read of their Resurrection
only, without any thing expressed of implied about their Ascension. By what
Authority then shall we add this New Notion to the History or Scheme of the
Millennium? The Scripture on the contrary, makes mention of the descent of the
New Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 2. making the Earth the Theater of all that affair.
And the Camp of the Saints is upon the Earth, ver. 9. and these Saints are the
same persons, so far as can be collected from the text, that rise from the
dead, and reigned with Christ, and were Priests to God, ver. 4, 5, 6. Neither
is there any distinction made, that I find, by S. John, of two sorts of Saints
in the Millennium, the one in Heaven, and the other upon Earth. Lastly, The
four and twenty Elders, chapter 5. 10. though they were Kings and Priests unto God,
were content to reign upon Earth. Now who can you suppose of a superior order
to these four and twenty Elders: Whether they represent the twelve Patriarchs
and twelve Apostles, or whomsoever they represent, they are placed next to him
that sits upon the Throne, chapter 11. 1^.
and they have Crowns of Gold upon their heads, chapter 4. 4. There can be no marks
of honor and dignity greater than these are; and therefore seeing these
highest Dignitaries in the Millennium or future Kingdom of Christ, are to reign
upon Earth, there is no ground to suppose the assumption of any other into
Heaven upon that account, or upon that occasion.

This is a short and general draught of the Millennial state, or future Reign
of the Saints, according to Scripture. Wherein I have endeavored to rectify
some mistakes or misconceptions about it: That viewing it in its true Nature,
we may be the better able to judge, when and where it will obtain. Which is the
next thing to be considered.

CHAP. VIII. The Third Proposition laid down, concerning the Time and Place of
the Millennium. Several Arguments used to prove that it cannot be till after
the Conflagration: and that the New Heavens and the New Earth are the true Seat
of the blessed Millennium.
WE come now to the Third and last head of our Discourse: To determine the Time
and Place of the Millennium. And seeing it is indifferent whether the proofs
lead or follow the Conclusion, we will lay down the Conclusion in the first
place, that our business may be more in view; and back it with proofs in the
following part of the Chapter. Our Third and last Proposition therefore is
this, Propos. 3.
That the Blessed Millennium, (properly so called) according as it is described
in Scripture, cannot obtain in the present Earth, nor under the present
constitution of Nature and Providence; but is to be celebrated in the New
Heavens and New Earth, after the Conflagration. This Proposition, it may be,
will seem a Paradox or singularity to many, even of those that believe a
Millennium; We will therefore make it the business of this Chapter, to state
it, and prove it; by such Arguments as are manifestly founded in Scripture and
in Reason.

And to prevent mistakes* we must premise this in the first place; (...)
That, tho the Blessed Millennium will not be in this Earth, yet we allow that
the state of the Church here, will grow much better than it is at present.
There will be a better Idea of Christianity, and according to the Prophecies, a
full Resurrection of the Witnesses, and an Ascension into power, and the tenth
part of the City will fall; which things imply ease from Persecution, The
Conversion of some part of the Christian World to the reformed Faith, and a
considerable diminution of the power of Antichrist. But this still comes short
of the happiness and glory wherein the future Kingdom of Christ is represented.
Which cannot come to pass till the Man of Sin be destroyed, with a total
destruction. After the Resurrection of the Witnesses, there is a Third WOE yet
to come: and how long that will last, does not appear. If it bear proportion
with the preceding WOES, it may last some hundreds of years. And we cannot
imagine the Millennium to begin till that WOE be finished. As neither till the
Vials be poured out, in the 15th. chap. which cannot be all poured out till
after the Resurrection of the Witnesses; those Vials being the last plagues
that complete the destruction of Antichrist. Wherefore allowing that the
Church, upon the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, will be advanced
into a better condition, yet that condition cannot be the Millennial state;
where the Beast is utterly destroyed, and Satan bound, and cast into the
bottomless pit.

This being premised, let us now examine what grounds there are for the
Translation of that blessed state into the New Heavens and New Earth: seeing
that Thought, it may be, to many persons, will appear new and extraordinary. In
the first place, We suppose it out of dispute, that there will be New Heavens
and a New Earth after the Conflagration. This was our first Proposition, and we
depend upon it, as sufficiently proved both from Scripture and Antiquity. This
being admitted, How will you stock this New Earth? What use will you put it to?
'Twill be a much nobler Earth, and better built than the present: and it is pity
it should only float about, empty and useless, in the wild Air. If you will not
make it the seat and habitation of the Just in the blessed Millennium, what
will you make it? How will it turn to account? What has Providence designed it
for? We must not suppose New Worlds made without counsel or design. And as, on
the one hand, you cannot tell what to do with this New Creation, if it be not
thus employed: so, on the other hand, it is every way fitted and suited to be
an happy and Paradisiacal habitation, and answers all the natural Characters of
the Millennial state; which is a great presumption that it is designed for it.

But to argue this more closely upon Scripture-grounds. S. Peter says, the
Righteous shall inhabit the New Heavens and the New Earth: 2. Pet. 3. 13.
Nevertheless, according to his promise, we look for New Heavens and New Earth,
WHEREIN DWELLS RIGHTEOUSNESS: that is, a Righteous People, as we have shown
before. But who are these Righteous People? That Is the great question. If you
compare S. Peter's New Heavens and New Earth with S. John's Apoc. 21. 1, 2. it
will go far toward the resolution of this question: For S. John seems plainly
to make the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem to be in this New Earth. I saw,
says he, New Heavens and a New Earth: and the New Jerusalem descending from God
out of Heaven; therefore descending into this New Earth, which he had mentioned
immediately before. And there the Tabernacle of God was with men, ver. 3. and
there He that sat upon the Throne, said, Behold I make all things New.
Referring still to this New Heavens and New Earth, as the Theater where all
these things are acted, or all these Scenes exhibited: from the first Verse to
the eighth. Now the New Jerusalem state being the same with the Millennial, if
the one be in the New Heavens and New Earth, the other is there also. And this
interpretation of S. John's word is confirmed and fully assured to us by the
Prophet Isaiah; who also places the joy and rejoicing of the New Jerusalem in
the New Heavens and New Earth: Chap. 65. 17, 18. For behold I create new
Heavens and a new Earth: and the former shall not be remembered: but be you glad
and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for behold, I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy. Namely, in that New Heavens and New Earth.
Which answers to S. John's Vision of the New Jerusalem being let down upon the
New Earth.

To these Reasons, and deductions from Scripture, we might add the testimony of
several of the Fathers; I mean of those that were Millenaries. For we are
speaking now to such as believe the Millennium, but place it in the present
Earth before the Renovation; whereas the ancient Millenaries supposed the
regeneration and renovation of the World before the Kingdom of Christ came. As
you may see in Li. 5. chapter 32, etc.
Irenaeus, Dial. cum Tryph.
Justin Martyr, Contra Marc.
Tertullian, Li. 7.
Lactantius, and Quaest. and respon. 93.
the Author ad Orthodoxos. And the neglect of this, I look upon as one reason,
as we noted before, that brought that doctrine into discredit and decay. For
when they placed the Kingdom of the Saints upon this Earth, it bec^me more
capable of being abused, by fanatical spirits, to the disturbance of the World,
and the invasion of the rights of the Magistrate, Civil or Ecclesiastical,
under that notion of Saints. And made them also dream of sensual pleasures,
such as they see in this life: Or at least gave an occasion and opportunity to
those, that had a mind to make the doctrine odious, of charging it with these
consequences. All these abuses are cut off, and these scandals prevented, by
placing the Millennium aright. Namely, not in this present Life, or on this
present Earth, but in the New Creation, where Peace and Righteousness will
dwell. And this is our first Argument why we place the Millennium in the New
Heavens and New Earth: and it is taken partly, you see, from the reason of the
thing it self, the difficulty of assigning any other use of the New Earth, and
its fitness for this; and partly from Scripture-evidence, and partly from
Antiquity.

The second argument for our opinion, is this; The present constitution of
Nature will not bear that happiness, that is promised in the Millennium, or is
not consistent with it. The diseases of our Bodies, the disorders of our
Passions, the incommodiousness of external Nature; Indigency, servility, and
the unpeaceableness of the World; These are things inconsistent with the
happiness that is promised in the Kingdom of Christ. But these are constant
attendants upon this Life, and inseparable from the present state of Nature.
Suppose the Millennium was to begin Nine or Ten Years hence, as some pretend it
will. How shall this World, all on a sudden, be metamorphos'd into that happy
state? Apoc. 21. 4.
No more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, nor death, says S. John: All former
things are past away. But how past away? Shall we not have the same Bodies: and
the same external Nature: and the same corruptions of the Air: and the same
excesses and intemperature of Seasons? Will there not be the same ba^^enness of
the ground: the same number of People to be fed: and must they not get their
living by the sweat of their brows, with servile labor and drudgery? How then
are all former evils past away? And as to public affairs, while there are the
same necessities of humane Life, and a distinction of Nations, those Nations
sometimes will have contrary interests, will clash and interfere one with
another: whence differences, and contests, and Wars will arise, and the
Thousand Years Truce, I am afraid, will be often broken. We might add also,
that if our Bodies be not changed, we shall be subject to the same appetites,
and the same passions: and upon those, vices will grow: as bad fruit upon a bad
Tree. To conclude, so long as our Bodies are the same: external Nature the
same: The necessities of humane Life the same: which things are the roots of
evil; you may call it a Millennium, or what you please, but there will be still
diseases, vices, wars, tears and cries, pain and sorrow in this Millenuium; and
if so, it is a Millennium of your own making; for that which the Prophets
describe is quite another thing.

Furthermore, if you suppose the Millennium will be upon this Earth, and begin,
it may be, ten or twenty years hence, How will it be introduced; how shall we
know when we are in it, or when we enter upon it? If we continue the same, and
all Nature continue the same, we shall not discern when we slip into the
Millennium. And as to the Moral state of it, shall we all, on a sudden, become
Kings and Priests to God? wherein will that change consist, and how will it be
wrought? St. John makes the First Resurrection introduce the Millennium; and
that is a conspicuous mark and boundary. But as to the modern or vulgar
Millennium, I know not how it is ushered in. Whether they suppose a visible
resurrection of the Martyrs, and a visible Ascension: and that to be a Signal
to all the World that the Jubilee is beginning: or whether it is gradual and
creeps upon us insensibly: or the fall of the Beast marks it. These things need
both explication and proof; for to me they seem either arbitrary, or
unintelligible.

But to pursue our design and Subject. That which gives me the greatest scandal
in this doctrine of the vulgar Millennium, is, their joining things together
that are really inconsistent; a natural World of one color, and a moral World
of another. They will make us happy in spite of Nature: as the Stoics would
make a man happy in Phalaris his Bull; so must the Saints be in full bliss in
the Millennium, though they be under a fit of the Gout, or of the Stone. For my
part, I could never reconcile pain to happiness: It seems to me to destroy and
drown all pleasure, as a loud noise does a still voice. It affects the Nerves
with violence, and over-bears all other motions. But if, according to this
modern supposition, they have the same Bodies, and breath the same air, in the
Millennium, as we do now, there will be both private and Epidemical distempers,
in the same manner as now; Suppose then a Plague comes and sweeps away half an
hundred thousand Saints in the Millennium, is this no prejudice or dishonor to
the State? Or a War makes a Nation desolate: or, in single Persons, a lingering
disease makes life a burden: or a burning Fever, or a violent Colic tortures
them to death. Where such evils as these reign, christen the thing what you
will, it can be no better than a Mock-Millennium. Nor shall I ever be persuaded
that such a state as our present life, where an akeing Tooth, or an akeing
Head, does so discompose the Soul, as to make her unfit for business, study,
devotion, or any useful employment: And that all the powers of the mind, all
its virtue, and all its wisdom, are not able to stop these little motions, or
to support them with tranquillity: I can never persuade my self, I say, that
such a state was designed by God or Nature, for a state of happiness.

Our third argument is this: The future Kingdom of Christ will not take place,
till the Kingdom of Antichrist be wholly destroyed. But that will not be wholly
destroyed till the end of the World, and the appearing of our Savior.
Therefore the Millennium will not be till then. Christ and Antichrist cannot
reign upon Earth together: their Kingdoms are opposite, as Light to darkness.
Besides, the Kingdom of Christ is universal, extends to all the Nations, and
leaves no room for other Kingdoms at that time. Thus it is described in
Daniel^s in the place mentioned before, Chap. 7. 13, 14. I saw in the Night
visions, and behold, one like the Son of man, came with the Clouds of Heaven,
and came to the Ancient of days; And there was given him dominion and glory,
and a Kingdom; that all People, Nations, and Language, should serve him. And
again, ver. 27. And the Kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most
High; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominion shall serve and
obey him. The same character^ of universality is given to the Kingdom of Christ
by David, Psalm. 2. and Psalm. 72.
Isaih, and other Prophets. But the most direct proof of this, Isa. 2. 2.
is from the Apocalypse where the Beast and false Prophet are thrown into the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, (Chap. 19. 20) before the Millennium comes on: chapter
20. This, being cast into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone, must needs
signify utter destruction. Not a diminution of power only, but a total
perdition and consumption. And that this was before the Millennium, both the
order of the narration shows, and its place in the Prophecy; And also because
notice is taken, at the end of the Millennium, of the Beast and false Prophet's
being in the Lake of fire, as of a thing past, and formerly transacted. For
when Satan, at length, is thrown into the same Lake, it is said, He is thrown
into the Lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and false Prophet are:
Apoc. 20. ^0. They were there before, it seems; namely, at the beginning of the
Millennium; land now at the conclusion of it, the Devil is thrown in to them.
Besides, the Ligation of Satan proves this point effectually. For so long as
Antichrist reigns, Satan cannot be said to be bound; but he is bound at the
beginning of the Millennium, therefore Antichrist's reign was then totally
expired. Lastly, the destruction of Babylon, and the destruction of Antichrist
go together: but you see Babylon utterly and finally destroyed, (Apoc. 18. and
19.) before the Millennium comes on. I say utterly and finally destroyed. For
she is not only said to be made an utter desolation, but to be consumed by
fire: and absorpt as a Millstone thrown into the Sea: and that he shall be found
no more at all, Chap. 18. 21. Nothing can express a total and universal
destruction more effectually, or more emphatically. And this is before the
Millennium begins; as you may see both by the order of the Prophecies, and
particularly, in that upon this destruction, the Hallelujah's are sung, Chap.
19. and concluded thus, (ver. 6. 7.) Hallelujah, for the God omnipotent
reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to him; for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. This, I suppose,
every one allows to be the Millennial state, which now approaches, and is
making ready, upon the destruction of Babylon.

Thus much for the first part of our argument, That the Kingdom of Christ will
not take place, till the Kingdom of Antichrist be wholly destroyed. We are now
to prove the second part: That the Kingdom of Antichrist will not be wholly
destroyed till end of the World, and the coming of our Savior. This, one would
think, is sufficiently proved from St. Paul's words alone, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. The
Lord shall consume the man of sin, who is supposed the same with Antichrist,
with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his
coming. He will not then be destroyed before the coming of our Savior: and
that will not be till the end of the World. For St. Peter says, Act. 3. 21. The
Heaven must receive him, speaking of Christ, until the times of restitution of
all things: that is, the renovation of the World. And if we consider that our
Savior's coming will be in flames of fire, as the same Apostle St. Paul tells
us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. it is plain that his coming will not be till the
Conflagration: in which last flames Antichrist will be universally destroyed.
This manner of destruction agrees also with the Apocalypse, and with Daniel,
and the Prophets of the Old Testament. As to the Apocalypse, Babylon, the seat
of Antichrist, is represented there as destroyed by Fire, Chap. 18. 8, 18.
Chap. 14. 11. Chap. 19. 3, 20. And in Daniel, when the Beast is destroyed,
Chap. 7. 11. His body was given to the burning flame. Then as to the other
Prophets, they do not, you know, speak of Antichrist or the Beast in terms: but
under the Types of Babylon, Tire, and such like; and these places or Princes
are represented by them as to be destroyed by fire, Isa. 13. 19. Ier. 51. 25.
Ezekiel. 28. 18.

So much for this third Argument. The fourth Argument is this: The Future
Kingdom of Christ will not be till the day of Judgment and the Resurrection.
But that will not be till the end of the World. Therefore neither the Kingdom
of Christ. By the day of Judgment here I do not mean the final and universal
Judgment: Nor by the Resurrection, the final and universal Resurrection: for
these will not be till after the Millennium. But we understand here the first
day of Judgment and the first Resurrection, which will be at the end of this
present World; according as S. John does distinguish them, in the 20th. Chap.
of the Apocalypse. Now that the Millennium will not be till the day of Judgment
in this sense, we have both the Testimonies of Daniel and of S. John. Ver. 9,
etc.
Daniel in the 7th. Chap. supposes the Beast to rule till judgment shall sit,
Ver. 26, etc.
and then they shall take away his dominion, and it shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most High. S. John makes an explicit declaration
of both these, in his 20th. Chap. of the Apocalypse, which is the great
Directory in this point of the Millennium; He says there were Thrones set, as
for a Judicature. Ver. 4.
Then there was a Resurrection from the Dead: and those that rise, reigned with
Christ a Thousand years. Here Is a Judicial Session, a Resurrection, and the
reign of Christ joined together. There is also another passage in S. John, that
joins the judgment of the Dead with the Kingdom of Christ. It Is in the 11th.
Chap. under the seventh Trumpet. The words are these, ver. 15. And the seventh
Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of
this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ: and he shall
reign for ever and ever. And the four and twenty Elders, etc. And the nations
were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the Dead, that they should
be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy servants the Prophets,
and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name. Here are two things plainly
expressed and linked together, The judging of the Dead, and the Kingdom of
Christ; wherein the Prophets and Saints are rewarded. Now as the judging of the
Dead is not in this life, so neither is the reward of the Prophets and Saints
in this life: as we are taught sufficiently in the Gospel and by the Apostles,
Mat. 19. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 7. and Chapter 5. 4.) Therefore
the Reign and Kingdom of Christ which is joined with these two, cannot be in
this life, or before the end of the world. And as a further testimony and
confirmation of this, we may observe that S. Paul to Timothy, has joined
together these three things; The appearance of Christ, the Reign of Christ, and
the judging of the Dead. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing and his
Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1.

This might also be proved from the order, extent, and progress, of the
Prophecies of the Apocalypse; whereof some are such as reach to the end of the
World, and yet must be accomplished before the Millennium begin: as the Vials.
Others are so far already advanced toward the end of the World, as to leave no
room for a thousand years reign; as the Trumpets. But because every one has
his own interpretation of these Prophecies, and it would be tedious here to
prove any single Hypothesis in contradistinction to all the rest, we will
therefore leave this remark, to have more or less effect, according to the
minds it falls upon. And proceed to our fifth Argument.

Fifthly, The New Ierusalem-state is the same with the Millennial state: But
the New Jerusalem state will not be till the end of the World, or till after
the Conflagration: Therefore neither the Millennium. That the New
Ierusalem-state is the same with the Millennium, is agreed upon, I think, by
all Millenaries, Ancient and Modern. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertullian,
speak of it in that sense; and so do the later Authors, so far as I have
observed. And St. John seems to give them good authority for it. In the 20th.
Chap. of the Apocalypse, he says, the Camp of the Saints, and the Beloved City
were besieged by Satan and his Gigantick crew at the end of the Millennium.
That Beloved City is the New Jerusalem, and you see it is the same with the
Camp of the Saints, or, at least, contemporary with it. Besides, the Marriage
of the Lamb was in, or at the appearance of the New Jerusalem, for that was the
Spouse of the Lamb, Apoc. 21. 2. Now this Spouse was ready, and this Marriage
was said to be come, at the destruction of Babylon: which was the beginning of
the Millennium, Chap. 18. 7. Therefore the New Jerusalem run all along with the
Millennium, and was indeed the same thing under another name. Lastly, What is
this New Jerusalem, if it be not the same with the Millennial state? It is
promised as a reward to the sufferers for Christ, Apoc. 3. 12. and you see its
wonderful privileges, Chapter 21. 3, 4. and yet it is not Heaven and eternal Life;
for it is said to come down from God out of Heaven, Chapter 21. 2. and Chapter 3. 12.
It can therefore be nothing but the glorious Kingdom of Christ upon Earth,
where the Saints shall reign with him a Thousand Years.

Now as to the second part of our Argument, that the New Jerusalem will not
come down from Heaven till the end of the World: of this S. John seems to give
us a plain proof or demonstration: for he places the New Jerusalem in the New
Heavens and New Earth* which cannot be till after the Conflagration. Let us
hear his words, Apoc. 21. 1, 2. And I saw a New Heaven and a New Earth, for the
first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.
And I John saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
Heaven: prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband. When the New Earth was
made, he sees the New Jerusalem coming down upon it; and this Renovation of the
Earth not being till the Conflagration, The New Jerusalem could not be till
then, neither. The Prophet Isaiah had long before said the same thing, though
not in terms so express; Isa. 65. 17, 18.
He first says, Behold I create new heavens and a new earth, wherein you shall
rejoice. Then subjoyns immediately, Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing.
This rejoicing is still in the same place; in the New Heavens and New Earth, or
in the New Jerusalem. And S. John in a like method, first sets down the New
Earth, then the New Jerusalem; and expresses the mind of the Prophet Isaiah
more distinctly.

This leads me to a Sixth Argument to confirm our Conclusion. The time of the
Restitution or Restoration of all things, spoken of by S. Peter and the
Prophets, is the same with the Millennium: But that Restoration will not be
till the coming of Christ, and the end of the World: Therefore neither the
Millennium. That this Restitution of all things will not be till the coming of
our Savior, S. Peter declares in his Sermon, Act. 3. 21. and that the coming
of our Savior will not be till the end of the World, or till the
Conflagration, both S. Paul and S. Peter signify to us, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. 2
Pet. 3. 10. Therefore it remains only to prove, that this Restitution of all
things spoken of here by the Apostle, is the same with the Millennium. I know
that which it does directly and immediately signify, is the Renovation of the
World: but it must include the Moral World as well as the Natural: otherwise it
cannot be truly said, as S. Peter does there, that all the Prophets have spoken
of it. And what is the Renovation of the Natural and Moral World, but the New
Jerusalem or the Millennium.

These Arguments, taken together, have, to me, an irresistible evidence for the
proof of our Conclusion; That the Blessed Millennium cannot obtain in the
present Earth, or before the Conflagration; But when Nature is renewed, and the
Saints and Martyrs raised from the Dead, then they shall reign together with
Christ, in the New Heavens and New Earth, or in the New Jerusalem; Satan being
bound for a Thousand Years.

CHAP. IX. The chief employment of the Millennium, DEVOTION and CONTEMPLATION.
WE have now done with the substance of our Discourse; which is comprehended in
these Three Propositions: I. After the Conflagration of this World, there will
be New Heavens and a New Earth: and That Earth will be inhabited. II. That
there is an happy Millennial state; Or a future Kingdom of Christ and his
Saints, prophesied of and promised in the Old and New Testament: and received
by the Primitive Church, as a Christian and Catholic Doctrine. III. That this
blessed Millennial state, according as it is described in Scripture, cannot
take place in the present Earth, nor under the present constitution of Nature
and Providence: But is to be celebrated in the New Heavens and New Earth, after
the Conflagration.


These Three Propositions support this Work; and if any of them be broken, I
confess my design is broken, and this Treatise is of no effect. But what
remains to be spoken to in these last Chapters, is more circumstantial or
modal; and an error or mistake in such things, does not wound any vital part of
the Argument. You must now therefore lay aside your severity, and rigorous
censures; we are very happy, if, in this Life, we can attain to the substance
of truth: and make rational conjectures concerning modes and circumstances;
where every one has right to offer his sense, with modesty and submission.
Revelations made to us from Heaven in this present state, are often incomplete,
and do not tell us all: as if it was on purpose to set our thoughts a-work to
supply the rest; which we may lawfully do, provided it be according to the
analogy of Scripture and Reason.

To proceed therefore; We suppose, as you see, the new Heavens and the new
Earth to be the seat of the Millennium: and that new Creation to be
Paradisiacal. Its Inhabitants also to be Righteous Persons, the Saints of the
most High. And seeing the ordinary employments of our present Life, will then
be needless and superseded, as Military affairs, Sea-affairs, most Trades and
Manufactures, Law, Physic, and the laborious part of Agriculture: it may be
wondered, how this Happy People will bestow their time: What entertainment they
will find in a state of so much ease, and so little action. To this one might
answer in short, by another question, How would they have entertained
themselves in Paradise, if Man had continued in Innocence? This is a revolution
of the same state, and therefore they may pass their time as well now as they
could have done then. But to answer more particularly, besides all innocent
diversions, ingenuous conversations, and entertainments of friendship, the
greatest part of their time will be spent in Devotion and Contemplation. O
happy employment, and next to that of Heaven it self. What do the Saints above,
but sing Praises unto God, and contemplate his Perfections. And how mean and
despicable, for the most part, are the employments of this present Life, if
compared with those Intellectual Actions. If Mankind was divided into ten
parts, nine of those ten employ their time to get bread to their belly, and
clothes to their back; And what impertinences are these to a reasonable Soul,
if she was free from the clog of a Mortal Body; or if that could be provided
for, without trouble or loss of time? Corporeal Labor is from need and
necessity, but intellectual exercises are matter of choice, that please and
perfect at the same time.

Devotion warms and opens the Soul, and disposes it to receive Divine
Influences. It sometimes raises the mind into an heavenly ecstasie, and fills
it with a joy that is not to be expressed. When it is pure, it leaves a strong
impression upon the heart, of Love to God; and inspires us with a contempt of
this* World, having tasted the pleasures of the World to come. In the state
which we speak of, seeing the Tabernacle of God will be with men, Apoc. 21. 3.
we may reasonably suppose that there will be greater effusions and
irradiations of the Holy Spirit, than we have or can expect in this region of
darkness: and consequently, all the strength and comfort that can arise from
private devotion.

And as to their public Devotions, all beauties of Holiness, all perfection of
Divine Worship, will shine in their Assemblies. Whatsoever David says of Sion
and Jerusalem, Psalm. 84.
are but shadows of this New Jerusalem, Psalm. 87.
and of the glory that will be in those Solemnities. Imagine what a
Congregation will be there of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Christian
Martyrs, and Saints of the first rank, throughout all Ages. And these all known
to one another by their Names and History. This very meeting together of such
Persons, must needs create a joy unspeakable: But when they unite in their
praises to God and to the Lamb, with pure hearts full of divine Love: when they
sing their Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, that has washed them
in his blood, and redeemed them out of every Kingdom, and Tongue and People,
and Nation. When, with their Palms in their hands, they triumph over Sin, and
Death, and Hell, and all the Powers of Darkness: can there be any thing, on
this side Heaven, and a Quire of Angels, more glorious or more joyful?

But why did I except Angels? Why may not they be thought to be present at
these Assemblies? In a Society of Saints and purified Spirits, Why should we
think their converse impossible? In the Golden Age, the Gods were always
represented, as having freer intercourse with Men; and before the Flood, we may
reasonably believe it so. I cannot think, Enoch was translated into Heaven
without any converse with its Inhabitants before he went thither. And seeing
the Angels vouchsafed often, in former Ages, to visit the Patriarchs upon
Earth, we may with reason judge, that they will much more converse with the
same Patriarchs and holy Prophets, now they are risen from the Dead, and
cleans'd from their sins, and seated in the New Jerusalem. I cannot but call to
mind upon this occasion, That representation which S. Paul makes to us, of a
glorious state and a glorious Assembly, too high for this present Earth: It Is
Hebr. 12. 22, etc. in these words: But you are come unto Mount Sion, and unto
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels; to the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which
are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
men made perfect. This, I know, several apply to the Times and state of the
Gospel, in opposition to that of the Law; and it is introduced in that manner;
But here are several expressions too high for any present state of things; They
must respect a future state, either of Heaven, or of the Millennial Kingdom of
Christ. And to the later of these the expressions agree, and have a peculiar
fitness and applicability to it. And what follows in the context, ver. 26, 27,
28. About shaking the Heavens and the Earth once more: Removing the former
Scenes, and bringing on a New Kingdom that cannot be shaken: All this, I say,
answers to the Kingdom of Christ, which is to be established in the New Heavens
and New Earth.

But to proceed in their Public Devotions; Suppose this August Assembly,
inflamed with all Divine Passions, met together to celebrate the Name of God;
with Angels intermixed, to bear a part in this Holy Exercise. And let this
concourse be, not in any Temple made with hands, but under the great roof of
Heaven, (the True Temple of the most High,) so as all the Air may be filled
with the cheerful harmony of their Hymns and Hallelujahs. Then, in the height
of their Devotion, as they sing Praises to the Lamb, and to Him that sits upon
the Throne, suppose the Heavens to open, and the Son of God to appear in his
glory, Apoc. 5. 11.
with Thousands and Ten Thousands of Angels round about him; That their eyes
may see him, who, for their sakes, was crucified upon Earth, now encircled with
Light and Majesty. This will raise them into as great transports as humane
nature can bear: They will wish to be dissolved, they will strive to fly up to
him in the clouds, or to breath out their Souls in repeated doxologles of
Blessing, chapter 5. 13.
and honor, and glory, and power, to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb, for ever and ever.

But we cannot live always in the flames of Devotion. The weakness of our
Nature will not suffer us to continue long under such strong Passions, and such
intenseness of Mind. The question is therefore, What will be the ordinary
employment of that Life? How will they entertain their thoughts, or spend their
time? For we suppose they will not have that multiplicity of frivolous business
that we have now: About our Bodies, about our Children: in Trades and
Mechanics: in Traffic and Navigation: or Wars by Sea or Land. These things
being swept away, wholly or in a great measure, what will come in their place?
how will they find work or entertainment for a long life? If, we consider, who
they are that will have a part in this first Resurrection, and be Inhabitants
of that World that is to come, we may easily believe that the most constant
employment of their life will be CONTEMPLATION. Not that I exclude any innocent
diversions, as I said before: The entertainments of friendship, or ingenuous
conversation, but the great business and design of that life is Contemplation:
as preparatory to Heaven and eternal Glory. L. 5. c. 32.
Ui paulatim assuescant capere Deum, as Irenaeus says: That they may, by
degrees, enlarge their capacities, fit and accustom themselves to receive God.
Or, as he says in another place, That they may become capable of the glory of
the Father, that is, capable of bearing the glory and presence of God: capable
of the highest enjoyment of him, which is usually called the Beatifical Vision;
and is the condition of the Blessed in Heaven.

It cannot be denied, that in such a Millennial state, where we shall be freed
from all the encumbrances of this life, and provided of better Bodies and
greater light of Mind: It cannot be doubted, I say, but that we shall then be
in a disposition to make great proficiency in the knowledge of all things,
Divine and Intellectual: and consequently of making happy preparations for our
entering upon a further state of glory. For there is nothing certainly does more
prepare the mind of man for the highest perfections, than Contemplation: with
that Devotion which naturally flows from it, as heat follows light. And this
Contemplation has always a greater or less effect upon the mind according to
the perfection of its object. So as the Contemplation of the Divine Nature, is,
of all others, the most perfective in it self, and to us, according to our
capacities and degree of abstraction. An Immense Being does strangely fill the
Soul: and Omnipotency, Omnisciency, and Infinite Goodness, do enlarge and
dilate the Spirit, while it fixtly looks upon them. They raise strong passions
of Love and Admiration, which melt our Nature, and transform it into the mould
and image of that which we contemplate. What the Scripture says of our
Transformation into the Divine likeness: what S. John and the Platonists say of
our Union with God. And whatever is not Cant in the Mystical Theology, when
they tell us of being Deified; all this must spring from these sources of
Devotion and Contemplation. They will change and raise us from perfection to
perfection, as from glory to glory: into a greater similitude and nearer
station to the Divine Nature.

The Contemplation of God and his Works, comprehends all things. For, the one
makes the uncreated World, and the other the Created. And as the Divine Essence
and Attributes are the greatest object that the mind of man can set before it
self; so next to that are the effects and emanations of the Divinity, or the
Works of the Divine Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, in the Created World. This
has a vast extent and variety, and would be sufficient to entertain their
time, in that happy state, much longer than a thousand years. As you will
easily grant, if you allow me but to point at the several heads of those
Speculations.

The Contemplation of the Created World divides it self into three parts, that
of the Intellectual World: that of the Corporal: And the Government and
Administration of both, which is usually called Providence. These three, drawn
into one thought, with the reasons and proportions that result from them,
compose that GRAND IDEA, which is the treasury and comprehension of all
Knowledge. Whereof we have spoken more largely in the last Chapter of the
Second Book of this Theory, under the name of the Mundane Idea. But at present
we shall only mention such particulars, as may be thought proper subjects for
the meditations and enquiries of those who shall enjoy that happy state which
we now treat of.

As to the Intellectual World, excepting our own Souls, we know little, in this
region of darkness where we are at present, more than bare names. We hear of
Angels and Archangels, of Cherubins and Seraphins, of Principalities and Powers
and Thrones and Dominions. We hear the sound of these words with admiration,
but we know little of their natures; wherein their general notion, and wherein
their distinction, consists: what peculiar excellencies they have, what offices
and employments: of all this we are ignorant. Only in general, we cannot but
suppose that there are more orders and degrees of Intellectual Beings, betwixt
us and the Almighty, than there are kinds or species of living Creatures upon
the face of the Earth: betwixt Man, their Lord and Master, and the least worm
that creeps upon the ground. Nay, than there are Stars in Heaven, or Sands upon
the Seashore. For there is an infinite distance and interval betwixt us and
God Almighty: and all that, is filled with created Beings of different degrees
of perfection, still approaching nearer and nearer to their Maker. And when
this invisible World shall be opened to us: when the Curtain is drawn, and the
Celestial Hierarchy set in order before our eyes, we shall despise our selves,
and all the petty glories of a mortal life, as the dirt under our feet.

As to the Corporeal Universe, we have some share already in the Contemplation
and knowledge of that: though little in comparison of what will be then
discovered. The doctrine of the Heavens, fixed Stars, Planets and Comets, both
as to their matter, motion and form, will be then clearly demonstrated: and
what are mysteries to us now, will become matter of ordinary conversation. We
shall be better acquainted with our neighboring Worlds, and make new
discoveries as to the state of their affairs. The Sun especially, the Great
Monarch of the Planetary Worlds: whose Dominion reaches from Pole to Pole, and
the greatness of his Kingdom is under the whole Heaven. Who sends his bright
Messengers every day through all the regions of his vast Empire; throwing his
beams of light round about him, swifter and further than a thought can follow.
This noble Creature, I say, will make a good part of their study in the
succeeding World. Eudoxus the Philosopher, wished he might die like Phaeton, in
approaching too near to the Sun; provided he could fly so near it, and endure
it so long, till he had discovered its beauty and perfection. Who can blame
his curiosity: who would not venture far to see the Court of so great a Prince:
who has more Worlds under his command than the Emperors of the Earth have
Provinces or Principalities. Neither does he make his Subjects slaves to his
pleasure, or tributaries to serve and supply his wants; on the contrary, They
live upon him, he nourishes and preserves them: gives them fruits every year,
corn, and wine, and all the comforts of life. This glorious Body, which now we
can only gaze upon and admire, will be then better understood. A mass of Light
and Flame, and Ethereal matter, ten thousand times bigger than this Earth:
Enlightening and enlivening an Orb that exceeds the bulk of our Globe, as much
as that does the least sand upon the Seashore, may reasonably be presumed to
have some great Being at the Center of it. But what that is, we must leave to
the enquiries of another life.

The Theory of the Earth will be a common lession there: carried through all
its vicissitudes and periods from first to last, till its entire revolution be
accomplished. I told you in the Preface, The Revolution of World was one of the
greatest Speculations that we are capable of in this life: and this little
World where we are, will be the first and easiest instance of it; seeing we
have Records, Historical or Prophetical, that reach from the Chaos to the end
of the new Heavens and new Earth: which course of time makes up the greatest
part of the Circle or Revolution. And as what was before the Chaos, was but, in
my opinion, the first remove from a Fixed Star, so what is after the thousand
years Renovation, is but the last step to it again.

The Theory of humane Nature is also an useful and necessary speculation, and
will be carried on to perfection in that state. Having fixed the true
distinction betwixt Matter and Spirit, betwixt the Soul and the Body, and the
true nature and laws of their union: The original contract, and the terms
ratified by Providence at their first conjunction: It will not be hard to
discover the springs of action and passion: how the thoughts of our mind, and
the motions of our body act in dependence one upon another. What are the
primary differences of Genius's and complexions, and how our Intellectuals or
Morals depend upon them. What is the Root of Fatality, and how far it extends.
By these lights, they will see into their own and every Man's breast, and trace
the footsteps of the Divine wisdom in that strange composition of Soul and
Body.

This indeed is a mixed speculation, as most others are: and takes in something
of both Worlds, Intellectual and Corporeal: and may also belong in part to the
Third Head we mentioned, Providence. But there is no need of distinguishing
these Heads so nicely, provided we take in, under some or other of them, what
may be thought best to deserve our knowledge, now, or in another World. As to
Providence, what we intend chiefly by it here, is the general economy of our
Religion, and what is revealed to us in Scripture, concerning God, Angels, and
Mankind. These Revelations, as most in Sacred Writ, are short and incomplete:
as being designed for practice more than for speculation, or to awaken and
excite our thoughts, rather than to satisfy them. Accordingly we read in
Scripture of a Triune Deity: of God made flesh, in the Womb of a Virgin:
Barbarously crucified by the Jews: Descending into Hell: rising again from the
Dead: visibly ascending into Heaven: And sitting at the right hand of God the
Father, above Angels and Archangels. These great things are imperfectly
revealed to us in this life; which we are to believe so far as they are
revealed: In hopes these mysteries will be made more intelligible, in that
happy state to come, where Prophets, Apostles, and Angels, will meet in
conversation together.

In like manner, Mat. 3. 16.
how little is it we understand concerning the Holy Ghost. Act. 2.
That he descended like a Dove upon our Savior: Like cloven Tongues of fire
upon the Apostles; Matt. 1. 18.
The Place being filled with a rushing mighty Wind: Luke 1. 35.
That he over-shadowed the Blessed Virgin, and begot the Holy Infant. That He
made the Apostles speak all sort of Tongues and Languages ex tempore, and
poured out strange Virtues and Miraculous Gifts upon the Primitive Christians.
These things we know as bare matter of fact, but the method of these operations
we do not at all understand. Who can tell us now, what that is which we call
INSPIRATION? What change is wrought in the Brain, and what in the Soul: and
how the effect follows? Who will give us the just definition of a Miracle?
What the proximate Agent is above Man, and whether they are all from the same
power? How the manner and process of those miraculous changes in matter, may be
conceived? These things we see darkly, and hope they will be set in a clearer
light, and the Doctrines of our Religion more fully expounded to us, in that
Future World. For as several things obscurely expressed in the Old Testament,
are more clearly revealed in the New; So the same mysteries, in a succeeding
state, may still receive a further explication.

The History of the Angels, Good or bad, makes another part of this
Providential Systeme. Christian Religion gives us some notices, of both kinds,
but very imperfect; What interest the Good Angels have in the Government of
the World, and in ordering the affairs of this Earth and Mankind: What
subjection they have to our Savior, and what part in his Ministry: Whether
they are Guardians to particular Persons, to Kingdoms, to Empires; All that we
know at present, concerning these things, is but conectural. And as to the bad
Angels, who will give us an account of their Fall, and of their former
condition? I had rather know the History of Lucifer, than of all the Babylonian
and Persian Kings; Nay, than of all the Kings of the Earth. What the
Birthright was of that mighty Prince: what his Dominions: where his Imperial
Court and Residence? How he was deposed: for what Crime, and by what Power? How
he still wages War against Heaven, in his exile: What Confederates he has:
What is his Power over Mankind, and how limited? What change or damage he
suffered by the coming of Christ, and how it altered the posture of his
affairs. Where he will be imprisoned in the Millennium: and what will be his
last fate and final doom: whether he may ever hope for a Revolution or
Restoration? These things lie hid in the secret Records of Providence, which
then, I hope, will be opened to us.

With the Revolution of Worlds, we mentioned before the Revolution of Souls;
which is another great Circle of Providence, to be studied hereafter. We know
little here, either of the pre-existence or post-existence of our Souls. We
know not what they will be, till the loud Trump awakes us, and calls us again
into the Corporeal World. Who knows how many turns he shall take upon this
stage of the Earth, and how many trials he shall have, before his doom will be
finally concluded. Who knows where, or what, is the state of Hell: where the
Souls of the wicked are said to be for ever. What is the true state of Heaven:
What our Celestial Bodies: and What that Sovereign Happiness that is called the
Beatifical Vision? Our knowledge and conceptions of these things, are, at
present, very general and superficial; but in the future Kingdom of Christ,
which is introductory to Heaven it self, these imperfections, in a great
measure, will be done away; and such preparations wrought, both in the Will and
Understanding, as may fit us for the Life of Angels, and the enjoyment of God
in Eternal Glory.

Thus you see in general, what will be the employment of the Saints in the
blessed Millennium. And though they have few of the trifling businesses of this
life, they will not want the best and noblest of diversions. It Is an happy
thing when a Man's pleasure is also his perfection: for most Men's pleasures
are such as debase their nature. We commonly gratify our lower faculties, our
Passions, and our Appetites: and these do not improve, but depress the Mind.
And besides, they are so gross, that the finest tempers are surfeited in a
little time. There is no lasting pleasure, but Contemplation. All others grow
flat and insipid upon frequent use; and when a Man has run through a Set of
Vanities, in the declension of his Age, he knows not what to do with himself,
if he cannot Think. He saunters about, from one dull business to another, to
wear out time: And has no reason to value Life, but because he is afraid of
Death. But Contemplation is a continual spring of fresh pleasures. Truth is
inexhausted, and when you are once in the right way, the further you go, the
greater discoveries you make, and with the greater joy. We are sometimes highly
pleased, and even transported, with little inventions in Mathematics, or
Mechanics, or Natural Philosophy; All these things will make part of their
diversion and entertainment in that state; All the doctrine of Sounds and
Harmony: Of Light, Colors, and Perspective, will be known in perfection. But
these I call Diversions, in comparison of their higher and more serious
Speculations, which will be the business and happiness of that Life.

Do but imagine, that they will have the Scheme of all humane affairs lying
before them: from the Chaos to the last period. The universal history and order
of Times. The whole economy of the Christian Religion, and of all Religions in
the World. The Plan of the undertaking of the Messiah: with all other parts and
ingredients of the Providence of this Earth. Do but imagine this, I say, and
you will easily allow, that when they contemplate the Beauty, Wisdom, and
Goodness, of the whole design, it must needs raise great and noble Passions,
and a far richer joy than either the pleasures or speculations of this Life can
excite in us. And this being the last Act and close of all humane affairs, it
ought to be the more exquisite and elaborate: that it may crown the work,
satisfy the Spectators, and end in a general applause. The whole Theater
resounding with the praises of the great Dramatist, and the wonderful Art and
Order of the composition.

CHAP. X. Objections against the Millennium, answered. With some Conjectures
concerning the state of things after the Millennium: and what will be the final
Consummation of this World.
YOU see how Nature and Providence have conspired, to make the Millennium as
happy a state, as any Terrestrial state can be. For, besides Health and Plenty:
Peace, Truth, and Righteousness will flourish there, and all the evils of this
Life stand excluded. There will be no Ambitious Princes, studying mischief one
against another; or contriving methods to bring their own Subjects into
slavery. No mercenary Statesmen, to assist and intrigue with them. No
oppression from the Powerful, no snares or traps laid for the Innocent. No
treacherous Friends, no malicious Enemies. No Knaves, Cheats, Hypocrites; the
Vermin of this Earth, that swarm every where. There will be nothing but Truth,
Candor, Sincerity, and Ingenuity: as in a Society or Commonwealth of Saints and
Philosophers. In a word, 'twill be Paradise restored: both as to Innocence of
Temper, and the Beauties of Nature.

I believe you will be apt to say, If this be not True, it is pity but that it
should be True. For it is a very desirable state, where all good People would
find themselves mightily at ease. What is it that hinders it then? It must be
some ill Genius. For Nature tends to such a Renovation, as we suppose: and
Scripture speaks loudly of an happy state to be, some time or other, on this
side Heaven. And what is there, pray, in this present World, Natural or Moral,
if I may ask with reverence, that could make it worth the while for God to
create it, if it never was better, nor ever will be better? Is there not more
Misery than Happiness: Is there not more Vice than Virtue, in this World? as if
it had been made by a Manichean God. The Earth barren, the Heavens inconstant:
Men wicked and God offended. This is the posture of our Affairs: such has our
World been hitherto: with W^rs and Bloodshed, Sickness and Diseases, Poverty,
servitude and perpetual Drudgery for the necessaries of a Mortal Life. We may
therefore reasonably hope, from a God infinitely good and powerful, for better
Times and a better State, before the last period and consummation of all things.

But it will be objected, it may be, that, according to Scripture, the vices
and wickedness of Men will continue to the end of the World; and so there will
be no room for such an happy state, as we hope for. Luke 18. 8.
Our Savior says, When the son of man comes, shall he find faith upon the
Earth? They shall eat and drink and play, as before the destruction of the old
World, or of Sodom, (Luke 17. 26, etc.) and the wickedness of those Men, you
know, continued to the last. This objection may pinch those that suppose the
Millennium to be in the present Earth, and a thousand years before the coming
of our Savior: for his words seem to imply that the World will be in a state
of wickedness even till his coming. Accordingty Antichrist or the Man of Sin,
is not said to be destroyed till the coming of our Savior, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. and
till he be destroyed, we cannot hope for a Millennium. Lastly, The coming of
our Savior is always represented in Scripture as sudden, surprising and
unexpected. As Lightning breaking suddenly out of the clouds, (Luke 17. 24. and
chapter 21. 34, 35) or as a thief in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3, 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
Apoc. 16. 15. But if there be such a forerunner of it as the Millennial state,
whose bounds we know, according as that expires and draws to an end, Men will
be certainly advertised of the approaching of our Savior. But this objection,
as I told you, does not affect our Hypothesis, for we suppose the Millennium
will not be till after the coming of our Savior, and the Conflagration. And
also that his coming will be sudden and surprising: and that Antichrist will
continue in being, though not in the same degree of power, till that time. So
that they that place the Millennium in the present Earth, are chiefly concerned
to answer this first objection.

But you will object, it may be, in the second place, That this Millennium,
wheresoever it is, would degenerate at length, into sensuality, and a Mohammedan
Paradise. For where there are earthly pleasures and earthly appetites, they
will not be kept always in order without any excess or luxuriancy: especially
as to the senses of Touch and Taste. I am apt to think this is true, if the
Soul have no more power over the Body than she has at present: and our Senses,
Passions, and Appetites be as strong as they are now. But according to our
explication of the Millennium, we have great reason to hope, that the Soul will
have a greater dominion over the Resurrection-body, than she has over this.
And you know we suppose that none will truly inherit the Millennium, but those
that rise from the Dead. Nor do we admit any propagation there, nor the trouble
or weakness of Infants. But that all rise in a perfect age, and never die:
being translated, at the final judgment, to meet our Savior in the clouds, and
to be with him for ever. Thus we easily avoid the force of this objection. But
those that place the Millennium in this Life, and to be enjoyed in these
Bodies, must find out some new preservatives against vice: otherwise they will
be continually subject to degeneracy.

Another objection may be taken from the personal Reign of Christ upon Earth:
which is a thing incongruous, and yet asserted by many modern Millenaries. That
Christ should leave that right hand of his Father, to come and pass a thousand
years here below: living upon Earth in an heavenly Body: This, I confess, is a
thing I never could digest, and therefore I am not concerned in this objection;
not thinking it necessary that Christ should be personally present and resident
upon Earth in the Millennium. I am apt to believe that there will be then a
Celestial Presence or Christ, or a Shekinah, as we noted before: As the Sun is
present to the Earth, yet never leaves its place in the Firmament; so Christ
may be visibly conspicuous in his Heavenly Throne, Act. 7. 55, 5^.
as he was to S. Stephen: and yet never leave the right hand of his Father. And
this would be a more glorious and illustrious presence, than if he should
descend, and converse amongst Men in a personal shape. But these things not
being distinctly revealed to us, we ought not to determine any thing concerning
them, but with modesty and submission.

We have thus far pretty well escaped, and kept our selves out of the reach of
the ordinary objections against the Millennium. But there remains one,
concerning a double Resurrection, which must fall upon every Hypothesis: and
it is this. The Scripture, they say, speaks but of one Resurrection: whereas the
doctrine of the Millennium supposes two; one at the beginning of the
Millennium, for the Martyrs, and those that enjoy that happy state, and the
other at the end of it; which is universal and final, in the last day of
judgment. It Is true, Scripture generally speaks of the Resurrection in gross:
without distinguishing first and second; and so it speaks of the Coming of our
Savior, without distinction of first or second; yet it does not follow from
that, that there is but one Coming of our Savior: so neither that there is but
one Resurrection. And seeing there is one place of Scripture that speaks
distinctly of two Resurrections, namely, the 20th chap. of the Apocalypse: that
is to us a sufficient warrant for asserting two. As there are some things in
one Evangelist that are not in another, yet we think them Authentic if they be
but in one. There are also some things in Daniel, concerning the Messiah, and
concerning the Resurrection, that are not in the rest of the Prophets: yet we
look upon his single testimony, as good authority. S. John writ the last of all
the Apostles: and as the whole series of his Prophecies is new, reaching
through the later times to the Consummation of all things; so we cannot wonder
if he had something more particular revealed to him concerning the
Resurrection; That which was spoken of before in general, being distinguished
now into First and Second, or particular and universal, See Mr. Mede.
in this last Prophet. Some think S. Paul means no less, when he makes an order
in the Resurrection: some rising sooner, some later: 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 15, etc. but whether that be so or no, S. John might have a more
distinct revelation concerning it, than S. Paul had, or any one before him.

After these Objections, a great many Queries and difficulties might be
proposed relating to the Millennium. But that is no more than what is found in
all other matters, remote from our knowledge. Who can answer all the Queries
that may be made concerning Heaven, or Hell, or Paradise? When we know a thing
as to the substance, we are not to let go our hold, though there remain some
difficulties unresolved: otherwise we should be eternally Skeptical in most
matters of Knowledge. Therefore, though we cannot, for example, give a full
account of the distinction of habitations and inhabitants in the Future Earth:
or, of the order of the First Resurrection; whether it be performed by degrees
and successively, or all the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem rise at once, and
continue throughout the whole Millennium. I say, though we cannot give a distinct
account of these, or such like particulars, we ought not therefore to deny or
doubt whether there will be a New Earth, or a First Resurrection. For the
Revelation goes clearly so far: and the obscurity is only in the consequences
and dependances of it. Which Providence thought fit, without further light, to
leave to our search and disquisition.

Scripture mentions one thing, at the end of the Millennium, which is a common
difficulty to all; and every one must contribute their best thoughts and
conjectures toward the solution of it. It Is the strange doctrine of Gog and
Magog; Apoc. 20. 8, 9.
which are to rise up in rebellion against the Saints, and besiege the holy
City, and the holy Camp. And this is to be upon the expiration of the thousand
years, when Satan is loosened. For no sooner will his Chains be knocked off,
but he will put himself in the head of this Army of Giants, or Sons of the
Earth, and attack Heaven, and the Saints of the most High. But with ill
success, for there will come down fire and lightning from Heaven, and consume
them. This, methinks, has a great affinity with the History of the Giants,
rebelling and assaulting Heaven and struck down by thunderbolts. But that of
setting mountains upon mountains, or tossing them into the Sky, that is the
Poetical part, and we must not expect to find it in the Prophecy. The Poets
told their Fable, as of a thing past, and so it was a Fable; But the Prophets
speak of it, as of a thing to come, and so it will be a reality. But how and in
what sense it is to be understood and explained, every one has the liberty to
make the best judgment he can.

Ezekiel mentions Gog and Magog: Chapter 38. and 39.
which I take to be only types and shadows of these which we are now speaking
of: and not yet exemplified, no more than his Temple. And seeing this People is
to be at the end of the Millennium, and in the same Earth with it, We must,
according to our Hypothesis, plant them in the Future Earth; and therefore all
former conjectures about the Turks, or Scythians, or other Barbarians, are out
of doors with us, seeing the Scene of this action does not lie in the present
Earth. They are also represented by the Prophet, as a People distinct and
separate from the Saints, not in their manners only, but also in their seats
and habitations; Apoc. 20. 8, 9
For they are said to come up from the four corners of the Earth, upon the
breadth of the Earth: and there to besiege the Camp of the Saints and the
beloved City: This makes it seem probable to me, that there will be a double
race of Mankind in that Future Earth: very different one from another, both as
to their temper and disposition, and as to their origin. The one born from
Heaven, Sons of God, and of the Resurrection: who are the true Saints and heirs
of the Millennium. The others born of the Earth, Sons of the Earth, generated
from the slime of the ground, and the heat of the Sun, as brute Creatures were
at first. This second Progeny or Generation of Men in the Future Earth, I
understand to be signified by the Prophet under these borrowed or feigned names
of Gog and Magog. And this Earth-born race, increasing and multiplying after
the manner of Men, by carnal propagation, after a thousand years, grew
numerous, as the Sand by the Sea; and thereupon made an irruption or inundation
upon the face of the Earth, and upon the habitations of the Saints; As the
barbarous Nations did formerly upon Christendom: Or as the Giants are said to
have made War against the Gods. But they were soon confounded in their impious
and sacrilegious design, being struck and consumed by fire from Heaven.

Some will think, it may be, that there was such a double race of Mankind in
the first World also. The Sons of Adam, and the Sons of God: because it is
said, Genesis 6. When men began to multiply upon the face of the Earth, that the
SONS OF GOD SAW THE DAUGHTERS OF MEN, that they were fair, and they took them
Wives of all that they liked. And it is added presently, ver. 4. There were
Giants in the Earth in those days; and also after that, when the Sons of God
came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them: the same
became mighty men, which were of old men of renown. Here seem to be two or
three orders or races in this Ante-diluvian World. The Sons of God: The Sons
and Daughters of Adam: and a third sort arising from the mixture and copulation
of these, which are called Mighty men of old, or Hero's. Besides, here are
Giants mentioned, and to which they are to be reduced, it does not certainly
appear.

This mixture of these two Races, whatsoever they were, gave, it seems, so
great offense to God, that he destroyed that World upon it, in a Deluge of
Water. It has been matter of great difficulty to determine, who these Sons of
God were, that fell in love with and married the daughters of men. There are
two conjectures that prevail most: One, that they were Angels: and another,
that they were of the Posterity of Seth, and distinguished from the rest, by
their Piety, and the worship of the true God: so that it was a great crime for
them to mingle with the rest of mankind, who are supposed to have been
Idolaters. Neither of these opinions is to me satisfactory. For as to Angels;
Good Angels neither marry, nor are given in marriage; Matt. 22. 30. and bad
Angels are not called the Sons of God. Besides, if Angels were capable of those
mean pleasures, we ought in reason to suppose, that there are female Angels, as
well as male; for surely those capacities are not in vain through a whole
Species of Beings. And if there be female Angels, we cannot imagine, but that
they must be of a far more charming beauty than the dowdy daughters of men.
Then as to the line of Seth, It does not appear that there was any such
distinction of Idolaters and true* Worshippers before the Flood, or that there
was any such thing, as Idolatry, at that time: nor for some Ages after.
Besides, it is not said, that the Sons of God fell in love with the Daughters
of Cain, or of any degenerate race, but with the Daughters of Adam: which may
be the Daughters of Seth, as well as of any other. These conjectures therefore
seem to be shallow and ill-grounded. But what the distinction was of those two
orders, remains yet very uncertain.

St. Paul to the Galatians, (Chap. 4. 21, 22, etc.) makes a distinction also of
a double Progeny: that of Sarah, and that of Hagar. One was born according to
the flesh, after a natural manner: and the other by the divine power, or in
virtue of the divine promise. This distinction of a natural and supernatural
origin, and of a double progeny: the one born to servitude, the other to
liberty: represents very well either the manner of our present birth, and of
our future, at the Resurrection: Or that double progeny and double manner of
birth, which we suppose in the Future Earth. It Is true, St. Paul applies this
to the Law and the Gospel; but Typical things, you know, have different aspects
and completions: which are not exclusive of one another: and so it may be here.
But however this double race of Mankind in the Future Earth, to explain the
Doctrine of Gog and Magog, is but a conjecture: and does not pretend to be
otherwise considered.

The last thing that remains to be considered and accounted for, is the upshot
and conclusion of all: namely, what will become of the Earth after the thousand
years expired? Or after the Day of Judgment past, and the Saints translated
into Heaven, what will be the face of things here below? There being nothing
expressly revealed concerning this, we must not expect a positive resolution of
it. And the difficulty is not peculiar to our hypothesis: for though the
Millennium, and the final Judgment were concluded in the present Earth, the
Quaere would still remain, What would become of this Earth after the Last Day.
So that all parties are equally concerned, and equally free, to give their
opinion, What will be the last state and Consummation of this Earth* Scripture,
I told you, has not defined this point: and the Philosophers say very little
concerning it. The Stoics indeed speak of the final resolution of all things
into Fire, or into Ether: which is the purest and subtlest sort of fire. So
that the whole Globe or Mass of the Earth, and all particular bodies, will,
according to them, be at last dissolved into a liquid flame. Neither was this
Doctrine first invented by the Stoics: Heraclitus taught it long before them:
and I take it to be as ancient as Orpheus himself: who was the first
Philosopher amongst the Greeks. And he deriving his notions from the Barbarick
Philosophers, or the Sages of the East, that School of Wisdom may be looked
upon as the true seminary of this Doctrine: as it was of most other natural
knowledge.

But this dissolution of the Earth into Fire, may be understood two ways;
either that it will be dissolved into a loose name, and so dissipated and lost
as Lightning in the Air, and vanish into nothing; or that it will be dissolved
into a fixed flame, such as the Sun is, or a fixed Star. And I am of opinion,
that the Earth after the last Day of Judgment, will be changed into the nature
of a Sun, or of a fixed Star; and shine like them in the Firmament. Being all
melted down into a mass of Ethereal matter, and enlightening a Sphere or Orb
round about it. I have no direct and demonstrative proof of this, I confess;
But if Planets were once fixed Stars, as I believe they were; their revolution
to the same state again, in a great Circle of Time, seems to be according to
the methods of Providence; which loves to recover what was lost or decayed,
after certain periods: and what was originally good and happy, to make it so
again; All Nature, R^^. 8. 21.
at last, being transformed into a like glory with the Sons of God.

I will not tell you what foundation there is in Nature, for this change or
transformation; from the interior constitution of the Earth, and the instances
we have seen of new Stars appearing in the Heavens. I should lead the English
Reader too far out of his way, to discourse of these things. But if there be
any passages or expressions in Scripture, that countenance such a state of
things after the day of Judgment, it will not be improper to take notice of
them. That radiant and illustrious Jerusalem, described by St. John, Apoc. 21.
ver. 10, 11, 12, etc. composed all of Gemms and bright materials, clear and
sparkling, as a Star in the Firmament: Who can give an account what that is?
Its foundations, walls, gates, streets, all the Body of it, resplendent as
light or fire. What is there in Nature, or in this Universe, that bears any
resemblance with such a Phenomenon as this, unless it be a Sun or a fixed Star?
Especially if we add and consider what follows, Ver. 23.
That the City had no need of the Sun, non of the Moon, Ver. 25.
to shine in it. And that there was no night there. This can be no Terrestrial
Body; it must be a substance luminous in it self, and a fountain of light, as a
fixed Star. And upon such a change of the Earth, or transformation, as this,
would be brought to pass the saying that is written, DEATH IS SWALLOWED UP IN
VICTORY. Which indeed S. Paul seems to apply to our Bodies in particular, 1
Cor. 15. 54. But in the Eighth Chapter to the Romans He extends it to all
Nature. Ver. 21.
The Creation it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. And accordingly S. John, speaking
of the same time with St. Paul in that place to the Corinthians, namely of the
general Resurrection and day of Judgment, says, Death and Hades, which we
render Hell, Apoc. 20. 14.
were cast into the lake of fire. This is their being swallowed up in victory,
which S. Paul speaks of; when Death and Hades, that is, all the Region of
mortality: The Earth and all its dependances: are absorpt into a mass of Fire;
and converted, by a glorious Victory over the powers of darkness, into a
Luminous Body and a region of Light.

This great Issue and Period of the Earth, and of all humane affairs, though it
seem to be founded in nature, and supported by several expressions of
Scripture; yet we cannot, for want of full instruction, propose it otherwise
than as a fair Conjecture. The Heavens and the Earth shall fly away at the day
of Judgment, says the Text: Apoc. 20. 11. And their place shall not be found.
This must be understood of our Heavens and our Earth. And their flying away
must be their removing to some other part of the Universe; so as their place or
residence shall not be found any more here below. This is the easy and natural
sense of the Words; and this translation of the Earth will not be without some
change preceding, that makes it leave its place, and, with a lofty flight, take
its seat amongst the Stars. -- There we leave it; Having conducted it for the
space of Seven Thousand Years, through various changes, from a dark Chaos to a
bright Star.

FINIS.
A REVIEW OF THE THEORY OF THE EARTH, And of its PROOFS: ESPECIALLY IN
REFERENCE TO SCRIPTURE.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

A REVIEW OF THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
TO take a review of this Theory of the Earth, which we have now finished, We
must consider, first, the extent of it: and then the principal parts whereof it
consists. It reaches, as you see, from one end of the World to the other: From
the first Chaos to the last day, and the Consummation of all things. This,
probably, will run the length of Seven Thousand Years: which is a good
competent space of time to exercise our Thoughts upon, and to observe the
several Scenes which Nature and Providence bring into View within the compass
of so many Ages.

The matter and principal parts of this Theory, are such things as are recorded
in Scripture. We do not feign a Subject, and then descant upon it, for
diversion; but endeavor to give an intelligible and rational account of such
matters of Fact, past or future, as are there specified and declared. What it
has seemed good to the Holy Ghost to communicate to us, by History or
Prophecy, concerning the several States and general Changes of this Earth,
makes the Argument of our Discourse. Therefore the things themselves must be
taken for granted, in one sense or other: seeing besides all other proofs, they
have the Authority of a Revelation; and our business is only to give such an
explication of them, as shall approve it self to the faculties of Man, and be
conformable to Scripture.

We will therefore first set down the things themselves, that make the subject
matter of this Theory: and remind you of our explication of them. Then
recollect the general proofs of that explication, from Reason and Nature: but
more fully and particularly show how it is grounded upon Scripture. The primary
Phenomenon whereof we are to give an account, are these Five or Six.

I. The Original of the Earth from a Chaos. II. The state of Paradise, and the
Ante-diluvian World. III. The Universal Deluge. IV. The Universal
Conflagration. V. The Renovation of the World, or the New Heavens and New
Earth. VI. The Consummation of all things.
These are unquestionably in Scripture: and these all relate, as you see, to
the several forms, s^^tes and revolutions of this Earth* We are therefore
obliged to give a clear and coherent account of these Phae^o^ena, in that or^er
and consecution wherein they stand to (...) another.

There are also in Scripture some other things, relating to the same Subjects,
that may be called the Secondary Ingredients of this Theory, and are to be
referred to their respective primary heads. Such are, for instance.

I. The Longevity of the Ante-diluvians. II. The Rupture of the Great Abyss, at
the Deluge. III. The appearing of the Rainbow after the Deluge: as a sign that
there never should be a second Flood.
^hese things Scripture has al^^ left upon ^^cord: as directions and
indications how to understand the Ante-diluvian state, and the Deluge it self.
Whosoever therefore shall undertake to write the Theory of the Earth, must
think himself bound to give us a just explication of these secondary
Phenomenon, as well as of the primary; and that in such a dependence and
connection, as to make them give and receive light from one another.

The former part of the Task is concerning the World behind us, Times and
Things past, that are already come to light. The later is concerning the World
before us, Times and Things to come: That lie yet in the bosom of Providence,
and in the ^eeds of Nature. And these are chiefly the Conflagration of the
World, and the Renovation of it. When these are over and expired, then comes
the end, 1 Cor. 15.
as S. Paul says. Then the Heavens and the Earth fly away, as S. John says*
Apoc. 20.
Then is the Consummation of all things, and the last period of this sublunary
World, whatsoever it is. Thus ^ar the Theorist must go, and pursue the motions
of Nature, till all things are brought to rest and silence. And in this latter
part of the Theory, there is also a collateral Phenomenon, the Millennium, or
Thousand Years Reign of Christ and his Saints, upon Earth, to be considered.
For this according as it is represented in Scripture, does imply a change in
the Natural World, as well as in the Moral* and therefore must be accounted
for, in the Theory of the Earth. At least it must be there determined, whether
that state of the World, which is singular and extraordinary, will be before or
after the Conf^agration.

These are the Principals and Incidents of this Theory of the Earth, as to the
Matter and Subject of it: which, you see, is both imp^rtant, and wholly taken
out of Scripture. As to our explication of these points, that is sufficiently
known, being set down at large in four Books of this Theory. Therefore it
remains only, having seen the Matter of the Theory, to examine the Form of it,
and the proofs of it: for from these two things it must receive its censure. As
to the form, the characters of a Regular Theory seem to be these three; Few and
easy Postulatums: Union of Parts: and a Fitness to answer, fully and clearly,
all the Phaenomend to which it is to be applied.

We think our Hypothesis does not want any of these Characters. As to the
First, we take but one single Postulatum for the whole Theory* and tha^ an
easy one, warranted both by Scripture and Antiquity* Namely, That this Earth
rise, at first, from a Chaos. As to the second, Union of Parts, The whole
Theory is but one Series of Causes and Effects from that first Chaos. Besides,
you can scarce admit any one part of it, first, last, or intermediate, but you
must, in consequence of that, admit all the rest. Grant me but that the Deluge
is truly explained, and I Will desire no more for proof of all the Theory. Or, if
you begin at the other end, and grant the New Heavens and New Earth after the
Conflagration, (...)
you will be led back again to the first Heavens and first Earth that were
before the Flood. For St. John says, that New Earth was without a Sea: Apoc.
21. 1. And it was a Renovation; or Restitution to some former state of things:
there was therefore some former Earth without a Sea; which not being the
present Earth, it must be the Ante diluvian. Besides, both St. John, and the
Prophet Isaias, have represented the New Heavens and New Earth, as
Paradisi^cal, According as is proved, Book the 4th. chap. 2. And having told us
the form of the New future Earth, that it will have no Sea, it is a reasonable
inference that there was no Sea in the Paradisi^cal Earth. However from the
form of this Future Earth, which St. John represents to us, we may at least
conclude, That an Earth without a Sea is no Chimaera, or impossibility: but
rather a fit seat and habitation for the Just and the Innocent.

Thus you see the parts of the Theory link and hold fast one another: according
to the second character. And as to the third, of being (...) to the Phenomenon,
we must refer that to the next head, of Proofs. It may be t^^ly said, that bare
coherence and union of parts is not a sufficient proof; The parts of a ^able or
Romance may hang aptly together, and yet have no truth in them. This is enough
indeed to give the title of a just Composition to any work, but not of a true
one: till it appear that the conclusions and exp^tations are grounded upon*
good natural evidence, or upon good Divine authority. We must therefore proceed
now to the third thing to be considered in a Theory, What its Proofs are: or
the grounds upon which it stands, whether Sacred or Natural.

According to Natural evidence, things are proved from their Causes or their
Effects. And we think we have this double order of proofs for the truth of our
Hypothesis. As to the method of Causes, we proceed from what is more simple, to
what is more compound: and build all upon one foundation. Go but to the Head of
the Theory, and you will see the Causes lying in a train before you, from first
to last. And though you did not know the Natural History of the World, past or
future, you might, by intuition, foretell it, as to the grand revolutions and
successive faces of Nature, through a long series of Ages. If we have given a
true account of the motions of the Chaos, we have also truly formed the first
habitable Earth. And if that be truly formed, we have thereby given a true
account of the state of Paradise, and of all that depends upon it. And not of
that only, but also of the universal Deluge. Both these we have shown in their
causes: The one from the Form of that Earth, and the other from the Fall of it
into the Abyss. And though we had not been made acquainted with these things by
Antiquity, we might, in contemplation of the Causes, have truly conceived them,
as properties or incidents to the First Earth. But as to the Deluge, I do not
say, that we might have calculated the Time, manner, and other circumstances of
it: These things were regulated by Providence, in subordination to the Moral
World. But that there would be, at one time or other, a disruption of that
Earth, or of the Great Abyss: and in consequence of it, an universal Deluge: So
far, I think, the light of a Theory might carry us.

Furthermore, In consequence of this disruption of the Primeval Earth, Theor.
Book 3. chapter 7, and 8.
at the Deluge, the present Earth was made hollow and cavernous: and by that
means, (due preparations being used) capable of Combustion, or of perishing by
an universal Fire: Yet, to speak ingenuously, This is as hard a step to be
made, in virtue of Natural causes, as any in the whole Theory. But in
recompense of that defect, the Conflagration is so plainly and literally taught
us in Scripture, and avowed by Antiquity, that it can fall under no dispute, as
to the thing it self. And as to a capacity or disposition to it in the present
Earth, that I think is sufficiently made out.

Then, the Conflagration admitted, in that way it is explained in the Third
Book: The Earth, you see, is, by that fire, reduced to a second Chaos. A Chaos
truly so called. And from that, as from the First, arises another Creation, or
New Heavens and a New Earth; By the same causes, and in the same form, with the
Paradisiacal. This is the Renovation of the World: The Restitution of all
things: mentioned both by Scripture and Antiquity: And by the Prophet Isaiah,
St. Peter and St. John, called the New Heaven and New Earth. With this, as the
last period, and most glorious Scene of all humane affairs, our Theory
concludes; as to this method of Causes, whereof we are now speaking.

I say, here it ends as to the method of Causes. For though we pursue the Earth
still further, even to its last Dissolution: which is called the Consummation
of all things: yet all, that we have superadded upon that occasion, is but
Problematical: and may, without prejudice to the Theory, be argued and disputed
on either hand. I do not know, but that our conjectures there may be well
grounded: but however, not springing so directly from the same root, or, at
least, not by ways, so clear and visible, I leave that part undecided.
Especially seeing we pretend to write no more than the Theory of the Earth, and
therefore as we begin no higher than the Chaos, so we are not obliged to go any
further than to the last state of a Terrestrial consistency: which is that of
the New Heavens and the New Earth.

This is the first natural proof, From the order of Causes. The second is from
the consideration of Effects. Namely of such effects as are already in being.
And therefore this proof can extend only to that part of the Theory, that
explains the present and past form and Phenomenon of the Earth. What is Future,
must be left to a further trial, when the things come to pass, and present
themselves to be examined and compared with the Hypothesis. As to the present
Form of the Earth, we call all Nature to witness for us: The Rocks and the
Mountains, the Hills and the Valleys, the deep and wide Sea, and the Caverns of
the Ground: Let these speak, and tell their origin: How the Body of the Earth
came to be thus torn and mangled: If this strange and irregular structure was
not the effect of a ruin: and of such a ruin as was universal over the face
of the whole Globe. But we have given such a full explication of this, in the
first part of the Theory, from Chapt. the 9th. to the end of that Treatise,
that we dare stand to the judgment of any that reads those four Chapters, to
determine if the Hypothesis does not answer all those Phenomenon, easily and
adequately.

The next Phenomenon to be considered, is the Deluge, with its adjuncts. This
also is fully explained by our Hypothesis, in the 2d. 3d. and 6th. Chapters of
the first Book. Where it is shown, that the Mosaical Deluge, that is, an
universal Inundation of the whole Earth, above the tops of the highest
Mountains, made by a breaking open of the Great Abyss, (for thus far Moses
leads us) is fully explained by this Hypothesis, and cannot be conceived in any
other method hitherto proposed? There are no sources or stores of Water
sufficient for such an effect, that may be drawn upon the Earth, and drawn off
again, but by supposing such an Abyss, and such a Disruption of it, as the
Theory represents.

Lastly, As to the Phenomenon of Paradise and the Ante-diluvian World, we have
set them down in order in the 2d. Book: and applied to each of them its proper
explication, from the same Hypothesis. We have also given an account of that
Character which Antiquity always assigned to the first age of the World, or the
Golden Age, as they called it: namely, Equality of Seasons throughout the Year,
or a perpetual Equinox. We have also taken in all the adjuncts or concomitants
of these States, as they are mentioned in Scripture. The Longevity of the
Ante-diluvians, and the declension of their age by degrees, after the Flood. As
also that wonderful Phenomenon, the Rainbow: which appeared to Noah for a
Sign, that the Earth should never undergo a second Deluge. Theor. Book 2. chap.
5.
And we have shown, wherein the force and propriety of that Sign consisted, for
confirming Noah's faith in the promise and in the divine veracity.

Thus far we have explained the past Phenomenon of the Natural World. The rest
are Futurities, which still lie hid in their Causes; and we cannot properly
prove a Theory from effects that are not yet in being. But so far as they are
foretold in Scripture, both as to substance and circumstance, in prosecution of
the same Principles we have ante dated their birth, and showed how they will
come to pass. We may therefore, I think, reasonably conclude, That this Theory
has performed its task, and answered its title: having given an account of all
the general changes of the Natural World, as far as either Sacred History looks
backwards, or Sacred Prophecy looks forwards. So far as the one tells us what
is past in Nature, and the other what is to come. And if all this be nothing
but an appearance of truth, it is a kind of fatality upon us to be deceived.

SO much for Natural Evidence, from the Causes or Effects. We now proceed to
Scripture, which will make the greatest part of this Review. The Sacred Basis
upon which the whole Theory stands, is the doctrine of S. Peter, delivered in
his Second Epistle and Third Chapter, concerning the Triple Order and
Succession of the Heavens and the Earth. That comprehends the whole extent of
our Theory: which indeed is but a large Commentary upon S. Peter's Text. The
Apostle sets out a threefold state of the Heavens and Earth: with some general
properties of each: taken from their different Constitution and different Fate.
The Theory takes the same threefold state of the Heavens and the Earth: and
explains more part^cularly, wherein their different Constitution consists: and
how, under the conduct of Providence, their different fate depends upon it. Let
us set down the Apostle's words, with the occasion of them: and their plain
sense, according to the most easy and natural explication.

Ver. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, 2
Pet. 3.
walking after their own lusts.

4. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.

5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God, the
heavens were of old, and the earth consisting of water and by water.

6. Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.

7. But the heavens and the earth that are now, by the some word, are kept in
store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
men. --

10. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

This is the whole Discourse so far as relates to our Subject. S Peter, you
see, had met with some that scoffed at the future destruction of the World, and
the coming of our Savior; and they were men, it seems, that pretended to
Philosophy and Argument; and they use this argument for their opinion, Seeing
there has been no change in Nature, or in the World, from the beginning to
this time, why should we think there will be any change for the future?

The Apostle answers to this, That they willingly forget or are ignorant that
there were Heavens of old, and an Earth, so and so constituted; consisting of
Water and by Water; by reason whereof that World, or those Heavens and that
Earth, perished in a Deluge of Water. But, says he, the Heavens and the Earth
that are now, are of another constitution, fitted and reserved to another fate,
namely, to perish by Fire. And after these are perished, there will be New
Heavens and a New Earth, according to God's promise.

This is an easy Paraphrase, and the plain and genuine sense of the Apostle's
discourse; and no body, I think, would ever look after any other sense, if this
did not carry them out of their usual road and point to conclusions which they
did not fancy. This sense, you see* hits the objections directly, or the Cavil
which these scoffers made; and tells them, that they vainly pretend that there
has been no change in the World since the beginning, for there was one sort of
Heavens and Earth before the Flood, and another sort now; the first having been
destroyed at the Deluge. So that the Apostle's argument stands upon this
Foundation, That there is a diversity betwixt the present Heavens and Earth,
and the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth; take away that, and you take away all
the force of his Answer.

Then as to his New Heavens and New Earth after the Conflagration, they must be
material and natural, in the same sense and signification with the former
Heavens and Earth; unless you will offer open violence to the Text. So that
this Triplicity of the Heavens and the Earth, is the first, obvious, plain
sense of the Apostle's discourse: which every one would readily accept, if it
did not draw after it a long train of Consequences, and lead them into other
Worlds than they ever thought of before, or are willing to enter upon now.

But we shall have occasion by and by, to examine this Text more fully in all
its circumstances. Give me leave in the mean time to observe, That S. Paul also
implies that triple Creation which S. Peter expresses, S. Paul, I say, in the
8th Chap. to the Romans ver. 20, 21. tells us of a Creation that will be redeemed
from Vanity: which are the New Heavens and New Earth to come. A Creation in
subjection to Vanity: which is the present state of the World, And a Creation
that was subjected to Vanity, in hopes of being restored: which was the first
Paradisiacal Creation. And these are the Three States of the Natural World,
which make the subject of our Theory.

To these two places of S. Peter and S. Paul, I might add that third in S.
John, concerning the New Heavens and New Earth; with that distinguishing
Character, that the Earth was without a Sea. As this distinguishes it from the
present Earth, so, being a Restitution or Restoration, as we noted before, it
must be the same with some former Earth: and consequently, it implies that
there was another precedent state of the Natural World, to which this is a
Restitution. These three places I allege, as comprehending and confirming the
Theory in its full extent. But we do not suppose them all of the same force and
clearness. S. Peter leads the way, and gives light and strength to the other
two. When a Point is proved by one clear Text, we allow others, as auxiliaries,
that are not of the same clearness; But being opened, receive light from the
primary Text, and reflect it upon the Argument.

So much for the Theory in general. We will now take one or two principal heads
of it, which vertually contain all the rest, and examine them more strictly and
particularly, in reference to their agreement with Scripture. The two Heads we
pitch upon, shall be, our Explication of the Deluge, and our Explication of the
New Heavens and New Earth. We told you before, these Two were as ^he Hinges,
upon which all the Theory moves, and which hok^ the parts of it in firm union
one with another. As to the Deluge, if I have explained that aright, by the
Disruption of the Great Abyss, and the Dissolution of the Earth that covered
it, all the rest follows in such a chain of Consequences, as cannot be broken.
Wherefore in order to the proof of that Explication, and of all that depends
upon it, I will make bold to lay down this Proposition, That our Hypothesis
concerning the Universal Deluge, is not only more agreeable to Reason and
Philosophy tha^ any other yet proposed to the World, but is also more agreeable
to Scripture. Namely to such places of Scripture, as reflect upon the Deluge,
the Abyss, and the form of the first Earth. And particularly, to the History of
Noah's Flood, as recorded by Moses. If I can make this good, it will,
doubtless, give satisfaction to all that are free and intelligent. And I desire
their patience, if I proceed slowly and by several steps. We will divide our
task into parts, and examine them separately. First, by Scripture in general,
and then by Moses his History and description of the Flood.

Our Hypothesis of the Deluge consists of Three Principal Heads, or differs
remarkably in Three things from the common Explication. First, In that we
suppose the Ante diluvian Earth to have been of another Form and Constitution
from the present Earth: with the Abyss placed under it.

Secondly, In that we suppose the Deluge to have been made, not by any
inun^ation of the Sea, or overflowing of Fountains and Rivers: nor
(principally) by any excess of Rains: but by a real dissolution of the
Exterior Earth, and disruption of the Abyss which it covered. These are the
two principal points, to which may be added, as a Corollary,

Thirdly, That the Deluge was not in the nature of a standing Pool: The Waters
lying every where level, of an equal depth and with an uniform Surface: But was
made by a fluctuation and commotion of the Abyss upon the disruption: Which
commotion being over, the Waters retired into their Channels, and let the dry
Land appear.

These are the most material and fundamental parts of our Hypothesis: and these
being proved consonant to Scripture, there can be no doubt of the rest.

We begin with the first: That the Ante-diluvian Earth was of another form and
constitution from the present Earth, with the Abyss placed under it. This is
confirmed in Scripture, both by such places as assert a diversity in general:
and by other places that intimate to us, wherein that diversity consisted, and
what was the form of the first Earth. That discourse of S. Peter's, which we
have set before you concerning the past, present, and future, Heavens and
Earth, is so full a proof of this diversity in general, that you must either
allow it, or make the Apostle's argumentation of no effect. He speaks plainly
of the Natural World, The Heavens and the Earth: And he makes a plain
distinction, or rather opposition, betwixt those before and after the Flood: so
that the least we can conclude from his words, is a diversity betwixt them; in
answer to that Identity or Immutability of Nature, which the Scoffers pretended
to have been ever since the beginning.

But though the Apostle, to me, speaks plainly of the Natural World, and
distinguishes that which was before the Flood, from the present* Yet there are
some that will allow neither of these to be contained in S. Peter's words; and
by that means would make this whole Discourse of little or no effect, as to our
purpose. And seeing we, on the contrary, have made it the chief Scripture-basis
of the whole Theory of the Earth, we are obliged to free it from those false
glosses or mis-interpretations, that lessen the force of its testimony, or make
it wholly ineffectual.

These Interpreters say, That S. Peter meant no more than to mind these
Scoffers, that the World was once destroyed by a Deluge of Water: meaning the
Animate World, Mankind and living Creatures. And that it shall be destroyed
again by another Element, namely by Fire. So as there is no opposition or
diversity betwixt the two Natural Worlds, taught or intended by the Apostle;
but only in reference to their different fate or manner of perishing, and not
of their different nature or constitution.

Here are two main points, you see, wherein our interpretations of this
discourse of the Apostles, differ. First, In that they make the Apostle (in
that sixth verse) to understand only the World Animate, or Men and brute
Creatures. That these were indeed destroyed, but not the Natural World, or the
form and constitution of the then Earth and Heavens. Secondly, That there is no
diversity or opposition made by S. Peter betwixt the ancient Heavens and Earth,
and the present, as to their form and constitution. We pretend that these are
mis-apprehensions, or mis-representations of the sense of the Apostle in both
respects, and offer these reasons to prove them to be so.

For the first point; That the Apostle speaks here of the Natural World,
particularly in the 6th Verse; and that it perished, as well as the animate,
These Considerations seem to prove.

First, Because the Argument or ground these Scoffers went upon, was taken from
the Natural World, its constancy and permanency in the same state from the
beginning; Therefore if the Apostle answers ad idem, and takes away their
Argument, he must understand the same Natural World, and show that it has been
changed, or has perished.

You will say, it may be, the Apostle does not deny, nor take away the ground
they went upon, but denies the consequence they made from it; That Therefore
there would be no change, because there had been none. No, neither does he do
this, if by the World in the 6th. ver. he understands Mankind only; for their
ground was this, there has been no change in the Natural World; Their
consequence, this, Therefore there will be none, nor any Conflagration. Now the
Apostle's answer, according to you, is this, You forget that Mankind has been
destroyed in a Deluge. And what then? what is this to the Natural World, whereof
they were speaking? This takes away neither antecedent nor consequent, neither
ground nor inference; nor any way touches their Argument, which proceeded from
the Natural World to the Natural World. Therefore you must either suppose that
the Apostle takes away their ground, or he takes away nothing.

Secondly, What is it that the Apostle tells these Scoffers they were ignorant
of? That there was a Deluge, that destroyed Mankind? They could not be ignorant
of that, nor pretend to be so; It was therefore the constitution of those Old
Heavens and Earth, and the change or destruction of them at the Deluge, that
they were ignorant of, or did not attend to; and of this the Apostle minds
them. These Scoffers appear to have been Jews by the phrase they use, since the
Fathers fell asleep, which in both parts of it is a Judaical expression; and
does S. Peter tell the Jews that had Moses read to them every Sabbath, That
they were ignorant that Mankind was once destroyed with a Deluge in the Days of
Noah? or could they pretend to be ignorant of that without making themselves
ridiculous both to Jews and Christians? Besides, these do not seem to have been
of the vulgar amongst them, for they bring a Philosophical Argument for their
opinion; There was a Sect amongst the Jews that held this perpetuity and
immutability of Nature; and Maimonides himself was of this principle, and gives
the same reason for it with the Scoffers here in the Text, Quod mundus reti^et
and sequitur consuetudinem suam. And as to those of the Jews that were
Aristoteleans, it was very suitable to their principles to hold the
incortuptibility of the World, as their Master did. Vid. Med. in loc.
and also in their very argument they refer to the History of the Old
Testament, in saying, Since the Fathers fell asleep, amongst which Fathers,
Noah was one of the most remarkable.

Thirdly, The design of the Apostle is to prove to them, or to dispose them to
the belief of the Conflagration, or future destruction of the World; which I
suppose you will not deny to be a destruction of the Natural World; therefore
to prove or persuade this, he must use an argument taken from a precedent
destruction of the Natural World; for to give an instance of the perishing of
Mankind only, would not reach home to his purpose. And you are to observe here
that the Apostle does not proceed against them barely by Authority; for what
would that have booted? If these Scoffers would have submitted to Authority,
they had already the Authority of the Prophets and Apostles in this point: but
he deals with them at their own weapon, and opposes reasons to reasons; What
has been done may be done, and if the Natural World has been once destroyed,
it is not hard, nor unreasonable, to suppose those Prophecies to be true, that
say it shall be destroyed again.

Fourthly, Unless we understand here the Natural World, we make the Apostle
both redundant in his discourse, and also very obscure in an easy Argument. If
his design was only to tell them that Mankind was once destroyed in a Deluge,
what is that to the Heavens and the Earth? The 5th Verse would be superfluous;
which yet he seems to make the foundation of his discourse. He might have told
them how Mankind had perished before with a Deluge, and aggravated that
destruction as much as he pleased, without telling them how the Heavens and the
Earth were constituted then; what was that to the purpose, if it had no
dependence or connection with the other? In the precedent Chapter, ver. 5. when
he speaks only of the Floods destroying Mankind, he mentions nothing of the
Heavens or the Earth: and if you make him to intend no more here, what he says
more is superfluous.

I also add, that you make the Apostle very obscure and operose in a very easy
argument. How easy had it been for him, without this Apparatus, to have told
them, as he did before, that God brought a Flood upon the World of the ungodly;
and not given us so much difficulty to understand his sense, or such a
suspicion and appearance, that he intended something more; for that there is at
least a great appearance and tendency to a further sense, I think none can
deny; And St. Austin, Didymus Alex. Bid, as we shall see hereafter, understood
it plainly of the natural World: Also modern Expositors and Critics; as
Cajetan, Estius, Drusius, Heinfius, have extended it to the natural World, more
or less; though they had no Theory to mislead them, nor so much as an hypothesis
to support them; but attended only to the tenor of the Apostle's discourse,
which constrained them to that sense, in whole or in part.

Fifthly, the opposition carries it upon the natural World. The opposition lies
betwixt the (...), the Heavens that were of old, and the Earth, and the present
Heavens and Earth, or the two natural Worlds. And if they will not allow them
to be opposed in their natures (which yet we shall prove by and by) at least
they must be opposed in their fate; and as This is to perish by fire, so That
perished by water; And if it perished by water, it perished; which is all we
contend for at present.

Lastly, if we would be as easily governed in the exposition of this place, as
we are of other places of Scripture, it would be enough to suggest, that in
reason and fairness of interpretation, the same World is destroyed in the 6th.
verse, that was described in the foregoing verse; but it is the Natural World
that is described there, the Heavens and the Earth, so and so constituted; and
therefore in fairness of interpretation they ought to be understood here; that
World being the subject that went immediately before, and there being nothing
in the words that restrains them to the animate World or to Mankind. In the 2d
chapter ver. 5. the Apostle does restrain the word (...) by adding (...), the World
of the ungodly; but here it is not only illimited, but according to the context,
both preceding and following, to be extended to the Natural World. I say by the
following context too, for so it answers to the World that is to perish by
Fire; which will reach the frame of Nature as well as Mankind.

For a conclusion of this first point, I will set down S. Austin' s judgment in
this case; who in several parts of his works has interpreted this place of S.
Peter, of the natural world. As to the heavens, he has these words in his
Exposition upon Genesis, Hos etiam aerios coelos quondam periisse Diluvio, in
quadam earum quae Canonica appellantur, Epistola legimus. We read in one of the
Epistles called Canonical, meaning this of S. Peter' s, that the aerila heavens
perished in the Deluge. And he concerns himself there to let you know that it
was not the starry heavens that were destroyed; the waters could not reach so
high; but the regions of our air. Then afterward he has these words, Facilius
eos (coelos) secundum illius Epistolae authoritatem credimus periisse, and
alios, sicut ibi scribitur, repositos. We do more easily believe, according to
the authority of that Epistle, those heavens to have perished; and others, as
it is there written, substituted in their pla^e. In like manner, and to the
same sense, he has these words upon Psalm. 101. Aerii utique coeli perierunt ut
propinqus Terris, secundum quod dicuntur volucres coeli; sunt autem and coeli
coelorum, superiores in Firmamento, sed utrum and ipsi perituri sint igni, an
hi soli, qui etiam diluvio perierunt, disceptatio est aliquanto scrupulosior
inter doctos. And in his Book de Civ. Dei, he has several passages to the same
purpose, Quemadmodum in Apostolica illa Epistola a toto pars a^cipitur, quod
diluvio periisse dictus est mundus, quamvis sola ejus cum suis coelis pars ima
perierit. These being to the same effect with the first c^tation, I need not
make them English; and this last place refers to the Earth as well as the
Heavens, as several other places in S. Austin do, whereof we shall give you an
account, when we come to show his judgment concerning the second point, the
diversity of the ante-diluvian and post-diluvian World. This being but a
foretaste of his good will and inclinations toward this Doctrine.

These considerations alleged, so far as I can judge, are full and
unanswerable proofs, that this discourse of the Apostle's comprehends and
refers to the Natural World; and consequently they warrant our interpretation
in this particular, and destroy the contrary. We have but one step more to make
good, That there was a change made in this natural world at the Deluge,
according to the Apostle; and this is to confute the second part of their
interpretation, which supposes that S. Peter makes no distinction or
opposition betwixt the antediluvian Heavens and Earth, and the present Heavens
and Earth, in that respect.

This second difference betwixt us, methinks, is still harsher than the first;
and contrary to the very form, as well as to the matter of the Apostle's
discourse. For there is a plain antithesis, or opposition made betwixt the
Heavens and the Earth of old (ver. the 5th.) and the Heavens and the Earth that
are now (ver. the 7th.) (...), and the adversative particle, but, (...)
you see marks the opposition; so that it is full and plain according to
Grammar and Logic. And that the parts or members of this opposition differ in
nature from one another, is certain from this, because otherwise the Apostle's
argument or discourse is of no effect, concludes nothing to the purpose; he
makes no answer to the objection, nor proves any thing against the Scoffers,
unless you admit that diversity. For they said, All things had been the same
from the beginning in the Natural World, and unless he say, as he manifestly
does, that there has been a change in Nature, and that the Heavens and Earth
that are now, are different from the ancient Heavens and Earth, which perished
at the Flood, he says nothing to destroy their argument, nor to confirm the
Prophetical doctrine of the future destruction of the Natural World.

This, I think, would be enough to satisfy any clear and free mind concerning
the meaning of the Apostle; but because I desire to give as full a light to
this place as I can, and to put the sense of it out of controversy, if
possible, for the future, I will make some further remarks to confirm this
exposition.

And we may observe that several of those reasons which we have given to prove,
That the Natural World is understood by S. Peter, are double reasons; and do
also prove the other point in question, a diversity betwixt the two Natural
Worlds, the Ante diluvian and the present. As for instance, unless you admit
this diversity betwixt the two natural Worlds, you make the 5th. verse in this
Chapter superfluous and useless: and you must suppose the Apostle to make an
inference here without premises. In the 6th. verse he makes an inference, (...)
per quae. Vulgat. Quamobrem. Beza. Qua de caus^, Grot. Nems interpretum
reddidit (...) per quas; subintelligendo aquas. Hoc enim argumentationem
Apostolicam tolleret, supponeretque illussores illos ignorasse quod olim fuerit
(...) supponi non posse supra o^tendimus.
Whereby the World; that then was, perished in a Deluge* what does this whereby
relate to? by reason of what? sure of the particular constitution o^ the
Heavens and the Earth immediately be fore described. Neither would it have
signified any thing to the Scoffers, for the Apostle to have told them how the
Ante diluvian Heavens and Earth were constituted, if they were constituted just
in the same manner as the present.

Besides, what is it, as I asked before, that the Apostle tells these Scoffers
they were ignorant of? does he not say formally and expressly (ver. 5.) that
they were ignornat that the Heavens and the Earth were constituted so and so,
before the Flood? but if they were constituted as these present Heavens and
Earth are, they were not ignorant of their constitution; nor did pretend to be
ignorant, for their own (mistaken) argument supposes it.

But before we proceed any further, give me leave to note the impropriety of
our Translation, in the 5th. Verse, or latter part of it; (...) (vel (...),
This we translate standing in the water, and out of the water, which is done
manifestly in compliance with the present form of the Earth, and the notions of
the Translators: and not according to the natural force and sense of the Greek
words. If one met with this sentence This phrase or manner of speech (...) vel
(...) is not unusual in Greek Authors, and upon a like subject; Plato says,
(...) but he that should translate Plato, The World stands out of fire, water,
etc. would be thought neither Grecian, nor Philosopher. The same phrase is
used in reciting Heraclitus his opinion, (...). And also in Thales his, which
is still nearer to the subject, (...), which Cicero renders, ex aqua, dixit,
constare omnia. So that it is easy to know the true importance of this phrase,
and how ill it is rendered in the English, standing out of the water.
in a Greek Author, who would ever render it standing in the water and out of
the water? nor do I know any Latin Translator that has ventured to render them
in that sense; nor any Latin Father; St. Austin and St. Jerome I Am sure do not,
but Consistens ex aqua, or de aqua, and per aquam: for that later phrase also
(...) does not with so good propriety signify to stand in the water, as to
consist or subsist by water, or by the help of water, Tanquam per causam
sustinentem; as St. Austin and Jerome render it. Neither does that instance
they give from 1 Pet. 3. 20. prove any thing to the contrary, for the Ark was
sustained by the waters, and the English does render it accordingly.

The Translation being thus rectified, you see the ante diluvian Heavens and
Earth consisted of Water, and by water; which makes way for a second
observation to prove our sense of the Text; for if you admit no diversity
betwixt those Heavens and Earth, and the present, show us pray, how the present
Heavens and Earth consist of water, and by water. What watery constitution have
they? The Apostle implies rather, that The now Heavens and Earth have a fiery
constitution. We have now Meteors of all sorts in the air, winds, hail, snow,
lightning, thunder, and all things engendered of fiery exhalations, Book 2. c.
5. p. 233.
^as well as we have rain; but according to our Theory, the antediluvian
Heavens, of all these Meteors had none but dews and vapors, or watery Meteors
only; and therefore might very aptly be said by the Apostle to be constituted
of water, or to have a watery (...). Then the Earth was said to consist by
water, because it was built upon it, and at first was sustained by it. And when
such a Key as this is put into our hands, that does so easily unlock this hard
passage, and makes it intelligible, according to the just force of the words,
why should we pertinaciously adhere to an interpretation, that neither agrees
with the words, Whether you refer the words (...). separately, to the Heavens
and the Earth, or both to the Earth, or both to both, it will make no great
difference as to our interpretation.
nor makes any sense that is considerable?

Thirdly, If the Apostle had made the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth the same
with the present, his apodosis in the 7th. Verse, should not have been (...),
but (...), etc. I say, it should not have been by way of antithesis, but of
identity or continuation; And the same Heavens and Earth are kept in store
reserved unto fire, etc. Accordingly we see the Apostle speaks thus, as to the
Logos, or the Word of God, Verse 7. (...), by the same Word of God; where the
thing is the same, he expresses it as the same; And if it had been the same
Heavens and Earth, as well as the same Word of God, Why should he use a mark of
opposition for the one, and of identity for the other? to this I do not see
what can be fairly answered.

Fourthly, the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were different from the present,
because, as the Apostle intimates, they were such, and so constituted, as made
them obnoxious to a Deluge; whereas ours are of such a form, The^r. 1. Book. c.
2.
as makes them incapable of a Deluge, and obnoxious to a Conflagration; the
just contrary fate.

If you say there was nothing of natural tendency or disposition in either
World to their respective fate, but the first might as well have perished by
fire, as water, and this by water as by fire, you unhinge all Nature and
natural providence in that method, and contradict one main scope of the Apostle
in this discourse. His first scope is to assert, and mind them of that
diversity there was betwixt the ancient Heavens and Earth, and the present; and
from that, to prove against those Scoffers, that there had been a change and
revolution in Nature; And his second scope seems to be this, to show that
diversity to be such, as, under the Divine conduct, leads to a different fate,
and exposed that World to a Deluge; for when he had described the constitution
of the first Heavens and Earth, he subjoyns, (...). Quia talis erat, says
Grotius, qualem diximus, constitutio and Terrae and Coeli. WHERE BY the then
World perished in a Flood of Water. This whereby notes some kind of causal
dependence, and must relate to some means or conditions precedent. It cannot
relate to Logos, or the Word of God, Grammar will not permit that; therefore it
must relate to the state of the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth immediately
premised. And to what purpose indeed should he premise the description of those
Heavens and Earth, if it was not to lay a ground for this Inference?

Having given these Reasons for the necessity of this Interpretation; in the
last place, let us consider S. Austin's judgment, and his sense upon this place,
as to the point in question. As also the reflections that some other of the
Ancients have made upon this doctrine of S. Peter's. Didymus Alexandrinus, who
was for some time S. Ierome's Master, made such a seve^e reflection upon it,
that he said this Epistle was corrupted, and should not be admitted into the
Canon, because it taught the doctrine of a Triple or Triform World in this
third Chapter. As you may see in his Enarr. in Epist. Canonicas. Now this
threefold World is first that in the 6th ver. The World that then was. In the
7th ver. The Heavens and the Earth that are now. And in the 13th ver. We expect
new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his promise. This seems to be a fair
account that S. Peter taught the doctrine of a Triple World; And I quote this
testimony, to show what S. Peter's words do naturally import, even in the
judgment of one that was not of his mind. And a Man is not prone to make an
exposition against his own Opinion, unless he think the words very pregnant and
express.

But S. Austin owns the authority of this Epistle, and of this doctrine, as
derived from it, taking notice of this Text of S. Peter's in several parts of
his Works. We have noted three or four places already to this purpose, and we
may further take notice of several passages in his Treatise, de Civ. Dei, which
confirm our exposition. In his 20th. Book, chapter 24. he disputes against
Porphyry, who had the same Principles with these Eternalists in the Text; or,
if I may so call them, Incorruptarians; and thought the World never had, nor
ever would undergo any change, especially as to the Heavens. S. Austin could
not urge Porphyry with the authority of S. Peter, for he had no veneration for
the Christian Oracles; but it seems he had some for the Jewish, and arguing
against him, upon that Text in the Psalms, Coeli peribunt, he shows upon
occasion how he understands S. Peter's destruction of the Old World. Legitur
Coelum and Terra transibunt, Mundus transit, sed puto quod praeterit, transit,
transibunt aliquanto mitius dicta sunt quam peribunt. In Epistola quoque Petri
Apostoli, ubi aqua inundatus, qui tum erat, periisse dictus est Mundus; satis
clarum est quae pars mundi a toto significata est, and quatenus periisse dicta
sit, and qui coeli repositi igni reservandi. This he explains more fully
afterward by subjoyning a caution (which we cited before) that we must not
understand this passion of S. Peter's, concerning the destruction of the Ante
diluvian World, to take in the whole Universe, and the highest Heavens, but
only the aerial Heavens, and the sublunary World. In Apostolica illa Epistola a
toto part accipitur, quod Diluvie periisse dictus est (...) quamvis sol^ ejus,
cum su^s coelis, pars ima pe^ierit. In that Apostolical Epistle, a part is
signified by the whole, when the World is said to have perished in the Deluge,
although the lower part of it only, with the Heavens belonging to at, perished:
that is, The Earth with the regions of the Air that belong to it. And consonant
to this in his exposition of that hundred and first Psalm, upon those words*
The Heavens are the work of thy hands, They shall perish, but thou shall
endure. This perishing of the Heavens, he says, S. Peter tells us, has been
once done already, namely, at the Deluge; Ape^^e dixit hoc Apostolus Petrus,
Coeli erant olim and Terra, de aqua and per ^quam constituti, Dei verbo; per
quod qui factus est mundus aqua (...) Terra autem and coeli qui nunc sunt,
(...) ergo dixit perisse coelos per Dilavium.

These places show us that S. Austin understood S. Peter's discourse to aim at
the Natural World and his periit or periisse (ver. 6.) to be of the same force
as (...) in the Psalms, when it is said the Heavens shall perish^ and
consequently that the Heavens and the Earth, in this Father's opinion, were as
really changed and transformed at the time of the Flood, as they will be at the
Conflagration. But we must not expect from S. Austin, or any of the Ancients a
distinct account of this Apostolical Doctrine, as if they knew and acknowledged
the Theory of the First World; that does not at all appear; but what they said
was either from broken Tradition, or extorted from them by the force of the
Apostle's words and their own sincerity.

There are yet other places in S. Austin worthy our consideration upon this
subject; especially his exposition of this 3d. chap. of S. Peter, as we find it
^n that same Treatise de Civ. Dei. cap. 18.
There he compares again, the destruction of the World at the Deluge, with that
which shall be at the Conf^agration, and supposes both the Heavens and Earth
to have perished. Apostelus ^ominemorans factum ante Diluvium, videtur
admon^^sse quodaminodo quatenus in fi^e hujus secu^^ mundum istum periturium
esse credamus. Nam and illo tempore periisse dixit, qui tunc erat, mundum; nec
solum otbem terrae, verum etiam coelos. Then giving his usual caution, That the
Stars and Starry Heavens should not be comprehended in that mundane
destruction, He goes on, Atque hoc modo (pene totus aer) cum terra periorat;
cujus Terrae utique prior facies (nempe ante-diluviana) fuerat deleta Diluvio.
Qui autem nunc sunt coeli and terra eodem verbo rep^siti sunt igni reservandi;
Proinde qui coeli and quae Terra, id est, qui mundus, pro ^o mundo qui Diluvio
periit, ex eadem aqua repos^tus est, ipse igni novissimo reservatur. Here you
see S. Austin's sense upon the whole matter; which is this, That the Natural
World, the Earth with the Heavens about it, was destroyed and changed at the
Deluge into the present Heavens and Earth; which shall again in like manner be
destroyed and changed by the last Fire. Accordingly in another place, to add no
more, cap. 16.
he says the figure of the (sub^^nary) World shall be changed at the
Conflagration, as it was changed at the Deluge. Tunc figura huius mundi, etc.
cap. 16.

Thus you see, we have S. Austin on our side, in both parts of our
interpretation; that S. Peter's discourse is to be referred to the natural
inanimate World, and that the present Natural World is distinct and different
from that which was before the Deluge. And S. Austin having applied this
expressly to S. Peter's doctrine by way of Commentary, it will free us from any
crime or affectation of singularity in the exposition we have given of that
place.

Venerable Bede has ^ollowed S. Austin' s footsteps in this doctrine; for,
interpreting S. Peter' s Original World ((...).) 2 Peti. 2. 5. he refers both
that* and this (chap. 3. 6.) to the natural inanimate World, which he supposes
to have undergone a change at the Deluge. His words are these, Idem ipse mundus
est (nempe quoad materiam*) in quo nunc humanum genus habitat, quem
inhabitaverunt hi qui ante diluvium fuerunt, fed tamen recte Originalis Mundus,
quasi alius dicitur; quia sicut in consequentibus bujus Epistolae ^^riptum
continetur, Ille tunc mundus aqua inundatus peri^^. Coelis videlicet qui eran^
prius, id est, cunctis aeris hujus turbulent^ spaciis, aquanum accrescentium
altitudine consumptis, ac Terra in alteram faciem, excedentibus aquis,
immutata* Nam etsi montes aliqui atque convalles ab initio facti creduntur, non
tament anti quanti nunc in orb cernuntur universo. It Is the same World (namely,
as to the matter and substance of it) which mankind lives in now, and did live
in before the Flood, but yet that is truly called the ORIGINAL WORLD, being as
it were another from the present. For it is said in the sequel of this Epistle
that the World that was then, perished in the Deluge; namely, The regions of
the air were consumed by the height and excess of the waters, and by the same
waters the Earth was changed into another form or face. For although some
Mountains and Valleys are thought to have been made from the beginning, yet not
such great ones as now we see throughout the whole Earth.

You see this Author does not only own a change made at the Deluge, but offers
at a further explication wherein that change consisted, viz. That the Mountains
and inequalities of the Earth were made greater than they were before the
Flood; and so he makes the change or the difference betwixt the two Worlds
gradual, rather than specifical, if I may so term it. But we cannot wonder at
that, if he had no principles to carry it further, or to make any other sort of
change intelligible to him. De 6. dier. creat.
Bid also pursues the same sense and notion in his interpretation of that
fountain, Genesis 2. 5. that watered the face of the Earth before the Flood. And
many other transcribers of Antiquity have recorded this Tradition concerning a
difference, gradual or specifical, both in the Ante-diluvian heavens (Gloss.
Ordin. Genesis 9. de Iride. Lyran. ibid. Hist. Scholast. c. 35. Rab. Maurus and
Gloss. Inter. Genesis 2. 5, 6. Alcuin. Quaest. in Genesis inter. 135.) and in the
Ante-diluvian Earth, as the same Authors witness in other places. As Hist.
Schol. o. 34. Gloss. Ord. in Genesis 7. Al^uin. Inter. 118, etc. Not to instance
in those that tell us the properties of the Ante-diluvian World under the name
and notion of Paradise.

Thus much concerning this remarkable place in S. Peter, and the true
exposition of it; which I have the more largely insisted upon, because I look
upon this place as the chief repository of that great Natural Mystery, which in
Scripture is communicated to us concerning the Triple State or Revolution of
the World. And of those Men that are so scrupulous to admit the Theory we have
proposed, I would willingly know whether they believe the Apostle in what he
says concerning the New Heavens and the New Earth to come, ver. 13. and if they
do, why they should not believe him as much concerning the Old Heavens and the
Old Earth, past; ver. 5, and 6. which h^ mentions as formally, and describes
more distinctly than the other. But if they believe neither past nor to come,
in a natural sense, but an unchangeable state of Nature from the Creation to
its annihilation, I leave them then to their Fellow Eternalists in the Text,
and to the character or censure the Apostle gives them, (...), men that go by
their own private humor and passions, and prefer that to all other evidence.

They deserve this censure, I am sure, if they do not only disbelieve, but also
scoff, at this Prophetic and Apostolic doctrine concerning the Vicissitudes
of Nature and a Triple World; The Apostle in this discourse does formally
distinguish Three Worlds (for it is well known that the Hebrows have no word to
signify the Natural World, but use that Periphrass, The Heavens and the Earth)
and upon each of them engraves a Name and Title that bears a note of
distinction in it; He calls them the Old Heavens and Earth, the Preseut Heaven^
and Earth, and the New Heavens and Earth. It Is true, these Three are one, as ^o
Matter and Substance; but they must differ as to Form and Properties; otherwise
what is the ground of this distinction and of these three different
appe^lations? Suppose the Jews had expected Ezekiel's Temple for the Third, and
Last, and most perfect; and that in the time of the Second Temple they had
spoke of them with this distinction, or under these different names, The Old
Temple, the Present Temple, and the New Temple we expect: Would any have
understood those Three of one and the same Temple; never demolished, never
changed, never rebuilt; always the same both as to Materials and Form? no,
doubtless, but of Three several Temples succeeding one another. And have we not
the same reason to understand this Temple of the World, whereof S. Peter
speaks, to be threefold in succession; seeing he does as plainly distinguish it
into the Old heavens and earth, the Present heavens and earth, and the New
heavens and earth. And I do the more willingly use this comparison of the
Temple, because it has been thought an Emblem of the outward World.

I know we are naturally averse to entertain any thing that is inconsistent
with the general frame and texture of our own thoughts; That Is to begin the
World again; and we often reject such things without examination. Neither do I
wonder that the generality of Interpreters beat down the Apostle's words and
sense to their own notions; They had no other grounds to go upon, and Men are
not willing, especially in natural and comprehensible things, to put such a
meaning upon Scripture, as is unintelligible to themselves; They rather venture
to offer a little violence to the words, that they may pitch the sense at such
a convenient height, as their Principles will reach to. And therefore though
some of our modern Interpreters, whom I mentioned before, have been sensible of
the natural tendency of this discourse of S. Peter's, and have much ado to bear
of the force of the words, so as not to acknowledge that they import a real
diversity betwixt the two Worlds spoken of; yet having no Principles to guide
or support them in following that Tract, they are forced to stop or divert
another way. It Is like entering into the mouth of a Cave, we are not willing to
venture further than the light goes. Nor are they much to blame for this; the
fault is only in those Persons that continue* wilfully in their darkness, and
when they cannot otherwise resist the light, shut their eyes against it, or
turn their head another way. -- but I am afraid I have staid too long upon this
argument: not for my own sake, but to satisfy others.

You may please to remember that all that I have said hitherto, belongs only to
the first Head: To prove a Diversity in general betwixt the Ante-diluvian
Heavens and Earth, and the present: not expressing what their particular form
was. And this general diversity may be argued also by observations taken from
Moses his History of the World, before and after the Flood. From the Longevity
of the Antediluvians: The Rain-bowu appearing after the Deluge: and the
breaking open an Abyss capable to overflow the Earth. The Heavens that had no
Rainbow, See Theor. Book 2. chapter 5.
and under whose benign and steady influence, Men lived seven, eight, nine
hundred years and upwards, must have been of a different aspect and
constitution from the present Heavens. And that Earth that had such an Abyss,
that the disruption of it made an universal Deluge, must have been of another
form than the present Earth. And those that will not admit a diversity in the
two worlds, are bound to give us an intelligible account of these Phenomenon:
How they could possibly be in Heavens and Earth, like the present. Or if they
were there once, why they do not continue so still, if Nature be the same.

We need say no more, as to the Ante-diluvian Heavens: but as to the Earth, we
must now, according to the second Part of the first Head; enquire, If that
Particular Form, which we have assigned it before the Flood, be agreeable to
Scripture. You know how we have described the Form and situation of that Earth:
namely, that it was built over the Abyss, as a regular Orb, covering and
incompassing the waters round about: and founded, as it were, upon them. There
are many passages of Scripture that favor this description: Some more
expressly, others upon a due explication. To this purpose there are two express
Texts in the Psalms: as Psalm. 24. 1, 2. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof: The habitable World, and they that dwell therein. FOR he has founded
it upon I know some would make this place of no effect by rendering the Hebrew
particle (...) juxta, by or near to; so they would read it thus, He has
founded the Earth by the Seaside, and established it by the Floods. What is
there wonderful in this, that the shores should lie by the Seaside; Where
could they lie else? What reason or argument is this, why the Earth should be
the Lord's? The Earth is the Lord's, for he has founded it near the Seas,
Where is the consequence of this? But if he founded it upon the Seas which
could not be done by any other hand but his, it shows both the Workman and the
Master. And accordingly in that other place, Psalm. 136. 6. if you render it, he
stretched out the Earth near the Waters. How is that one of God's great
wonders? as it is there represented to be. Because in some few places this
particle is rendered otherwise, where the sense will bear it, must we therefore
render it so when we please, and where the sense will not bear it? This being
the most usual signification of it, and there being no other word that
signifies above more frequently or determinately than this does* Why must it
signify otherwise in this place? Men will (...) any way to get from under the
force of a Text, that does not suit to their own Notions.
the Sea, and established it upon the Floods. An Earth founded upon the Seas,
and established upon the Waters, is not this the Earth we have described? the
first Earth, as it came from the hands of its Maker. Where can we now find in
Nature, such an Earth as has the Seas and the Water for its foundation? Neither
is this Text without a second, as a fellow-witness to confirm the same truth:
For in the 136. Psalm. ver. 4, 5, 6. we read to the same effect, in these words:
To him, who alone does great wonders: To him that by wisdom made the Heavens's
To him that stretched out the Earth above the Waters. We can hardly express
that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, in words more determinate than these are;
Let us then in the same simplicity of heart, follow the words of Scripture;
seeing this literal sense is not repugnant to Nature, but, on the contrary,
agreeable to it upon the strictest examination. And we cannot, without some
violence, turn the words to any other sense. What tolerable interpretation can
these admit of, if we do not allow the Earth ones to have encompassed and
overspread the face of the Waters? To be founded upon the waters, to be
established upon the waters, to be extended upon the waters, what rational or
satisfactory account can be given of these phrases and expressions from any
thing we find in the present situation of the Earth: or how can they be
verified concerning it? Consult Interpreters, ancient or modern, upon these two
places: see if they answer your expectation, or answer the natural importance
of the words, unless they acknowledge another form of the Earth, than the
present. Because a Rock hangs its ^ose over the Sea, must the body of the Earth
be said to be stretched over the waters? Or because there are waters in some
subterraneous cavities, is the Earth therefore founded upon the Seas? Yet such
lame explications as these you will meet with; and while we have no better
light, we must content our selves with them; but when an explication is
offered, that answers the propriety, force, and extent of the words, to reject
it, only because it is not fitted to our former opinions, or because we did
not first think of it, is to take an ill method in expounding Scripture. This
Foundation or Establishment of the Earth upon the Seas, this Extension of it
above the waters, relates plainly to the body, or whole circuit of the Earth,
not to parcels and particles of it; as appears from the occasion, and its being
joined with the Heavens, the other part of the World. Besides, David is
speaking of the Origin of the World, and of the Divine power and wisdom in the
construction and situation of our Earth, and these attributes do not appear
from the holes of the Earth, and broken Rocks; which have rather the face of a
ruin, than of wisdom; but in that wonderful libration and expansion of the
first Earth over the face of the waters, sustained by its own proportions, and
the hand of his Providence.

These two places in the Psalms being duly considered, we shall more easily
understand a third place, to the same effect, in the Proverbs; delivered by
WISDOM, concerning the Origin of the World, and the form of the first Earth, in
these words, Chap. 8. 27. When he prepared the Heavens I was there, when HE SET
an Orb or Sphere upon the face of the Abyss. We render it, when we set a
Compass upon the face of the Abyss; but if we have rightly interpreted the
Prophet David, it is plain enough what compass is here to be understood; not an
imaginary circle, (for why should that be thought one of the wonderful works of
God) but that exterior Orb of the Earth that was set upon the waters. That was
the Masterpiece of the Divine art in framing of the first Earth, and therefore
very fit to be taken notice of by Wisdom. And upon this occasion, I desire you
to reflect upon St. Peter's expression, concerning the first Earth, and to
compare it with Solomon's, to see if they do not answer one another. St. Peter
calls it, (...), An Earth consisting, standing, or sustained by the waters. And
Solomon calls it (...) An Orb drawn upon the face of the Abyss. And St. Peter
says, that was done (...) by the wisdom of God: which is the same (...) or
wisdom, that here declares her self, to have been present at this work. Add now
to these two places, the two forementioned out of the Psalmist; An Earth
founded upon the Seas, (Psalm. 24. 2.) and an Earth stretched out above the
waters: (Psalm. 136. 6.) Can any body doubt or question, but all these four
Texts refer to the same thing? And seeing St. Peter's description refers
^^rtainly to the Ante-diluvian Earth, they must all refer to it; and do all as
certainly and evidently agree with our Theory concerning the form and situation
of it.

The pendulous form and posture of that first Earth being proved from these
four places, it is more easy and emphatical to interpret in this sense that
passage in Job chapter 26. 7. He stretches ^ut the North over the Tohu, (for so it
is in the original) and hangs the Earth upon nothing. And this strange
foundation or no foundation of the exterior Earth seems to be the ground of
those noble questions proposed to Job by God Almighty, Chapter 38. Where wast thou
when I laid the foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou have understanding.
Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened, and who laid the cornerstone?
There was neither foundation, nor cornerstone, in that piece of Architecture;
and that was it which made the art and wonder of it. But I have spoken more
largely to these places in the Theory it self. Book 1. p. 88.
And if the four Texts beforementioned be considered without prejudice, I
think there are few matters of natural Speculation that can be so well proved
out of Scripture, as the Form which we have given to the Ante-diluvian Earth.

But yet it may be thought a just, if not a necessary appendix to this
discourse, concerning the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, to give an account
also of the Ante-diluvian Abyss, and the situation of it according to
Scripture; for the relation which these two have to one another, will be a
further means to discover if we have rightly determined the form of that Earth.
The Abyss or Tehom-Rabbah is a Scripture notion, and the word is not used, that
I know of, in that distinct and peculiar sense in Heathen Authors. It Is plain
that in Scripture it is not always taken for the Sea (as Genesis 1. 2. and 7. 11.
and 49. 25. Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Job 28. 14. and 38. 16. Psalm. 33. 7. and 71. 20 and
78. 15. and 135. 6. Apoc. 20. 1. 3.) but for some other mass of waters, or
subterraneous storehouse. And this being observed, we may easily discover the
nature, and set down the History of the Scripture-Abyss.

The Mother-Abyss is no doubt that in the beginning of Genesis, v. 2. which had
nothing but darkness upon the face of it, or a thick caliginous air. The next
news we hear of this Abyss is at the Deluge, (Genesis 7. 11.) where it is said to
be broke open, and the waters of it to have drowned the World. It seems then
this Abyss was closed up some time betwixt the Creation and the Deluge, and had
got another cover than that of darkness. And if we will believe Wisdom, (Prove.
8. 27.) who was there present at the formation of the Earth, an Orb was set
upon the face of the Abyss at the beginning of the World.

That these three places refer to the same Abyss, I think, cannot be questioned
by any that will compare them and consider them. That of the Deluge, Moses
calls there Tehom-Rabbah, the Great Abyss; and can there be any greater than
the forementioned Mother-Abyss? And WISDOM, in that place in the Proverbs,
uses the same phrase and words with Moses, Genesis 1. 2. (...)* upon the face of
the Deep or of the Abyss* chang^ng darkness for that Orb of the exterior Earth
which was made afterward to enclose it. And in th^s vault it lay, and under
this cover, when the Psalmist speaks of it in these words (Psalm. 33. 7. He
gathers the waters of the Sea, as in a This reading or translating is
generally followed, (Theor. Book 1. p. 86.) though the English Translation read
on a heap, unsuitably to the matter and to the sense.
bag; he lays up the Abyss in storehouses. Lastly, we may observe that 'twas
this Mother-Abyss whose womb was burst at the Deluge, when the Sea was born,
and broke forth as if it had issued out of a womb; as God expresses it to Job,
chapter 38. 8. in which place the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, when it broke forth,
coming out of the Abyss. Which disruption at the Deluge seems also to be
alluded to Job 12. 14, 15. and more plainly, Prove. 3. 20. by his knowledge the
Abysses are broken up.

Thus you have already a threefold state of the Abyss, which makes a short
History of it; first, Open, at the beginning; then covered, till the Deluge.
Then broke open again, as it is at present. And we pursue the History of it no
further; but we are told, Apoc. 20. 3. That it shall be shut up again, and the
great Dragon in it, for a Thousand years. In the mean time we may observe from
this form and posture of the Ante diluvian Abyss, how suitable it is and
coherent with that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth which St. Peter and the
Psalmist had described, sustained by the waters; founded upon the waters;
stretched above the waters; for if it was the cover of this Abyss (and it had
some cover that was broke at the Deluge) it was spread as a Crust or Ice upon
the face of those waters, and so made an Orbis Terrarum, an habitable sphere of
Earth about the Abyss.

SO much for the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth and Abyss; which as they aptly
correspond to one another, so, you see, our Theory answers and is adjusted to
both; and, I think, so fitly, that we have no reason hitherto to be displeased
with the success we have had in the examination of it, according to Scripture.
We have dispatched the two main points in question, first, to prove a diversity
in general betwixt the two natural Worlds, or betwixt the Heavens and the Earth
before and after the Flood. Secondly, to prove wherein this diversity
consisted; or that the particular form of the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth
was such according to Scripture, as we have described it in the Theory. You Will
say, then the work is done, what needs more, all the rest follows of course;
for if the Antediluvian Earth had such a ^orm as we have proposed and proved it
to have had, there could be no Deluge in it but by a dissolution of its parts
and exterior frame: And a Deluge so made, would not be in the nature of a
standing Pool, but of a violent agitation and commotion of the Waters. This is
true; These parts of the Theory are so cemented, that you must grant all, if
you grant any. However we will try if even these two particulars also may be
proved out of Scripture; That is, if there be any marks or memorandums left
there by the Spirit of God, of such a fraction or dissolution of the Earth at
the Deluge. And also such characters of the Deluge it self, as show it to have
been by a fluctuation and impetuous commotion of the Waters.

To proceed then; That there was a Fraction or Dissolution of the Earth at the
Deluge, the history of it by Moses gives us the first account, seeing he tells
us, as the principol cause of the Flood, That the Fountains of the Great Abyss
were cloven or burst asunder; and upon this disruption the waters gushed out
from the bowels of the Earth, as from the widen'd mouths of so many Fountains.
I do not take Fountains there to signify any more than Sources or Stores of
Water; noting also this manner of their eruption from below, or out of the
ground, as Fountains do. Accordingly in the Proverbs, (chap. 3. 20.) it is only
said, the Abysses were broken open. I do not doubt but this refers to the
Deluge, as Bede, and others understand it; the very word being used here, (...)
both in the Hebrew and Septuagint, that expressed the disruption of the Abyss
at the Deluge.

And this breaking up of the Earth at that time, is elegantly expressed in Job,
chapter 3^.
by the bursting of the Womb of Nature, when the Sea was first brought to
light; when after many pangs and throes and dilacerations of her body, Nature
was delivered of a burden which she had born in her Womb Sixteen Hundred Years.

These three places I take to be memorials and proofs of the disruption of the
Earth, or of the Abyss, at the universal Deluge. And to these we may add more
out of the Prophets, Job, and the Psalms, by way of allusion (commonly) to the
state of Nature at that time. The Prophet Isaiah in describing the future
destruction of the World, chap. 24. 18, 19. seems plainly to allude and have
respect to the past destruction of it at the Deluge; as appears by that leading
expression, the windows from an high are open, (...), taken manifestly from
Genesis 7. 11. Then see how the description goes on, the windows from an high are
open, and the foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken
down, the Earth is quite dissolved, the Earth is exceedingly moved. Here are
Concussions, and Fractions, and dissolutions, as there were in the Mundane
Earthquake and Deluge; which we had expressed before only by breaking open the
Abyss. By the Foundations of the Earth here and elsewhere, I perceive many
understand the Center; so by moving or shaking the foundations, or putting them
out of course, must be understood a displacing of the Center; which was really
done at the Deluge, Theor. book 2. p. 194, 195.
as we have shown in its proper place. If we therefore remember that there was
both a dislocation, as I may so say; and a fraction in the body of the Earth,
by that great fall; a dislocation as to the Center, and a fraction as to the
Surface and Exterior Region, it will truly answer to all those expressions in
the Prophet, that seem so strange and extraordinary. It Is true, this place of
the Prophet respects also and foretells the future destruction of the World; but
that being by Fire, when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the
Earth with the works therein shall be burnt up, these expressions of fractions
and concussions, seem to be taken originally from the manner of the World's
first destruction, and to be transferred, by way of application, to represent
and signify the second destruction of it, though, it may be, not with the same
exactness and propriety.

There are several other places that refer to the dissolution and subversion of
the Earth at the Deluge: Amos 9. 5, 6. The Lord of Hosts is he that touches
the Earth, and it shall melt, or be dissolved -- and it shall rise up wholly
like a Flood, and shall be drowned as by the Flood of Egypt. By this and by the
next verse the Prophet seems to allude to the Deluge, and to the dissolution of
the Earth that was then. This in Job seems to be called breaking down the
Earth, and overturning the Earth, Chap. 12. 14, 15. Behold he breaks down and
it cannot be built again, He sh^^teth upon man, and there can be no opening.
Behold, he witholdeth the waters, and they dry up; also he ^endeth them out,
and they overturn the Earth: Which place you may see paraphrased, Theor. Book
1. p. 91, 92. We have already cited, and shall hereafter cite, other places out
of Job; And as that Ancient Author (who is thought to have lived before the
Judaical Oeconoray, and nearer to Noah than Moses) seems to have had the
Praecept a Noachidarum, so also he seems to have had the Dogmata Noachidarum;
which were delivered by Noah to his Children and Posterity, concerning the
mysteries of Natural Providence, the origin and fate of the World, the Deluge
and Ante-diluvian state, etc. and accordingly we find many strictures of these
doctrines in the Book of Job. Lastly, In the Psalms there are Texts that
mention the shaking of the Earth, and the foundations of the World, in
reference to the Flood, if we judge aright; whereof we will speak under the
next Head, concerning the raging of the Waters in the Deluge.

These places of Scripture may be noted, as left us to be remembrancers of that
general ruin and disruption of the Earth at the time of the Deluge. But I know
it will be said of them, That they are not strict proofs, but allusions only.
Be it so; yet what is the ground of those allusions? something must be alluded
to, and something that has past in Nature, and that is recorded in Sacred
History; and what is that, unless it be the Universal Deluge, and that change
and disturbance that was then in all Nature. If others say, that these and such
like places are to be understood morally and allegorically, I do not envy them
their interpretations; but when Nature and Reason will bear a literal sense,
the rule is, that we should not recede from the Letter. But I leave these
things to every one's thoughts; which the more calm they are, and the more
impartial, the more easily they will feel the impressions of Truth. In the mean
time, I proceed to the last particular mentioned, The form of the Deluge it
self.

This we suppose to have been not in the way of a standing Pool, the Waters
making an equal Surface, and an equal height every where; but that the extreme
height of the Waters was made by the extreme agitation of them; caused by the
weight and force of great Masses or Regions of Earth falling at once into the
Abyss; by which means, as the Waters in some places were pressed out, and thrown
at an excessive height into the Air, so they would also in certain places gape,
and lay bare even the bottom of the Abyss; which would look as an open Grave
ready to swallow up the Earth, and all it bore. Whilst the Ark, in the mean
time, falling and rising by these gulphs and precipices, sometimes above water,
and sometimes under, was a true Type of the state of the Church in this World;
And to this time and state David alludes in the name of the Church, Psalm. 42.
7. Abyss calls unto Abyss at the noise of thy Cataracts or Water-spouts; All
thy waves and billows have gone over me. And again, Psalm. 46. 2, 3. In the name
of the Church, Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the Seas. The waters thereof roar
and are troubled, the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.

But there is no description more remarkable or more eloquent, than of that
Scene of things represented, Psalm. 18. 7, 8, 9, etc. which still alludes, in my
opinion, to the Deluge-scene, and in the name of the Church. We will set down
the words at large.

Ver. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God; He heard
my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him into his ears.

7. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved
and were shaken, because he was wroth.

8. There went up a smoke from his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured; Coals were kindled by it.

9. He bowed the Heavens also and came down, and darkness was under his feet.

10. And he rode upon a Cherub and did fly, he did fly upon the wings of the
wind.

11. He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him was dark
waters and thick clouds of the sky.

12. At the brightness before him the thick clouds passed, hail and coals of
fire.

13. The Lord also thundered in the Heavens, and the Highest gave his voice,
hail and coals of fire.

14. Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them: and he shot out
lightnings and discoinfited them.

15. Then the Channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the World
were discovered; at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils.

He sent from above, (...)
he took me; he drew me out of great waters.

This I think is a rough* draught of the face of the Heavens and the Earth at
the Deluge, as the last Verses do intimate; and it is applied to express the
dangers and deliverances of the Church: The Expressions are far too high to be
applied to David in his Person, and to his deliverance from Saul; no such
agonies or disorders of Nature as are here instanced in, were made in David*s
time, or upon his account; but it is a Scheme of the Church, and of her fate,
particularly, as represented by the Ark, in that dismal distress, when all
nature was in confusion. And though there may be some things here intermixed to
make up the Scene, that are not so close to the subject as the rest, or that
may be referred to the future destruction of the World: yet that is not
unusual, nor amiss, in such descriptions, if the great strokes be fit and
rightly placed. That there was Smoke, and Fire, and Water, and Thunder, and
Darkness, and Winds, and Earthquakes at the Deluge, we cannot doubt, if we
consider the circumstances of it; Waters dashed and broken make a smoke and
darkness, See Philo Iudaeus his description of the Deluge, both as to the
commotions of the Heavens, and the fractions of the Earth. In his first
Treatise de Abrahamo, mihi, p. 279.
and no Hurricano could be so violent as the motions of the Air at that time;
Then the Earth was torn in pieces, and its Foundations shaken; And as to
Thunder and Lightning, the encounters and collisions of the mighty Waves, and
the cracks of a falling World, would make flashes and noises, far greater and
more terrible, than any that can come from vapors and clouds. There was an
Universal Tempest, a conflict and clashing of all the Elements; and David seems
to have represented it so; with God Almighty in the midst of it, ruling them
all.

But I am apt to think some will say, all this is Poetical in the Prophet, and
these are Hyperbolical and figurate expressions, from which we cannot make any
inference, as to the Deluge and the Natural World. It Is true, those that have
no Idea of the Deluge, that will answer to such a Scene of things, as is here
represented, must give such a slight account of this Psalm. But on the other
hand, if we have already an Idea of the Deluge that is rational, and also
consonant to Scripture upon other proofs, and the description here made by the
Prophet answer to that Idea, whether then is it not more reasonable to think
that it stands upon that ground, than to think it a mere fancy and Poetical
Scene of things: This is the true state of the case, and that which we must
judge of. Methinks it is very harsh to suppose all this a bare fiction, grounded
upon no matter of fact, upon no Sacred Story, upon no appearance of God in
Nature. If you say it has a moral signification, so let it have, we do not
destroy that; it has reference no doubt, to the dangers and deliverances of
the Church; but the question is, whether the words and natural sense be a fancy
only, a bundle of random hyperboles: or whether they relate to the history of
the Deluge, and the state of the Ark there representing the Church. This makes
the Sense doubly rich, Historically and Morally; and grounds it upon Scripture
and Reason, as well as upon Fancy.

That violent eruption of the Sea out of the Womb of the Earth, which Job
speaks of, is, in my judgment, another description of the Deluge; It Is Chap.
38. 8, 9, 10, 11. Who shut up the Sea with doors, when it broke forth, as if it
had issued out of a Womb; When I made the eloud the garment thereof, and thick
darkness a swaddling band for it. And broke up for it my decreed place --
hitherto shall thou come, etc. Here you see the birth and nativity of the Sea,
or of Oceanus, described Uti comparatio praecedens, Ver. 4, 5, 6. de ortu
Telluris, simitur ab aedificio, ita haec altera de ortu maris, sumitur a partu^
and exhibetur Oceanus, primum, ut foetus inclusus in utero, dein ut erumpens
and prodeuns, denique ut fasciis and primis suis pannis involutus. Atque ex
aperto Terrae utero prorupit aquarum moles, ut proluvies illae, quam simul cum
foetu profundere so^et puerpera.
; how he broke out of the Womb, and what his first garment and swaddling clothes
were; namely clouds and thick darkness. This cannot refer to any thing, that I
know of, but to the face of Nature at the Deluge; when the Sea was born, and
wrapped up in clouds and broken waves, and a dark impenetrable mist round the
body of the Earth. And this seems to be the very same that David had expressed in
his description of the Deluge, Psalm. 18. 11. He made darkness his secret place
his pavilion round about him were d^rk waters and thick clouds of the skies.
For this was truly the face of the World in the time of the Flood, though we
little reflect upon it. And this dark confusion every where, above and below,
arose from the violent and confused motion of the Abyss; See Theor. Book 1. p.
99.
which was dashed in pieces by the falling Earth, and flew into the air in misty
drops, as dust flies up in a great ruin.

But I am afraid, we have stayed too long upon this particular, the form of the
Deluge; seeing it is but a Corollary from the precedent article about the
dissolution of the Earth. However time is not ill spent about any thing that
relates to natural Providence, whereof the two most signal instances in our
Sacred Writings, are, the Deluge and the Conflagration. And seeing Job and
David do often reflect upon the works of God in the external creation, and upon
the administrations of Providence, it cannot be imagined that they should never
reflect upon the Deluge; the most remarkable change of Nature that ever has
been, and the most remarkable judgment upon mankind. And if they have reflected
upon it any where, it is, I think, in those places and those instances which I
have noted; and if those places do relate to the Deluge, they are not capable,
in my judgment, of any fairer or more natural interpretation than that which we
have given them; which, you see, how much it favors and confirms our Theory.

I have now finished the heads I undertook to prove, that I might show our
Theory to agree with Scripture in these three principal points; first, in that
it supposes a diversity and difference betwixt the Ante-diluvian Heavens and
Earth, and the present Heavens and Earth. Secondly, in assigning the particular
form of the Ante-diluvian Earth and Abyss. Thirdly, in explaining the Deluge by
a dissolution of that Earth, and an eruption of the Abyss. How far I have
succeeded in this attempt, as to others, I cannot tell; but I am sure I have
convinced my self, and am satisfied that my thoughts, in that Theory, have run
in the same tract with the holy Writings: with the true intent and spirit of
them. There are some persons that are wilfully ignorant in certain things, and
others that are willing to be ignorant as the Apostle phraseth it; speaking of
those Eternalists that denied the doctrine of the change and revolutions of the
Natural World: And it is not to be expected but there are many still of the same
humor; and therefore may be called willingly ignorant, that is, they will not
use that pains and attention that is necessary for the examination of such a
doctrine, nor impartiality in judging after examination; they greedily lay hold
on all evidence on one side, and willingly forget, or slightly pass over, all
evidence for the other; this I think is the character of those that are
willingly ignorant; for I do not take it to be so deep as a downright wilful
ignorance, where they are plainly conscious to themselves of that wilfulness;
but where an insensible mixture of humane passions inclines them one way, and
makes them averse to the other; and in that method draws on all the
consequences of a willing ignorance.

There remains still, as I remember, one Proposition that I am bound to make
good; I said at first, that our Hypothesis concerning the Deluge was more
agreeable not only to Scripture in general, but also to the particular History
of the Flood left us by Moses; I say, more agreeable to it than any other
Hypothesis that has yet been proposed. This may be made good in a few words.
For in Moses's History of the Deluge there are two principal points, The extent
of the Deluge, and the Causes of it; and in both these we do fully agree with
that sacred Author. As to the extent of it, He makes the Deluge universal; All
the high hills under the whole heaven were covered fifteen cubits upwards; We
also make it universal, over the face of the whole Earth; and in such a manner
as must needs raise the waters above the top of the highest Hills every where.
As to the canses of it, Moses makes them to be the disruption of the Abyss, and
the Rains; and no more; and in this also we exactly agree with him; we know no
other causes, nor pretend to any other but those two. Distinguishing therefore
Moses his narration as to the substance and circumstances of it, it must be
allowed that these two points make the substance of it, and that an Hypothesis
that differs from it in either of these two, differs from it more than Ours;
which, at the worst, can but differ in matter of circumstance. Now seeing the
great difficulty about the Deluge is the quantity of Water required for it,
there have been two explications proposed, besides ours, to remove or satisfy
this difficulty; One whereof makes the Deluge not to have been universal, or to
have reached only Judea and some neighboring Countries; and therefore less
water would suffice; The other owning the Deluge to be universal, supplies it
self with Water from the Divine Omnipotenty, and says new Waters were created
then for the nonce, and again annihilated when the Deluge was to cease. Both
these explications you see, (and I know no more of note that are not obnoxious
to the same exceptions) differ from Moses in the substance, or in one of the
two substantial points, and consequently more than ours does. The first
changes the Flood into a kind of national inundation, and the second assigns
other causes of it than Moses had assigned. And as they both differ apparently
from the Mosaical History, so you may see them refuted upon other grounds also,
in the third Chapter of the First Book of the Theory.

This may be sufficient as to the History of the Flood by Moses. But possibly
it may be said the principal objection will arise from Moses his Six-days
Creation in the first Chapter of Genesis: where another sort of Earth, than
what we have formed from the Chaos, is represented to us; namely, a Terraqueous
Globe, such as our Earth is at present. It Is indeed very apparent, that Moses
has accommodated his Six days Creation to the present form of the Earth, or to
that which was before the eyes of the people when he writ. But it is a great
question whether that was ever intended for a true Physical account of the
origin of the Earth: or whether Moses did either Philosophize or Astronomize
in that description. The ancient Fathers, when they answer the Heathens, and
the adversaries of Christianity, do generally deny it; as I am ready to make
good upon another occasion. And the thing it self bears in it evident marks of
an accommodation and condescension to the vulgar notions concerning the form of
the World. Those that think otherwise, and would make it literally and
physically true in all the parts of it, I desire them, without entering upon the
strict merits of the cause, to determine these Preliminaries. First, whether
the whole universe rise from a Terrestrial Chaos. Secondly, what Systeme of the
World this Six-days Creation proceeds upon: whether it supposes the Earth, or
the Sun, for the Center. Thirdly, Whether the Sun and Fixed Stars are of a later
date, and a later birth, than this Globe of Earth. And lastly, Where is the
Region of the Super-celestial Waters. When they have determined these
Fundamentals, we will proceed to other observations upon the Six-days work,
which will further assure us, that it is a narration suited to the capacity of
the people, and not to the strict and physical nature of things. Besides, we
are to remember, that Moses must be so interpreted in the first Chapter of
Genesis, as not to interfere with himself in other parts of his History; nor to
interfere with S. Peter, or the Prophet David, or any other Sacred Authors,
when they treat of the same matter. Nor lastly, so, as to be repugnant to clear
and uncontested Science. For, in things that concern the natural World, that
must always be consulted.

With these precautions, let them try if they can reduce that narrative of the
Origin of the World, to physical truth; so as to be consistent, both with
Nature, and with Divine Revelation every where. It is easily reconcilable to
both, if we suppose it writ in a Vulgar style, and to the conceptions of the
People: And we cannot deny that a Vulgar style is often made use of in the holy
Writings. How freely and unconcernedly does Scripture speak of God Almighty,
according to the opinions of the vulgar? of his passions, local motions, parts
and members of his body. Which all are things that do not belong, or are not
compatible with the Divine Nature, according to truth and Science. And if this
liberty be taken, as to God himself, much more may it be taken as to his works.
And accordingly we see, what motion the Scripture gives to the Sun: what figure
to the Earth: what figure to the Heavens: All according to the appearance of
sense and popular credulity; without any remorse for having transgressed the
rules of intellectual truth.

This vulgar style of Scripture in describing the natures of things, has been
often mistaken for the real sense, and so become a stumbling block in the way
of truth. Thus the Anthropomorphites of old contended for the humane shape of
God, from the Letter of Scripture; and brought many express Texts for their
purpose: but sound reason at length, got the upper hand of Literal authority.
Then, several of the Christian Fathers contended, that there were no Antipodes:
and made that doctrine irreconcilable to Scripture. But this also, after a
while, went off, and yielded to reason and experience. Then, the Motion of the
Earth must by no means be allowed, as being contrary to Scripture: for so it is
indeed, according to the Letter and Vulgar style. But all intelligent Persons
see thorough this Argument, and depend upon it no more in this case, than in
the former. Lastly, The original of the Earth from a Chaos, drawn according to
the rules of Physiology, will not be admitted: because it does not agree with
the Scheme of the Six-days Creation. But why may not this be writ in a Vulgar
style, as well as the rest? Certainly there can be nothing more like a Vulgar
style, than to set God to work by the day, and in Six-days to finish his task:
as he is there represented. We may therefore probably hope that all these
disguises of truth will at length fall off, and that we shall see God and his
Works in a pure and naked Light.

Thus I have finished what I had to say in confirmation of this Theory from
Scripture. I mean of the former part of it, which depends chiefly upon the
Deluge, and the Ante-diluvian Earth. When you have collated the places of
Scripture, on either side, and laid them in the balance, to be weighed one
against another; If you do but find them equal, or near to an equal poise, you
know in whether Scale the Natural Reasons are to be laid: and of what weight
they ought to be in an argument of this kind. There is a great difference
betwixt Scripture with Philosophy on its side, and Scripture with Philosophy
against it: when the question is concerning the Natural World. And this is our
Case: which I leave now to the consideration of the unprejudiced Reader: and
proceed to the Proof of the Second Part of the Theory.

THE later Part consists of the Conflagration of the World, and the New Heavens
and New Earth. And seeing there is no dispute concerning the former of these
two, our task will now lie in a little compass. Being only this, To prove that
there will be New Heavens, and a New Earth, after the Conflagration. This, to
my mind, is sufficiently done already, in the first, second and third Chapters
of the 4th. Book, both from Scripture and Antiquity, whether Sacred or
Profane: and therefore, at present, we will only make a short and easy review
of Scripture-Testimonies, with design chiefly to obviate and disappoint the
Evasions of such, as would beat down solid Texts into thin Metaphors and
Allegories.

The Testimonies Scripture concerning the Renovation of the World, are either
express, ^implicit. Those I call express, that mention the New Heavens and ^ew
Earth: And those implicit that signify the same thing, but r^^ express terms.
So when our Savior speaks of a Palingenesia, (...) Regeneration, (Matt. 19.
28, 29.) Or S. Peter of an Apocatastas^ or Restitution, (Act. 3. 21.) These
being words used by all Auth^rs, Profane or Ecclesiastical, for the Renovation
of the World, ^^ght, in reason, to be interpreted in the same sense in the Holy
W^^tings. And in like manner, when S. Paul speaks of his Future Ea^^h, (...)
or an habitable World to come, Hebr. 2. 5. or of a Redemption or ^^lioration
of the present state of Nature, Romans 8. 21, 22. These lead (...) again, in
other terms, to the same Renovation of the World. ^^t there are also some
places of Scripture, that set the New Heavens ^^d New Earth in such a full and
open view, that we must shut our^^yes not to see them. S. John says, he saw
them, and observed the f^^m of the New Earth, Isa. 65. 17.
Apoc. 21. 1. The Seer Isaiah spoke of then^ in express words, many hundred
years before. And S. Peter mar^^ the time when they are to be introduced,
namely, after the Co^^lagration, or after the Dissolution of the present
Heavens and Ea^^h: 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.

These lat^^r Texts of Scripture, being so express, there is but one way left
to ^^lude the force of them; and that is, by turning the Renovation (...) the
World into an Allegory: and making the New Heavens and ^ew Earth to be
Allegorical Heavens and Earth, not real and mate^^al, as ours are. This is a
bold attempt of some modern Authors, ^ho choose rather to strain the Word of
God, than their own No^^ons. There are Allegories, no doubt, in Scripture, but
we are not (...) allegorize Scripture without some warrant: either from an
Apo^olical Interpretation, or from the necessity of the matter: and I d^ not
know how they can pretend to either of these, in this case. ^owever, That they
may have all fair play, we will lay aside, at present, all the other Texts of
Scripture, and confine our selves wholly to S. Peter's words: to see and
examine whether they are, or can ^e turned into an Allegory, according to the
best rules of Interpre^ation.

S. ^eter's words are these: 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13.
Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought
ye to be, in holy conversation and godli^^ss? Looking for, and hasting the
coming of the Day of God: wher^in the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the Elements shall melt with servent heat. NEVERTHELESS, we, according
(...) his promise, look for New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein Rig^^eousness
shall dwell. The Question is concerning this last Verse, Whether the New
Heavens and Earth here promised, are to be real and ma^^rial Heavens and Earth,
or only figurative and allegorical. The wo^ds, you see, are clear: and the
general rule of Interpretation is thi^, That we are not to recede from the
letter, or the literal sense, un^ess there be a necessity from the subject
matter; such a necessity, as makes a literal Interpretation absurd. But where
is that necessity in this Case? Cannot God make New Heavens and a New Earth, as
^easily as he made the Old ones: Is his strength decayed since that Time, or is
Matter grown more disobedient? (...) does not Nature offer her self voluntarily
to raise a New Wor^^ from the Second Chaos, as well as from the First: and,
under the conduct of Providence, to make it as convenient an habitation as
(...) Primaeval Earth? Therefore no necessity can be pretended of leavin^ the
literal sense, upon an incapacity of the subject matter.

The Second Rule to determine an Interpretation to be Literal or Allegorical,
is, The use of the same words or phra^^ in the Context, and the signification
of them there. Let Us then exa^ine our case according to this rule, S. Peter had
used the same p^ase of Heavens and Earth twice before in the same Chapter. The
(...) Heavens and Earth, ver. 5. The Present Heavens and Earth, ver. 7. and now
he uses it again, ver. 13. The New Heavens and Earth. Have we not then reason
to suppose, that he takes it here in the some sense, that he had done twice
before, for real and material Hea^^ns and Earth? There is no mark set of a new
signification, nor wh^ we should alter the sense of the words. That he used
them alw^ys before for the material Heavens and Earth, I think none will
^uestion; and therefore, unless they can give us a sufficient reason, w^y we
should change the signification of the words, we are bound, (...) this second
rule also, to understand them in a literal sense.

Lastly, The very form of the Words, and the manne^ of their dependence upon
the Context, leads us to a literal sense, and to material Heavens and Earth.
NEVERTHELESS, says ^he Apostle, we expect New Heavens, etc. Why Nevertheless!
that is, no^^ithstanding the dissolution of the present Heavens and Earth. The
Apostle foresaw, what he had said, might raise a doubt in their m^^ds, whether
all things would not be at an end: Nothing more o^ Heavens and Earth, or of any
habitable World, after the Conf^^gration; and to obviate this, he tells them,
Notwithstanding that w^nderful desolation that I have described, we do,
according to God's ^^mises, expect New Heavens and a New Earth, to be an
Habitatio^ for the Righteous.

You see then the New Heavens and New Earth, which the ^postle speaks of are
substituted in the place of those that were dest^^y'd at the Conflagration; and
would you substitute Allegorical H^avens and Earth in the place of Material? A
shadow for a subs^^nce? What (...) Equivocation would it be in the Apostle,
when the ^oubt was about the material Heavens and Earth, to make an answer
about Allegorical. Lastly, The Timeing of the thing determines the (...) When
shall this New World appear? after the Conflagration: the Apostle says:
Therefore it cannot be understood of any Moral R^novation, to be made at, or in
the times of the Gospel, as these ^^llegorists pretend. We must therefore, upon
all accounts, con^^de, that the Apostle intended a literal sense: real and
material Heav^ns, to succeed these after the Conflagration; which was the thing
to be proved. And I know not what Bars the Spirit of God can set, to keep us
within the compass of a Literal Sense, if these be not su^ficient.

Thus much for the Explication of S. Peter's Doctrine, concerni^g the New
Heavens and New Earth: which secures the Second Part of our Theory. For the
Theory stands upon two Pillars, or two Pedestals, The Ante-diluvian Earth and
the Future Earth: or, in S. Peter's phrase, The Old Heavens and Earth, and the
New Heavens and Earth: And it cannot be shaken, so long as these two continue
firm and immovable. We might now put an end to this Review, but it may be
expected possibly that we should say something concerning the Millennium: which
we have, contrary to the general Sentiment of the Modern Millenaries, placed in
the Future Earth. Our Opinion has this advantage above others, that, all
fanatical pretensions to power and empire in this World, are, by these means,
blown away, as chaff before the wind. Princes need not fear to be dethroned, to
make way to the Saints: nor Governments unhinged, that They may rule the World
with a rod of Iron. These are the effects of a wild Enthusiasm; seeing the very
state which they aim at, is not to be upon this Earth.

But that our sense may not be mistaken or misapprehended in this particular,
as if we thought the Christian Church would never, upon this Earth, be in a
better and happier posture than it is in at present: We must distinguish
betwixt a melioration of the World, if you will allow that word: and a
Millennium. We do not deny a reformation and improvement of the Church, both as
to Peace, Purity, and Piety. That knowledge may increase, men's minds be
enlarged, and Christian Religion better understood: That the power of
Antichrist shall be diminished, Persecution cease, Liberty of Conscience
allowed, amongst the Reformed: and a greater union and harmony established.
That Princes will mind the public good, more than they do now; and be
themselves better examples of Virtue and true Piety. All this may be, and I
hope will be, e're long. But the Apocalyptical Millennium, or the New
Jerusalem, is still another matter. It differs not in degree only from the
present state, but is a new order of things: both in the Moral World and in the
Natural; and that cannot be till we come into the New Heavens and New Earth.
Suppose what Reformation you can in this World, there will still remain many
things inconsistent with the true Millennial state. Antichrist, though weakened,
will not be finally destroyed till the coming of our Savior, nor Satan bound.
And there will be always Poverty, Wars, Diseases, Knaves and Hypocrites, in
this World: which are not consistent with the New Jerusalem, as S. John
describes it. Apoc. 21. 2, 3, 4, etc.

You see now what our notion is of the Millennium, as we deny this Earth to be
the Seat of it. It Is the state that succeeds the first Resurrection, when Satan
is locked up in the bottomless pit. The state when the Martyrs are to return
into Life, and wherein they are to have the first lot and chief share. A state
which is to last a thousand years. And Blessed and Holy is he, that has a part
in it: on such the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God
and Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. If you would see more
particular reasons of our judgment in this case, why such a Millennium is not
to be expected in this World: they are set down in the 8th. Chapt. of the 4th.
Book, and we do not think it necessary that they should be here repeated.

As to that dissertation that follows the Millennium, and reaches to the
Consummation of all things, seeing it is but problematical, we leave it to
stand or fall by the evidence already given. And should be very glad to see the
conjectures of others, more learned, in Speculations so abstruse and remote
from common knowledge. They cannot surely be thought unworthy or unfit for our
Meditations, seeing they are suggested to us by Scripture it self. And to what
end were they proposed to us there, if it was not intended that they should be
understood, sooner or later?

I have done with this Review: and shall only add one or two reflections upon
the whole discourse, and so conclude. You have seen the state of the Theory of
the Earth, as to the Matter, Form, and Proofs of it: both Natural and Sacred.
If any one will substitute a better in its place, I shall think my self more
obliged to him, than if he had showed me the Quadrature of the Circle. But it
is not enough to pick quarrels here and there: that may be done by any writing,
especially when it is of so great extent and comprehension. They must build up,
as well as pull down; and give us another Theory instead of this, fitted to the
same Natural History of the Earth, according as it is set down in Scripture:
and then let the World take their choice. He that cuts down a Tree, is bound in
reason to plant two, because there is an hazard in their growth and thriving.

Then as to those that are such rigorous Scripturists, as to require plainly
demonstrative and irresistible Texts for every thing they entertain or believe;
They would do well to reflect and consider, whether, for every article in the
three Creeds (which have no support from natural reason) they can bring such
Texts of Scripture as they require of others: or a fai^er and juster evidence,
all things considered, than we have done for the substance of this Theory. We
have not indeed said all that might be said, as to Antiquity: that making no
part in this Review, and being capable still of great additions. But as to
Scripture and Reason I have no more to add. Those that are not satisfied with
the proofs already produced upon these two heads, are under a fate, good or
bad, which is not in my power to overcome.

FINIS.

