THREE LETTERS Concerning the Present State OF ITALY, Written in the Year 1687.
I. Relating to the Affair of MOLINOS, and the QUIETISTS. II. Relating to the
INQUISITION, and the State of Religion. III. Relating to the Policy and
Interests of some of the States of ITALY.
Being A SUPPLEMENT to Dr. BURNETS LETTERS.

Printed in the Year 1688.

A TABLE Of the Contents of the Three LETTERS.
The first Letter.
THE curiosity which Dr. Burnets Letters had excited of knowing more concerning
the Quietists, was the motives to this Author's further Enquiry about them, p.
1, 2. with what difficulty things before the Inquisition come to be known, and
with how much fear and reserve the Italians talk of them, especially to
Heretics. p. 2, 3. The amasing Wealth of the Churches, Palaces, and Convents
in Rome and through all Italy; and yet the astonishing Poverty of the Inhabitants,
p. 4. A comparison between the Italians upon the one hand, and the English and
Dutch on the other hand, p. 4, 5. That the poverty of the people in Italy,
arises from the Government's being in the hands of Priests, and from the
ascendancy which the principles of their Religion give them over men's
consciences. p. 6, 7. How little many of the Italians believe the chief
Doctrines of their Church; and what temptation their Religion lay's them under
to Atheism. ibid. That the Mysteries of the Conclave; the qualifications of the
Cardinal's; the characters of the late Popes, particularly of the present; and
the manner how the Purple, and the Triple Crown are obtained, are evidences
that the Romish Church is not what she pretends to be, p. 8, 9. That tho they
who are under the yoke, may be willing to continue in Slavery; yet it is matter
of amasement* that such who are delivered from Papal Bondage, should submit
again unto it. p. 9, 10. Whence it was, that so many of all ranks came to be so
favorable to Molinos; and upon what grounds, his opinions came to be so
universally received. p. 11, 12. A Character of Molinos himself; with an
account of the chief Authors of the Mystical Divinity; together with a
representation of it, and why the followers of Molinos are styled Quietists;
and what different Ends men might have, in falling in with this new Method. p.
12, to 19. When Molinos's Book called il Gui^a Spirituale was first published;
and with whose approbations; and how much it was esteemed. p. 19, 20. The great
reputation he grew into, especially with which of the Cardinals. p. 20, 21. The
friendship betwixt Card. d'Estree and him; and the value that the present Pope
had for him, and the encouragement he gave to his design. p. 21, 22. Of a
French Book written on the Subject of Mystical Divinity, and by whose means,
and of its being Translated into Italian. p. 22, 23. Of the several Writings of
Petrucci in relation to a contemplative State, with their character. ibid. The
Jesuits and Dominicans allarmed at the progress of Quietism, and why. ibid.
Books writ by the Society against Molinos and his Method; and the way that the
Jesuit Segueri took to decry it. p. 24. That the matter being brought before
the Inquisition, the Jesuits were accounted accusers; with an account of what
became of F. Martin Esparsa a Jesuit, who had approved Molinos's Book. p. 25.
Of Molinos and Petrucci their coming off justified, and that their Books were
approved, and the Answers of the Jesuits censured as scandalous. p. 26. The
Popes advancing Petrucci to be Bishop of J^ssi, and how he behaved himself in
his Bishopric. ibid. How the party grew in credit and in number, with a short
character of them. ibid. and p. 27. Of the Jesuits persevering to calumniate
them, and in what Methods; and of the care that Molino* took to desend himself,
and of his writing in order thereunto a Treatise of Frequent and daily
Communion. p. 28. An account of that Book; and with whose approbations it was
published; and of the Answers given therein to some of Mr. Arnau^'s Objections
against Frequent Communion. p. 28, 29. Of the offense taken at that Book, and
for what; and how the Quietists are in many things calumniated, p. 30. That
their Maxims are resembled to those of Socrates his School, and wherein. p. 31,
32. A conversation which the Author had with a French Clergyman, with the
reasons given by that person why Worship ought to be Pompous, etc. p. 33. The
Jesuits upon not being able to ruin Molinos by their influence upon the Pope,
apply themselves by means of F. la Chaise to the French King. p. 3^. The
ascendant they have over that Monarch; with a just censure of the Persecution
exercised in France. ibid. The Popes disputing the Regale with the French King,
and at the same time favoring Molinos, laid hold of in France, to reproach the
Pope, and to crush the Quietists. p. 34. 35. A Report at Rome of Cardinal
d'Estrees betraying Molinos, by informing the Inquisition of many particulars
against him. A Relation of that whole Story, and of Molinos's being thereupon
clapped up. p. 35, 36, 37, 38* The imprisonment of Count Vespiniani and his Lady,
and how they came to be Released upon Bail'.* p. 38, 3* Of the Popes being
suspected of Heresy, and his being Examined by the Inquisition. p. 39. How
they endeavor to avoid the Reflection that this exposes the Papal
Infallibility unto. p. 40. Of a Circular Letter sent by the Inquisition to
Cardinal Cibo. p. ^1, 42, 43. That several Cardinals are apprehensive of a
Storm from the Inquisition, and who they are. A Character of Don Livi^ the
Popes Nephew, and how jealous he is of falling into the hands of the
Inquisitors, p. 44. Of the imprisonment of F. Appiani a Jesuit, and the
mortification it gave the Society, with a Reflection upon the Conduct of the
Society. p. 45. A remarkable Story of F. Cann an English Jesuit in Rome. p.
46, 47. A character of Cardinal Howard; and of his being shut out of all the
Councils of the E. of Cast^em^n during his Embassay at Rome, with an account of
the rude and insolent carriage of F. Morgan toward the Cardinal. p. 47, 48.
The great concern expressed for those in the Inquisition by their friends; with
the impression it makes upon the Inquisitors, and their behavior through the
apprehension they have of it p. 48, 49. That the Pope and Cardinal Cibo are
much troubled to see this matter gone so far; and that Cardinal Petrucci is
still in the Popes favor* ibid. The great number of the Regulars in Rome and
in Naples, who being generally against the Quietists, they are made a Sacrifice
to their resentment, p. 49. Nineteen Propositions pretended to be extracted out
of the Writings and Doctrines of the Quietists, with a Censure of them
published by Order of the Inquisition. p. 50. The Circular Letter, both in
Italian and in English, p. 51, 52, 53, 54. The Censure of the Opinions of the
Quietists in Italian and in English, with some Remarks upon it, showing that
many things charged upon them are misrepresented; that other things are weakly
and ridiculously resuted; that several absurdities are therein obtruded upon
the world for Truths; and that the Adoration of Images, which the Papists in
England and France do disclaim, is in the Censure justified and recommended. p.
55. to p. 88. Of the Condemnation of Molinos; of the rage expressed by many of
the People against him; and of the hatred declared upon this occasion against
the present Pontificate, with a character of it, and an account of the
Gentlness of the Inquisition to many of Molinos's followers, and what
Reflections wise men make thereupon, p. 89, 90, 91. The whole Ceremony at the
Minerva, the day that Molinos was brought forth to abjure, with a Relation of
some things he said, and of his deportment, p. 92, 93, 94. The mildness of the
Punishment inflicted upon him, ibid. Of the boldness of one of his followers
before the Inquisition, and how slightly he came off, p. 94. Of the vast
correspondence which Molinos had in all places; and that most of the condemned
Articles, are but an invidious Aggravating of the Doctrine of Predestination,
and of Efficacious Grace, ibid, and p. 95.

The Second LETTER.
THE Author's Capacity for giving the following Relation, through having resided
so long in Rome and in Italy, p. 96. Some Reflections upon the study of
Manuscripts, Medals, Inscriptions, and of Religion and Politics, p. 97, 98. A
commendation of Dr. Burnets Letters, and that most which the Author had
observed, is already related there; and that what is here published, refers
either to places which the Dr. did not see, or to matters which his short stay
in Italy, did not allow him to enquire after, ibid. Of a Crucifix shut up in
the Inquisition, the occasion of it, with several Reflections on the Bigotry,
Superstition, and Idolatry of the Papists, especially of the Italians, p. 99,
100, 101. Of the Plague in S. Gregory the Great's time, ibid. Of a Stone in the
Chapel of Ara Coeli, pretended to have the impression of an Angel's Foot upon
it, and therefore worshipped by the people; but is now made Prisoner in the
Inquisition, to keep the Crucifix company, p. 102, 103. The story of Sr. Burrhi
a Millanese Gentleman and a Chemist, who becoming suspected by the Priests, was
brought into the Inquisition, and getting off at that time, was afterward
apprehended, and being accused of many Errors, was made to abjure, and confined
to a perpetual Imprisonment, etc. p. 103, 104, 105. Of the scandalous and
lascivous Pictures, that are in many Churches of Italy, and that their most
celebrated Madonna's have been the Mistresses of the great Painters; with a
Relation of an Intrigue between a Friar and a Nun, p. 106, 107. Of their
sottish and Idolatrous Representations of the Trinity, ibid. Of the Picture of
the B. Virgin, with the Order of the Capuchins under her Petticoat, ibid. How
Learning came to flourish so much in the last Age, and to decay so greatly in
this; and of the great Masters of painting that Italy produced in the former
Century, p. 108, 109, 110. Of the Picture of the Virgin in the Annunciata in
Florence, which they pretend to have been finished by an Angel, p. 110. The
Fable of Loretto, and what exceptions the Author made to it in a Conversation;
and how the Italians justify the Devotion of the people, upon a supposition
that the whole story is a Fiction, p. 111, 112. Of a Conference between an
Abbot and an English Clergyman, of the difference between the two Churches, p.
112, 113. That the Conversion of Nations, is no further accounted of at Rome,
than as it brings profit to the Datary; and the reason why so little respect
was had to the English Ambassador, and to every thing he proposed, p. 113. What
retarded the Promotion of the Card. d'Este so long; with a Relation how the
late Card. d'Este Protector of the French Nation at Rome, hectored Pope
Alexander VII. p. 114. Of the scandalous imposture of the Blood of St. January
at Naples, p. 115. To what excessive height the Priests carry the
Ecclesiastical Immunities, and in what danger the General of the Horse at
Naples was of being Excommunicated, p. 116, 117. A remarkable story how far the
Immunities of the Clergy have been pusht in the Dukedom of Florence, for the
saving of a Priest; with a character of the present Duke, p. 117, 118. The
present Viceroy of Naples commended, for supporting the Secular Tribunal
against the Invasions of the Ecclesiastical Court; with a Relation of the
ingenuous and public Affront he put upon an Auditor of the Nuncio's, and how
ill it was resented at Rome, p. 118, 119, 120. Of the difference betwixt the
Pope and the French King about the Regale; with a further character of the
Pope, p. 120, 121. What improvement the Jansenists made of the difference, p.
121, 122. Concerning the business of the Franchises, and that the Pope seems
resolved to maintain his late Bull, and how it may prove fatal to himself, and
the Papal Sea, to contend that matter with the French King, p. 123. Of the way
that this Pope treats Ambassadors; and of an Answer he gave to the English
Ambassador upon his threatening to leave Rome, that showed the little Respect he
had either for him or his Master, p. 124. How the present Pope conducts his
Revenue; that being the only thing he understands. Of his Retrenching both all
Expenses and the public Charities; and that he must have a vast Treasure, p.
124. The inducement to the making so many Cardinals in the last Promotion. And
the Aversion which Card. Taia, and Card. Ricci expressed to the Purple in the
Promotion that was made five year ago, p. 125. How Cardinal Farnese, that was
afterward Paull III. and who raised the Family of Parma, came to be created
Cardinal by Alexander VI. with an account in what manner the Promotion of
Cardinals is carried; and how the Wench was too crafty both for that lewd Pope,
and for his Son Caesar Borgia, p. 126, 127, 128. Of the Aversion which this
Pope has to the Jesuits; and that the English Ambassador's Resigning himself
to their conduct, was the reason of the cold usage he met with at Rome, p. 129.
What character all wise and indifferent Italians fasten upon those of that
Society; and their concluding from the credit which they have in England, that
the Roman Catholic Religion must needs miscarry there, ibid. and p. 130. The
Romantic Letters which the Jesuits write to Rome out of England, and what
just discredit this puts upon all that they write out of the Indies and other
remote Countries, ibid. Of the Letter lately printed that was wrote by a
Jesuit of Liege to those at Friburg, concerning the present state of Popery in
England; that it is a true and Authentic Letter, p. 130, 131. Of two things
peculiar to this Order which render it formidable; how independent the General
of the Jesuits is above the Generals of other Orders, and how absolute his
Government, p. 132, 133. By what means the Mission comes to be generally in
their hands, and of their getting thereby into Families, p. 133, 134. The
different humor and conduct of the Secular Priests, from those of the
Regulars: and what prejudice it is the suffering Regulars to live in Protestant
States; how it is matter of wonder at Rome, that Protestans should permit
Regulars to be in their Countries; and what a wise Roman said to the Author
about it, p. 134, 135. How the people of Lombardy are possessed with a
Superstition of mixing Water with their Wine, and how the Priests who nourish
the Vulgar in that conceit, excuse their own Wine from being mixed, p. 136,
137. That the Tax which is laid upon Wine in Florence, makes the people there
preserve it pure, ibid. Of an Abbey of Benedictines at Etal in Bavaria, where
the Monks live in as great abundance as the Duke himself, p. 138. A beautiful
prospect the Author had at Burgo in the Hills of Trent, p. 138. The way of
Celebrating St. Anthony's day at Rome, and how the people bring all their
Horses, Mulets, and Asses to be sprinkled with Holy Water by the Monks of thet
Order. How profitable this piece of superstitious Folly is to the Priests, p.
139, 140. That Molinos's abjuring was only a pretended thing; that his party
continues still to be very numerous; and that all the Reports about the
lewdness of his Life, are esteemed to be no other than Fables, p. 141, 142.

The Third LETTER.
OF a curious Salt-work at Sode near Francfort, with an account of the way, of
making the Salt, p. 144, 145, 146 That Italy is the highest Country in Europe,
as appears by the small Descent from the Alps on that side, to what it is
either on the French or German side, p. 147. Of Guastale, its situation, and of
its being wrested from the rightful owner by the French King; the danger that
all Italy will be thereby exposed unto, p. 148, 149, 150, 151, 152. A Character
of the present Duke of Mantua; How he favors the French Interest; of his
putting Cassal and Guastale into their hands; and how they wind him as they
please, p. 152, 153. Of the courage and fidelity of the Marquises of Cannosse
and Palliotti to the Duke of Mantua; and how the French got them both to be
made close Prisoners, p. 153, 154. That the Princes of Italy are absolute in
their Dominions, and the Slavery their Subjects are in, ibid. That there is a
French Envoy always attending upon the Duke of Mantua, ibid. How one of the
Duke of Mantua's Secretaries was by the Duke sent to Turin, and seized by a
party of French Horse from Pignerol, p. 155, 156. The Imperious way that the
French in Casal act toward those of Montferrat, and Piedmont, p. 157. That
having Bargained with Masons, how they broke the Agreement, ibid. How the
French King having advanced three Millions toward a Fond for an East India
Company, did withdraw it, p. 158. Of the disfavour that the Marquise of
Pianesse fell in to with the late Duke of Savoy, and how he came to be
introduced into the Ministry again, and afterward was disgraced, put in
prison, and tried; and how the Court of Savoy remains governed by the French,
p. 158, 159, 160, 161. Of the design that was carried on of matching this
present Duke to the Infanta of Portugal; and of his being poisoned (as his
Father had been) and his reflecting on the wise Advices which the Marquise de
Pianesse had given him, p. 161, 162. How much the Dukes of Savoy are sunk in
this Age from the Figure that they made in the last; how difficult it will be
to remedy it, while Cassal and Pignerol are in the hands of the French, ibid.
Of the late persecution in the Valley's of Piedmont; how all in the Court of
Savoy are ashamed of it; with an account of the Fidelity, peaceableness, and
industry of that poor people; and what the person who acquainted the Author
with these things, upon his knowing him to be an Englishman, said to him upon
it, p. 162, 163. Of the luxury and vanity of living magnificently, wherewith
France has infected the Princes of Germany, together with a representation of
the mischiefs which arise from Princes and Noblemens traveling into France, p.
164. How fatal Luxury and a vain Expencefulness are in a special manner to
Commonwealths; And what sensible decays in strength, the expenceful way of
living that the Dutch and Cantons are grown into; with a commendation of that
part of the Venetian Constitution, which regulates the Expense of their
Nobility, p. 165, 166. Of the misery and poverty that appears in Pisa through the
Severity of the Government; and of the Wealth and populousness of Lucca, through
being a Free Government; how jealous they of Lucca are of having their Liberty
supplanted, and how infinitely they prise it; with an Account of the Strength
and Decoration of the Town, p. 167, 168. Of Genoa; its decay from what it
formerly was; and yet its being vastly more wealthy and populous, than any part
of Tuscany or of the Popes Patrimony. Of the number of the Subjects of that
Republic; their Forts in Corsica, with a Character of the Corses; the Compass
of the Fortifications of Genoa; the Expense they have laid out on the two
Moles; the debt it has run them into; with an Account of the Extent of their
whole Country, and how it is defended; and what their Marine strength is, p.
168, 169, 170, 171. How much the safety of Millan and of all Italy depends upon
the preservation of Genoa; and that its Interest and Spains are inseparably
united, p. 172, 173. A large Account of their Civil Constitution; and of the
Divisions that are among them, and how occasioned; and that these were the
Inducements to France to attack them, p. 173, 174, 175, 176, 177. That tho the
Subjects be wealthy, yet the State is weak; that there is such a degeneracy
among them from what they were, that they have neither Heads nor Hearts to
defend themselves, were they vigorously assaulted; and whence that degeneracy
proceeds, p. 178. Curious Refl^ctions upon the Diseases, that Commonwealths are
subject unto, with a friendly application of all unto Holland, p. 179. That the
project of France's falling upon Genoa, was formed by one Valdyron of Nismes,
that was a Protestant, and had lived long in Genoa. That the French might have
been easily Masters of it, had they assaulted it vigorously at first. The
injustice of this way of proceeding, and how the Italians style it, p. 180,
181, 182. What Reflections a Spaniard, belonging to the Count of Melgar, made
upon the French miscarrying in that, and in some other of their Undertakings,
p. 182, 183. How Valdyron was treated by the Genoese, and how poorly requited
by the French King, p. 184. An Account of a Conversation the Author had with
two of the old Magistrates of Messina, wherein they said many things reslective
on the Honor, Veracity and Justice of the French King and his Ministers, and
by what Arguments they justified the Revolt of their Town from the Spaniard, p.
185, 186, 187. Of the method they use in preparing Vitriol in the Sulfatara
near Puzzolo. Of a little Town in the Appenins, called Norcia, which tho in the
Popes Territories, may be accounted a Commonwealth, and which is so jealous of
all Priests obtaining any share in their Government, that they will admit none
into Magistracy, who can either read or write p. 189, 190. Of the Mortification
which one of the Magistrates, put upon an Auditor who was a Churchman, by
gelding him, for attempting to debauch his wife; with a pleasant account, how
one that has been so treated, may continue capable to say Mass, ibid. and p.
191.

The Stationer to the Reader.
I Can give no other account of these Letters, but that they were communicated
to me, by a person of known Integrity; who assured me, that he who made these
Observations, is a man of great virtue, and considerably learned: who has been
long and much in Italy: who is both capable of looking narrowly into matters,
and is of such severe morals, that one may safely depend on all he says. This
was enough for me; so without making any further enquiry, or knowing any thing
of the Author, I have set about the printing of them.

VALE.
A LETTER Writ from ROME, To one in Holland, concerning the QUIETISTS.
SIR,
YOur desire of being informed particularly by me, of the state of Religion and
Learning in Italy, and chiefly here at Rome, has quickened my curiosity, and has
set an edge upon a humor that is of it self Inquisitive enough: and tho I am
not so much in lo^^ with writing, as to delight in transmitting you long
Letters, yet I find I have matter at present for a very long one; chiefly in
that which relates to the Quietists: for you observe right, that the short
hints that Dr. Burnet gave of their matters in his Letters, did rather increase
the curiosity of the English, than satisfy it. He told as much as was generally
known in Rome at that time, concerning them; but as a longer stay might have
discovered more particulars to him, so there have fallen out since that time
such new and surprising accidents, that there is not more harkening after new
Evidence in England, upon the breaking out of Plots, than there was at Rome
upon the Imprisonment of so great a number of persons in February and March
last; the number alone of 200 persons, was enough to raise a great curiosity;
but this was much increased by the quality of the persons that were clapped up,
who were both for Rank, for Learning, and for Piety, the most esteemed of any
in Rome. So I was pusht on by my own Inclinations, as well as by your
Entreaties, to take all the pains that was possible for me, to be well Informed
of this matter. The particular Application with which I had read some of the
Books of Devotion writ in this method, and the pleasure, and, I hope, profit,
that I had found in it, made me still the more earnest to know this matter to
the bottom. It is true, it was hard to find it out: for those who have been in
Rome, know with how much caution all people there talk of matters that are
before the Inquisition: those are like the Secrets of state elsewhere: of which
a man cannot talk much without incurring some Inconvenience; and there is no
Inconvenience that is more terrible at Rome, than the falling into the hands of
the Inquisitors: for besides the Danger that a man runs, if the suspicions are
well founded, the least ill effect that this must have, is the cutting off all
a man's hopes of Preferment; for what a Suspicion of High Treason is elsewhere,
the Suspicion of Heresy is at Rome; and where there are many Pretenders, and
there is so much to be expected, you may imagine that Hope and Fear working at
the same time so powerfully, it must be very hard to engage such persons as
probably know the secret of things, to trust themselves upon so tender a point,
to strangers. The truth is, Learning is so low in Italy, and the Opinion that
they have of the Learning of Strangers, chiefly of Heretics, is so high, that
they do not willingly enter either on Subjects of Learning or of Religion with
them; and on the other hand a Stranger and a Heretic, who is considered as a
Spy, or a fair Enemy at best, will not find it convenient to thrust on such
subjects of conversation, as are tender and suspicious. All this is to prepare
you for a relation which you will perhaps think defective, yet is as full a I
could possibly gather, out of all the Hints and Informations that some months
stay at Rome procured me.

The first thing that surprises a stranger in Rome, is the very unequal mixture
of Wealth and Poverty, that he sees here, as well as in all the parts of Italy;
yet it is more conspicuous here, than elsewhere: for as the Wealth of the
Churches, Palaces and Convents is astonishing, so the Poverty of the
Inhabitants, and the meanness of the ordinary Buildings, is extremely
unsuteable to the magnificence of the other. When a man sees what Italy was an
Age or two ago, not to go back so far as to remember what Rome was once; he can
hardly imagine how such a fall, such a dispeopling, and such a poverty could
befall a Nation and Climate, that Nature has made to be one of the richest of
the world, or of Europe at least; if the PRIESTS had not at the same time a
secret to make the Natives miserable, in spite of all that Abundance with which
Nature has furnished them. It were not able to withstand even an ordinary
Enemy, and it can scarce support it self. Those Italians that have seen the
Wealth and Abundance that is in England and Holland, tho their Sun is less
favorable, and their Climate is more unhappy, and that come home so see their
Towns deserted, and their Inhabitants in Rags, speak of this sometimes with an
Indignation that is too sensible to be at all times kept within bounds. They
speak of the difference betweeen Holland and Italy, like men affected when they
compared the two soils and Climates together. The one is a soil divided between
sand and turff, preserved from the Innudations of Land-floods, and the
overflowing of the sea, at a vast Charge, suffering often such losses as would
ruin other states, and paying great and constant Impositions: and yet with all
these Inconveniences, and all the disadvantages of a feeble sun, a stagnating
and phlegmatic Air, violent Colds, and moderate, or at least very shorts
Heats, this Country is full of Wealth and People; and there is in it such an
abundance of great Towns and considerable villages, and in all these there
appear so many marks of plenty, and none at all of Want: and the other has a
kind sun, long and happy Summers, and mild Winters: a fruitful and rich soil,
and every thing that the Inhabitants can wish for on Natures part, to render
them the Envy of the World: whereas they are become the Scorn and contempt of
all that see them. And as much as the Dutch seem to have acted in spite of
Nature on the one hand, in rendering themselves much more considerable than she
has Intended they should be; so the Government of Italy seems to have reversed
the design of Nature as much on the other hand, by reducing the Inhabitants to
such a degree of Misery, in spite of all her Bounty: upon this subject the
Italians will talk more freely than upon matters of Religion: and do not stick
to say, that it flows from the share that PRIESTS have in the Government, and
that not only in the Popes Territory, but in all the other Courts of Italy,
where they have the main stroke. They will tell you, that Priests have not
Souls big enough, nor tender enough, for Government: they have both a
narrowness of spirit, and a sourness of mind, that does not agree with the
Principles of human Society: Their having so short and so uncertain a time of
governing, makes them think only on the present, so that they do not carry
their prospect to the Happiness of, or misery that must be the consequences of
what they do, at any considerable distance of time: nor have they those
Compassions for the Miserable with which wise Governors ought to temper all
their Counsels; for a stern sourness of temper, and an unrelenting hardness of
heart, seems to belong to all that sort of men in Italy. Whatsoever advances
their present Interests, and inriches their families, is preferred to all wise,
great or generous counsels. Now tho the Natives dare not carry this matter
further, yet a stranger, that thinks more freely, and that has examined matters
of Religion, in a more Inquisitive manner, sees plainly that all these errors
in Government, are the effects of their Religion, and of that authority which
they believe is lodged in the Pope, chiefly and of which every Priest has so
considerable a share, that he is easily able to make himself master of every
man's Conscience that lets him into it, and that believes those three great
branches of their power: that they can pardon their sins, make their God, and
secure them both from Hell and Purgatory. These are things of such a mighty
operation, that if it is not easy to imagine how they should be so easily
believed, yet supposing once the belief of them, all other things flow very
naturally from thence: men are not convinced of these errors till it is too
late to come and undeceive others. It is true, many of the Italians believe
these things as little as we do; yet this is in them rather an effect of a
loose and libertine temper, than of study and enquiry, in a Country where not
only Heretical books would endanger a man, but the bare reading even of a Latin
New Testament would give some suspicion. But the thinking men among them are
led to doubt of all things, rather from a principle of Atheism, than of
searching into matters of Controversy: the one is much less dangerous there,
than the other would be. And indeed as soon as a man becomes a little familiar
with any of the men of freer thoughts here, he will soon see that the belief of
their Religion has very little power over many of those who are the most
zealous to support it, only because their Interest determins them. When a man
has lived some time at Rome, and has known a little of the Mysteries of the
Conclave, with the Character both of the present and the late Popes,
particularly the weakness and Ignorance of him that now reigns, who does not so
much as understand Latin; when a man sees how matters are carried in that
Court, what are the Maxims they go by, and the Methods that they take; when he
sees what a sort of men the Cardinals are, men indeed of great Civility, and of
much Craft; but as to the matters of Religion, men of an equal sise both of
Ignorance and Indifference: when a man sees how all preferments are obtained,
but chiefly how the purple is given, and how men rise up to the Triple Crown:
when, I say, a man has seen and observed all this a little, he cannot wonder
enough at the Character that so great a part of the World sets on that Court.
The plain and simple Arguments of Common sense work so strong, that
Transubstantiation it self is not harder to be believed, than that this man is
Christ's Vicar, a man of Infallibility, and the source or channel at least of
divine truth. So that a man that has given himself the opportunities of
observing these matters Critically, will feel a persuasion of the falsehood of
those pretensions formed so deep in him, that all the Sophistry of Argument
will never be able to overthrow it: for the plain sense of what he has seen
will apparently discover the delusion of those Reasons, which perhaps he is not
learned enough to answer: for let men say what they will, it is no easy matter
to believe in a Contradiction to the clear Evidence of sense: and I cannot make
my self so much as doubt, but that as Cato was wont to wonder how it came that
every one of the Heathen Priests did not laugh when he saw another of the
Trade, so the Cardinals when they look on one another, and a Pope even as
Ignorant a one as the present Pope is, when he receives the submissions that
are offered him by all who are of that Communion, must laugh within himself
when he sees how lucky that Imposture is, which has subdued the World into so
much respect for him, and to so great a dependence on him. A man who sees all
these things upon the place, and is of an Age capable of making solid
Reflections, and has a due portion of Learning, must return amassed, not so much
at those who being already under the Yoke, have neither knowledge nor courage
enough to shake it off, nor at those who go into it because they find their
account in it, and so hope to have a good share of the spoil, as at those who
have shaken off the Yoke, and have got into more Liberty and more Knowledge, and
feel the happy Influence of their deliverance even in their Civil Liberties and
other Temporal Concerns, if they should ever come so much as to deliberate
whether they ought to return and serve their old and severe Masters, or not.
For my part, I speak freely to you, that I could sooner bring my mind to
believe that there is no such thing as Instituted Religion; and that it is
enough for men to be just and honest, civil and obliging, and to have a general
reverence for the Deity, than ever to think that such Stuff as the men of the
Mission would impose on the World can be true. Chiefly in that part of it which
relates to the Popes Authority, after all that I have seen and known.

You will perhaps think, that this is a long digression, or at least a very
improper introduction to that which I told you I would offer to you, since the
relation that all this has with the matter of the Quietists, does not appear to
be so very proper. Yet you will perhaps change your mind, when I tell you, that
the Miseries of Italy, that the Aversion that all men of sense there have to
the Artifices of their Religion, and chiefly to the conduct of the Regulars,
and above all, of the Jesuits, is believed the true reason that led such
numbers of men of all sorts to be so favorable to Molinos: to which this was
rather to be ascribed, than to any Extraordinary Elevation of Piety or
Devotion, of which so little appears in that Country, that nothing which
touches only upon that Principle can have great effects among them. Men that
are sick, turn to all sorts of remedies: and those who are discontented, do
naturally go into every new thing that either promises relief, or that wounds
those that displease them. The present state of things in Italy being such as I
have described it, you need not wonder to find so many ready to hearken after
any thing that seemed both new and safe. For as the Novelty gave that curiosity
which might draw in many, so the safety that seemed to be in a Method of
Devotion in which so many of the Canonised Saints had gone before them, and
which appeared at first authorized by the Approbation of so many Inquisitours,
made them apprehend that there could be no danger in it. In the recital that I
am to give you, I do not pretend to tell you all the whole affair: nor will I
assure you of the truth of all that you will find here. For in matters of this
nature, in which Interest and Passion are apt to work so strongly, there are
always so many false Reports spread, and matters are so often aggravated on
the one hand, and diminished or denied on the other, that I will not say but
there may be some things here that upon a stricter inquiry will perhaps appear
not to be well founded; yet of this I will assure you very positively, that I
have Invented and added nothing my self. I leave those arts to the Italians,
and the Court of Rome: therefore I will tell you things nakedly and simply, as
I found them, without adding so much as one Circumstance out of my own
Invention. I also made as much use of my Judgment as was possible for me to do,
both in considering the Circumstances of those with whom I talked on those
heads, and the things themselves that they said to me; so I let pass all that
seemed to be the effect of Passion or Prejudice, and only marked down that
which seemed to be true, as well as that which I had from men whom I had reason
to believe. My Informers were men of Probity and of Sense; they were not indeed
easily brought to talk of this Subject, and they spoke of it with great
Reserves: so that there may be many defects, and possibly some mistakes in the
account that I am to offer you; yet you must be contented with it; for it is
all that I could gather; and it is not corrupted with any mixture of my own.

Michael de Molinos is a Spaniard, of a good and Opulent Family. He entered into
Priests Ordors, but had never any Ecclesiastical Benefice: so that he seemed to
have dedicated himself to the service of the Church, without designing any
Advantage by it to himself. He passes in Italy for a man both of Learning and
of good Sense. His course of life has been exact, but he has never practiced
those Austerities that are so much magnified in the Church of Rome, and among
the Religious Orders: and as he did not affect to practice them, so he did not
recommend them to others; nor was he fond of those poor Superstitions that are
so much magnified by the trafficking men of that Church But he gave in to the
Method of the Mystical. Divines, of which, since your studies have not perhaps
lien much that way, I shall give you this short account.

That sublime, but mysterious way of Devotion, was not set out by any of the
first Writers of the Church; which is indeed a great Prejudice against it: for
how many soever they may be, who have followed it in the latter Ages, yet
Cassians Collations, which is a work of the middle of the fifth Century, is the
antientest Book that is writ in that strain: for the pretended Denis the
Areopagite is now by the consent of all learned men thought no Elder than the
end of the fifth or the beginning of the sixth Century. Yet after these Books
appeared, very few followed the elevated strains that were in them: the latter
was indeed too dark to be either well understood or much followed. So that this
way of Devotion, if it was practiced in Religious Houses, yet was not much set
out to the World before S. Bernards time, whose melting strains, tho a little
too much labored and affected, yet have something in them that both touches
and pleases: after him many began to write in that sublime strain; such as
Thauler, Rusbrachius, Harphius, Suso, but above all Thomas a Kempis. And when
for some considerable time that way of writing was discontinued, it was again
raised up in the last Age, with much luster by S. Teresa; and after her by
Baltasar Alvares a Jesuit: and as England produced a Carthusian in King Henry
the sixths time, one Walter Hilton, who writ the Scale of Perfection, a Book
Inferior to none of these I have cited, and more simple and natural than most
of them; so of late F. Cressy has published out of F. Bakers Papers, who was a
Benedictine, a whole body of that method of Divinity and Devotion. The right
notion of this way of Devotion is somewhat hard to be well understood, by those
who have not studied their Metaphisicks, and is entangled with too many of the
terms of the School; yet I shall give it to you as free of these as is possible.

With relation to Devotion they consider a man in three different degrees of
Progress and Improvement: the first is the Animal, or the Imaginative state: in
which the Impressions of Religion work strongly upon a man's Fancy, and his
sensitive Powers: this state is but low and mean, and suitable to the Age of a
Child; and all the Devotion that works this way, that raises a heat in the
Brain, tenderness in the Thoughts, that draws Sighs and Tears, and that awakens
many melting Imaginations, is of a low form, variable, and of no great force.
The second state is the Rational, in which those Reflections that are made on
Truths, which convince ones reason, carry one to all suitable Acts: this they
say is dry, and without motion: it is a Force which the Reason puts upon the
Will, and tho upon a great Variety of Motives, and many Meditations upon them,
the mind goes through a great many Performances of Devotion, yet this is still a
Force put upon the will. So they reckon that the third and highest state is the
Contemplative, in which the Will is so united to God, and overcome by that
Union, that in one single Act of Contemplation, it adores God, it loves him,
and resigns it self up to him: and without wearying itself with a dry
multiplicity of Acts, it feels in one Act of Faith more force than a whole day
of Meditation can produce. In this they say that a true Contemplative Man,
feels a secret Joy in God, and an acquiescing in his Will; in which the true
elevation of Devotion lies; and which is far above either the heats of Fancy,
which accompany the first state, or the Subtilty of Meditation, that belongs to
the second state: and they say, that the perfection of a Contemplative state
above the others, appears in this, that whereas all men are not capable of
forming lively Imaginations, or of a fruitful Invention, yet every man is
capable of the simplicity of contemplation: which is nothing but the silent and
humble adoration of God, that arises out of a pure and quiet mind. But because
all this may appear a little Intricate, I shall illustratte it by a similitude,
which will make the difference of those three states more sensible; 1. A man
that sees the exterior of another, with whom he has no acquaintance, and is
much taken with his face, shape, quality, and mien, and this has a blind
prevention in his favor, and a sort of a feeble kindness for him, may be
compared to him whose Devotion consists in lively Imaginations, and tender
Impressions on his lower and sensible Powers: 2. A man that upon an
acquaintance with another, sees a great many reasons to value and esteem, both
his parts and his Virtues, yet in all this he feels no inward Charm that
overcomes him, and knits his soul to the other; so that how high soever the
esteem may be, yet it is cold and dry, and does not affect his heart much, may
be compared to one whose Devotion consists in many Acts, and much Meditation.
But 3dly, when a man enters into an entire friendship with another, then one
single Thought of his Friend, affects him more tenderly, than all that variety
of reflections, which may arise in his mind, where this Union is not felt. And
thus they explain the sublime state of Contemplation. And they reckon that all
the common methods of Devotion, ought to be considered, only as steps to raise
men up to this state: when men rest and continue in them, they are but dead and
lifeless Forms: and if they rise above them, they become Cloggs and Hindrances,
which amuse them with many dry Performances, in which those who are of a higher
Dispensation will feel no pleasure nor advantage. Therefore the use of the
Rosary, the daily repeating the Breviary, together with the common Devotions to
the Saints, are generally laid aside by those who rise up to the Contemplative
State; and the chief business to which they apply themselves, is to keep their
Minds in an inward Calm and Quiet, that so they may in silence form simple Acts
of Faith, and feel those inward Motions and Directions which they believe
follow all those who rise up to this Elevation. But because a man may be much
deceived in those Inspirations, therefore they recommend to all who enter into
this method, above all other things, the choice of a Spiritual Guide, who has a
right sense and a true taste of those matters, and is by Consequence a Competent
Judge in them.

This is all that I will lay before you in general, for giving you some taste of
Molinos's Methods; and by this you will both see why his Followers are called
QUIETISTS and why his Book is Entitled il Gui. da Spiritualc. But if you Intend
to Inform your self more particularly of this matter, you must seek for it,
either in the Authors that I have already mentioned, or in those of which I am
to give you some account in the ^equel of this Letter. Molinos having it seems
drunk in the principles of the Contemplative Devotion in Spain, where the great
Veneration that is paid to S. Teresa gives it much reputation, he brought over
with him to Italy a great Zeal for propagating it. He came and settled at Rome,
where he writ his Book, and entered into a great commerce with the men of the
best Apprehensions, and the most Elevated thoughts that he found there. All
that seemed to concur with him in his design for setting on foot this sublimer
way, were not perhaps animated with the same principles. Some designed sincerly
to elevate the World above those poor and trifling Superstitions, that are so
much in vogue, among all the Bigots of the Church of Rome, but more
particularly in Spain and Italy, and which are so much set on by almost all the
Regulars, who seem to place Religion chiefly in the exact performing of them.
It was thought that others entered into the design upon more Indirect motives.
Some perhaps from the aversion that they bore the Regulars, were disposed to
entertain every thing that might lead men's Devotions into other Channells, and
to a conduct different from that prescribed by Friars and Jesuits. Some
perhaps had understandings good enough to see the necess^ty of correcting many
things in their Worship, which yet they dur^t not attack as simply unlawful: so
that it might appear more safe to expose these things to the Contempt of the
World, by pretending to raise men far above them: and thus they might have
hoped to have Introduced a Reformation of many Abuses without seeming to do it.
In fine, some who seemed to enter into this matter, were men that aspired to
fame, and hoped by this means to raise a Name to themselves; and to have a
Party that should depend upon them: for in such great numbers as seemed to
imbark in this design, it is not to be imagined that all were acted by the same
motives, and that every man had as good Intentions as it is probable Molinos
himself had.

In the year 1675. his Book was first published with five Approbations before
it. One of these was by the Archbishop of Rheggio; another was by the General
of the Franciscans, who was likewise one of the Qualificators of the
Inquisition: another was by Fa. Martin de Esparsa a Jesuit, that had been
Divinity Professor both at Salamanca and at Rome; and was at that time a
Qualificator of the Inquisition. As for the rest, I refer you to the Book it
self. The Book was no sooner printed, than it was much read and highly esteemed
both in Italy and Spain. It was considered as a Book writ with much Clearness
and great simplicity; and this so raised the Reputation of the Author, that his
Acquaintance came to be generally much desired: those who were in the greatest
credit in Rome, seemed to value themselves upon his friendship. Letters were
writ to him from all places: so that a correspondence was settled between him
and those who approved of his method in many different places of Europe. Some
secular Priests both at Rome and Naples declared themselves openly for it: and
consulted him as a sort of an Oracle upon many occasions. But those who joined
themselves to him with the greatest Heartiness and Sincerity, were some of the
Fathers of the Oratory, in particular three of the most Eminent of them, who
were all advanced at the last promotion of Cardinals, Coloredi, Ciceri, but
above all Petrucci, who was accounted his Timothy. Many of the Cardinals were
also observed to court his Acquaintance: and they thought it no small Honor to
be reckoned in the number of Molinos's Friends. Such were Cassanata Azolini and
Carpegna; but above all Card. d'Estrees. The last you must needs know, is a man
of great Learning: he was Ambitious to be thought a Reformer of some of those
Abuses, which are among them, that are too gross to pass upon a man of his
freedom of spirit; who had been bred up in the Sorbon, and had conversed much
with Mr. de Launay. He therefore seemed the most zealous of all others to
advance Molinos's Design: so that he entered into a very close commerce with
him. They were often and long together: and notwithstanding all the distrust that
a Spaniard has naturally of a Frenchman, and that all men have of one another,
who have lived long at Rome, yet Molinos, who was sincere and plain-hearted,
opened himself without reserve to the Cardinal: and by his means a
Correspondence was settled between Molinos and some in France: for tho the
spirits of those of that Nation go generally too quick for a way of Devotion,
that was settled and silent, yet some were strongly Inclined to favor it even
there. Perhaps it might be considered as a method more like to gain upon
Protestants, and to facilitate the Design of the Reunion, that was so long
talked of there. All these things concurred to raise Molinos's Character, and
to render his person so considerable. When the Pope that now reigns, was
advanced to the Throne, which was, you know, in the year 1676. that he took
most particular notice of him: and made it Visibly apparent, that even in all
that Exaltation, he thought it might contribute to raise his Character, if he
were considered as a friend of Molinos's and an Encourager of his Design: For
he lodged him in an Appartment of the Palace; and put many singular Marks of
his Esteem on him. This made him become still the more Conspicuous, when he had
the advantage of Favor joined to his other Qualities: tho he neither seemed to
be fond of it, nor lifted up with it. His Conversation was much desired; and
many Priests came not only to form themselves according to his Method, but to
dispose all their Penetents to follow it: and it grew to be so much in vogue in
Rome, that all the Nuns, except those who had Jesuits to their Confessors,
began to lay aside their Rosaries, and other Devotions, and to give themselves
much to the practice of Mental prayer. This way had more Credit given to it by
the translation of a French Book, that was writ upon the same subject, which
Cardinal d'Estrees ordered to be made. It was writ in the form of a Dialogue,
and was printed in France in the year 1669. by the Approbation of some of the
Doctors of the Sorbon. I am able to give you no other account of the Author,
but that in the Italian Translation he is called Francis Malleva^la, a blind
Clergyman. The Book being chiefly formed upon the model of S. Terese, the
Translation of it was dedicated to the Discalciate Carmelites of her Order.
This did not contribute a little for raising the credit of Molinos's Method,
since it appeared to be approved both in Italy, France and Spain. At the same
time Fa. Petrucci writ a great many Letters and Treatises relating to a
Contemplative Staete: yet he mixed in many of them, so many Rules relating to
the Devotions of the Quire, that there was less occasion given for censure in
his Writings: They are a little too tedious; but they were writ chiefly for
Nuns and others, that perhaps could not have apprehended his meaning aright, if
he had expressed himself in a closer style, and in sewer words. Both the
Jesuits and the Dominicans began to be alarmed at the progress of Quietism:
they saw clearly, that their trade was in a decay, and must decay still more
and more, if some stop was not put to the progress of this new Method: in order
to this, it was necessary to decry the Authors of it: and because of all the
Imputations in the world Heresy is that, which makes the greatest* Impression
at Rome, Molinos and his Followers were given out to be Heretics. It being
also necessary to fasten a particular Name to every new Heresy, they branded
this with the Name of Quietism. Books were also writ by some Jesuits against
Molinos and his Method; in which there appeared much of that Sourness and
Malignity that is thought to be peculiar to the Society; they were also writ
with their usual candor and sincerity. One of the Fathers Segueri took a more
dectrous Method to decry it. He began his Book magnifying the Contemplative
State highly, as Superior to all others; and blaming those who had said any
thing that seemed to detract from it: yet he corrected all this, by saying,
that very few were capable of it; and that none ought to pretend to it, but
those who were called by God to so sublime a State: and by this he seemed only
to censure the Indiscretion of those Spiritual Guides, who proposed this way of
Devotion to all persons, without distinction. He also believed, that such as
were at some times called to it, could not remain long in so high a state, to
which God called men rather for some happy Minutes, than for a longer
continuance: therefore he thought that such persons as were raised to it, ought
not to fancy that they were now got so far above all their former helps, as
never to need them any more: so he proposed to them the accustoming themselves
still to Meditation, and to support themselves by that when they could not
contemplate. He censured severely some of Molinos's expressions, such as that,
He who had God, had Christ; as if this were an abandoning of Christ's Humanity:
he also insisted much on that of a fixed looking on God, and the suspending of
all the Powers of the Soul: but that on which he insisted most, was the Molinos
(whom he never named, tho he cited his Words, and described him very plainly)
made the Quiet of Contemplation to be a State to which a man could raise
himself; whereas he maintains, that in this Quiet the Soul is passive, and as
it were in a rapture; and that she could not raise her self to it, but that it
was an Immediate and Extraordinary Favor, which was only to be expected from
God, and which an humble mind could not so much as ask of him.

These Disputes raised so much noise in Rome, that the Inquisition took Notice
of the whole matter: Molinos and his Book, and F. Petrucci's Treatises and
Letters, were brought under a second and severer Examination; and here the
Jesuits were considered as the Accusers. It is true, one of the Society, as
was formerly told, had approved Molinos's Book; but they took care that he
should be no more seen at Rome: for he was sent away, and it is not known
whether, it is generally believed that he is shut up within Four Walls; but
what truth soever may be in that, he is no more visible, so careful are they to
have all their Order speak the same Language; and if any speak in a different
style from the rest, they at least take care that he shall speak no more; yet
in this Examen that was made, both Molinos and Petrucci justified themselves so
well, that their Books were again approved, and the Answers which the Jesuits
had writ, were censured as scandalous: and in this matter Petrucci behaved
himself so signally well, that it raised not only the Credit of the Cause, but
his own Reputation so much, that soon after he was made Bishop of Iessi, which
was a new Declaration that the Pope made in their Favors: their Books were now
more esteemed than ever, their Method was more followed, and the Novelty of it,
the opposition made to it, by a Society that his rendered it self odious to all
the World, and the new Approbation that was given to it after so vigorous an
Accusation, did all contribute to raise the Credit and to increase the Numbers
of the Party. F. Petrucci's behavior in his Bishopric, contributed to raise
his Reputation still higher, so that his Enemy's were willing to give him no
more Disturbance; and indeed there was less occasion given for Censure by his
Writings, than by Molino's little Book; whose succinctness made that some
Passages were not so fully nor so cautiously expressed, but that there was room
for making Exceptions to them: on the other hand, Petrucci was rather
excessively tedious, so that he had so fully explained himself, that he very
easily cleared some small difficulties that were made upon some of his Letters:
In short, every body was that thought either sincerely devout, or that at least
affected the Reputation of it, came to be reckoned among the Quietists: and if
these persons were observed to become more strict in their Lives, more retired
and serious in their mental Devotions, yet there appeared less Zeal in their
whole deportment as to the exterior parts of the Religion of that Church. They
were not so assiduous at Mass, nor so earnest to procure Masses to be said for
their Friends: nor were they so frequently either at Confession or in
Processions: so that the Trade of those that live by these things was sensibly
sunk: and tho the new Approbation that was given to Molinos's Book by the
Inquisition stopped the Mouths of his Enemies, so that they could no more
complain of it, yet they did not cease to scatter about Surmises of all that
sort of men, as of a Cabale, that would have dangerous consequences; they
remembered the story of the Illuminated Men of Spain, and said, here was a Spawn
of the same Sect: they insinuated, that they had ill Designs, and profound
Secrets among them; that these were in their Hearts Enemies to the Christian
Religion; and that under a pretense of raising men to a most sublime strain of
Devotion, they intended to wear out of their minds the sense of the Death and
Sacrifice of Christ, and of the other Mysteries of Christianity: and because
Molinos was by his birth a Spaniard, it has been given out of late, that
perhaps he was descended of a Jewish or Mohammedan Race, and that he might carry
in his Blood, or in his first Education, some Seeds of those Religions, which
he has since cultivated, with no less Art than Zeal: yet this last Calumny has
gained but little Credit at Rome; tho it is said, that an Order has been sent
to examine the Registers of the Baptism, in the place of his Birth, to see if
his Name is to be found in it or not.

Thus he saw himself attacked with great vigor, and with an unrelenting
Malice. He took as much care as was possible to prevent, or to shake off these
Imputations; for he writ a Treatise, of frequent and daily Communion, which was
likewise approved by some of the most learned of the Regulars at Rome, among
whom one is Martinez a Jesuit, the Senior Divinity Reader in their College at
Rome. This was printed with his Spiritual Guide, in the year 1675. and in the
Preface he protests, that he had not writ it with any design to engage himself
into matters of Controversy, but that it was drawn from him, by the most
earnest Solicitations of some Zealous Persons. In it he pressed a daily
Communion, by a vast number of Passages that he cited both out of the Ancient
Fathers, and the Schoolmen; yet he qualified this and all his other directions
in the matters of Devotion by that which he constantly repeats, which is the
necessity of being conducted in all things by a Spiritual Guide: whether he
intended to soften the aversion that the Jesuits had to him, by refuting some
parts of Mr. Arnaud's famous Book of Frequent Communion or not, I cannot tell,
but in this Discourse he answers some of the Objections that Mr. Arnaud had
made to Frequent Communion, and in particular, to that which he makes one main
ground of restraining men from it, which was the obliging them to go through with
their Penitence and Mortifications, before they were admitted to the Sacrament;
whereas Molinos makes the being free of Moral Sin, the only necessary
qualification. In this Discourse one sees more of a heated Eloquence, than of
severe or solid Reasoning: yet it presses the point of daily Communion, and of
an inward application of Soul to Jesus Christ, and to his Death, so vehemently,
that it might have been hoped that this should have put an end to those
Surmises, that had been thrown out to defame him; as if he had designed to lay
aside the Humanity of our Savior, by his way of Devotion: but there is no cure
for Jealousy; especially when Malice and Interest are at bottom: so new matter
was found for censure in this Discourse. He had asserted, that there was no
other Preparation necessary, but to be free of Mortal Sin: so it was given out,
that he intended to lay aside Confession: and tho he had advised the use of a
Spiritual Guide, in this, as well as in all other things; yet the necessity of
Confession before Communion, was not expressed: so that by this people seemed
to be set at Liberty from that Obligation: and it was said, that what he
advised with relation to a Spiritual Guide, looked rather like the taking some
general Directions and Council from ones Priest, than the coming always to him
as the Minister of the Sacrament of Penance before every Communion; and to
support this Imputation, it was said, that all of that Cabale had set down this
for a Rule, by which they conducted their Penitents, that they might come to
the Sacrament, when they found themselves out of the state of Mortal sin,
without going at every time to Confession; but I will not enlarge further upon
the matters of Doctrine or Devotion, in which you may think that I have dwelt
too long, for a man of my Breeding and Profession: and I should think so my
self, if I were not consining my self exactly to the Memorials and Informations
that I received at Rome. You will see by the Articles objected to the
Quietists, and censured by one of the Inquisition, which I send you with this
Letter, what are all the other points that are laid to their charge. Only I
must advertise you of one thing, that their Friends at Rome say, that a great
many of these Articles are only the Calumnies of their Enemies, and that they
are disowned by them: but that they have fastened these things on them, to
render them odious, and to make them suffer with the less Pity: which is the
putting in practice the same Maxims which we object to their Predecessors, who
condemned the Waldenses and Albigenses of a great many Errors of which they
always protested themselves Innocent: yet the Accusing them of those horrid
Opinions and Practices, prevailed upon the Simplicity and Credulity of the Age,
to animate them with all the Degrees of Rage against a Sect of men, that were
set forth as Monsters: the same Maxims and Politics are still imputed, and
perhaps not without reason to that severe Court, which if you believe many has
as little regard to Justice as it has to Mercy. Some have carried their
Jealousies so far against the Quietists, as to compare their Maxims to those of
Socrates his School, and his Followers after his death, when they saw what his
Freedom in speaking openly against the established Religion had cost him: they
resolved to comply with the received Customs in their exterior, and not to
communicate their Philosophy to the Vulgar; nor even to their Disciples, till
they had prepared them well to it, by training them long in the precepts of
Virtue, which they called the Purgative State: and when men were well tried and
exercised in this, then they communicated to them their sublimer Secrets: the
meaning of all which was, in short, that they would not discover their Opinions
in those points that were contrary to the received Religion, and to the public
Rites to any, but to those of whom they were well assured, that they would not
betray them: and therefore they satisfied themselves with having true and just
notions of things; but they practiced outwardly as the Rabble did. They thought
it was no great matter what Opinions were entertained by them, and that none
but men of Noble and elevated Tempers deserved that such sublime Truths should
be communicated to them, and that the herd of the Vulgar neither were worthy
nor capable of Truth, which is too pure and too high a thing for such mean and
base minds. The Affinity of the matter makes me remember a conversation that I
once had with one of the wittiest Clergymen of France, who is likewise
esteemed one of the Learned Men in it; He said, The World could not bear a
Religion calculated only for Philosophers: The people did not know what it was
to think* and to govern themselves by the Impressions that abstracted thoughts
made on their minds: they must have outward things to strike upon their senses
and Imaginations, to amuse, to terrify and to excite them: so legends, dreadful
stories and a pompous Worship were necessary to make the Impressions of
Religion go deep into such course souls: for a Lancet, said he, can open a
vein, but an Axe must fell down a Tree; so he concluded, that the Reformation
had reduced the Christian Religion to such severe terms, that among us it was
only a Religion for Philosophers: and since few were capable of that strength
of thought: he concluded, that if the Church of Rome had perhaps too much of
this exterior pomp, those of the Reformation had stripped it too much, and had
not left enough of garnishing, and of the bells and feathers for amusing the
rabble. The speculation seems pretty enough, if Religion were to be considered
only as a contrivance of ours, to be fitted by us to the tempers and humors of
People; and not as a Body of Divine Truths, that are conveyed to us from heaven.

Thus was Molinos's method censured or approved in Rome, according to the
different Apprehensions and Interests of those that made Reflections upon it.
But the Jesuits finding they were not so omnipotent in this Pontificate, as
they have been formerly, resolved to carry their point another way. I need not
tell you how great an Ascendant F. la Chaise has gained over that Monarch, that
has been so long the terror of Europe: and how much all the Order is now in
the Interests of France. The Zeal with which that King has been extirpating
Heresy, Furnishes them with abundance of matter for high Panegyricks; since
that which in the opinion of many will pass down to posterity, for the lasting
reproach of a Reign, which in its former parts has seemed to approach even to
Augustus's Glory, but has received in this a stain, which with Indifferent men
passes for a blind, poor-spirited and furious Bigottry, and is represented by
Protestants as a complication of as much Treachery and Cruelty as the World
ever saw; yet among the bigots it is set forth as the brightest side of that
Glorious Reign: and therefore it has been often cited by them with relation to
the cold correspondence that is observed to be between the Courts of Rome, and
that at Versailles, that nothing was more Incongruous, than to see the Head of
the Church dispute so obstinatly with its Eldest son such a trifle, as the
matter of the Regale, and that with so much eagerness; and that he showed so
little regard to so great a Monarch, that seemed to sacrifice all his own
Interests to those of his Religion* It is believed, that the Jesuits at Rome,
proposed the matter of Molinos to F. la Chaise, as a fit reproach to be made to
the Pope, in that Kings name, that while he himself was Employing all possible
means to extirpate Heresy out of his Dominions. The Pope was cherishing it in
his own Palace: and that while the Pope pretended to such an unyielding Zeal
for the Rights of the Church, he was entertaining a person who was corrupting
the doctrine, or at least the devotion, of that Body, of which he had the
honor to be the Head. But here I must add a thing which comes very uneasily
from me, and yet I cannot keep my word to you, of giving you a faithful account
of all that I could learn of this matter at Rome, without mentioning it. I do
not pretend to affirm it is true, for I only tell you what is believed at Rome,
and not what I believe my self, nor what I would have you to believe; for I
know you have so high an esteem of Cardinal d'Estrees, that you will not easily
believe any thing that is to his Disadvantage. It is then said, that he being
commanded by the Orders that were sent him from the Court of France, to
prosecute Molinos with all possible vigor, resolved to sacrifice his old
Friend, and all that is sacred in Friendship, to the Passion he has for His
Masters Glory; finding then that there was not matter enough for an Accusation
against Moliuos, he resolved to supply that defect himself; so that he, who was
once as deep as any man alive in the whole Secret of this Affair, went and
Informed the Inquisition of many particulars, for which tho there was no other
evidence but his Testimony, yet that was sufficient to raise a great Storm
against Molinos; and upon this delation, he and a few others of his friends
were put in the Inquisition; but this was managed so secretly, that all that is
pretended to be known concerning it, is, that upon a new Prosecution both
Molinos and Petrucci were brought before the Inquisition in 1684. Petrucci was
soon absolved; for there was so little objected to him, and he answered that
with so much Judgment and Temper, that he was quickly dismissed; and tho
Molinos's matter was longer in agitation, yet is was generally expected that he
should have been acquitted. In conclusion, a Correspondence held by him all
Europe over, was objected to him: but that could be no Crime, unless the matter
of that Correspondence was Criminal: some suspicions papers were found in his
Chamber, but as he himself explained them, nothing could be made out of them,
till Cardinal d'Estrees delivered a Letter and a Message from the King of
France to the Pope, as was formerly mentioned: and that the Cardinal added,
that he himself could prove against Molinos, more than was necessary to show
that he was guilty of Heresy. The Pope said not a word to this, but left the
matter to the Inquisitors; and the Cardinal went to them, and gave other senses
of those doubtful Passages, that were in Molinos's Books and Papers, and
pretended that he knew from himself, what his true Meaning in them was. The
Cardinal owned, that he had lived with him in the Appearances of Friendship:
but he said, he had early smelled out an ill dedesign in all that matter; that
he saw of what dangerous consequence it was like to be; but yet, that he might
fully discover what was at the bottom of it, he confessed, he seemed to assent
to several things, which he detested: and that by this means he saw into their
secret, and knew all the steps they made, he still cautiously observing all
that past among them till it should be necessary for him to discover and crush
this Cabal. I need not tell you how severely this is censured, by those who
belive it. I would rather hope, that it is not true, how positively soever it
may be affirmed at Rome; but tho it is hard to reconcile such a way of
proceeding with the common rules of human Society and of Virtue, yet at Rome a
Zeal for the Faith, and against Heresy, supersedes all the Bonds of Morality
or Humainty, which are only the common Virtues of Heathens.

In short, what truth soever may be in this particular, relating to the
Cardinal, it is certain that Molinos was clapped up by the Inquisition in May
1685. and so an end was put to all Discourses relating to him: and in this
silence the business of the Quietists was laid to sleep, till the ninth of
February 1687. that of a sudden it broke out again in a much more surprising
manner.

The Count Vespiniani and his Lady, Don Paulo Rocchi, Confessor to the Prince
Borghese, and some of his family, with several others, in all 70 persons, were
clapped up. Among whom many were highly esteemed both for their Learning and
Piety. The things laid to the charge of the Churchmen were their neglecting to
say their Breviary; and for the rest, they were accused for their going to
Communion without a going at every time first to Confession: and in a word, it
was said, that they neglected all the exterior parts of their Religion, and
gave themselves up wholly to Solitude and inward Prayer. The Countess
Vespiniani made a great noise of this matter; for she said, she had never
revealed her Method of Devotion to any Mortal, but to her Confessor, and so it
was not possible that it could come to their knowledge any other way, but by
his betraying that Secret: and she said, it was time for people to give over
going to Confession, if Priests made this use of it, to discover those who
trusted their secretest Thoughts to them; and therefore she said, that in all
time coming, she would make her Confessions only to God. This had got vent, and
I heard it generally talked up and down Rome: so the Inquisitors thought it
more fitting to dismiss Her and her Husband, than to give any occasion to
lessen the credit of Confession; they were therefore let out of prison, but
they were bound to appear whenever they should be called upon. I cannot
express to you, the Consternation that appeared both in Rome and in many other
parts of Italy, when in a months time about 200 persons were put in the
Inquisition: and that all of the sudden, a Method of Devotion, that had passed
up and down Italy for the highest Elevation to which mortals could aspire, was
found to be Heretical, and that the chief promoters of it were shut up in
prison.

But the most surprising part of the whole story, was, that the Pope himself
came to be suspected as a favourer of this new Heresy: so that on the 13th. of
February some were deputed by the Court of the Inquisition to examine him, not
in the quality of Christ's Vicar, or St. Peter's successor, but in the single
quality of Benedict Odescalchi: what passed in that Audience, was too great a
Secret for me to be able to penetrate into it: but upon this there were many
and strange Discourses up and down Rome: and while we Heretics were upon that
asking, where was the Popes Infallibility? I remember a very pretty Answer that
was made me. They said, the Popes Infallibility did not flow from any thing
that was Personal in him, but from the care that Christ had of his Church: for
a Pope, said one, may be a Heretic as he is a private man: but Christ, who
said to St. Peter, feed my sheep, will certainly so order matters that the Pope
shall never decree Heresy, and by consequence shall never give the flock Poison
instead of the Bread of Life; while the Popes Heresy was only a personal thing,
it could have no other effect but to damn himself: but if he decreed Heresy,
this corrupted the whole Church: and since Christ had committed all the flock
to the Popes care, it ought to be believed, that he would never suffer them to
pronounce Heresy ex Cathedra, as they call it. This had some color in it, that
was plausible: but the shift of which another served himself, seemed
Intolerable. He said, the Pope could never decree Heresy: for which he argued
thus: he must be a Heretic before he can decree it; and upon that he gave me
many Authorities to prove, that in the minute that the Pope became a Heretic,
he fell ipso facto from his Dignity; and therefore he said, the Pope could not
decree Heresy; for he must have fallen from his Chair, and have forfeited his
Authority, before he could possibly do it: so that he was no more Pope. This
looked so like a Juggle of the Schools, that I confess it made no great
Impression on me. Imagine what a thing it would be, to see a King accused of
Treason by one of his own Courts; and then you have fancied somewhat that comes
near this attempt of the Inquisition's: which being a Court authorized by the
Pope, yet had the Boldness to examine himself: and it had certainly been an odd
piece of News, if upon the Popes Answers, the Inquisition had stained him with
the Imputation of Heresy, and had lodged him in the Minerva. Upon the discourse
to which this gave occasion, I have heard the Authority of the Court of
Inquisition magnified to so Extravagant a degree, that some have asserted, it
was in some respects superior even to the Pope himself. Two days after that,
the Inquisition sent a Circular Letter to Card. Cibo, as the chief Minister, to
be sent by him all about Italy, of which I send you a Copy in Italian: for tho
it ought to have been writ in Latin, yet I do not know how it came to be writ
in Italian: for the writing it in the Vulgar language, was censured not only as
an Indecent thing, but as that which made the matter more public; it was
addressed to all Prelates; and it warns them, that whereas many Schools and
Fraternities were formed in several parts of Italy, in which some persons,
under a pretense of leading people into the Ways of the Spirit, and to the
prayer of quietness, they instilled in them many abominable Heresies; therefore
a stricte charge was given to dissolve all these Societies: and to oblige all
the Spiritual Guides to tread in the known Paths: and in particular, to take
care, that none of that sort should be suffered to have the Direction of the
Nunneries, Order was likewise given to proceed in the way of Justice against
those who should be found guilty of these abominable Errors. After this a
strict enquiry was made into all the Nunneries of Rome; for most of their
Directors and Confessors were found to be engaged into this new Method. It was
found that the Carmelites, the Nuns of the Conception, of the Palestrina, and
Albano, were wholly given up to Prayer and Contemplation, and that instead of
their Beads, and their Hours, and the other Devotions to Saints, or Images,
they were much alone, and often in the Exercise of Mental Prayer: and when they
were asked, why they had laid aside the use of their Beads, and their ancient
Forms; their Answer was, that their Directors had advised them, to wean
themselves from these things, as being but Rude Beginnings, and Hindrances to
their further progress: they justified also their Practice from those Books
that had been lately published by the approbation of the Inquisitors
themselves, such as Molinos and Petrucci's Books. When report was made of this
matter to the Inquisition, they sent Orders to take out of the Nuns hands all
those Boaks, and such Forms of Devotion as were written in that strain; and
they required them to return again to the use of their Beads, and their other
abandoned Forms, which was no small mortification to them. The Circular Letter
produced no great effects; for most of the Italian Bishops were either extreme
unconcerned in all those matters, or were Inclined to Molinos's Method: and
whereas it was Intended, that this as well as all the other Orders that come
from the Inquisition, should he kept secret, yet it got abroad, and Copies of
it were in all peoples hands, so that this gave the Romans the more occasion to
discourse of these matters, which troubled the Inquisitors extremely, who love
not to have the World look into their Proceedings, nor to descant upon them:
they blamed Card. Cibo, as if this matter was grown so public by his means:
but he on the other hand blamed the Inquisitors for it, and his Secretary
blamed both. It was also said, that the Pope was not pleased with Card. Cibo's
conduct, and that he thought he had suffered this matter to go too far, without
giving a check to the Inquisitors, when it might have been more easily done;
whereas now matters are gone to that height, that many think they cannot end
without some very great Scandal. For the Quality of the Prisoners is
considerable; some of Cardinal Petrucci's Domestics, and both his Secretary
and his Nephew were of the Number; and tho the Cardinal himself came to Rome
soon after, yet he was there for some time Incognito. It is generally believed,
that both he and the Cardinal Caraffa, and Cardinal Ciceri, who is Bishop of
Como, are in great apprehensions of a storm from the Inquisition: and the
Ceremony of giving them their Hats being so long delayed, was generally
ascribed to some complaints that it seems the Inquisitors made; yet in
Conclusion they appeared in Public, and had there Hats given them. The Duke of
Ceri, Don Livio, that is the Popes Nephew, is believed to be deeply engaged in
the matter: for the Count Vespiniani, who was first seized on, is his
particular Friend and Favorite: and is a sort of a Domestic of his. Don Livio
himself is likewise a person of a Melancholy Temper, that is much retired; and
this at present is enough to make a man pass there for a Quietist. He went from
Rome to a House he has not far from Civitavecchia, to avoid, as was thought,
the falling into the hands of the Inquisitors. The Pope writ often for him,
before he could prevail with him to return; and it was said, that he did not
think himself secure even after all the Assurances that the Pope gave him, that
no harm should come to him; for it might be justly enough apprehended, that the
Inquisitors, who had been so hardy as to examine the Pope, would make no
Ceremony with his Nephew, if they found matter against him.

But among all that were clapped up, Father Appiani was the man that surprised
the Romans the most: he was seized on the first Sunday of April; he was
esteemed the learnedest and Eminentest Jesuit that was in the whole Roman
College. This did not a little mortify the Society; one of their Fathers had
approved of Molinos's Book, and now another was found to be engaged in this
matter: upon which a Priest, that was indeed no Friend to their Order, said to
me, that this was their true Genius, to have men among them of all sides; that
so which side soever prevailed, they might have some among them, that should
have a considerable share in the Honor of the Victorious. And thus if
Molinos's Method had been established, then they would have gloried as much in
Esparza and Appiani, as they are now ashamed of them. It is likely that they
had not discovered Appiani's favoring the party, otherwise no doubt they had
been beforehand with the Inquisition, and had shut him up as they did Esparza;
and so have covered themselves from the reproach of having a man that favored
Heresy among them. But the Confidence of that Society is an Original; and since
I have this occasion to mention them, I will here digress a little from the
business of Quietism, to give you account of some of their Practices at Rome,
with relation to English Affairs, with which I was made acquainted during my
stay there.

There is a Jesuit belonging to the English House, F. Cann, well known in
England, by some of his Writings, and in particular by one against the Oath of
Allegiance, in which he pleads for the Popes Power of deposing Princes; it
seems he was sorry to see that the Discourse which he had writ against the
taking that Oath, had no better effect, and that the Papists generally took it:
so he resolved to carry this matter further, therefore tho he had no other
Character but that of a Father of the Society; he proposed at Rome, that a
formal Oath, abjuring the Oath of Allegiance, should be taken by all who had
taken the other; and that for all that should be received to be Students in
that House, in all time coming, they should be bound by an Oath never to swear
the Oath of Allegiance: since he said, a time might come, in which it should be
necessary for their Interests, that they should be under no such tie to a
Heretical Prince: But because it was not safe for them to enjoin any new Oath,
without an order from the Court of the Rota, according to the Forms there, it
was necessary to present a Memorial for this: and that ought to come from the
Protector of the Nation concerned: So he ought to have addressed himself to
Cardinal Howard; but the Cardinal's temper, and his principles, with relation
to Civil Obedience, were so well known, that F. Cann thought to carry the
business without his having any share in it. Yet he found himself mistaken; for
the Judges of the Rota were surprised at the Proposition; and gave notice of it
to the Pope, who looked upon it as a thing of very bad consequence: and asked
Cardinal Howard, if it had been set on by any direction from him; for it seems
his Name was made use of, tho without his knowledge. The Cardinal was surprised
at it, and highly resented the Impudence of F. Cann: He sent a Complaint of it
to the General of the Society, who, to give the Cardinal some content, gave
Cann a Reprimand, and sent him out of Rome: But the Jesuits carry a Grudge in
their Hearts to the Cardinal for this, and other things: and this appeared very
visibly during the Earl of Castlemain's Embassay: for tho he lodged for some
time in the Cardinal's Palace, yet he gave himself up so entirely to the
Conduct of the Jesuits, that the Cardinal was quite shut out of the Councils:
and while Fa. Morgan came at all hours to the Ambassador, even in his night
Gown and Shippers, which was thought an unusual thing at Rome, where public
persons live in an exactness of Ceremony: once the Cardinal was made to wait in
the Antichamber, while the Father was within entertaining the Ambassador in
this lasy dress, who coming out in it, the Cardinal was so provoked at this
Indignity, that was done him, and at the Jesuits Insolence, that he threatened
to sling him down stairs, if he ever presumed to come within his House again in
that Habit: and indeed, a Cardinal makes so great a figure in Rome, that such
an usage of him was thought a little Extraordinary, but the Cardinal is of so
mild a temper, and the Jesuits are so violent, as to be reckoned the Horns of
the Beast, that no wonder if a Sympathy of temper made the Ambassador fall in
more naturally with them.

But I will now return to the Quietists, from whom, the particular regard that
I hear to the Order of the Jesuits, has diverted me so long. The Prisons of
the Holy Office were full, and the Terror of this matter had struck so many,
that no body could guess when or where it should stop. It is said, that the
Inquisitours have found in some of their Examinations, that they have to do
with men that are learneder than themselves: and that their Prisoners are
steady and resolute. It is also said, that their Friends abroad have expressed
a great concern for them, and for the cause of their Sufferings, and that many
Letters have been writ to the Inquisitors, wishing them to consider well what
they do to their Prisoners; and assuring them, that they will maintain their
Interests: and that they are ready to seal them with their Blood. It is
certain, the Pope and Cardinal Cibo are much troubled, to see that this matter
is gone so far, and is now so much talked of. Cardinal Petrucci is still much
in the Popes favor, and was suffered not long ago to go visit Molinos, with
whom he had a long conversation all alone, but the subject and the effects of
it are not known: yet a severe Sentence is expected against Molinos. Those that
speak the mildest, think he will be a Prisoner for life: but a little time will
show more than I can presume to tell you. It is a terrible thing to have the
whole body of the Regulars against one, who according to the estimate that is
made at Rome, are about 500000. Persons, and of that number it is said the
Jesuits make 40000. In the City of Naples alone it is believed the Regulars
and other Ecclesiastics amount to 25000. so it is very likely, that when such
Bodies, and Molinos are in the balance, Cajaphas's Resolution may once more
take place: It is expedient that one man should die, rather than that those
Nations of Regulars should perish, or their Trade and Profits be lessned. But
to come to an end, the Inquisitors have prepared the world for any Judgments
that they may pass in this matter, by ordering one of their number, to draw up
a Censure of 19. Articles, which he pretends to have collected out of the
Writings and Doctrines of the Quietists, and thus by representing them so
odiously, they have as much as in them lies, prevented those Compassions which
may perhaps be kindled by the sufferings of those whom they may condemn as
guilty of those censured Opinions. I have now given you all the Informations
that I could pick up of this matter, with all possible sincerity; for I have
represented this business to you, just as it was set before my self, without
making any Additions to it, or interposing my poor judgment in such a matter,
which I leave to you, and to such as you are. I conclude, referring you for a
further light into this Affair to the Censure of the Inquisitors, which I
procured in Italian, for tho probably it is written Originally in Latin, yet I
could not get a Copy of the Latin Censure, and so was forced to content my self
with this that follows. It appears by it, how low the study both of Divinity
and of the Scriptures is sunk at Rome: some few strictures will be found on the
Margin of the English Translation of this Censur, which I have added, because
some perhaps may desire to see this, who do not understand Italian.

THE CIRCULAR LETTER, That was sent about Italy, by the Order of the
Inquisition.
Emmo e Rmo Sige mio Ossmo
ESsendo venuto a notitia di questa Sacra Congregatione, che in diversi luoghi
d' Italia si vadino poco a poco erigendo, e forse anche si siano erette certe
Scuole o Compagnie, Fratellanze, o Radunanze, o con altro nomi, o nelle Chiese,
o nelli Oratorii, o in Case private a titolo di Conferenze Spirituali, o siano
di sole Done, o di soli Huomini, o misti, nelle quali alcuni direttori
Spirituali inesperti della vera via dello Spirito calcata da Santi, e forse
anche malitiosi sotto titolo d'instradare l'anime per l'Oratione, che chiamano*
la la Quiet, o di pura Feed interna, o con altri nome, benche dal principio
apparisca, che persuadino massime d'isquisita perfettione, ad ogni modo da
certi principi^ mal' intesi, e peggio pratticati van^^o insensibilmente
instillando nella mente de semplici diversi gravissimi errori, che poi
abortiscono anco in aperte Eresie, and abominevoli laidezze con discapito
irreparabile di quelle anime, che per solo zelo di ben servire a Dio si mettono
in mano di simplice Direttori, come pur troppo e noto esser sequito in qualche
luogho. Hanno percio questi miei Em. Signori Colleghi Generali Inquisitori
stimato opportuno di significare a V. E. con la present ch^ si fa circolare a
tutti gll Ordinarii d'Italia; accio si compiaccia d'invigilare sopra
qualsivoglia nuove adunanze simili diverse dalle gia pratticate and approvate
ne luoghi Cattolici, e trovandone de tali onninamente, le abolisca; ne permetta
in avenire che in modo alcuno ne vengano instituite, and insista, chei
Direttori Spirituali caminino la strada battuta della perfettione Christiana,
senza affettare singolarita di vie di Spirito, con avvertire sopra tutto, che
nessuna persona sospetta di novita simili s'ingerisca a diriggere ne in voce,
ne in scritto le monache, accio che non entri ne' Monasterli quella peste, che
pur troppo potrebbe contaminare la spiritual intention di queste Spose del
Signore. Il che tutto si rimette alla prudenza dell' E. V. con che pero non
s'intenda con quelle provisionali, che ella sara per fare preclusa la via di
procedere, anche per via di giustitia: quando si scoprissero in qualche persona
^ali errori non escusabili. In tanto si va qui digerendo la materia, per poter
a suo tempo auvertire il Christianesimo degli errori da evitarsi.

E le Bacio, 15. Febrari, 1687.
THE CIRCULAR LETTER, Put in English
Most Eminent, or Most Reverend Lord:
THIS Holy Congregation, having received Advertisement, that there are some in
diverse places of Italy, that by little and little are erecting, or perhaps that
have already erected, some Schools, Companies, Fraternities, or Assemblies,
under some other Denomination, either in Churches, Chapels, or in private
Houses, under the pretense of Spiritual Conferences; and these consisting
either only of Women, or only of Men, or of both Sexes together, in which some
Spiritual Guides, that are unacquainted with the true way of the Spirit, in
which the Saints have trod, and that are perhaps men of ill designs, do under
the pretense of leading Souls by the Prayer of Quietness, as they call it, or
of Pure Inward Faith, or under any other name, in which tho in the beginning
that they carry men, by Maxims that are of the highest perfection, yet at last
they by certain principles, that are ill understood, and worse practiced, do
insensibly infuse into the minds of the simple, diverse grievous Errors, that do
break out into open Heresy, and to abominable Practices, to the irreparable
prejudice of those Souls, who out of their single Zeal to serve God well, put
themselves in the hands of such simple Directors, which is too notoriously
known to have fallen out in some places. In consideration of all this, my most
Eminent Lords and Colleagues, the Inquisitors General, have thought fit to
signify this to you, by this Circular Letter, which is sent to all the
Ordinaries of Italy, that so you may be pleased, to watch over all such new
Assemblies, that are different from those that are practiced and approved in
other Catholic places: and that where you find any such, you abolish them
entirely, and suffer them not to be any further advanced; and that you take
care that Spiritual Directors shall tread in the beaten Paths of Christian
Perfection, without affecting any Singularity in the Ways of the Spirit: and
that above all other things, you take care, that no person suspected of these
Novelties, be suffered to thrust himself into the direction of Nunneries,
either by Word or Writing: that so this Pest may not enter within those Houses;
which may too much corrupt the Spiritual Intention of those Spouses of Christ.
All this is referred to your prudence: but with all this provisional care, it
is not to be understood as if hereby the proceedings in the way of Justice,
were to be hindered, in case any persons are found to hold inexcusable Errors.
In the mean while, care is taken so to digest this matter, that Christendom may
be in due time advertised of those Errors that are to be avoided.

Rome the 15. of February, 1687.
THE CENSURE OF THE Opinions of the Quietists, Prepared for the Inquisition.
Errori principali di quelli, che esercitano l'Oratione di Quiet, co' le
Risposte.
I. LA Contemplatione, o vero Oratione di Quiet consiste in constituirsi alla
presenza di Dio, con un atto di Feed oscura, pura, and amorosa, e dipoi senza
passar piu avanti, e senza ammettere discorso, specie, o pensiero alcuno,
starsene cosi otioso; par esser contrario alla riverenza dovuta a Dio il
replicare quel purissimo atto, il quale pero e di tanto merito, e vigore, che
contiene in se, anzi supera con gran vantaggio tutti insieme li meriti delle
altre virtu, e persevera tutt' il tempo della vita, mentre non si ritratti con
un atto contrario: Onde non e necessario reiterarlo, e replicarlo.

CENSURA e RIS POSTA.
Niun' atto di Feed ci constituisse presenti a Dio, il quale e dentro a noi per
indispensabile necessita della ^ua Immensit a, e pero spesso dicevano Elia,
Michea, and altri Proseti: Vivit Deus in cujus conspectusto. E con Agostino
dicono i Teologi: In Deo vivimus, movemur, and sumus. Dunque l'atto di Feed,
perch suppone l'estere della Creatura, suppone questa gia prima nella presenza
di Dio, e solamente sara rassegnatione di Spirito nelle braccie della Divinita.
Intorno a questa all' hora sara contemplatione, quando l'Anima contemplara, e
non sara otiosa, doppo il primo atto di Feed oscura, pura, and amorosa. E
poifalfita evidente il dire, che non sono necessarii altri buoni atti. L'Atto
buono, per es^er finito, e migliorabile, per mezzo della continuatione di
simili atti. Ne' la moltiplicatione di atti virtuosi e'contrario alla riverenza
dovuta a Dio, perch Iddio non si tedia, o impedisce, essendo libero da'ogni
passione, and in tanto non conviene replicare atti riverentiali a' Maggiori del
Mondo, in quanto, che questi, secondo che porta l'esperienza, sono alterabili,
impedibili, o tediabili della vista di simili atti frequentati. L'atto dunque
in se stesso buono, moltiplicato sara un buono maggiore, e pero da' Dio
approvato, a piu rimunerabile, che un' atto solo. Nella Contemplatione poi si
sta in atto di operare, e non ostinatamente sopra l'attopassato, essendo il
Contemplare l'operare mentalmente, ancorche altro anco vi si richieda.

II. Senza la Contemplatione, per mezzo della meditatione non puo darsi un
passo nella Perfettione.

R Per meditarsi dal Christiano precisamente la Passione di Christo, si
riflette, che per amor dell' Huomo tanto pati un Dio, unde puo risolvarsi a
riamarlo, e volerlo obedire in che commanda, e mettere in prattica (con la
gratia di Dio, che sempre e in Noi) tal santa deliberatione. Dunque permezzo
della Meditatione puo been incaminarsi l'Anima alla perfettione. Anni senza
contemplare, e senza meditare, purche s'opri secondo li Leggi, con l'ajuto di
Dio fi puo ogn' uno salvare; non si salva poi chi non e perfetto, and Amico di
Dio. Dunque e falsissima l'opinione contenuta nel secondo Capo.

III. La Scienza, e Dottrina anche Teologica, e Sacra, e d'impedimento, e
repugnanza alla Contemplatione, della quale non possono dar giuditio gli
Huomini Dotti, ma solo li Meditativi, e Contemplativi.

R La Dottrina Teologica notifica stabili in noi l'Oggetto della
Contemplatione, che dicono i Quietisti esser la Divina Essenza. Dunque in noi e
compinibile con la Contemplatione, alla quale se la Teologia repugnasse
l'istesso sarebbe esser Contemplativo, e nulla saper d'Iddio Teologalmente, e
cosi Agostino, e gli altri Santi Dottori, e Luminari della Chiesa, perch erano
scientifici, si doverebbero incapaci esser stati della Contemplatione. Il che e
falso, imperoche Dio, che institui il Sacerdotio, come Ministero il piu degno,
non v'e ragione, che habbia voluto i Sacerdoti, ma' che non fossero
Contemplativi, gia che volse col Sacerdotio unita la Scienza, mentre nella
Sacra Scrittura minaccio per Osea Profetta a chi disprezzatore della Scienza
esercitava il Sacerdotio. Tu repulisti scientiam, and ego repellam te, ne
Sacerdotio fungaris mihi. E tralascio altre Scritture, e raggioni, perch mi
viene incaricata la breuita. In quanto poi al che si dice in questo 3. cap. che
della Contemplatione non possono dar giuditio li Dotti, si vede apertamente,
che l'ignoranza di questi spiritelli senza intelligenza ha una temerita di non
volar soggiacere all' emenda, per mezzo dell' Infallibile sentimento de'
Scientifici.

IV. Non puo darsi perfetta Contemplatione, se non circa la sola Divinita. I
Misteri dell' Incarnanatione, Vita, e Passione del nostro Salvatore non sono
oggetto di Contemplatione, anzi l'impediscono, onde devono da Contemplativi
tenersi lontani; o solo considerarsi spregiatamente.

R Se la Contemplatione e un affettione dell' Intelletto, e della Volonta con
l'Ogetto, mediante la gratia di Dio, in un raccoglimento di Spirito, potra la
vita di Christo contemplarsi, perch a quella il Christiano puo farsi present
in Spirito, and affettive con atto di Feed, and Amore. Aggiongo che se Christo
venne a piantar Paradisi in terra per commissione dell' Eterno Padre, come
disse il Profeta Isaia, Posui verbum meum in ore tuo, ut plantos Coelos, and
fundes terram. Dove la Parafrase Caldea cosi leg: Ut plants Coelos in terra:
Come dire (si come l'intese Girolamo) che piantasse le contentezze negli
Huomini disgratiati per il peccato originale: E se i Contemplationi si portano
sopra se stessi alla Consolationi Divine nella loro Contemplativi, perch si
deve disprezzare, e tener lontano Christo, che e l'immediato Datore? Christo
non impedisce l'atto del Contemplatione se ve^ne a compartirci perfettioni, e
contenti spirituali, che sono il fine de' Contemplativi.

V. Le Penitenze corporali, l'austerita della vita non convengono alli
Contemplativi, anzi meglio si comincia la conversione dalla vita contemplativa,
che dalla Purgativa, e dalle Penitenze. Ancora gli effetti della Divotione
sensioile, la tenerezza del Cuore, le Lagrime, e Consolationi spirituali si
devono fuggire, anzi dispreggiare da' Contemplativi, come cose repugnanti alla
Contemplatione.

R. Le Mortificationi dispongono lo Spirito, accio viva sopra le motioni del
senso, e percio tutti i santi cominciarono a viaggiare verso la Perfettione con
discipline, Digiuni, etc. Dunque se i Contemplativi hanno per fine anco la
perfettione, ben li convengono le Penitenze, perch piu spedito si renda alla
Contemplatione, chi piu tiene domate le alterationi del senso. E se Dio
promette nelle Scritture pardonar al Peccatore piante, che saranno da lui le
colpe, ma in nessun luogo del vecchio, o nuovo Testamento, per essersi posto
nella Contemplatione. Dunque meglio si comincia la conversione dalla vita
purgativa, e dalle Penitenze, che dalla contemplatione.

VI. La vera Contemplatione deve fermarsi nella pura Essenza d'Iddio, spogliata
delle Person, e degli Attributi, e l'Atto di Feed di Dio cosi concepito, e piu
perfetto, e meritorio di quello, che riguarda Dio con le Person, and Attributi.

R. Le Person Divine, egli adorabili Attributi di Dio hanno la raggione
formale d'esser Oggetti di Feed, ed'Amore nel racoglimento delle nostre
potenze, e nella rassegnatione dello Spirito, perch sono verita rivelate, e
come Predicati Divini suoni buoni in se stessi, and all Creature. Donde puo
darsene vera contemplatione. Che poi l'atto di Feed di Dio senza le Person,
and Attributi concepito sia piu perfetto, e meritorio di quello, che riguarda
Dio con le Person, and attributi e falsita. Perch se gia il credere che Dio
sia Trino, e sia giusto e atto di feed perfetto, e meritorio, e credere Dio
vero nell' Essenza anco e atto meritorio e perfetto, sara l'atto con cui si
creed Dio vero erino, e giusto, piu perfetto, e meritorio d'un altro atto, con
cui solamente si creed uno nell' Essenza, perch si merita piu per due atti
dell' istessa virtu, che per un solo di questi. (Havendoci Dio communicate le
virtu supranaturali non per sar un atto solo virtuoso, ma per avanzarsi col'
esercitio ^li tali doni) Un' atto di feed, che equivale (...) due e piu
meritorio, e perfetto di un solo atto delli due: onde ben si conclude contra la
prima propositione di questo 6. Cap. che la vera, e perfetta contemplatione per
essere megliore deve fermarsi nella pura Essenza di Dio, ma questa nella
Person, e negli Attributi.

VII. Nella Contemplatione s'unisee l'Anima immediatamente con Dio, onde non vi
si richiede Fantasmi, o Imagini, o specie di sort alcuna.

R. Nella Contemplatione ancorche in un certo modo s'unisca l'Anima
immediatamente con Dio, cio e effettiye, perch vi concorre l'intelletto a
mirar Dio semplicemente, pero si richiede qualche specie per sollicitare
l'intellettuale habilita natural a portarsi nella consideratione di Dio,
servendo la specie per oggetto mottivo all' Intelletto.

VIII. Tutti i Contemplativi nell' atto della Contemplatione patiscono pene,
and angoscie si gravi, che pareggiano, anzi superano, li tormenti dell^ istessi
Martiri.

R. Se (come dicono i Quietisti nel primo capo) la Contemplatione consiste nel
farsi present a Dio con un atto di Feed amorosa, e poi starsene in otio, non e
formalmente essere tormentato, e patire pene piu delli Martiri. E quantunque ad
alcuno spesso succeda nella Contemplatione angoscie, e dolori, cio proviene da'
altra causa o dal Demonio, permettendolo Dio, o da' fiachezza di natura, che
consuma il Corpo, o da' motivi di Malenconia, o da' soverchio sangue, che
sormontato alla testa caggiona dolor. Ma moltissimi altri si sono visti nell'
atto della Contemplatione, circondati di luce con front serena, e bocca
ridente, come Francesco di Paola fu osservato da Luiggi XI. Re di Francia, e
finita la Contemplatione restar tutti inondati di allegrezza, perch in quella
vennero a vista (semplicemente ben si) li sposi, per restar concertato il
Matrimonio fra Dio e l'Anima.

IX. Nel Sagrificio della Messa, e nelle Feste de' Santi, e meglio applicarsi
all' atto di pura feed, e Contemplatione, che alli Misteri di esso Sacrificio,
o a considerare le attioni, ele cose aptenenti alli medesimi Santi.

R. Vive ingannato chi giudica entrare nella Contemplatione senza buona
dispositione dell' Anima; e perch la consideratione delli Mister^ della Messa,
e dell'esempio de' Santi e preparamento spirituale, ancorche remoto, percio
stimarsi deve meglio, prima applicarsi il Christiano alla consideratione de i
Misteri della Messa, e delle attioni de' Santi, e poscia darsi alla
Contemplatione con piu Adobbo nell' Anima.

X. La Lettione spirituale de' libri, le Prediche, l'Orationi vocali,
l'Invocationi de'Santi, e cose simili, sono d'impedimento alla Contemplatione,
overo Oratione di Quiet, alla quale non si deve premettere preparatione alcuna.

R. Se in ogni professione, e' maggiormente in quella della vera, e non
fintionata spiritualita: Nemo repent sit summus, come l'esperienza dimostra,
perch e ordine della nostra fiacca natura, co' cui si va accommodando la
gratia per il nostro camino all' ultimo termine dell' Eternita, che a
facilioribus sit incipiendum; che percio e grand' ignoranza, e presontione
entrare nell' Oratione di Quiet, prima d'altri esercitii, e senza
preparatione. Chi cosi entra, uscira ancora senz' aleun profitto.

XI. Il Sacramento della Penitenza, avanti la Communione non e per l'Anime
interiori, e contemplative, ma per l'esteriori, e meditative.

R. I contemplativi hanno solamente un' Anima che e puo meditare, e puo
contemplare, and anco puo star in peccato. Dunque il Sacramento della Penitenza
prima della S. Communione, e necessario all' Anime contemplative.

XII. La Meditatione non riguarda Dio col lume della Feed, ma con il lume
natural in Spirito e verita, e pero non ha merito appresso Dio.

R. Se la meditatione non fosse meritoria appresso Dio, (saltem aliqualiter de
congruo) no' sarebbe cosi famigliare all Religioni, dove furono, e sono grand'
Huomini fanali della S. C. R. ne sarebbe incaricata da' SS. Patriarchi, e da'
Sommi Pontefici rimunerata con Indulgenze plenarie, come esercitio spirituale,
proportionato alli Amici di Dio, and a quelli, che abandonano le fallacy del
mondo. Di Dio, come si puo conoscere l'esistenza col lume natural, e con la
feed sopranaturale, cosi puo darsi Meditatione che lo riguardi naturalmente, e
Meditatione che lo riguardi con feed pura, e sopranaturale.

XIII. L'Imagini non solo interne, e mentali, ma anco l'esterne solite
venerarsi da' fedeli, come sono quelle di Christo, e de' suoi Santi, sono
dannose a' Contemplativi, onde devono fuggirsi, e toglier via, accio non
impediscano la Contemplatione.

R. Quanto decreto, e decretara la S. Madre Chiesa, a cui presiede Direttore lo
Spirito Santo tutto giovevole all' Vassallaggio di Christo; pero se a' Fedeli
la Chiesa ordina l'adorationi delle SS. Immagini, non devono queste s^uggirsi,
o toglier via, come nocive alla Contemplatione: nulladimeno alcuni sguardi alla
sfuggita verso debt Immagini non sono valevoli a far perdere la
Contemplatione, overo Oratione di Quiet al Contemplativo, quale se in ogni
caso la perde, proviene dalla sua troppa imbecillita, e per altro poi e piu
ampia l'Anima raggionevole; e maggine la gratia, che l'assiste di quello che
suppone queste 13. Cap. Anzi la moderata consideratione di debt Imagini serve
a formar nell' Anima l'interno racoglimento, perch il contemplativo si faccia
regolare dalla Gratia.

XIV. Chi una volta si e applicato alla Contemplatione non deve piu ritornare
alla Meditatione, perch sarebbe un passare dal meglio al peggio.

R. E vero che e cosa mala passare dal meglio al peggio, ma spesso conviene non
possedendo attualmente it meglio incaminarsi a posseder il buono. E vero
ancora, che essendo pontualmente nella Contemplatione, non si deve lacciar
questa a fine di mettarsi nella Meditatione. Ancorche la Contemplatione sia
migliore, non ritrovandosi il Christiano attualmente nella Contemplatione, non
opera inconvenientemente applicandosi a meditare, perch conviene, che per ogni
via, che Dio si puo mirare dall' Anima, sia da questa riverentemente essequiata.

XV. Se nel tempo della Contemplatione vengono pensieribrutti, and osceni, non
si deve usar diligenza alcuna in scacicarli, no' riccorrer ad alcu uno buon
pensiero, ma compiacersi di essere da' quelli molestato.

R. Per non perdersi l'unione effettiva con Dio, che nella formale
contemplatione si trova, e atto di prudenza toglier via l'occasione, come e
atto di scioperaggine il trattenersi con compiacenza, perch come dice S.
Tomaso d'Aquino, qui vult causam, ex quanecessario, vel regulariter sequitur
affectus, vult virtualiter effectum, E lo Spirito Santo. Qui amat periculum
peribit in illo. Dunque sentendo in noi la rebellione del senso nella
Contemplatione, ancorche fidati in noi stessi, dobbiamo usar ogni diligenza per
superarla. Dovemo pero raccommandarci alla Divinita, e chieder la sua gratia,
per tranquillare i mali pensieri, diffondere le sue gioie nell' Anima,
incalmare i sensi alterati, and ut sint aspera in vias planas.

XVI. Niun' atto o affetto nostro interno, benche formato per mezzo della feed,
e puro, ne piace a' Dio, perch nasce dall' Amor proprio, mentre non vi sia
infuso dallo Spirito Santo, sensa nostra industria, e diligenza alcuna, onde
quelli, che stanno nella Contemplatione o in Oratione d'affetti, devono stare
otiosi, o aspettando l'influsso dello Spirito Santo.

R. A Dio solamente piacciono in suoi Doni, ma tutte quelle nostre Operationi,
che da' Noi si fanno con la sua Santa Gratia. Quindi tanto pier, profetta sara'
la Contemplatione, quanto meno sara otiosa, purche il Contemplatore non si
lasci da' qualche sensibile trasportare, preche perderia la Contemplatione, e
gli succederabbe come alla Moglie di Loath, che per mirar indietro perse il
Camino. E poi temerita aspettare in otiosita l'influsso miracosa' dallo Spirito
Santo, perch a' quei, che sono nell' Oratione di Quiet non si deve il camino
passivo, mentre non hanno condegnita sopra i doni della Spirito Santo. Bensi
succeed all volte che lo Spirito penetri l' Anima di chi sta nell' Oratione
d'affetti, ma per gratia particolare. Aggiongo contro la prima propositione di
questo 16. capo. Li Quietisti dicono nel 12. capo che la Meditatione non ha
merito appresso Dio, perch non lo riguarda col lume della feed, dunque l'atto
formato per mezzo della feed ha merito appresso Dio, dunque e puro, e gli piace.

XVII. Quelli che stanno nell' atto della Contemplatione, o dell' Oratione di
Quiet, o siano Person Religiose, o figli di famiglia, o altri, che vivono
sotto l'altrui commando, non devono in quel tempo obedire and eseguire gli
ordini della Regola, o de' superiori, per non interrompere la Contemplatione.

R. La contemplatione ancorche sia in noi di gran perfettione, perch non ci
viene commandata da' Dio, interrompendosi non si pecca, ma essendoci commandata
da' Dio l'Obedienza a' Genitori, and a superiori, si deve obedire a' questi,
anco con ^lasciare l'attual Contemplatione, perch in riguardo dell' ordine
divino l'obedienza e preferibile nella prattica, ancorche la Contemplatione sia
molto piu considerabile nella sua perfettione objettiva.

XVIII. Devono i Contemplativi esser totalmente spogliati dell' affetto di
tutte le Cose, che rigettino a' se, e dispreggino li Doni, e favori di Dio, e
si disaffettionino dell' istessa virtu, o per maggiormente spogliarsi d'ogni
cosa, e viver meglio a'^se medisimi, fare ancora quello, che ripugno alla
modestia, and all' Honesta, purche non sia espressamente contro liprecetti del
Decalogo.

R. Iddio favorisce i Contemplativi con la Communicatione de' suoi boni, non
per essere questi disprezzati, ma per abbellirgli l'Anima, e fortificargli
l'habilita natural all' esercitio della virtu. Dvnque ancorche i Contemplativi
non se ne debbano insuperbire, devono sopramodo stimarli, o servirsene con
humilta di spirito: E se Dio vuole l'honesta come buona, sono in obligo anche i
Contemplativi esser honesti, perch Iddio non ha fatto decreto, che
privilegiasse i Contemplativi a non esser sogetti alla raggione, su la quale si
fond la Modestia, e l' honesta della Vita.

XIX. Li Contemplativi sono sogetti all Violenze, per le quali restano privi
dell' uso del libero arbitrio, si che se anco been gravissimamente peccano
esteriormente, nondimeno interiormente non fanno peccato alcuno; onde ne anco
devono Confessarsi di cio, che hanno fatto. Cio si prova con l'esempio di Giob,
il quale con tutto che non solo ingiuriasse il Prossimo, ma anco bestemmiasse
empiamente Dio, in ogni modo non peccava, perch tutto questo faceva per
violenza del Demonio. E per dar giuditio di queste violenze, non serve la
Teologia Scolastica, e morale, ma e necessario Spirito sopranaturale, il quale
in pocchissimi si trova, and in questi s'ha da giudicare non l'interno dall'
esterno, ma l'esterno dall' interno.

R. Che in questo Cap. 19. non solamente latet Anguis sub herha, ma apertamente
si vede, che sotto nome di Contemplativi spirituali, vogliono i Quietisti
essere debacanti sensuali. L'esempio, che adducono di Giob ben dimostra che no'
hanno intelligenza della Scrittura. May Giob pecco esteriormente ne contro il
Prossimo, ne contro Dio, quando parlo nel cap. 19. nel 6. vorso, come ben
dimonstra, anco per mezzo del senso litterale Pineda tom. 11. sopra Giob c. 35.
ne pecco contro il Prossimo, come nell' istesso puo vedersi, sempre fondata su
la Dottrina de' SS, Padri, che delle Scritture, e insegnano il vero senso. E
per dirla in poche parole con altre raggioni, la gratia con la quale Iddio
sempre ci assiste, unita con la nostra cooperatione puo superare ogni assalto
nemico. E Christo lo disse a t^tti in persona di S. Paolo: Sufficit tibi gratia
mea. Dunque il Contemplativo non e violentabile de venghi necessitato al
peccato este^iori, etc.

THE PRINCIPAL ERRORS. Of those who Practice, The Prayer of Quietness, Censured
and Refuted.
I. ERROR.
COntemplation, or the prayer of Inward quietness, consists in this, that a man
puts himself in the presence of God, by forming an ^bscure Act of Faith, full
of Love, tho simple, and stops there, without going further: and without
suffering any Reasoning, the Images of any things, or any Object whatsoever to
^nter into his mind: and so remains fixed and ^nmoveable, in his Act of Faith:
it being a ^ant in that Reverence that is due to God, ^o redouble this simple
act of his: which is a thing of so much Merit, and of so great force, that it
comprehends within it self, and far ex^eeds the merit of all other virtues,
joined together: and it lasts the whole course of a man's life, if it is not
discontinued by some other Act, that is contrary to it; therefore it is not
necessary to repeat or redouble it.

The CENSURE and REFUTATION.
It is not an Act of Faith that puts us in the Presence of God: for he is
within us by a necessary effect of the Immensity of his nature: therefore
Elias, Micaiah, and the other Prophets said, Vivit Deus in cujus conspecto sto.
The Lord lives in whose presence I stand: and it is upon the same reason that
the Divines have said after S. Austin, In Deo vivimus movemur and sumus; In God
we live, we move, and have our being: Another would have thought that S. Paul
should have been cited for this, rather than S. Aust., since he had said this
first, Acts. 17. v. 28. but Rome is not the place of the World where the N.
Testament is most read; and this putting of ones self in the presence of God,
can only mean the considering ones self as before him.
so that an Act of Faith, that presupposes that the Agent is in being, supposes
likewise that it is in the presence of God; and is indeed nothing else but a
Resignation that the Creature makes of it self to God. Therefore Contemplation,
even during that first obscure Act of Faith, that i^ simple and full of love,
is carried on by the Soul while she looks at God, and not at all while she
continues in an unmovable state. It is then an Evident Falsehood to say, that
other good actions are not at all necessary: any good act being of its nature
finite, may become always better, by being often reiterated, and the
multiplying the Acts of virtue cannot be contrary to the Reverence that is due
to God, who being exempt from all passion, can never be troubled or wearied
with Importunities, as great men are apt to be, who as Experience teaches, are
often changed, disturbed, and become uneasy, when the same things are too often
repeated to them. But with relation to God, when an act is in it self good, the
repeating it is a progress in good; which is approved of God, and becomes more
meritorious in his sight. Therefore the Soul in Contemplating, continues her
Acts, and does not stick obstinatly to one single Act, Contemplation being
still an Operation of the Mind, tho other things are likewise necessary.

II. ERROR.
One cannot make one step toward Perfection by meditation, that being to be
obtained entirely by Contemplation.

REFUTATION.
A Christian by meditating seriously on the Passion of Christ, and teflecting
on that Love that made a God suffer so much for Mankind, may upon that resolve
to love him again, and to obey all his Commands: and he may by the grace of God
which is ever present to us, put those good purposes in Execution: so that the
Soul may well advance toward Perfection by Meditation: It may be also done
without Meditation: for every one that lives according to the Laws of God, may
work out his own Salvation by the help of God. Now since no man can be saved
but he that is Perfect, and a Friend of God's, then this Article is most
certainly false.

III. ERROR.
All Study and Learning, even in sacred Matters and in Divinity, is a Hindrance
to Contemplation: of which learned men are not able to make a true judgment,
that being only to be expected from those that are given to Meditation and
Contemplation.

REFUTATION.
The Study of Divinity makes known to us the Object of Contemplation: This
Article is falsely represented: for the Quietists, as all other Mysticks, only
except to that dry learning which is not accompanied with an inward sense of
Divine matters.
which as the Quietists say, is the Divine Essence: therefore it consists well
with Contemplation: and if the Study of Divinity were opposite to this, then the
ignorance of it is necessary to make a man Contemplative: and thus since S.
Austin and all the other holy Doctors and Lights of the Church, were men
Learned in this study, they must be looked on as men that were Incapable of
rising up to Contemplation: which is false: because God, who has appointed the
Priesthood as the highest degree of service done him, cannot be supposed to
have Intended that the Priests should not be Contemplative persons; and it is
plain, that God will have his Priests to be knowing: since in the Scriptures he
threatens by Hosea the Prophet such as despised knowledge, and yet were in the
Priesthood. Turepulisti scientiam and egorcpellam te ne sacerdotio fungaris.
Thou have rejected knowledge, and therefore I have rejected thee from the
Priesthood. I pass over other Arguments from scripture and reason, because I am
ordered to be short: and as for what is said in this Article, that the Learned
cannot Judge of Contemplation, it shows plainly, that the Ignorance of those
spiritualists carries them to this boldness, of not being willing to submit to
that Correction, which they might expect from that Infallible mean of the
Judgment of the Learned. Here is a new tribunal of Infallibility.


IV. ERROR.
There is no Contemplation that is perfect, but that which regards God himself;
the Mysteries of the Incarnation, and of the Life and Passion of our Savior,
are not the Objects of Contemplation: on the contrary, they hinder it: so that
Contemplative persons must avoid them at a great distance, and think of them
only with Contempt.

REFUTATION.
If Contemplation is an affection that is raised in the understanding or the
Will by its proper object by the help of the Grace of God, and that consists in
an Inward Recollection of the mind, then the Life of Christ is a proper Object
for it, since a Christian can present this to his thoughts, and raise upon it
an Act of Faith and love. Besides, Christ came by a Commission from his Eternal
Father to plant Paradise here on earth, If we judge of this new Infallibility
by this way of proving that Jesus Christ is the proper Object of Contemplation,
we will not much admire it; but if this Article is true, it looks liker Deism.
according to that of the Prophet Isaias, Posui verbum meum in ore tuo ut
plants Coelos and fundes terram; I have put my word in thy mouth that thou may
plant the Heavens and establish the earth; or as the Chaldee Paraphrase has
it, ut plants Coelos in terra, that thou may plant the Heavens in the Earth;
as if he had said (as S. Jerome understood the words) that thou may plant true
joy in those minds, that were debased by Original sin; and how can it be
imagined, that Contemplative persons can rise above themselves in their
Contemplations to taste of Divine Joy's, if they must keep at such a distance
from Jesus Christ, who is the Immediate giver of them; and despise him? Christ
is so far from hindering of Contemplation, that he came into the world to
distribute all those Perfections and spiritual Joys to which the Contemplative
aspire.

V. ERROR.
Corporal Penitences and Austerities do not belong to Contemplative Persons: on
the Contrary, it is better to begin ones Conversion by a state of
Contemplation, than by a State of Purgation or of Penance; and Contemplative
Persons ought to avoid and despise all the effects of sensible Devotion, such
as Tenderness of Heart, Tears, and Spiritual Consolations, all which are
contrary to Contemplation.

REFUTATION.
Mortifications dispose the Spirit to rise above the motions of sense; and
therefore it is that all the Saints have begun their course toward Perfection
with Fasting and Discipline. And therefore if these Contemplatives design
Perfection, they must practice Penance: since nothing renders a man so fit for
Contemplation, as to rise above all the Disorders of Sense. God in the
Sciptures promises to forgive the mourning Sinner; but this is not promised to
the Contemplative in any place either of the Old or New Testament. Therefore it
is better to begin ones Conversion with purgative Exercises and Pennances, than
with Contemplation.

VI. ERROR.
True Contemplation must keep it self fixed only to the essence of God, without
reflecting either on his Persons or his Attributes. If this Article is true, it
confirms the suspicion of Deism.
And an Act of Faith thus conceived, is more perfect and meritorious than that
which considers God with the Divine Attributes, or with the Persons of the
Trinity in it.

REFUTATION.
The Persons of the Trinity, and the Attributes of God, are the proper Objects
of Faith and love, while we recollect all the Powers of our Souls, and resign
our selves to God: for as these are divine Truths, that are revealed to us, so
the Attributes of God are both good in themselves, and good to us, so that they
are proper to raise in us a true Contemplation. It is also false, that an Act
of Faith, that has God for its Object, without considering his Attributes, or
the Persons of the Trinity, is more perfect than that which regards God in
conjunction with them. For if to believe that God is one, and that he is Just,
is a perfect and a meritorious Act of Faith, Here one sees what a thing school
Divinity is, by this way of reckoning: but the value of acts rises from the
Intention of the mind, and not from the Extension of the object.
and to believe that God is true in his Nature is also a perfect and
meritorious Act; then the Act by which God is believed to be true, just and
Three in One, is a more perfect and a more meritorious Act, than that in which
he was considered only as one in Essence. Because a man merits more by two Acts
of the same virtue than by a single one only: for God has communicated
supernatural helps to us, not only for doing one Act of virtue, but that we may
make an advance in such Acts. Therefore one Act of Faith, that is equivalent to
two others, is more meritorious and perfect than any one of these two.
Therefore we may justly conclude against the first branch of this Article, that
true and perfect Contemplation raised to its highest pitch, must not only
regard God in his Essence, but likewise in his Persons and Attributes.

VII. ERROR.
The Soul becomes immediately united to God in Contemplation; so that there is
no need of Phantasms, Images, or any sort of Representation.

REFUTATION.
Tho it is true, that the Soul in some sort unites her self immediately to God
in Contemplation, This is not meant of pure Ideas, but of gross Phantasms.
that is, by a Union of Affections; for the Understanding beholds God simply,
yet some Ideas are necessary for exciting the natural force of the
Understanding, and to carry it to look at God: which Idea is a sort of Object
that moves the Understanding.

VIII. ERROR.
All contemplative persons suffer in the Act of Contemplation such grievous
Torments, they seem to surpass even the sufferings of the Martyrs themselves.

REFUTATION.
If Contemplation consists (as the Quietists pretend it does) in this, that the
Soul puts her self in the presence of God, This Article is also falsely
represented; for the Quietists only mean, that Souls suffer many inward Agonies
in a contemplative state, of which all the Books of the Mysticks are full, and
which they call the great Desolation.
by an act of Faith, full of Love, and after that continues idle: this is not
the being formally tormented, or the enduring more than the Martyrs suffered:
and tho it is true in some sort, that Pains and Miseries come after
Contemplation, this flows either from the Devil, to whom upon that occasion God
gives leave to try those persons, or from some weakness in Nature, that
oppresses the Body, from Melancholy, or an abundance of Blood, that raises
Headaches, or from some other unknown Cause. But many others have appeared to
be in the very Act of Contemplation, as it were environed with Light, and have
looked with a serene, and sometimes with a smiling countenance; which Lewis the
XI. of France observed in Francis a Paula; and they have been as it were
overflown with Joy, when the Contemplation was over; having been admitted in
it, to see their Bridegroom in that simple Act, in which there passes as it
were a Marriage between God and the Soul.

IX. ERROR.
During the Sacrifice of the Mass, and on the Festivals of the Saints, it is
better to apply ones self to an Act of pure Faith, and to Contemplation, than
to the Mysteries of that Sacrifice, or to consider the Lives of those Saints.

REFUTATION.
He is much deceived, who thinks to arrive at Contemplation without a due
disposition of Soul for it: The Quietists only mean by this, that if a man in
an act of outward devotion is carried to Contemplate, he is not to hold his
mind to the outward devotion.
and therefore the consideration of the Mysteries of the Mass, and of the
Examples that the Saints have set us, is a spiritual preparation for it, tho it
may be only a remote one: therefore a Christian ought to set himself first to
consider the Mysteries of the Mass, and the Lives of the Saints, and then apply
himself to Contemplation, having prepared his Soul duly for it.

X. ERROR.
The reading of Spiritual Books, Sermons, Vocal Prayer, the Invocation of
Saints, and all such things, are hindrances to Contemplation, which is only
attained by the Prayer of Quietness, to which it is not necessary to premise
any preparation whatsoever.

REFUTATION.
If in every profession, but chiefly in a true and unfainedly spiritual Temper,
The Quietists only mean, that no general Methods carry men to Contemplation,
and that it is the effect of a special Grace.
that Maxim holds good, Nemo repent sit summas, No man attains to the height
all of the sudden, which daily experience demonstrates, then it is but suitable
to the feebleness of our Nature, to which the Divine Grace accommodates it
self, that in our Journey toward that height of Eternity, as facilioribus sit
incipiendum, we must begin with those things that are easier; therefore it is
great Ignorance or presumption to enter into the Prayer of Quietness before
other exercises, and without due preparation. And he who begins his course
thus, will end it without any fruit.

XI. ERROR.
The Sacrament of Penance before Communion, is not for contemplative Souls,
that live in this inward state; but only for those that are in the Exterior
and Meditative state.

REFUTATION.
These Contemplative persons have but one Soul, which at some times meditates,
This of one Soul is ridiculous.
and at other times contemplates: and that may come to be in a state of sin.
Therefore the Sacrament of Penance is necessary even for those Contemplative
Souls, before they go to Communion.

XII. ERROR.
Meditation does not look at God with the Light of Faith, but only in a natural
Light, in Spirit and in Truth: and therefore it is not meritorious before God.

REFUTATION.
If Meditation were not in some sort at least in the way of Congruity,
meritorious before God; The Quietists only condemn a dry and Mechanical
Meditation.
it could not be so much practiced in all Religious Orders, from whence there
have come, and daily there does come, so many of the shining-lights of the Holy
Roman Church: nor would it have been set on so much by their Holy Patriarchs,
nor rewarded by the Popes with Plenary Indulgences, as a spiritual Exercise
suitable to the Friends of God; and to those who had abandoned the Snares of
this present World. But as one may know the Existence of God by the Light of
Nature, as well as by a supernatural Faith, so likewise some Meditations look
at God, only with the Light of Nature; and others are Acts of a Supernatural
Faith.

XIII. ERROR.
Not only inward and mental Images, but those outward ones which are worshipped
by the Faithful, such as the Images of Christ and of his Saints, are hurtful
to contemplative Persons, and they ought to be avoided and removed, that so
they may not hinder Contemplation.

REFUTATION.
All things are useful to the Service of Christ, that either is decreed, Here,
notwithstanding all our Representers in England, you see the Adoration of
Images is so received at Rome, that it is a Crime to think that the most
perfect may be above it.
or that may be decreed by the Holy Mother Church: in all whose Consultations
the Holy Ghost presides and directs them. Therefore if the Church appoints the
Adoration of Images, none of the Faithful ought to avoid them, or remove them
as hurtful to Contemplation, and some secret looks toward these Images, is no
way likely to make a man fall from the height of Contemplation; or the Prayer
of Quietness; from which if he falls at any time, it flows from his own great
Instability, since the reasonable Soul is a Nobler being, and the Grace that it
receives, is of a higher nature, than is supposed in this Article. Therefore a
moderate regard to Images will serve to confirm the Soul in her inward
Recollection, if a Contemplative man regulates this by the help of the Grace of
God.

XIV. ERROR.
He that has once applied himself to Contemplation, must never return to
Meditation; for this were to fall from a better State to a worse.

REFUTATION.
It is true, that it is an ill thing to go from better to worse; but it is often
times good for a man, This is only meant by the Quietists, of returning to a
Mechanical way of Meditation.
that cannot attain to that which is better, to content himself with that which
is good. It is also true, that while a man is in Contemplation, he ought not to
let that go that he may turn himself to Meditation. Yet tho Contemplation is
still the better State, when a Christian is not actually in Contemplation, it
is not Inconvenient for him to apply himself to Meditation: because the Soul
ought to follow God with all due Reverence, in all those ways in which he may
lead her.

XV. ERROR.
If foul and impure Thoughts come into the mind while one is in Contemplation,
he ought to take no care to drive them away: nor to turn himself to any good
thoughts, but to have a complacence in the trouble that he suffers from them.

REFUTATION.
It is a piece of prudence in a man who being in Contemplation, would not lose
that union by which he is united to God, This is only so to be understood, that
according to the rules given by all the Mysticks, when ill thoughts come into a
man's mind, the best may to overcome them, is rather to neglect them, than to
struggle much against them.
to avoid every thing that may occasion it; as on the contrary, it is a strong
piece of neglect to entertain that with complacence which must make one lose
it, as St. Thomas of Aquin says, He that loves the cause from which any effect
follows, either naturally, or at least commonly, does vertually love the effect
it self: And the Holy Ghost says, He that loves danger, shall perish in it.
Therefore a man who being in Contemplation, feels the Rebellion of the sensible
part, he ought to use all diligence to overcome in whatsoever a state he may be
in. He ought therefore to recommend it to God, and to implore his Grace to
quie^ all those evil thoughts: that so his joy being spread abroad in the Soul,
all the disorderly motions of sense may be calmed, and ut sine aspera in vias
planas, That what is rough may be made smooth.

XVI. ERROR.
No inward Action or Affection, tho formed by the virtue of Faith, is pure or
pleasing to God: because it rises out of self-love, unless it is unfused in us
by the Holy Ghost, without any Industry or Diligence used by us: therefore they
that are in the state of Contemplation or of Prayer, or inward Affections,
ought to continue in a state of suspense, waiting for the miraculous Influence
of the H. Ghost.

REFUTATION.
God is not only pleased with all his own Gifts, that are in us, but with every
thing that is done by us, This is indeed downright Enthusiasm, yet much of
this strain will be found in all the Writings of the Mysticks.
with the help of his Grace: therefore our Contemplation will be so much the
more perfect, the less inactive we our selves are: provided that the
Contemplative person does not suffer himself to be carried away by any sensible
Object; for by that he would fall from that State, and become as Lot's Wife,
who was stopped short, because she looked behind her. It is then a rashness to
keep our selves in an unactive state, and in it to look for the miraculous
Influence of the H. (...)* For all that are in the Prayer of Quietness, must
not expect to be led into this Passive State, since they have not a Condignity
suitable to those Gifts. Tho sometimes the H. Ghost does penetrate the Souls of
those who are in this prayer of inward affection, but this is the effect of a
particular Grace: I add against the first branch of this Article that the
Quietists say in the 12th Article, that Meditation is of no merit in the sight
of God, because it does not look at him with the Light of Faith; from which I
infer, that an Act formed by the Power of Faith, is meritorious before God, and
by consequence, it is pure and acceptable to him.

XVII. ERROR.
Those who have arrived at the State of Contemplation, and the Prayer of inward
Quietness, being Religious Persons, or being under the Authority of Parents, or
any other superiors, are not bound to observe their Rules, or to obey their
Superiors, while they are in Contemplation, lest that Interrupt it.

REFUTATION.
Although Contemplation is an Act of high Perfection, yet since it is not
commanded by God, This the Quietists deny, as an Imputation cast upon them.
it may be interrupted without sin: and since Obedience to Parents and
superiors, is commanded by God, (...) ought to take place, and even
Contemplation ought to be discontinued in order to it. And therefore
considering the Order that God has settled, that Obedience ought to be preferred
to Contemplation, tho the latter is as to its objective Perfection much more
valuable than the former.

XVIII. ERROR.
Contemplative persons ought to divest themselves of all affections to all
things: All the Mysticks, and in particular Sr. Philip Nerius, have often done
things that seemed ridiculous and absurd, as the highest excercises of
Mortification and Humility.
they ought to reject and despise all Gods gifts and favors, and to strip
themselves of all Inclinations even for virtue it self; and in order to this
total abnegation of all things, and that they may live better within
themselves, they ought even to do that which is contrary to Modesty and
decency; provided that it be not expressly contrary to some of the ten
Commandments.

REFUTATION.
When God favors Contemplative Persons so far, as to communicate any of his
blessings to them, these things ought not to be despised, but to be considered
as Favors that tend both to beautify the Soul, and to fortify her in the
exercise of Virtue: so that tho Contemplative Persons ought not to be lifted up
with them, yet they ought to value them highly, and to make use of them with
all Humility of Spirit: and since God considers Decency as a sort of Goodness,
Contemplative persons ought to be decent in all things: for God has not by any
special Decree exempted them from the Rules of Reason, upon which all the
Modesty and decency of Life is founded.

XIX. ERROR.
Contemplative Persons are subject to violent Commotions, by which they lose
the exercise of the Freedom of their Will. This the Quietists reject as a
Calumny, to render them justly odious to all the world
So that tho they may fall into most grievous Sins, as to the exterior Act,
yet they do not at all sin inwardly: And so they are not bound to confess that
which they have done. All this is proved by the example of Job, who tho he not
only said things that were very Injurious to his Neighbor, but had blasphemed
God most Impiously, yet he did not sin in all this: because all was done by the
Violence of the Devil. In order to the judging of these Violences, neither the
Learning of the Schoolmen or of the Casuists, is of any use: but a supernatural
Spirit is necessary, which is to be found in very few persons: now these are
the only Competent Judges, who must not judge of the Internal by the External;
but on the contrary, of the External by the Internal.

REFUTATION.
In this Article the Snake does not hide himself in the Grass, but shows
himself very visibly: But it is very poorly refuted, certainly Job said many
very hard things, which God who knew the sincerity of his heart, and the
strength of his temtations, did not lay to his charge.
since by this it is plain, that the Quietists will be sensual Libertines under
the name of Spiritual and Contemplative Persons. The Example that they bring of
Job shows clearly how little they understand the Scripture. Job did not sin
outwardly, neither against his Neighbor nor against God in what he said, cap.
19. ver. 6. as Pineda (tom. 2. in Job 235) has evidently proved from the
literal sense of the words: he did not sin against his Neighbor, as appears by
the Expositions of the Holy Fathers, from whom we are to learn the true sense
of the Scriptures. And to end this matter in a few words, that Grace with which
God assists us at all times, is such, that we cooperating with it, may
overcome all the Temtations of our Enemies. And Christ has said to all in the
person of S. Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee: therefore a Contemplative
Person cannot be pushed on by any violence or necessity whatsoever, to any
External Act of Sin.

It is not easy to judge whether these Articles are faithfully drawn out, or
truly represented: for it is probable, that Malice has a large share in some of
them, chiefly in this last, which leads to downright Libertinage; tho others
have rather suspected, that all tended to an Elevated Deism: yet it is certain,
that if there is much Poison in these Articles, the Antidote of the Censure is
so feeble, that it cannot have a strong Operation; and it shows how little the
Scripture and true Divinity is understood at Rome.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN the former Letter, I told you all that I could learn of this matter, during
my stay at Rome, but having left in July, I prevailed with one to give me an
account of the Conclusion of this Affair, of which I send you a Copy: for tho I
know all the Gazettes of Europe will be full of the Decision and end that is
believed to be put to the business of Quietism, yet you know too well, how
little one ought to depend on such Relations: all the news of this matter, will
either be that which is writ by the direction of the Inquisition, or by the
Strangers that are there, and pick up such things as they find among the
Romans, who are ever true to the old Character that Iuvenal gave of that City,

Sequitur fortunam, ut semper, and odit Damnator.

Therefore I will give you an account of this business, on which you may
depend, in the words of a Letter writ me from Rome.

Now this great Affair, upon which men have so long looked with so much
expectation, is at an end: and a party that was believed to be a Million
strong, is now either quite extinguished, or at least oppressed with a great
deal of Infamy: and Mr. Molinos, who has lived above twenty years in this City,
in the highest Reputation possible, is now as much hated as ever he was
admired: he is not only considered as a Condemned, and an Abjured Heretic, but
he is said to have been convicted of much Hypocrisy, and of a very Iewd course
of life; which is so firmly believed by the Romans, that he was treated by them
on the day of his Abjuration, with all possible Indignities; but the people as
they showed their affections to him, by their cries of Fire, Fire, so were
ready to have sacrificed him to their rage, if he had not been well defended by
the Sbiri and Guards that were about him. And it would be a crime enough at
present, to recommend a man to the care of the Inquisitors, if he should seem
to doubt either of his Heresy, or of the Scandals of his life. All the party is
extremely sunk: Cardinal Petrucci himself lives in Rome as if he were in a
desert; for no Body goes to visit him, and he stirs as little abroad: nor is it
thought that he will escape: there are four sent by the Inquisition to his
Diocese of Iessi to examine his behavior there: there is also a discourse, that
has lately appeared at Rome, that was secretly printed, of which he is
suspected to be the Author, which is an Apology for Quietism, that gives great
offense. It is said, that the Inquisitors had full proofs against Molinos, by
fourteen Witness; of whom eight indeed came and offered their Depositions of
their own accord, and the other six were forced to declare the truth, which
raises the Credit of their Testimony: since his Abjuration, it is said that
many of his Followers have abjured in private, and that besides the Prisoners
that are in their hands, great numbers come in every day to accuse themselves,
and to offer themselves to penance, these are all very gently dismissed by the
Inquisitors, who are now as much censured by the Romans for their excessive
mildness, as ever they have been blamed by others for their rigor: and those
secret Abjurations are believed to be all the Severity that they will practice
on this Occasion; for it is said that even F. Appiani the Jesuit will be
abjured in secret; tho some say, he is madd, others that he is become deaf and
dumb, and not a few believe that he is dead: so uncertain are all Reports at
present. In a word, the hatred of the present Pontificate appears very visibly
upon this Occasion: the People affecting to show a very extraordinary rage
against a person, and a party, that has been so much favored and supported by
the Pope: so that this matter comes clearly home to him, and wounds his
Reputation extremely; all this raises the credit of the Jesuits, who value
themselves upon the zeal and the conduct of their Society upon this Occasion.
All the Popes Enemies, the Jesuits, the French Party, and the body of the
People, that are Malecontented and weary of him, and his long and dull Reign,
show the Pleasure they have in aggravating this matter against him: they say,
this is the first time that ever any Heresy made Rome its Seat, where it
choosed to nestle it self; but it is yet more strange, that it should have
continued there above twenty years, notwithstanding all that multitude of Spies
that the Inquisition has every where; that the Pope should have shut his Ears
against all Complaints, so that this Doctrine had gained so great Authority,
that those who attackt it, passed for Heretics, or Calumniators at least, and
that even after all the Discoveries that have been made, that the Pope was
known to favor Molinos secretly, and was so hardly brought at last to consent
to the Condemnation, in which it is said, that nothing prevailed on him till
the Cardinal's informed him of the Scandals of Molinos's Life, that were
proved: this was indeed a matter that could fall within the Popes
understanding; for the points of Doctrine are believed to be above it. All
these things concur to increase the Contempt under which the present
Pontisicate lies; yet as for those Scandals of Molinos's life, I do not know
what to believe: many will not believe them, and think they are only Impostures
given out to render him odious; for if they had been true, and well proved, it
is said, that the Censure would have been severer; for a perpetual
Imprisonment, and the saying his Credo, and the fourth part of the Rosary every
day, are mild Punishments, if he is found to have been so flagitious a man, and
so vile a Hypocrite, as is given out. His own Behavior at the Minerva did not
look, either like a Man, that was much confounded with the Discoveries that had
been made, or that was very Penitent for them, or for his Heresy: so that the
Mildness of the Censure, to a Man that showed to little humility or repentance,
seems to flow rather from the Defectiveness of the Proofs, than from the
gentleness of the Tribunal. I confess, I was not a Witness to what passed in
the Minerva; for as I would not venture in the Crowd, so both Money and Favor
was necessary to accommodate a man well on that occasion, where not only a
general Curiosity brought a vast confluence of People together, to see the
issue of a Business that has been so long in suspense, but a particular
Devotion: for the Pope had granted a General Indulgence to all that should
assist in that Solemnity: but I will give you the account as I had it from
Eyewitnesses. Molinos was well dressed, new trimmed, in his Priestly Habit,
with a cheerful Countenance, that as was said by his Enemies, had all the
Charms on it, that were necessary to recommend him to the fair Sex. He was
brought from Prison in an open Coach, one Dominican being with him in it. He
was at first placed for some time in one of the Corridori of the Minerva: he
looked about him very freely, and returned all the Salutes that were made him:
and all that he was heard say, was, That they saw a man that was defamed, but
that was Penitent (Infamato ma Pentito.) After that he was carried to dinner,
where he was well treated, that being to be his last good Dinner. After Dinner,
he was brought into the Church, as in a Triumph, carried on the shoulders of
the Sbiri in an open Chair: when he was brought to his place, as he made his
Reverence very devoutly to the Cardinals, so there was no show of Fear or of
Shame, in his whole Deportment. He was chained, and a Wax Light was put in his
hand, while two strong-lung'd Friars read his Process aloud, and care had been
taken to lay matters so, that as some of the Articles were read, all should cry
Fire, Fire. When he came back to Prison, he entered into his little Cell, with
great Tranquillity, calling it his Cabinet, and took leave of his Priest in
these words, Adieu Father, we shall meet again at the Day of Judgment, and then
it will appear on which side the Truth is, whether on my side, or on yours. So
he was shut up for Life. Yet after all I find none of the wise men here think
that the thing is at an end; but that the Fire which seems to be now
extinguished, will break out with more violence; for one of his Followers had
the boldness to tell the Inquisitors to their face, that they were a Company of
Unjust, Cruel, and Heretical men; and compared their Treatment with that which
Christ had met with, and yet even he has escaped upon an Abjuration, as is
pretended. The Reasons that are given for this extraordinary Gentleness of the
Inquisitors, who are seldom accused for erring on this side, are both the
Numbers of the Party, who might be much irritated by public Examples, and also
the great Credit that their Doctrine has from the Mystical Divinity, that is
authorized by so many Canonisations: for it is said, that from several parts
the Inquisitors have brought together above twenty thousand of Molino's
Letters: whose Correspondence was so vast, that some give out, that the Post of
the Letters, that were brought him the day in which he was seized on, rise to
twenty Crowns. And I heard a Divine of Rome confess, that they have such
Authorities for most of their Tenets, that they will never be beat out of them,
by the force of their School Divinity, therefore he thought it was necessary to
condemn them by a formal Sentence, in which the Authority of the Church was to
be interposed. Most of the condemned Articles are nothing but an Invidious
Aggravating of the Doctrine of Predestination and Grace Efficacious of it self,
and of Immediate Inspiration: for all the hard Consequences that are pretended
to be drawn, either from the one or the other of these Opinions, are all turned
into so many Articles, and condemned as so many Impious Doctrines; but you will
be better able to judge of this matter when you see all that the Inquisitors
will think sit to print concerning it.



A SECOND LETTER Writ from ROME, Containing some Particulars, relating to the
INQUISITION*
SIR;
MY last to you, together with the Advertisement which was sent me from Rome,
related wholly to the Affairs of the Quietists; but because I know your
Curiosity will perhaps go further, and that you expect such Observations from
me, as you fancy me capable to make, in a Country where I have now made so
long a stay, that it is my own fault, if I have not been able to see a little
further than Common Travelers do, therefore I will try what I can say that may
please you.

I am, as you know, no Searcher into Manuscripts, or the Curiosities of
Libraries, nor can I bring my self to so dry a study as is that of Medals, or
Inscriptions. I had rather be beholding to the Labors of others, for the
Discoveries they have made in those matters, than wear out my Eyes and spend my
Time in the reading and Deciphering those Remains of Antiquity. I love all that
knowledge, which, with how much difficulty soever it may be acquired, feeds the
mind with some useful Ideas: but as for that knowledge which carrys one no
further, then that such a Word, or such a Hierogliphick signified such a thing,
and that gives the mind no matter to work on, and raises no game at which it
may fly, it has not charm enough to work on so lasy a man as I am. I confess,
my studies, and my way of Life would have carried me more naturally into
matters of Religion, or into the Politics: but as to the former, Italy is not
a Country, where a man either can or dare reason upon these Subjects: for their
Ignorance is such, that no man can profit much by their conversation on those
heads: besides that, it is not safe to do it. The Italians are too well bred,
to attack a man on that Argument; and they know their own Ignorance so well,
and have so high an Opinion of the Learning of the Heretics, that they are
sure never to provoke any of them: and he were a very bold and Indiscreet man,
that would begin the dispute with them: so after all, News and Politics is
all that Remains, and you know I am idle enough both to think and to talk of
these upon occasion: yet I must confess, that I find so many of my Reflections
in Dr. Burnets Letters, that I have got sent me from Leghorn, that if I had not
seen these, I had very likely writ you a great many of those that are already
set out by him, with so much advantage, that I find the best part of all my
Observations are already made by a better Pen: but I, who have as great an
Aversion from copying, as he says he has; will avoid the saying any one thing
that I find in his Letters: and will only speak of those Places that he did not
see, or of those matters which he had not time enough to enquire after, or to
observe; and since the former Letter, contained such a long and serious recital
of a matter, that if it fixed your attention, yet must have wearied it, I will
now divert you a little, with some Storys, that will be more agreeable; and
then I will return to more serious Subjects. I will begin with some relating to
the Inquisition. I told you in my former Letter, of a great many Prisoners in
the Inquisition, but among all the Prisoners that are there, none will surprise
you so much as when I tell you that there is a Cruxifix kept there, which is
called, our Savior in the Inquisition: when this was first told me, I durst
not speak out that which naturally occurred to my thoughts, which was, that our
Savior and the Truth of his Gospel, was indeed shut up with so much severity
by the Inquisitors, that it was no wonder if he were reckoned among the
Prisoners of that severe Court. But this story is less serious, and more
Comical.

You know that in all the bigoted Towns, the people are sorted in several
Fraternities, and every one of these, has their peculiar Churches, Altars,
Images and Relics, to which they pay a more extraordinary devotion: so there
was one in Florence, among whose favorite Images a Crucifix happened to be one:
a Woman (that had a fair Daughter) fell sick: and as she had paid many
Devotions to that Image, so she came to fancy, that in her sickness she had the
Returns of very extraordinary Favors from it. The truth of the matter was,
that one who had a mind to have frequent access to her Daughter, made a shift
to deceive the poor sick Woman: for he appeared in such a disguise to her, that
she believed it was the Image that came to comfort her. And that which was the
most acceptable part of the Imposture was, that the Impostor knew by her
Daughters means, every thing that she wanted, and took care to provide it for
her, so that at every visit that he made her, he brought along with him, all
the things that she needed: this was sensible; so the credulous Woman believed
all this came from her beloved Image: and she was now as grateful as she had
been before devout: she told all that came to see her; how careful and
bountiful that Image was to her: and showed them how well she was supplied by
it. In short, this came to be generally believed: for when the least story of
this kind gets vent, and is well received by the Priests, the People run in so
headlong to it, that it would pass for a Crime capable enough of ruining one in
the Spirit of the Inquisitors, to seem to doubt of it; but much more if one
studied to undeceive others: therefore things of this nature kindle the minds
of a superstitious multitude so quick, that in a few days a whole Town will
seem as it was out of its Wits: which appeared signally on this occasion at
Florence: for now the whole Town entered into this Fraternity. The Great Duke
himself came into the number, and all were studying what new Honors should be
done to an Image that had been so kind to one of its Worshippers. But some that
were wiser than the rest, saw through the Cheat, and Informed P. Innocent the
10th. of it, who was resolved to put a stop to the current of this
Superstition: yet he saw it was necessary to do it with some address: It fell
out to be the year of Iubily 1650. so the Pope writ to Florence, that he had
heard of the Miracles of that Image, to which he desired earnestly to do his
own Devotions, therefore he entreated them to bring it to Rome; that so the
Image might have the addresses of all the Pilgrims, as well as his own made to
it. Upon this the more bigoted of the Fraternity, would needs accompany the
Charitable Image: so they carried it in Procession to Rome: and did not doubt
but that the Pope and Cardinals with the Clergy of Rome would have come out in
Procession to meet them and their Image: The surprise was no doubt very great,
when instead of all this, they found a Company of Sbirri staying for them at
the Porta dell Populo; who took their Image from them, and carried it away to
the Inquisition; and sent them away not a little mortified at the Disgrace,
that had befallen their Crucifix, who has been ever since a Prisoner in the
Inquisition.

I was told of another Prisoner there of a later date, but not much unlike
this. You know the legend of the Plague that was in Rome, as I remember in S.
Gregory the great's time, that was stopped by an Angel, that as was pretended
came down, and stood over that Castle, which was formerly called Moles
Hadriani, but has carried the name of Castro S. Angelo ever since. The Friars
of Ara Coeli had got a Stone, upon which there was an Impression like the print
of a Foot: so they had put this in some part of their Church, and gave it out
that this print was made by the Foot of that Angel; tho one can hardly Imagine
how they fancied that an Angel treads so hard. This Stone had many Devotions
paid it. The learned Sigr. Pietro Bellori, who is without dispute the best
Antiquary in Rome, being once in that Chapel at his Devotions; observed a
great many praying about this Stone, and kissing it with great Respect and
Affection; so he came to look upon it, and having examined it carefully, he saw
clearly it was a fragment of a Statue of the Goddess Isis; the Greek Characters
were legible, and many things concurred to make a man of his Learning and
Exactness conclude, that the Devotions were mis-applied that were paid it; so
he went to one of the Fathers of the House, and acquainted him with his
Observation: and wished that they would remove that mistaken Object of Worship,
lest some of the learned Heretics that passed through Rome, might discover and
reproach the Church with it. But the Fathers of the House found their account
in this matter, so they were so far from following his good Advice, that they
aspersed him that had given it, so as to accuse him of Impiety for diverting
the Devotions of the people: the Imputation was carried so far that he was
brought before the Inquisition to clear himself, which he did so fully, that he
not only got safe out of their hands, but which was more, he convinced them
that he was in the right: so the Stone was removed, and keeps the Crucifix
company in the Inquisition.

But by these two Storys, you will perhaps imagine that I design to beget in you
a good Opinion of that Court; but I will now tell you another, that will soon
bring you back to your old thoughts of that Tribunal. Burrhi is a man so famous
in the World, that one that has looked into Natural Philosophy and Chimistry,
could not be long in Rome without making an acquaintance with him: but to tell
you truth, I neither found him to be so great a Chimist as he fancies himself
to be, nor so great a Heretic as the Inquisitors have made him. I tell you
this the more particularly, that you may upon it judge how far you are to
believe the account that the Inquisitors may give of their proceedings against
Molinos: since you may conclude from what was done to the one, what may be
expected in all cases that are brought before them. Burrhi's Story is in short
this; He is a Gentleman of the Millanese, who was born to an Estate of 8000.
Crowns a year: In his youth he had traveled, and had got into his head the
Notions of the Now Philosophy and of Chimistry: so at his return to Milan, he
began to propogate the new Philosophy, and to form a Conference upon those
matters: the Priests it seems suspected, that there might be somewhat under
this, so he was put in the Inquisition, but nothing could be made out against
him, he was let out: after that he went and stayed for some years in Germany and
Holland; and it is very probable that he might have expressed himself
concerning the Courts of Inquisition, as a man that had no great opinion either
of their Justice, or of their Mercy. And as he has gone into all the high
pretensions of the Chimists, so it is probable enough that he has talked of
matters of Religion in that Mysterious unintelligible Iargon, that is used
almost by all the men that are of the highest Elevation of Chimistry, but
chiefly by Paracelsus and Van Helmont. In short, some Accusations were given in
to the Inquisitors against him, who complained of him to the Emperor, and had
so much credit in his Court that he strained his power to the utmost, and
seized on him, and sent him to Italy, where those good Fathers were resolved
not to give him a second occasion of boasting, that he had got safe out of
their hands: strange things were objected to him; and as is pretended, they
were proved against him; as that the B. Virgin was God equal with the Son; and
that the H. Ghost was incarnate in her, as well as the Eternal Word was in her
Son: that the three Persons in the Trinity were the first, the second, and the
third Heavens: that the Son was from all Eternity discontented with the Father,
for not making him equal to him: that the Consecrated Hosty had in it the Body
of the Mother as well as that of the Son: and that the putting the pieces of it
together in the Chalice, demonstrated the Union between the Mother and the Son.
These Opinions were all proved against him: tho he protests that he never
thought of them, yet he was forced to abjure them in the year 1668. and was
upon that condemned to perpetual Imprisonment; he continued in the Prison of
the Inquisition, till within these five or six years, that the Duke d'Estrees
being sick, procured an Order for having Burrhi to come and treat him; and in
gratitude to Burrhi, who cured him, he got his Prison changed to the Castle St.
Angelo: where he now entertains himself with Chimical Processes. It is indeed
very probable, that he had provoked the Inquisition, by speaking severely and
reproachfully of them, and this was all his Crime, unless another Article
against him might be his Estate; for of his 8000. Crowns a year, there is but
3000. left him; for the good Fathers have had the Charity to take 5000. to
themselves: and his 3000. is so eat up by them, through whose hands it comes to
him, that he has not 1500: Crowns a year paid him: and from this you may see
what credit you ought to give to the Processes, the Articles, and the
Abjurations that are made before that Court.

If instead of that Zeal which animates them against Heresy, they would purge
their own Church of those Disorders, which they themselves acknowledge to be
corruptions, they would sooner bring themselves again into credit. The
scandalous Pictures that are in many Churches of Italy, are things that might
deserve their care, if they would turn it to that hand. Is it not a shameful
thing, that there has not been a great Master in Painting who has not put that
Complement on his Mistress, as to paint her for the Virgin? so that the most
celebrated Madonna's of Italy are known to have been the Mistresses of the
Great Painters. The Postures, the Looks, and the Nakedness of many of the
Church-pieces, are Monstrous Indecent things. The great design of the Cupulo at
Florence, is such a Representation of Vice, that all that can be presented by a
defiled Imagination, comes short of what is to be seen there: and tho the
Scripture speaks but of one Apparition of the Holy Ghost in the shape of a
Dove; one shall find this Dove on the Head, at the Ear, and the Mouth of I know
not how many of their Saints; and as one finds in many Pieces, that their
Masters have resolved to perpetuate their own Amors in them, so Amors are
every day managed by the same methods: for while I was at Rome, I discovered an
Intrigue between a Friar and a Nun, by two Pictures, that were drawn for them:
the Friar was drawn as a S. Anthony, and the Nun as a S. Katherine of Siena:
these they were to exchange, and so to feed their passion under this disguise
of Devotion.

But to return to Indecent Pictures, there is nothing more scandalous, than the
many various Representations of the Trinity, which must needs give to all Jews
and Mahometans as well as to us, that pass for Heretics, a strange horror to a
Religion that suffers those odious Resemblances, that give such gross Ideas of
the Deity, and of the Trinity: and that which is yet the most scandalous part
of those Pictures, is that the Representation of God the Father is often
diversified according to the caprice of the Painter; and he is to be seen in
the Habits of the several Orders of that Church, and indeed both Features,
Hair, Habit, and Postures, have all the diversity in them that is necessary to
feed an Idolatry, that is as Extravagant as it is gross.

The Picture of the B. Virgin, with the Order of the Capuchins under her
Petticoat, is not very apt to raise Chaste Idea's in those who look upon it. In
short, whereas the Rule of the Ancient Architecture of Churches, was to below
and dark, which was thought the most proper, for the Recollection of a man's
Faculties, and by consequence for Devotion, is now quite altered: and great
Cupulos with a vast Illumination, are necessary to show the Beauty of those
rich Pieces, which would be lost in Churches built as dark as the Ancient Ones
were.

I confess, those Pictures are charming things, if they were any where else
than in Churches: but the pleasure they give, does so possess a man that begins
to understand them, that it will kindle any thoughts in him, sooner than devout
ones. I will not here let my Pen carry me into a Subject that must needs set
all my thoughts on fire; and speak of the great Pieces of Painting that are in
Italy, and of the many Masters that it produced in the last Age: who as they
were such Extraordinary men, so they lived within the Compass of one Age; as if
the Perfection in that amasing Art had been to dye with them, as well as it was
born with them; this, I say, would make one think, that there are Revolutions
and Aspects in the Heavens that are favorable or cross to Arts or Sciences: and
that then, the most favorable Aspect for Painting that ever was, produced
those astonishing performances. For tho the great decay of Learning that is
every where, may be reasonably enough resolved in this, that whereas in the
last Age many great Princes were either Learned themselves, or at least they
made it a Maxim to protect and encourage Learning; but this having at last
grown to an excess of Rudeness and Pedantry, and Princes becoming generally
extreme Ignorant, it came to pass for a piece of breeding, to say nothing that
was beyond their pitch, or that seemed to reproach their Ignorance: and those
who could not hide their Learning, were called Pedants: and pedantry was
represented so odious, that Ignorance being the lasiest as well as the surest
way to avoid this, all men took that very naturally; and when other methods are
as effectual to raise men to the highest preferments either of the Bar or of
the Pulpit as true Learning or real Merit, few will choose the long and
tedious, and often the most uncertain way, when the End that they propose to
themselves, may be certainly compassed by a more effectual and easier one.
Flattery and Submissions are sooner Learned and easier practiced by men of low
and mean souls, than much hard and dry study: thus, I say, the decay of
Learning is very easily accounted for, in the Age in which we live: but as for
the Art of Painting, it is still in such esteem, and great pieces go still at
such vast rates, that if the Genius and capacity for it were not lost, there is
encouragment enough still to set it a going: but I leave this subject not
without putting some constraint on my self; for who can think of such Wonderful
men as Correge, Michael Angelo, Raphael, Paulo Veronese, Iulio Romano,
Carrache, Palma, Titian and Tintoret, without feeling a concern at every time
that he reflects on the Wonders of their pencils: St. Lukes pretended work, and
even the supposed performances of Angels, are sad things set near their pieces.
One, whose thoughts are full of the Wonders of that Art, that are to be seen in
Florence, goes into the Annunciata, and sees not without Indignation, that
adored picture of the Virgin, which, as the fond people there believe, was
finished by an Angel, while the Painter that was working at it, and that could
not animate it as he desired, fell asleep, who as soon as he awaked, saw his
piece finished. This fiction of the painters, to raise the credit of his
picture, is so well believed at Florence, that he presents made to enrich the
Altar and Chapel, where it stands, are Invaluable: and yet after all, the
Angel's work is still no better than the common painting of that time: and that
Angel-painter, was but a bungler if compared, to the great Masters. In a word,
what can be thought of humane nature, when in so refined a place as Florence,
so course an Imposture has been able to draw to it, such an Inestimable stock
of Wealth.

All these things are so many digressions from my main subject, which was, to
show you how much matter the Inquisitors might find, if they would use any
exactness in redressing those Abuses which they themselves will not defend in
common conversation: and yet tho the smallest thing, that seems even at the
greatest distance to go against their Interest, is looked after with a very
watchful care; yet the grossest of all Impostures, that proves profitable to
them, is much encouraged by them.

The fable of Loretto, is so black and so ridiculous a piece of Imposture, that
I never saw a man of sense, that cared to enter upon that subject. I was once
in Company where I took the liberty to propose two modest Exceptions to it: the
one was, that about 200 years after the rest of the Angelical Labor in carrying
about that Cottage is pretended to have fallen out, Vincent Ferrrier, whom they
believe a great Saint, not only says nothing of its being then in Italy, but
says expressly, that it was then in Nazareth, and that many Miracles were
wrought about it. Antonin of Florence; who is also the most Impudent Writer of
Legends that ever was, says not a word of it some Ages after they say that it
was at Loretto. All the answer that I had to this was, that it was no Article
of Faith, but whether it was true or false, the Devotion of the People was
still entertained by it: and this, they said, was as much meritorious, tho
founded on a Fable, as the giving of Charity to one who is believed a fit
object, but yet is indeed a Cheat, is acceptable to God: and thus he who gives
upon a good inward motive, will be rewarded according to the Disposition of his
Mind, and not according to the Truth or Falsehood of the Story, that wrought
upon him. I durst not press this matter too far: otherwise I would have
replied, that how excuseable soever the Superstition of Ignorant People may be,
yet this does not at all justify the Cheat that the Church puts upon her so
easily deluded children. The truth is, the Romans themselves have not such
stiff notions of all the points of Controversy as we are apt to Imagine: this
makes me remember a conversation that past some years ago, between an Abbot and
one of our Clergymen, that was then a Governor to a Person of Quality, that in
his Travels stayed for some time at Rome. The Abbot seeing the Governor was
considered as a man of Learning, desired to be Informed of him, what were the
Points in difference between the two Churches: so the Governor told him, that
we had our worship in a known tongue; that we gave the Cup in the Sacrament;
that we had no Images, and did not pray to Saints: all this did not disturb the
Abbot, who said, that these were only different Rites and Ceremonies, which
might be well enough born with: when the other added, that we did not believe
Transubstantiation nor Purgatory, the Abbot said, these were the subtilties of
the School: so he was very gentle till the Governor told him, that we did not
acknowledge the Pope; then the Abbot was all on fire, and could not comprehend,
how men could be Christians, that did not acknowledge Christ's Vicar, and S.
Peter's Successor: and it is very plain at Rome at this day, that they consider
the Conversion of Nations, only as it may bring in more profit into the Datary
Court, and raise the value of the Offices there; for when I seemed amassed in
conversation with some of them, to see so little regard had to the Ambassador
of England, and to every thing that he proposed; they told me plainly, that
perhaps the Angels in Heaven rejoiced at the conversion of a sinner upon the
pure motives of perfect Charity, but they at Rome looked at other things. They
saw no profit like to come from England; no Bulls were called for, and no
Compositions like to be made; if those things should once appear, then an
Ambassador from thence would be treated like the penitent Prodigal, especially
if he were a little less governed by the Jesuits, who were believed to have
managed our Ambassador a little too absolutely: and here it will be no
unpleasant digression if I tell you the true reason that retarded the Promotion
of the Cardinal d'Este so long.

The Pope himself saw what the Uncle of this Cardinal did at Rome, in P.
Alexander the 7ths time, upon the business of the Corsis, and the affront that
was put on the Duke of Crequy, which made so much noise. That Cardinal being
then the Protector of the French Nation, offered first to the D. of Crequy, to
go with him, accompanied with 500 Men, that he knew he could raise in Rome, to
the Palace of Dom Mario Chigi, and to fling him out at window: but the D. of
Crequy thinking that such a revenge went too far, the Cardinal himself went
accompanied with his 500 Men to the Palace, and expostulated the matter with
the Pope, and demanded Reparation; and when the Pope put it by in some general
answers, he pressed him so hard, till the Pope threatened to pull his Cap from
him, but he answered, that he would clap a Headpiece on it, to defend it, and
that he would never part with that, till he had pulled the Tripple Crown from
his head: This was vigorous, and the Cardinal had a mind to perpetuate the
memory of it, for he made himself be drawn with a Headpiece by him, his hand
pointing toward it, which I saw at Modena; and it is plain by their way of
speaking of this matter, that they were proud of it. The present Pope being at
that time a Cardinal, saw this disorder, and so he was resolved never to raise
one of that family to the Purple: yet the earnest and repeated Instances from
England, overcame him at last.

But now again I return to that from which I have digressed so often, which is
the work that the Inquisition might find in Italy, even without departing from
any of their received Principles. That scandalous Imposture of the blood of S.
January at Naples, that seems to be firm and dry in the Vial, and that
dissolves and moves as it is brought near his Head, which is so firmly believed
by all the bigots there, must needs give an Indignation to all that love Truth,
when they see such gross Deceptions put upon the World. I will not take upon me
to say how it is managed; but nothing is more easy than the ordering of this
matter may be. For if that Vial be filled with tinctured liquor, the Vial being
put in Ice and Salt, will freese in an Instant; and it being again in the air,
may return very quickly to its former state, so that there is no need of any
great skill for the conducting this matter: and it is so much their Interest,
who have the keeping of this pretended Blood, to keep the secret very
religiously, that it is no wonder if it is not discovered. He indeed who either
doubts of it, or would adventure to discover it, must resolve to go and live
some were else than in Naples, where this passes for the chief Glory, as well
as the greatest blessing of their City: and the people there are so extremely
credulous, and the Priests are so very Insolent, that this has appeared of late
in such Instances, that if the Viceroy of Naples, were not both a very
extraordinary man, and most excessively esteemed and beloved there, he could
not have stood his ground in the Dispute which is now on foot, and of which tho
all the Gazettes make mention, yet I may perhaps tell you some particulars,
that may be new to you, for I was in Naples while this matter was in its
greatest heat.

The business of the Ecclesiastical Immunities, is carried so high here, that
the General of the Horse, who is by birth a Flemming, had almost felt it to his
cost; there were two under him, that had quarrelled, but were made Friends; and
one of these meeting the other some days after that, he embraced him with all
the shows of Friendship, but having a stiletto in his hand, he managed it so
fatally, that under all the appearences of tender Embraces, he killed him
outright, and presently he took Sanctuary in a Church, that was hard by; the
General hearing of this, resolved he would make an Example of the Murderer: but
not daring to drag him out of the Church, he set a Sentinel to the Doors,
reckoning that hunger would soon force him to come out: and tho the Priests
that belonged to the Church, carried him in some Provisions, yet that could not
serve him long. But the General was forced to discharge the Sentinels: for he
was Informed, that an Excommunication was coming out against him, for
distrurbing the devotions of those that went to the Church: and he knew that if
the Excommunication should be once given out, no body would so much as talk
with him or come near him after that: so he would not run that risque: and this
Assassinate had a fair occasion given him to make his escape: this was a good
Essay of the Zeal for the Immunity of places. Another fell out about the same
time near Leghorn, in which the sacredness of exempted persons was asserted in
a manner that was no less scandalous; a Priest was seized on, for a most horrid
Crime, either a Rape or a Murder, I do not remember which: but he who had no
mind to be taken, defended himself; and shot one of the Sbiri, upon which the
rest run away. So he apprehending that a stronger party would be sent, that
would be too hard for him, went and retired into a Wood, with his Fusee; and
some being sent to find him out, he had shot six or seven of them; yet after
all the sacred Character was like to save this execrable man; for while I was
at Leghorn I was told that an Excommunication was coming out, against all that
should violate the Ecclesiastical Immunities in his Person: and no doubt the
Great Duke will give way to this: for he is so entirely delivered up to his
Priests, and is become so excessively scrupulous, that to deliver himself from
those Troubles of Conscience, which many things, in the Administration of the
Government are apt to give him, he has found out an easy receipt, which if all
other Princes can be brought to follow, it will be very happy for their
Ministers. He then considers, that the only sure way to be Innocent in the
Conduct of Affairs, is not to know them at all: but to devolve them entirely on
his Ministers, who do all, without so much as communicating matters to him.

But the Viceroy of Naples is not so very tractable in those matters, as
appears by the vigor with which he has supported the secular Tribunal against
the Invasions of the Ecclesiastical Court. That which gave the rise to the
dispute, was, a suit that was between a Layman and a Churchman, before one of
the Judges of Naples, who decided in favor of the Layman; upon which it was
pretended, that this was a Violation of the Immunities of the Church: so the
Judge was Excommunicated; And upon it no body would willingly appear before
him, or so much as speak to him, so terrible a thing is that Thunder there: but
the Viceroy has showed on this occasion, that firmness that has appeared in all
his other Actions: and has also received Orders from Spain authorizing him to
keep his ground. The Judge is not only maintained in what he has done, but
continues still to sit on the bench, all people are forced to bring their
causes before him; and his Sentences are executed with resolution. This
Contempt put on the Ecclesiastical Censures by a Minister of Spain, and at a
time in which the Pope is so much in their Interests, is a little
Extraordinary. But the affront that the Viceroy put on an Auditor of the
Nuntio's, was yet much more provoking, for it was managed with a particular
care to make the Scorn very wounding as well as it was public. The Nuntio is
believed to do ill Offices in this matter; and his Auditor was known to be a
man of Liberties; it was found out that he went often to a Bordello; the
Viceroy therefore gave order to watch him so carefully, that the Sbiri should
be sure to find him in such circumstances, as should make his shame very
Conspicuous: so he was taken, and carried before the next Judge: the thing was
laid before hand, and the Judge refusing to meddle in it, the Sbiri (a sort of
men like our Bailiffs) carried him to another, and so made the round of all the
Judges in Naples; and every one of them refusing to meddle with the Auditor, the
Sbiri let him go, when the matter was made sufficiently public, by their
carrying him about to so manny places. The Nuntio complained of the Violation
of the Rights of a Public Minister, especially of so sacred a one. But the
Reparation that the Viceroy made, was a redoubling of the Affront: for he
ordered the Sbiri that had taken the Auditor, to be carried about all Naples
with an Inscription writ in Capital Letters, both on their Breasts and on their
Backs, mentioning the Crime for which they were thus led about, which was their
having disturbed the Nuntio's Auditor in his pleasures.

You will easily imagine that this was considered at Rome as a most outrageous
Affront; and indeed the Pope has carried the matter of the Regale in France so
very far, that it is hard to tell to what a degree this breach in Naples may be
also carried: for tho the Pope is most excessively ignorant in all those
Matters, yet he has another Quality, that is the only thing that is great in
him, and that would indeed become him very well, if he had a little more
Knowledge to govern it: and that is, that he is the wilfullest man alive; and
his temper is fearless enough to make him shut his Eyes upon all Danger.

It cannot be denied, but it is the Interest of the Pope, as he is a Temporal
Prince, to be of the side that is now the weakest; and that needs his support
the most: and therefore it is no wonder if he is so favorable to the Crown of
Spain, and the House of Austria: but after all, his carrying the business of
the Regale so far, against so great a King, and a King that has merited so much
from that Church, by his zeal against Heretics, is somewhat unaccountable:
After all the Havoc, that has been made both by Princes and Popes of the true
Liberties of the Church, and particularly after that shameful Bargain that was
made between them in the Concordate, it has a very ill grace to see a Pope make
this the subject of so great and so long a Dispute; and that the factious
Clamours of a few ill-natured and angry Priests, should have been so much
considered, as to interrupt the good understanding of the Courts of the Vatican
and Versailles. All this flowed from the ill opinion that the Pope had of the
Jesuits, which being known in France, the Iansenists thought it was high time
for them to recommend themselves to the Court of Rome, in hope of mortifying
the Jesuits: yet they could not with any decency carry the Papal Authority
high, after they had with so much force both of reason and learning, depressed
it as they had done: so they betook themselves to the first thing that offered
it self, that they knew would be very acceptable in Rome, which was the
asserting the Liberties of the Church, and the disputing the Kings Imposing the
Rights of the Regale (that is, the mean profits of Bishoprics, and the
Collating to Benefices without Cure, during the Vacancy) on the four southern
Provinces of France. I will not say more of a matter that is so well known,
only I will tell you, what a Doctor of the Sorbon said to me upon this subject;
I found he did not believe the Pope's Authority more than I did my self; and
yet he was one of those that indirectly opposed the Articles of the Clergy, and
the condemnation that was past on the Bishop of Strigonium's Censure of those
Articles; for his Authority and Learning gave a great turn to that matter: so
when I seemed amassed at this, that a man of his Principles, had acted as he had
done upon that occasion, he told me, he had no other Consideration before him
in that matter, but to mortify the Clergy of France, and to maintain the
Dignity of the Sorbon. It was not long since that in the Dispute about
Iansenius's matter, they had made the Pope not only Infallible in matters of
Right, but of Fact: and now because the Pope was not in the Interests of
France, the dispute of Infallibility, and of the Councils of Constance and
Basil, were again set on foot; all which would be given up, and the Pope would
be considered Infallible to morrow, if he were once more in the Interests of
France; and the Clergy, who had neither learning nor virtue, but made up all
Defects, by a slavish Obsequiousness, would be then as forward to magnify the
Infallibility, as they are now to depress it.

How far the Pope will embroil himself in this new business of the Franchises,
I do not know: he has expressed a great steadiness in it; and the truth is,
Rome is now so sunk from what it was, and the Franchises are so considerable a
part of the City, that their being covered from the Execution, both of Civil
and Criminal Justice, is a most horrible Disorder: and it seems reasonable
enough, that as in all other Courts, there is nothing now under the
Ambassadors Protection, but that which is within his Gates, so the same
Regulation should be made in Rome; where the extent of those privileged Places
is very great: yet afterall, if the French Ambassador, that is now on his way
thither, has positive Orders to maintain them, and has money enough to list men,
if the matter goes on to a more obstinate Dispute; It will be no hard matter
for him to raise such a Revolt in Rome, that neither the Popes Guards, nor
those in the Castle of St. Angelo, will be able to subdue it: and if this
matter goes on so far, the French will very probably cut off all Annates, and
find a shorter way of granting of Bulls within the Kingdom. It is said, that
while some have represented the apparent Inconveniences of a Rupture with
France to the Pope, and that he was in no condition to resist that mighty
Power: He answered, that he would suffer Martyrdom in maintaining the Rights of
St. Peter. It must be confessed, that there was something in this saying that
was more Magnanimous, than prudent. And indeed the Popes way of treating with
Ambassadors, has somewhat in it that comes nearer the simplicity of the
Fishermen, the more modern Politics. His dry Answer to our Ambassador, when
he threatened him that he would leave Rome, and go back to England, if he were
not better used; Lei e Badrone; You are Master of that as you please; had an
air in it that I should have been much pleased with, if it had fallen on any
other than on the King's Minister.

His Conduct of the Revenue is an unaccountable thing; for if there is not a
vast Treasure laid up, or a most prodigious deal of Wealth secretly conveyed to
his Family, it is not to be imagined what has become of all that Revenue that
he has raised, in which the Income is so vastly disproportioned to the expense,
that the most prying men do not know what is become of it. The War with the
Turks has not cost him so much as is believed; on the contrary, many think that
he has got by it; and that the Taxes which he has laid on the Clergy of Italy
amount to more than he has laid out upon it: It is certain, it has not cost him
very much. He retrenched all Expenses to so great a degree, that even the
public Charities were lessened: for in Lent, there is a weekly Charity of a
Iulio, or a six pence, to all the poor that come and ask it: and the poor
commonly brought their Children with them, so that they got as many Iulio's as
they brought Children; but the Pope limited this, that no Charity should be
given to any under such an Age, as I remember it was below ten year old. The
Administration of the Revenue is indeed the only thing that he understands, and
in which he imploys all his thoughts: and it was believed, that the true Secret
of the greatest number of the Cardinals in the last Promotion, was the
Advantages that he made by the sale of the Offices which they held, and that
fell to the Pope upon their Advancement; out of which it was thought that he
gained above a Million: and upon this I will tell you, what I have learned
concerning the aversion that two of the Cardinals, Taia and Ricci, expressed to
the Purple in the Promotion that was made five year ago; this was magnified in
several Books, that were printed out of Italy, as somewhat that seemed to
approach to the best Ages of the Primitive Times, when men refused to accept of
so great a Dignity, that brought them within a step of the Supreme Elevation:
but the truth of this matter was, they were both men of Fourscore, and not like
to live long; as they both died within a year of their Preferment: they had
very good Employments, which they had bought, and which by their accepting the
Purple were to fall into the Popes hands: besides that, the new Dignity was not
to be entered upon without a great Expense: so all this being considered, the
virtue of refusing so chargeable a Dignity, in men that were more concerned for
their Families, than for that small remnant of life that was before them, was
not so very Extraordinary.

But since I am upon the discourse of promoting of Cardinals, I will tell you a
remarkable Instance of a Promotion, that I do not remember to have met with in
any Book; and the Dignity of the Person and of the Family descended from him
makes me think it worth the relating; and the rather because I had it from no
ordinary person, but from one of the exactest men in Rome, and who has taken
the greatest pains to be well Informed in the Modern History. I had seen
several pictures of Clara Farnese, for there are more than one of them in the
Palestrina: so I knowing nothing concerning her, asked her story, which in
short was this: that she was P. Paul the 3d's Sister, and the person to whom he
owed his Cardinals Cap, and by Consequence all that followed upon it, tho he
rewarded her ill for it; for he poisoned both her and his Mother, that he might
have all their Wealth; their Father was a poor man, that went about selling
Saucidges and such sort of stuff. Clara was married young, and was soon a
Widow; she was a lovely woman, but no Extraordinary beauty: her Brother was
bred to Letters, and was one of those poor Churchmen, that was looking about on
all hands where he might find a Patron; when of a sudden his Sisters charms and
her artifices together raised him to a height, to which he was far enough from
pretending at that time. On a great occasion Clara Farnese was so near P.
Alexander the 6th, and was so much in his Eye and in his thoughts, that he
ordered one that was about him, to enquire who she was, and where she lived:
Instruments upon such occasions are never wanting to great Persons: and
notwithstanding the Popes great Age, yet his Vices hung still so close to him,
that he could have no quiet till Clara Farnese was brought him. She resolved to
manage her self on this occasion, and to raise her price all that was possible,
so a Cardinals Cap to her Brother was both asked and granted: a promise of it
was made at least, upon which she came and attended on the old lewd Pope: yet
when the next Promotion came to be in agitation, the Proposition for Abbot
Farnese was rejected by Caesar Borgia with scorn; he had never been a slave to
his word, and he had no mind that his Father should observe it on this occasion.

The way of a Promotion is this, the Pope setles the List of the Cardinals, and
writes down all their names in a paper with his own hand; and in a Consistory,
when all other business is ended, he throws down the Paper on the Table, and
says to the Cardinals, habetis Fratres; you have now some Brethren. One of the
Secretaries upon that takes up the Paper, and reads the Names aloud; and the
Sbiri are at the door, and as soon as one is named, they run for it, to see who
shall be able to carry the first news of it to the party concerned.

Upon this occasion, the Pope after he had concerted the Promotion with his
Son, writ down all the names. Clara Farnese was in great apprehensions for her
Brother, so she being to pass that night with the Pope, rise when the old man
was fast asleep, and searched his Pocket, and found the Paper, but her Brothers
name was not in it: then she set her self with great care to counterfeit the
Popes hand; and writ her Brothers name the first in the List: next morning she
kept the Pope as long in bed as was possible; till word was brought him, that
the Consistory was set, and that the Cardinals were all come: for she reckoned
that the less time that the Pope had for being dressed, there was the less Danger
of his looking into his Paper: So without ever opening it, he went into the
Consistory, and according to Custom, he threw down the list on the Table: but
to the great surprise of him, and of all that were upon his Secrets, the first
name that was read, was that of Abbot Farnese; and it seems the Pope thought it
better to let the matter pass, than to suffer the true secret of the business
to break out. It is well that the Doctrine of the Intention, does not belong to
the Creation of Cardinals, otherwise here was a Nullity with a Witness. Thus
begun that long course of P. Paul the thirds greatness, who lived above 50
years after this, and laid the Foundation of the Family of Parma, which he saw
quite overthrown, his Son being assassinated in his own time; and both his
Grandchildren having revolted against him, which, as was believed,
precipitated his death, tho he was then Fourscore.

But now I return to the present Pope; for I have writ you a very loose sort of
a Letter, all made up of digressions. His aversion to the Order of the Jesuits
is very visible; for he takes all occasions to mortify them; and every thing
that is proposed to him, thrives the worse for their sakes, if he believes they
are concerned in it; which was given by all at Rome, as the true reason of the
cold usage that the English Ambassador found there. Indeed the Pope is not
singular in the hard thoughts that he has of that Order: I never saw an
Indifferent man in all Italy, that was of another mind: they do generally look
upon them as a Covetous, Fraudulent, Intriguing, and turbulent sort of people;
who can never be at quiet, unless they reign: who are men of no Morals, that
will stick at nothing that may raise the Wealth and Power of their Order: and
at Rome they do not stick to say, that all the concerns of the Roman Catholic
Religion must needs miscarry in England, because the Jesuits are so much in
credit there. And indeed the Extravagantly vain Letters that they write to Rome
out of England, are such contextures of Legends, that ever since I saw them, I
know what value I ought to put on their Letters that come from the Indies and
other remote Countries; for when they take so great a Liberty when the
Falsehood is so easily found out, what must me think of the Relations that come
from places at such a distance, that they may lie with more assurance and less
hazard of discovery.

The Letter that was writ in February last from Liege to the Jesuits at
Friburg, of which so many Copies were given, that it got to the Press at last,
was a good Instance of their Vanity, and of the small regard that they have to
a Prince, that has as they give out, so much for them. Their representing the
King, as so concerned in the Interests of their Order, that he espoused them
all as if they were his own, that he was now become a Son of the Society, and
that he was received into a communication of the Merits of the Order, (tho a
share in their Treasure upon Earth were a much more considerable thing, than of
their Treasure that is Invisible,) Their setting out the Kings Zeal for their
Religion, in such high terms, that they say he is resolved to die a Martyr
rather than not to succeed in his design of changing the Religion, and
converting the Nation: and this at a time when the King was declaring himself
so much for Liberty of Conscience: and their affirming that the King is become
bigoted to so high a degree, as to refuse to suffer a Priest to kneel down and
do the duty of a Subject in kissing his Hand, and to tell him, that he himself
ought rather to kneel down, and to kiss his Hands: all these are such
Extravagant strains, that by the boldness of them it is Evident, that they were
writ by a Jesuit, and my Copy came to me from so good a hand, and so near the
source, that how many Falsehoods soever may be in that Letter* I can assure
you, it is no Imposture, but was really writ by those of Liege.

In a word, all the Romans have so very ill an Opinion of the Jesuits, that as
soon as any piece of News comes from England, that is not favorable to their
Affairs, one finds all, from the highest to the lowest, agree in the same short
reflection; Thus it must ever be, where the Jesuits have such a share in the
Councils. A man long practiced in the Court of Rome, told me, it was impossible
it could be otherwise, for all the chief men of that Order are kept teaching in
their Schools, till they are almost forty years of age; and by that means
Pedantry, a disputatious and Imperious humor, and a peevish littleness of
soul, becomes natural to them, so that an Eminent man here said to me, It was
Impossible that matters could go better than they did in England, as long as
the Morals and the Politics of the Jesuits, and the Understandings and
Courage of the Irish, were so much relied on.

But besides all these General Considerations, there are some things in the
Constitution of the Order of the Jesuits that give those at Rome reason enough
to be on their Guard against them. There are two things peculiar to this Order
that make it very formidable; the one is, that those who have made the fourth
vow are capable of no Preferment, unless it be to be Cardinals, and then they
are indeed capable of Bishoprics. In most of the other Orders, every man has
his own private Interest, and his particular views; so that they are not always
looking after the concerns of their Order. But a Jesuit can receive no Honor
but from his Order, therefore he Consecrates himself to it, and advances the
Interests of the Society with all possible zeal, knowing that there is no other
way left him to advance his own Interests, but this. So that Hope being one of
the great Springs of humane Nature, a Jesuit, who hopes for nothing but from
his Order, must be extremely devoted to it. Besides this, a Jesuit fears
nothing but from his Order: They have not a Cardinal Protector, as the other
Orders have, to whom an Appeal lies from the sentence of the General of the
Order: but the Jesuits are a body more shut up within themselves; for the
sentence of the General is definitive, and can never be reviewed, no Appeal
lying from it: whenever a Pope comes that dares mortify them, he will open a
way for Appeals, for till that is done, the General of the Jesuits is the most
Absolute and the most Arbitrary Sovereign that is in the World.

All these things concur to Unite almost all the several Interests in Rome
against this Society, which yet is strong enough to support it self against
them all: they have the Mission generally in their hands; for the Congregation
de Propaganda, pays a small pension of 20 Crowns to all the Secular Priests
that are on the Mission, whereas the Jesuits bear the expenses of their own
Missionaries, to whom they allow an 100 Crowns a year: and so those of the
Propaganda being willing to be eased of a charge, accept of the Missionaries
that the Jesuits offer them: and they find their account in this. Their
Missionaries are powerfully recommended, so they are quickly received into
Families, especially where there are young children to be bred up, or Estates to
be managed: for in these two lies their strength: but they never forget their
Order, for which they are as so many Factors every where: and they draw vast
Presents from all places to the House that returns them their Appointments;
whereas the poor Secular Priest must make a shift to live out of the small
allowance that he has from the Congregation de Propaganda fide, and out of what
he can raise by his Masses. Therefore there is nothing that they desire so
much, as to see Protestant States that give a Tolerance to Popery, grow once so
wise as to shut out all the Regulars, and above all the Jesuits; and to admit
none but Secular Priests: for the former, as they are so many Agents, to return
all the wealth that they can possibly draw together, to the house to which they
belong, so they are united together in one Body, under a most strict Obedience
to their General, which may be as great a prejudice to the Peace and Security
of a Country, as the other is to its Wealth and Abundance: on the other hand,
the Secular Priests are generally good-natured men, who are only subject to
their Bishop, and that have no designs upon the Government, nor the Concerns of
any House that is in Foreign Parts lying upon them: so that since those of
that Communion have the full exercise and all the Consolation of their Religion
from Secular Priests, even those in Rome it self wonder at the Error of
Protestant States, who have not Learned long ago to make this difference in the
Toleration that they allow: And one that has been almost 50 years in the most
refined practices of the Court of Rome, said to me with a very sensible
concern, how happy would we here reckon our selves, if we could have a
Toleration of our Religion allowed in England, tho it were with an Eternal
Exclusion of all Regulars and Jesuits? and added, that if he saw good grounds
for making it, he himself would go and carry the Proposition to those of the
Propaganda.

And now I am sure, I have rambled over a great Variety of matter, and have
made a shift to bring in to one place or other of this Letter, a great many
particulars, that I could have hardly brought out in an exactness of Method,
without a much greater compass of words, and a greater stifness of form: but I
thought it was more natural, and by consequence, that it would be more
acceptable to you, to make them follow one another, in an easy and unforced
contexture. I have discoursed all these matters often over and over again since
I came into Italy: but I have read very little concerning them; therefore there
may be many things here, that I mention because they were new to me, that
perhaps are no news to those that are much more Learned than my self. I have
told you all that I could gather upon these subjects from the wisest and
worthiest men that I found here: I have writ of all matters freely to you,
because I am in a Country where freedom of discourse, in matters of State
especially, is practiced in its utmost extent.

I have yet matter for another long letter, in which the matters of Religion
will have no share; for I will end all these in this: and therefore there is one
piece of the Superstition of Lombardy, that affected me too sensibly, not to
lead me to bestow a severe censure upon it. I went through that Country in
October and November, and was often in great distress, because it was not
possible to find a Glass of Wine, that could be drunk, all being either dead or
sour. At Parma I waited on an Eminent Person, and lamented to him the misery of
Travallers, since no Wine was to be found that could be drunk: he told me, the
Natives felt this much more sensibly than Strangers did, with whom it was soon
over, but they were condemned to suffer that every year; and tho he himself had
Vineyards, that produced much more Wine than he could consume, yet he could not
be Master of a good Glass of Wine, for a great many Months of the year; since
all the people were possessed with this Superstition, that it was Indispensably
necessary to mix it with Water in the Cask, that by this means it drunk dead or
sour for so great a part of the year: and all that could be said could not beat
this out of the heads of those that dressed their Wine: but he added, that the
Priests, who confirmed the vulgar in this Conceit, had found a Device to excuse
their own Wine from this hard fate: for they said, it must needs be kept
unmixed, since in the Sacrament the Wine must be pure, and is then only to be
mixed with Water; and thus in all their Cellars good Wine is to be found, where
there is not a drop any where else that can be drunk: one would think that this
is to abuse the Weakness and Credulity of the People, a little too grossly, when
they condemn all the laity to drink ill Wine, whereas they themselves drink it
pure, which is felt more sensibly by the Laity, than the depriving them of the
Chalice, and the engrossing it to the Priest in the Sacrament. Yet the Excise
that is laid on the Wine in Florence, has taught the Inhabitants a point of
Wisdom, that those on the other side of the Appenins are not capable of; for
the Excise being raised upon all their Wine, the People who have no mind to pay
Excise for Water, keep their Wine pure, so perhaps some such severity in the
Government in Lombardy, may likewise reform them in this piece of absurd
Superstition, which I felt too sensibly with all the effects that naturally
follow the drinking of sour Liquor, not to Insist upon it with some more than
ordinary concern.

But since I am upon the point, of the Arts that the Convents have to live
easy, I will end this Letter with an account of a House that was very
Extraordinary, which I saw in my way to Italy through Bavaria; Etal, an Abbey of
Benedictines, that by its foundation is bound only to maintain an Abbot and 25
Monks. It was founded by Lewis Duke of Bavaria, that was Emperor: the building
is not answerable to the Endowment, which is so vast, that they keep a stable
of 150 horses, which is indeed one of the best in Germany, the horses are of
great value, and well kept: they hunt perpetually, and live in as great an
abundance of all things as the Duke of Bavaria himself can do; and yet these
are Religious men, that are dead to the World.

I cannot forget to tell you a very beautifully diversified prospect that we
had at Burgo, a little Town in the hills of Trent, as we looked out at window,
We saw before us a lovely Meadow in all the Beauty and Pride of the Month of
May: a little beyond that was a rising Bank all covered over with Trees in
their full verdure: beyond that the ground rise higher, and the Trees had not
yet put out their leaves, and things looked dead and dry, as after Harvest: and
beyond that there was a huge hill, all covered on the top with snow: so that
here we saw in one prospect all the seasons of the year: upon which one of the
Company made this reflection, that if any Painter should in one Landscape; mix
all these things, that were then in our eye, he would be thought a man of an
Irregular fancy, whose designs did not agree with nature; and yet we had them
all then before us. I will make no Excuses nor Compliments: for those things do
not mend matters, and therefore I send you my Letter, such as it is, just as it
has grown under my Pen: and so Adieu.

POSTSCRIPT.
I find I have forgot to mention one very extravagant piece of Devotion, to
which I was a Witness at Rome, on the 17 of January, which is St. Anthonys day,
that was the great Father of the Monastic Orders, whose Life is pretended to
be writ by S. Athanase; all Horses and other Beasts of Burden are believed to
be in an especial manner under his Protection: and the Monks of his Order, have
a House near St. Maria Maggiore; thither all the Horses, Mulets and Asses of
Rome, and all round the City, are brought that day to the door of the Church,
where some Monks stand with a Broom in holy water, and sprinkle it upon them
all: many Dogs and Lambs, and other favorite Animals, are also brought to
share in this Aspersion: which is believed to have a most special virtue: the
force of this hallowing is believed to be such, that if any should fail to
bring his Horses thither, all the Neighborhood would look on those that have
no portion in it, as accursed Animals, upon whom some unlucky Accident were
hanging; which is so firmly believed, that none would hire a Horse or a Mulet,
that had not been so sprinkled. So that from the Popes Horses down to the
poorest man in Rome, all are brought thither; but this is not all, the
profitable part of this piece of Folly is, that every one brings a Present; the
richer sort send Purses of Money; some give great Wax- Lights, all stuck full
of Testons (a piece of 20 pence) the poorer bring either smaller pieces of
Money, or Presents of Wine, Oil, Bread, or such things as they can afford: but
in a Word, no man comes empty; so that this is the Market Day of those Monks,
in which for some Gallons of Water and Salt, they get more Presents, than would
serve to maintain them for seven years: they quickly convert all that is not
necessary for them into Money: and by this means they are vastly rich. When I
saw all this, I could not but think that men must become first Beasts
themselves, before things of this kind could pass upon them: but since I have
added this in a Postscript, rather than give my self the trouble to make it
come in pertinently into my Letter I will add another particular that is writ
me from Rome the sixth of October 1687.

I am told, that men are now more puzzled in their thoughts with Relation to the
business of Molinos than ever. It was Visible that his Abjuration was only a
pretended thing; for in effect he has abjured nothing: his party believe, that
they are very numerous, not only in Rome, Italy, Spain, and France, and in all
these parts of the world, but that they have many followers even in America it
self: one sees now in almost all the Churches in Rome some of them praying in
corners, with their Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, and all in Tears, and
Sighs; which is no small trouble to those who thought they had quite routed
them: but find they are not so much quasht as it was thought they would have
been by the mock Triumph that was made upon Molinos. Nor do they believe a word
of those Reports that are spread of his Leudness: they say, there was no Proof
ever brought of it; and that there are many thousands in Rome, of both sexes,
that conversed much with him, who have all possible reason to conclude, that
all these stories that were given out concerning him, are Impudent Calumnies,
set about only to blast Him and his Doctrine: and the truth is, this seems to
be much confirmed by the Bull that condemns his Books, and his Doctrine; in
which no mention is made of his ill Life and Hypocrisy, which had been very
probably done if the matter had been well proved: since this would not only
have satisfied people, with relation to him, but would have very much confirmed
the Accusations of those horrid Opinions that are laid to his Charge, Which had
appeared with much more Evidence, if it had been found that his Life had agreed
with those Tenets: for tho it had not been a just Inference to conclude him
guilty of those things, because they were charged on him in the Bull, yet one
may reckon it almost a sure Inference, that he is not guilty of them, since the
Bull does not tax him for them.



A THIRD LETTER, Concerning some of the STATES OF ITALY; And of their present
Interest and Policy.
SIR;
I Threw into my former Letter, all those general Reflections on the State of
Religion, and the Maxims of the Romans, concerning it, that I could gather
together during my Stay at Rome. Now I quit that subject, and shall at present
entertain you with some Political Observations, which will be so much the more
acceptable, because I fancy they will be new to you.

But before I go so far as Italy, I will give you an account of a very curious
Salt-work, that I saw in my way to Italy, at Sode near Francfort. It belongs to
Mr. Malapert, and has been wrought above 60 years; but the present Master of
it, as he is a man of great worth, so he is very Ingenious, and has much
perfected that, which was managed at a much greater Expense before he undertook
it. There rises at the foot of some little Hills, which produce a very good
Wine, a Spring of Water, that is so very little brackish to the taste, that one
will hardly think it possible to fetch much Salt out of it; yet it has such a
taste of Salt, that there was room for Industry to prepare this Water, so that
without such an expense in Fire as should eat out the profit, it might turn to
a good account; which Mr. Malapert seems to have carried as far as is possible.
The Meadow that lies in the levil with this Spring, is Impregnate with Salt,
Iron, Nitre, and Sulphur: but Salt is that which prevails: first then, a Pump
is put upon this Spring, which is managed by a Watermil, and throws up the
Water about fifteen Foot high; and then it goes by a Pipe into vast Machines,
that are made to receive it.

There is a great piece of ground Enclosed, in which there are 24 vast Chests
or Cisterns for the Water, in two stories, 12 in a story, the one just over the
other; they are about seventy foot long, twelve broad, and two deep; over every
one of these, there is a roof of boards, supported by wooden Pillars, of 12
foot high; which covers them from Rainwater, but yet the water within them is
in a full exposition to the Sun; those roofs are hung with straw, upon which
some that manage the work, are often throwing up the Water, so that a great
deal of the Phlegm is Imbibed by the Straw, and the more fixed parts fall
down: according to the heat of the Season, this Evaporation of the watery parts,
goes quicker or slower; there is a Gage, by which they Weigh the Water; and so
they know how the Evaporation advances; it is of Silver, and is so made, that
according to the weight of the Water, it sinks in it to such a depth; and so by
the degrees marked upon it, they know how heavy the Water is: according then to
the heat of the season, and the progress of the Evaporation, they let the Water
out of one Cistern into another, by a Pipe, and when it has past through the 12
that are in the upper story, then it is conveyed down by Pipes into the 12 that
are below, and in them all they continue still to throw up the water upon the
Withs of Straw, that are over head.

In a word, this Evaporation discharges the Water of so much of its Phlegin,
that the same quantity of water, that weighed one ounce when it was drawn from
the Spring, weighs six ounces in this last Chest: and all this rolling about of
the Water from Chest to Chest lasts sometimes not above twenty day's; but if
the season is only moderately hot, it will be longer a doing; sometimes it will
not be done in a month's time: after that the Water is brought to a very
considerable degree of Saltness, it is conveyed into two great Cauldrons, that
are 13 foot long, ten broad, and 3 deep; under which there are vast Furnaces,
where in a most violent Fire of 11 or 12 hours continuance, the Water receives
its last Evaporation; and when that is done, the Salt which is become thick,
but is still moist, is taken up in Baskets of Willows, and placed about the
wall of the Furnace: and so the humidity that remains in it drops out, and it
is brought to its last degree of perfection: out of it, a Tyth is paid; of
which the Elector of Ments has one half, and the City of Francfort the other.
This Salt is exceeding good and pleasant to the taste. It is much solider and
more like the Portugal Salt, than like our Newcastle salt. It serves very well
all the uses of the Kitchen, and Table: but it has not strength enough to
preserve things long. There are vast quantities made of it in hot and dry
Summers: for the Chests are always kept full: and thus all Franconia is
furnished with Salt of its own Production at very moderate rates; for there is
so great a lessening of the Expense of the fire by this conveyance of the water
through so many Chests, that it is afforded very cheap. This I thought deserved
well that I should Interrupt the earnestness in which you be, to hear what I
have to tell you concerning Italy, so that I hope you will not be ill pleased
with it, especially if your curiosity after the History of nature is as great
as it was.

I now go over in one step all the Journey that I made from hence to Italy,
which is certainly the highest situated Country in Europe: for as the Rhine
and Danube, that rise in the Alps, and run down to the Ocean and the Euxine,
shows you that all that tract of ground to those Seas is a constant descent,
so when one comes to the Alps, either on the French or on the German side, he
is a great many days in climbing up those vast mountains, but the descent on
the Italian side is very Inconsiderable. This appears yet more sensible when
one comes from Turin, where the ascent up Mount Senice is but a work of a few
hours: and yet from the height of that hill, one is in a constant descent till
he comes to Lions. I will not carry you about Italy, to tell you the remarkable
things that are there; but will only tell you some particulars that made the
greatest Impression on my self, and which were not seen by Dr. Burnet.

In my way from Parma to Mantua, I past at Guastale, which is half way between
them, 18 miles distant from both; where I saw a scene that surprised me. This
Town is situated on the southside of the Po, at half a miles distance from it:
It was a considerable branch of the Territory of Mantua, that was given off to
one of the Cadets of that Family, and was settled in an intail to the Heir male.
The best part of the Revenue of this small Principality, was a Duty that was
paid for all merchandises that went or came upon the Po, which when the Trade
of Italy was in a more flourishing condition than it is at present, was farmed
for above Threescore thousand Crowns. The situation of this place makes it yet
much more considerable than it is in it self; for as it lies in the
neighborhood of the Principalities of Parma and Modena, and is not far from
the Popes Territory, so if this place is Master of the Po, by crossing it, the
detachments that may be sent out from it are not only in the Territory of
Mantua, but they may be also in a very few hours both in the Milanese and in
the Venetian Dominion; so that Guastale in some respect may be esteemed the
Center of all the States of Lombardy. The Duke of Mantua married the Daughter
of the last Duke of Guastale, who died in the year 1680. and his Nephew Don
Vespasiano Gonzaga, who was then in the Spanish service, was acknowledged to be
his undoubted Heir: so he came and took peaceable possession of his Duchy: He
was extremely much beloved by his Subjects, and thought himself at quiet in the
enjoyment of his new Dignity: but all this was soon overturned; for one came to
him from the Court of France, to let him know, that that Great King could not
be wanting to his Ally the Duke of Mantua, to whom Guastale belonged of right,
his Duchess being the Daughter and Heir of the late Duke, and that therefore
since he had usurped the just right of another, the French King warned him,
that if he did not withdraw of his own accord, he would give order to put the
D. of Mantua in possession. It was to no purpose to argue against all this, and
to show the Messenger that Guastale was a Fee intailed on the Heir male, of
which there had never been the least dispute: But reasons taken from the equity
of the thing, are seldom thought strong enough to hold the balance against
reasons of State: so the poor Prince being in no condition to resist so
powerful an Enemy, was forced to abandon his Right, and to withdraw, and he was
again entertained by the Spaniards. For tho there was a sort of a fortification
cast about Guastale 50 or 60 year ago, yet as that was at best an
Inconsiderable defense, so even that was now quite ruined. Upon his retiring
there came a detachement of 300 Men from Cassale, who took possession of
Guastale, and continue there to this day: but this had been no great matter, if
it had not gone further: some years passed after the new Duke was driven away
before the true design of this matter appeared. The world was first to be laid
to sleep. The Town it self is composed of about six or seven thousand
Inhabitants; and so the small Garrison in it seemed of no great Consequence,
and was rather an Advantage than a prejudice to the Town; they were kept in
very good order, and they paid punctually for every thing that they called
for: only they brought the place into the Method of a Garrison; for all must
come in and go out of the Town only at one Gate.

But in the beginning of the year 1686. the mystery of this matter begun to
appear: for Mr. du Plessis, a French Engineer, came thither, under the pretense
of repairing the old Fortifications, and designed a Noble and a Regular
Fortification: It is to be a Hexagone, with all necessary Outworks; and there
is a great Splanade that is to be made round the place, and all the houses or
trees that are within a considerable distance are to be beat down. In a word,
the design is great, and will be executed in all the exactness of the modern
Fortification; so that the advantage of the situation, will make it the most
Important place of Italy, and that which will bridle all Lombardy, and be able
to put it all under Contribution upon every occasion. The Works were begun in
April 1686. and ever since they have kept 400 men constantly at work, upon the
pay of a Iulio a day: another year will go near to finish it. And yet tho here
the justest ground possible, is given to alarm all Italy, none seems to be so
much as concerned at it. The Venetians, that have at all other times, valued
themselves upon their prospect of Danger, even at the greatest distance, either
do not see this, or dare not own their fear. It is true, all this is carried on
in the name of the D. of Mantua: but it is as certain, that tho it lies so near
him, he has never been at the pains to go and see it: It has never been so much
as once considered by his Council; nor is his Revenue in such a condition as to
bear such an increase of Expense: and yet it passes among the people there,
that this is a great strength, that is to be made to keep the French out of
Italy; and some Priests that are corrupted to serve the French Interests
promote this Fiction. If the Venetians look on till this is finished, they will
do very well to assure themselves of their new Conquests in the Morea, for
their Ancient ones in the Terra firma of Italy will probably fail them very
quickly.

All those of the Territory, who know well that their Princes name is only made
use of, for the fortifying this place, look on with great regret, while they
see a Work advancing so fast, that is to be a Citadel upon all their Country:
of which an Ancient Person of Quality, that is there spoke to me with so much
feeling, that he could hardly forbear weeping, when he showed me that Yoke of
Slavery under which they were falling. I saw, during my stay in Mantua, how
much all the sensible people there, are concerned to see their Prince deliver
himself up so blindly to the French Interests: they told me, that since his
childhood he has been so beset with the Instruments and Agents of that Court,
that his Inclinations for them are become as another nature in him: he was not
out of Childhood, when almost all his Domestics, and his masters, both for
Languages and Arms, were furnished him from thence. His putting Cassale in the
hands of that Monarch, was one good Evidence, and now the business of Guastale
is another, to show that they have gained such an Ascendant over his Spirit,
and have Insinuated themselves so much into him, in all those fatal hours of
Liberty which he allows himself, that it is not thought he will stick at any
thing that they demand of him, unless it be at his own going into France; to
which he has been much solicited: but it is not so much as doubted, that if he
goes once into that Country, he will never come out of it again. So he is not
like to be wrought on so far; and if it were not for some such apprehension, it
is like enough that he might undertake the Journey; for he does not love
staying in his Principality so well, but takes pleasure to ramble about; and he
devests himself often of the Ceremonies of his Greatness, that so he may take a
freer career in those Exercises, that he loves better than his Affairs: and a
Prince, whose Revenue is none of the greatest, and whose expense is often
Irregular, who has an active Envoy always near him, and who is ever ready to
furnish him with Money, falls naturally into a great dependence on that Court.

Of this a very Extraordinary Instance appeared not long ago, in the Disgrace
of the Marquisses of Cannosse and Palliotti: the first of these is his Kinsman,
and has served him now for many years, with as much Fidelity as Affection; the
second was Captain of his Guards, and Governor of the Castle of Mantua which
commands the Town. These then had the Courage as well as the Fidelity, to lay
before him the Ruin that he was like to bring upon himself as well as upon all
Italy, by delivering himself up so entirely to the French Councils, and by
putting them first in possession of Guastale, and now suffering then to Fortify
it, which was in effect the delivering up of his Principality, and of all his
People to them; who looked upon themselves as brought already under a Foreign
Yoke: they also represented to him the danger of having almost no other
Domestics but Frenchmen about him, who were all as so many Spies upon him, and
upon all that were near him, and that were very exact in giving the French
Envoy Mr. Baumbeau an account of every thing that he either said or did. These
Demonstrances made some Impressions on the Duke, and he promised to them to
find out an effectual Remedy to all those Evils: But this was not a secret
very long; Money and Spies find out every thing; and it is possible that they
who gave the Duke these faithful Advices might have been engaged to it, either
by some Instruments of the Court of Spain, or of the Republic of Venice: yet
the truth of this is not known, but the French Envoy made a shift to charge
them so heavily, that he got them both to be made close Prisoners; in this
condition they were when I was at Mantua, and no body durst so much as mention
their Names, much less Interpose for them.

All the Princes of Italy, are as Absolute in their own Dominions, and as much
delivered from all the bonds of Law, as some greater Kings are, so their
subjects are at their Mercy, both for their Lives, Liberties, and Estates: and
this is that from which one may take a sure measure of the weakness of Italy.
Subjects that retain still all the due liberties of humane nature, and that are
not under an Arbitrary but a Legal Government; fight for themselves, as well
as for their Prince; but if they are already as miserable as they can be, so
that a change may perhaps put them in a better condition, but can hardly put
them in a worse, they will not much concern themselves in their Princes
Quarrel, since they only fight for the continuance, if not for the increase of
their Slavery.

But now to return to the Duke of Mantua; the French Envoy has since that time
stuck closer to him than ever; he indeed waits always on him, sometimes acting
like an Officer of his Household, and at other times like the Governor of his
Person: he made the tour of Italy with him this year, and waited on him to
Millan, Genoa, Florence, Rome, Naples and Venice, where they passed the
Carnavall together: and he took a most particular care that the Duke should
meet with none in all those places, that might open his eyes, to let him see
the Ruin that he is bringing upon himself; yet after all, one of his
Secretaries, had still the Integrity and Courage to give him such faithful
Councels, as had been fatal to others: yet the Duke used him better than he had
done the two Marquisses: for tho the French Spies discovered him likewise, yet,
nothing could be done to hurt him in the Dukes good opinion, therefore it was
resolved to take another method to tear so dangerous a man from him; so he
being sent to negotiate some business at the Court of Turin, was often invited
to go a Hunting, which he resisted for a great while, tho the French
Ambassador pressed him much to it; at last he was overcome, but his sport was
fatal to him; for he was seized on, and carried by a small Party sent from
Pignarol as is believed. In short, he is in the hands of the French, and it is
said in Italy, that he is clapped up in St. Margarite one of the little Islands
in the Mediterranean sea. This matter was at first highly resented by the Duke,
but a little time will show whether the earesses of the Court of France can
soften him in this matter or not; for if they can lay him asleep after such an
Attempt, then all persons will conclude that he is so much in their power, that
none will dare to run the hazard of undeceiving him any more.

Those in the Mountferrat feel what a Neighbor Cassal is to them; that
Imperious way of proceeding, without having any great regard to Justice, or to
Contracts and Aggreements, that is practiced in France, begins to be felt here
likewise: of which many smaller Instances were given me, but I will tell you
two that were more remarkable; when the Garrison was first settled in Cassal,
those of the Mountferrat held the price of their Corn so high, that it was hard
to furnish the Garrison with Bread: so some of Piedmont undertook to supply
them for two years at 21 Livers the Ration, and the bargain being made* they
bought in great stores, and so they quickly filled their Granaries: upon this
some in the Mountferrat came and offered to serve the Garrison at 14 Livers the
Ration, upon which the other bargain tho made as sure as any such contract can
possibly be made, was broke, and the undertakers were ruined by it. The other
story was, that in order to the building the Fortifications, some Masons made a
bargain at 32 Livers such a measure, so they brought together a great number of
Workmen, and were at work; when others came and offered to perform the work at
28 Livers, for which the others had 32 Livers, only they demanded a
considerable advance; so the first Bargain was presently broken, to the great
loss of the Undertakers: but the 2d Undertakers, that had Money advanced them,
found they had made a Bargain that was too hard for them to execute, so they
ran away with the Money, to the great joy of the Country. He that told me
this, said, that perhaps it surprised the Italians, who were not yet acquainted
with such things; but nothing of that kind would seem extraordinary in France,
which was so much accustomed to such a way of proceeding that he gave me a
particular account of so many, that he had reason to know well, as would fill a
Book: but that which touched him most sensibly, was the Fonds that was made for
an East India Company, to which the King gave in three Millions, with this
positive Assurance, that all the Losses and Damage of the Company should fall
on that Stock. This was a great encouragment to draw in men, to put Money into
the stock, and the Court set on the Project with so much Zeal, that Letters
were writ to all the great Bodies and Towns of France, that were considered
rather as Commands than Desires: yet after all were engaged, upon the first
occasion the Kings three Millions were taken out of the stock, and the rest
were left to shift for themselves.

But I must here give you an account of a very Extraordinary Transaction in the
Court of Turin, which is likewise thought an effect of the Authority that the
Councils of France have likewise there. The Marquis de Pianesse the son of him
that set on the Massacre of the Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont 34 years
ago, was in great favor with the late Duke of Savoy, but the war of Genoa
miscarried so in his hands in the year 1672 that the Duke could never forgive
him that matter; of which the Resentments were so quick when he died, that he
left a charge on Madame Royale, never to forgive him, nor to Employ him: he
upon his Disgrace retired into France and was so well entertained there, that
he had Interest enough to procure a Recommendation from the King to the
Duchess of Savoy in his favor; but her Excuse was so reasonable, being
founded on the Orders she had received from the Duke on his Death bed, that
there was no reply to be made to it: yet afterward a Nephew of his, the Count
Massin, was so happy in the Dutchesses favor, that he found he only wanted a
Head as able as his Uncles was to support him in that credit, which her favor
gave him: and he was so much in the good graces of Mad. Royale, that he at last
prevailed with her to bring his Uncle into the chief Ministry; he being
certainly one of the ablest men that belongs to that Court; and the pretense
found to bring this about decently, was, that the Duchess did secretly
Intimate to the Court of France, that she found it necessary to Employ the
Marq. de Pianesse, and therefore she desired that the King would renew his
recommendation of him, which being done, he was received into the Ministry, and
had the chief stroke in all Affairs: he placed another of his Nephews about the
Duke, and supported him so that he got very far into his favor, so Mr. de
Pianesse observing great Disorders in the Government, and a great and useless
Consumption of the Revenue, he Instructed his Nephew that was about the Duke so
well, that he entertained the young Duke often upon these heads, who was not
then 15 year old: he showed him how his Country was ruined by his Mothers ill
conduct, and was always suggesting to him the Necessity of his assuming the
Government, and putting an end to his Mothers Regency, which is a discourse to
which all Persons of that Age have such a natural Inclination, that it was no
wonder if both Uncle and Nephew came to believe that the Duke hearkened to the
Proposition: but the Duke thought it too hardy a thing to venture on it,
without consulting it with some wiser heads; upon which Mr. de Pianesses Nephew
told him, that he would bring his Uncle to him, who would conduct the matter
for him; for tho he had great obligations to Madam Royale, yet his Fidelity to
his Prince, and his Affection to his Country overcame them all. This was a
great surprise to the Duke, who looked on Mr. de Pianesse as the person in the
World, that was the most obliged to his Mother, and that was the most in her
Interests: and it was believed that the prejudice which this gave him, blasted
this whole design: yet he gave him several Audiences in secret, and had
concerted with him the whole method, both of assuming and managing the
Government: which was carried on so secretly, that there was no suspicion of
the matter, till the day before it was to break out, and that the Duke was to
withdraw himself from his Mother: but then it was discovered, and the Duke to
reconcile himself to his Mother, sacrificed the Marq. de Pianesse to her
resentments: he was not only Disgraced, and put in Prison, but his process was
made before the Court of Parliament of Chambery, for having endeavored to
throw the Government into a Confusion, by sowing of Division between the Duke
and his Mother: yet he defended himself so well that he was acquitted, but he
continues still a Prisoner: upon his Disgrace, there was none that durst oppose
himself to Mad. Royale, or offer any advices to the Duke, so that the Court of
Turin was as absolutely governed by the Directions that were sent from the
Court of France, as if the one had been the Vassal, if not the Subject to the
other.

I will not prosecute this discourse to tell you that which all Europe knows,
of the designed Match with the Infanta of Portugal, by which Savoy and Piedmont
would have undoubtely fallen into the hands of the French. The breaking of
this, and the Dukes being Poisoned, as well as his Father had been, tho his
youth carried him through it, are things too well known, for you to be Ignorant of
them. It is true, those who Poisoned the present Duke, have not been yet
Discovered and punished, as those were who poisoned his Father. While I was at
Turin, there was a discourse, that the Duke was reflecting on the Wise Advices
that Mr. de Pianesse had given him, and that he Intended not only to bring him
out of prison, but to receive him again into the Ministry, which is confirmed
to me since I left those parts. There is nothing more Visible, than that the
Dukes of Savoy have sunk extremely in this Age, from the figure which they made
in the last; and how much soever they may have raised their Titular Dignity, in
having the Title of Royal Highness given them, they have lost as much in the
Figure, that they made in the affairs of Europe: and it is now almost too late
to think of a Remedy: for Pignerol and Cassal are two very Inconvenient
neighbors. The truth is, the Vanity of this Title, and the expenceful humor
that their late Marriages with France has spread among them, have undone them,
for instead of keeping good Troops and strong places, all the Revenue goes to
the keeping up of the Magnificence of the Court; which is indeed very splendid.

I will not engage in a Relation of this last Affair of the Valleys of
Piedmont; for I could not find particulars enough, to give you that so
distinctly as you may perhaps desire it. It was all over, long before I came to
Turin? but this I found, that all the Court there, were ashamed of the matter:
and they took pains upon Strangers, not without some affectation, to convince
them that the Duke was very hardly drawn to it: that he was long pressed to it,
by the repeated Instances from the Court of France; that he excused it,
representing to the Court of France the constant Fidelity of those people ever
since the last Edict of Pacification, and their great Industry, so that they
were the profitablest Subjects that the Duke had, and that the body of men
which they had given his Father in the last War with Genoa, had done great
Service; for it saved the whole Army: but all these Excuses were without
effect; for the Court of France having broken its own Faith, that had been
given to Heretics, and in that showed, how true a respect it pays to the
Council of Constance, had a mind to engage other Princes to follow this new
Pattern of Fidelity that it set the world: so the Duke was not only pressed to
extirpate the Heretics of those Valeys; but this Threatening was added, that if
he would not do it, the King would send his own Troops to extirpate Heresy; for
he would not only not suffer it in his own Kingdom, but would even drive it out
of his Neighborhood. He who told me all this, knowing of what Country I was,
added, that perhaps he would within a little while send the like Messages to
some others of his Neighbors.

But to return to the expense that is made in the Court of Turin, I cannot
forget a discourse that I had on this subject with a German, that was a man of
very good sense: he told me, that nothing ruined the Empire so much, as the
great Magnificence which all the Princes affected to keep up in their Courts;
and the Luxury in which they begun to live, which had much corrupted the
Ancient Simplicity and Gallantry of that great and Warlike Nation. Not only the
Nobility, but their very Princes travel into France; and are so much taken with
the Splendour and Luxury that they see there, that they return home quite
spoiled with the ill Impressions that this makes on them. They carry home with
them French-Cooks, and all the contrivances of Pleasure that are so much
studied there, for the vitiating the minds of their Countrymen: and by a vast
Expense, they not only exhaust their Revenue, and ruin their Subjects, but they
become so liable to corruption, that if their Income at home cannot support
their charge, both their Princes and their Ministers are reduced, as it were to
the necessity of taking Pensions, from those whose Instruments have set on this
Luxury, and whose Pensions will still support it, till the Germans are
sufficiently enervated by the Feebleness into which all that Luxury must needs
throw them, and then they will despise and trample upon them, as much as they
do now Court them. He who told me all this, added, that the little Princes of
the Empire, affected now as much Splendour in their Courts as the Electors did
in the last Age, and that the Electors lived now in as much Magnificence as
Crowned Heads did formerly. But he carried his Observation further, and having
stayed some considerable time both in Switzerland and Holland, he added, that
Luxury and Expense were wicked things even in Monarchys, but they were fatal
and destructive when they got into Commonwealths; of which the History of
Lacedemon, Athens, and above all of Rome, give proofs that are beyond
exception; for there is a Humility, a Sobriety, and a Frugality, that is so
necessary for their preservation; that Kingdoms can be better-maintained
without Troops and strong Places, than Commonwealths without these. An
Emulation in Expense, a Vanity in Clothes, Furniture, or Entertainments, are so
contrary to all the principles upon which a Commonwealth must be either built
or preserved, that he said, he thought that the Dutch had lost more of their
real Strength, by the Progress that this Pest makes among them, than by all the
Expense of the last War, of which they complain so much: and indeed the men of
Luxury and Vanity ought to be driven out of Commonwealths, as public Enemies
to the Constitution of the Government: since an irregular Profusion throws them
into Injustice and Oppression, and may in time expose them to the Corruption of
other Princes, and dissolves that Industry and Application for Affairs by which
only they can subsist: for all the Maxims that relate to a Commonwealth,
there is none more Indispensable, than that all men regulate their Expense, so
that it may not exceed their Income: and therefore he admired that part of the
Venetian Constitution, that regulates the Expense of their Nobility; and
concluded, that if the States and the Cantons did not put an effectual stop to
the Progress of those Disorders among them, the Figure that they had made in
all the Affairs of Europe, as it was in a great degree already Eclipsed among
the Cantons, so would sink apace even in the States; and this was all that was
wanting, to set up a new Monarchy in the West.

But I have got such a trick of making Digressions, that I find it is hardly
possible for me to hold long close to a point: there is something in
traveling, I fancy, that makes a man's thoughts reel; and that leads his Pen to
wander about as much as his Person does: yet I remember still what drew me into
all this ramble; It was the business of Guastale, and the Court of Mantua that
led me so far about. I will say no more to you of the rest of Lombardy; nor
will I enter into any description of Tuscany; but shall only tell you one
thing, which both touched me much and pleased me extremely.

I need not enlarge to you on the Poverty and Misery that appears in Pisa,
where there remains yet enough to show what they once were, and how much they
are now sunk from what they were while they were a Free State: but all this is
much more sensible, when one goes from hence to Lucca, which tho it has not the
advantage of situation that Pisa has, yet is quite another sort of a place. The
Town is well built, full of People, and as full of Wealth: the whole soil of
this small State is well Cultivated and is full of Villages, all the marks and
effects of Liberty appear, in an Universal Civility, and a generous and frank
way of living: This is also the place of all Italy that is freest of all Crimes
and Public Vices; they value themselves upon nothing but their Liberty, of
which the State is so Jealous, that the frequent change of their Magistrates,
from two Months to two Months, and the Restraint in which they are kept while
they bear Office, they being indeed honorable Prisoners all the while, have
preserved that here, which so* many of their Neighboring States have lost: and
as Liberty is engraven in Capital Letters, upon the Public Buildings of this
State, so it appears to be much deeper in all their Hearts. One sees the
Effects of their Wealth, in all their Public works, as well as in the
Fortifications of this place, which are much better, and better kept than in
any place I saw in Italy, except Genoa. There is on the inward side of the
Ramparts, a noble Plantation, which is one of the beautifullest Decorations
that belongs to this place; for as there is a considerable space left void
between the Ramparts and the Buildings, so this is planted all about the whole
Town, with several rows of Trees, which afford pleasant Walks, and a lovely
Shade, which is no small matter, where they are exposed to so hot a Sun.

I come in the last place to give you an account of Genoa, which tho it is not
able now to Compete as it did some Ages ago with the Republic of Venice, yet
is still a great Body and full of Wealth; one that comes out of the Popes
Patrimony and Tuscany, into this narrow border that lies between the Hills and
the Sea, should expect to find as great a difference between their abounding in
People and Wealth, as there is between the soil of these two Countries: but he
finds the change just contrary to what in reason he ought to expect: for all
this edge of soil, is so full of Villages and Towns, and there is so great a
plenty of Money and of every thing else here, that it Amases a Traveller no
less, than the abandoned state of those other places.

The numbers of the subjects of this Republic, are estimated to 330000
Persons; which are thus reckoned up; In the Town of Genoa it self there are
about 80000. Persons: in the Villages and Towns that lie Westward there are
120000. and 30000. in those that lie to the East: and the Inhabitants of the
Island of Corsica are reckoned to be 100000. They keep two small Forts in
Corsica, one at Calvi on that end that looks to Genoa, and another at Boniface
on the other end that looks to Sardinia; for they have let S. Fiorenza and some
other small places go to ruin. These two are considerable in themselves, and
command two very good Harbors; yet as the building in Calvi are too much
exposed and too high, so Boniface is under a high Ground, that is within musket
shut of it, and that commands it: these places are now in a sad condition, ill
kept, and ill furnished both with Men and Animunition, so that they could not
make a great Resistance, there being but 150 men in Calvi, and 200 in Boniface;
and it is believed, that the reason of their letting S. Fiorenza go to ruin,
is, the Greatness of the Place, and the Expense of keeping it. The Corses are
extremely brave, and have a Rage in their courage, that would be much more
valueable and useful than it is if they were more governable, and could be
brought under an exact Discipline: but they are unruly, and as apt to Mutiny,
when they see no Enemy, as to fight well when it comes to that. The compass of
the Fortification of Genoa is an amasing thing; for it runs all along the hills
in a compass of many miles, I was told it was above 15 mile, and in the Expense
that has been laid out on this and on the two Moles, chiefly the new one, one
sees that this State spares nothing which Public safety or the Convenience of
Trade do require: these Public Works has run the Republic into a vast debt;
for they owe above Nine Millions of Crowns that are upon the Bank, besides
several other debts, in particular their great Debt to St. Georges House; the
greatest part of the Revenue of this State stands engaged for the Interest that
they pay, so that tho the whole Revenue amounts to 1200000 Crowns, they reckon
that 900000 Crowns of this is engaged, so that they have only three hundred
thousand Crowns clear for their whole Expense, which is so small a matter, that
it is no wonder if they are in a low condition, and can do little upon so
narrow a fond: their Revenue rises chiefly out of an Excise that falls so
equally upon all the Subjects of this State, that they reckon that every man in
Genoa, pays six Crowns a year to the State. The whole Land Forces of this
State were but 3500 men, yet of late they have raised them up to 4000 men; of
which 2500 are the Garrison of the City, and there are 600 in Savona, which
after the City it self is the most Important place that belongs to this State:
the extent of the whole Country, that goes by the name of the River of Genoa,
is 180 miles, of which 120 lie Westward, and 60 lie Eastward; the Mountains
that are almost Impassible are thought a sufficient Defense to cover them from
their Neighbors in Lombardy, and from the Duke of Savoy, and the State of
Millan. It is true, they have one Fort called Gavi, that is 25 miles distant
from the Town, which has all the advantages of sitution that are possible for
keeping the Passes through the Mountains: but as they keep only a Garrison of 120
men in it, so all things in it are so neglected, that it could make no
considerable Resistance to an Enemy that could attack in vigorously. In short,
the strength of this State is very Inconsiderable, their Soldiers are ill
Disciplined, their Officers want Experience, and they have no good Engineers;
the New Mole is indeed a vast work, built out into the Sea seven fathom deep,
and there are an hundred pieces of Cannon on it to defend the Old Mole; their
Naval forces consist in six Galleys, and and two Men of War; but these are not
kept as Ships of War, but are Employed rather as Merchantmen, so that they not
only bear their own Expense, but bring in an Overplus to the State.

Finale, which is the only Seaport that belongs to the State of Millan, is a
poor abandoned Village without either Fortification or Garrison, nor do the
Spanish Galleys come there any more; but make Genoa it self their Step, and
Passage between Spain and Millan: so that an attempt upon Genoa was indeed the
taking of all the Milanese, since the communication between Spain and it, being
now through Genoa, whenever this Republic falls into the hands of the French,
all the Millanese must fall of it self, or rather indeed all Italy, must needs
fall with it.

This is as far as I could understand it the outward force of Genoa: for it can
expect little from its Allies, it having none at all beside Spain: and the
Slowness and Feebleness of that Court, are too visible to give any State great
Courage that has no other support besides this to depend on: As for their
Neighbors in Italy, they have no sort of Commerce with them; for they pretend
to a degree of Precedence, equal to the Venetians: and to have the respect of a
Crowned Head paid to them, and this cuts off all Communication with the other
Courts of Italy, who consider Venice in another manner than they do Genoa. As
for Spain, they have all possible Engagements with it: many of the richest
Families of Genoa have great Estates in the Milanese, and the other Dominions
of the King of Spain; so that they must upon their own account be true to the
Interests of that Crown, and Spain is as much concerned in their preservation
as in any of its own Provinces, since it defends their Empire in Italy; so that
Genoa and Spain are now inseparably united to one another, by their mutual
Interests.

But I come next to give you some account of the Inward state of Genoa. It is
known, that the Liberty was restored to them, by the most earnest Intercession
of that great Captain, and gallant Countryman, Andreas Doria, whose Statue,
in remembrance of this, is set up in an open place in their Town: this was in
the year 1528. yet tho from that time they had their Government in their own
hands, they were still obliged to let a Squadron of the Spanish Gallys, stand
in their Arsenal, who kept then a Fleet of about 80. Gallys, so that till Spain
was so much sunk from its former Greatness, that it was no more a Terror to
any of its Neighbors, Genoa was still in great dread of having their Liberty
swallowed up by them, and therefore they do not reckon their entire Liberty but
from the year 1624. or 1625. that they saw themselves out of all Danger from
any of their Neighbors: France was not then begun to grow strong at Sea, and
Spain was strong no where; so that since that time, till France began to put
out great Fleets, and that they had such a dreadful Neighbor of Touloun, they
were safe and at quiet: but they fell under the common Disease of all
Commonwealths, when they are long in Peace, and while their Commerce
flourishes; a Spirit of Insolence and of Faction began to spread it self over
the whole Town, which was grown to such a height, that in the Project that was
offered to the Court of France, showing the easiness of this Conquest (of which
I have seen the Copy) the Divisions and Factions amongst them are proposed, as
the chief ground upon which they founded the Probability of the ruin of that
Commonwealth.

There are three sorts of Persons in Genoa, the Nobility, the Citizens, and the
Inferior People. There are two Ranks of Nobility, the one is of the more
Ancient Families, the other is of those who have been chosen and raised up to
that Dignity of late. It is true, the Aggreement that was made in the year
1576. between them, is exactly observed, by which the Government and the
Public Employments are to be equally divided between them: but yet there is so
great a height of Pride kept up among the Ancient Families, that they will not
Inter-marry with the other, and think it a diminution to them, to enter into
any Familiarity with them, and even to keep them Company: this on the other
hand kindles an Indignation in those latter Families, when they see themselves
so much despised by the other. The Ancient Families have a necessary Dependence
upon the Crown of Spain, by the great Estates that they have in their
Dominions; but the others, whole Estates lie rather in Money, which either is
in the Bank, or that runs out in Exchange or Trade, they are concerned in
nothing but in the preservation of their Bank, and by consequence in their
Liberty; for none can doubt but that if they fell in the power of another
Prince, the Debts on the Bank would be but ill paid. Thus the Nobility stand
divided into two Factions, which discover their Animosities to one another upon
very many occasions: for Public Employments are sought after here, with as
much Intrigue as elsewhere. I will give you only one Instance of this, because
it is both very refined, and it related to that Doge, whose Government was so
unhappy both by the Bombarding of Genoa, and by his own going to Versailles to
ask Pardon. He himself was a Man of a quiet temper, that did not aspire; but
his Wife could not be satisfied till he was Doge, and she Dogesse: so she set
so many Machines at work, that after the several tours, that the matter made in
the many Ballottings, it came to the fixing of the last three out of whom the
Doge was to be chosen: and her Husband was one of them; but there being one of
the three, of whom she was very apprehensive, she engaged one of her Friends,
to seem so assured of his Election, as to lay considerable wagers with several
of the Electors, who were likeliest to favor him, that he should be chosen:
now they having a greater mind to win their Betts, than to promote their
Friend, gave their Votes in favor of him, that was upon that made Doge.

The 2d body in Genoa is that of the Citizens, who seem to be extremely weary
of the Insolence of the Nobility; and there are many among them, that think
themselves no way Inferior to them, neither in the Antiquity, nor in the
Dignity of their Families. They do also complain of a great Injustice done them
by the Nobility; for in the agreement made between the Nobility and the
Citizens, in the year 1528. one Article was, that every year ten Citizens
should be according to their merit received into their body. It is certain,
that if this had been observed, the Nobility of Genoa had become by this time
so common, that this would have sunk its dignity extremely: but instead of
doing this yearly, it is now done but once in 30 years: so the Citizens
complane much, that this Encouragment and Recompense of Merit is now withdrawn.
The Nobility pretend on the other hand, that by that Agreement, they are only
enabled to make an Annual promotion, but that they are not obliged to it: and
I was told, that the Original Record of that Agreement, could not be found
now; and no doubt it has been destroyed by the Order of the Senate. In short,
the Citizens have so great an aversion to the Government, that it was generally
thought that they would easily be prevailed on to shake it often, and to throw
themselves rather into the Arms of another Prince, who would certainly have
very soon trampled upon them all equally; for it is too common a thing, to see
in all those Intestine Factions, that angry and ill-natured men, consider the
last Injury, more that all other things: and are ready to sacrifice all to
their Resentments: and are so intent upon their Revenges, that often they will
not look into the Consequences of what they do, but go on, which way soever the
Anger of the Faction drives them: and those who are wise enough, to make their
own Advantage of those Quarrels, and that are dextrous enough to manage them
artificially, make commonly those parties take their turns in using one another
ill, in which they know how to find their account: and as this observation
holds often in Colder Climates, so in a Country where revenges are very much
studied and gratified, no wonder if this was much relied on. The third rank is
of the Trades men and Rabble, who have their chief, dependence upon the great
Nobility: but they are a Vicious and dissolute sort of People, as any are in
the world. And indeed all Genoa is so extremely corrupt, so Ignorant, and so
brutal, and so little acquainted with the true Notions of Government, that here
is a Commonwealth degenerated to such a degree, that it cannot resist a
considerable shock. The Subjects are excessively Rich, tho the State is Poor:
and this appears both in the Magnificence of their Buildings, which is beyond
Imagination, and in the great Wealth that is in their Churches and Convents,
which seemed to me to be beyond what is in Venice it self.

A sensible man that I knew there told me, that as there was among them a sort
of Impunity to all Kind of Vice, so their gross Ignorance made them Incapable
to conduct their State; for while their Wealth blew them up, with that Pride
that it commonly produces in mean Souls, and when their Intrigues brought them
into a considerable share of the Government, they satisfied themselves with
carrying on the Interests of their own Cabal, and depressing those that opposed
them, without opening their minds to so great a thought, as that of correcting
or securing their Common wealth. They neither had Heads nor Hearts capable of a
vigorous Defense: and they knew nothing of what was doing abroad; but contented
themselves with minding the Interest of their City Factions. He added, that
when a Commonwealth fell once into this Disease, it was in a much worse state,
than any to which the Rigor even of an unhappy War, could reduce it: as a man
whose Vitals are Inwardly corrupted, is in a much worse condition, than he that
has received many Wounds; Nature may bring him through the one, tho he had lost
ever so much blood; whereas it must sink under the other: so all the mischief
that could befall a Commonwealth could hardly destroy it, if it retained the
Inward vigor of its first Maxims and Constitution: and he did not stick to
say, that as high as the States of Holland were now in holding the balance of
Europe, if their Towns fell once into established factions, if Learning sunk
among them, so that their Magistrates grew Ignorant, chiefly of the Affairs of
Europe, if they came to have a Magistracy, that had not the right understanding
of War, and the Courage with which some practice in Military matters Inspire
men, and if their Wealth swelled them up to an Unreasonable Pride, and that men
rise more upon the little Intrigues of City Factions, than upon true merit;
whenever, he said, the States fell into this disease, then the strength of
that Republic was gone; and tho they might subsist after that longer or
shorter, according to the Conjuncture of Affairs, yet one might reckon them to
be in their decline, which must end in a most certain Ruin to them, either
within doors, or from abroad.

I have now told you enough to let you see how reasonable a Project it was to
send a fleet against so feeble a body; which without most prodigious Errors in
the management, could not have miscarried: and this is so clear, and so
confessed by every man in Genoa, that one rather Wonders how they found a way
to conduct it so ill. The man that formed the whole project was Stiven Valdyron
of Nismes, and a Protestant, who is a person of a very good Understanding, and
having lived above 12 years in Genoa, had time enough not only to raise a very
good Estate out of his Trade, but to see into the whole Feebleness of that
Government. I conversed long and much with him: and having since that time been
in Genoa it self, I have seen so clearly the truth of all that he told me, that
I may now assure you of all that I learnt from him. He had a strange affection
to his Great Monarch, and fancied that the obligations of raising his Glory,
was superior to all other: and no doubt he reckoned to find his own account in
it, if he could have been the occasion of making the King of France Master of
Genoa: therefore he drew up the whole Project, and showed both of what
Importance the thing was; and how easily it might be executed: for I have a
Copy of the whole Scheme, which Mr. St. Olon sent to the Court of France, of
which Mr. Valdyron was indeed the Author; the design being entertained, St.
Olon had an Intimation given him, to withdraw some day's before the French
fleet came before the Town. But Valdyron was left to try his hard fate; for as
soon as the Fleet began to do Acts of Hostility, Valdyron, who had been known
to be much with St. Olon, was clapped in Prison, and while he was in it, a Bomb
broke through his Prison, but did him to hurt, only the violent noise it made
weakened the Tympan of his Ear so much, that he lost his hearing of one side.

But he, as well as all Genoa, fancied they were lost, and that the French must
be certainly Masters of the Place in a few hours. The Consternation and
Confusion was so great, that if at first a great shower of Bombs had been
thrown into the Town, and a descent had been made, they had certainly
succeeded; for the people were in such a disorder, that the Magistrates were
not regarded; and indeed many of them showed as much fear as the rabble did.
But the French, instead of beginning vigorously at first, threw in one Bomb,
and after some hours another; and so went on slowly for a day or two; in which
time, the People began to get into order, and to take heart: and now their
first fear, turned to a Rage against the French; so that when they made a
descent, they found such a Resistance, that they were forced to go back to
their Ships, having left behind them 500 of their best Men: and the Fleet
continued Bombarding the Town, till they had shot all their Bombs; and when
their store was spent, they sailed away, having laid a great many noble
buildings in ruins.

The morality of this way of proceeding, was somewhat hard to be found out: the
Italians do not stick to say, it was an Assassinat, when without Warning or
proceeding in the way of a fair War, a fleet came and surprised and burnt a
Town: but the Conduct was as extraordinary, as the Action it self was honorable
and worthy of a MOST CHRISTIAN KING.

It was pleasant to hear a Spaniard, that belonged to the Count of Melgar talk
of this matter: he said, that in this, France had acted as it had done on many
other occasions, in which tho it had the favourablest conjuncture possible, it
had done nothing suitable to what might have been expected; for tho they had
here a calm Sea, for four days, which is a very Extraordinary thing in the Bay
of Genoa, that is almost always in a Storm, and tho they had surprised the
Town, that had not the least apprehension of such a Design, and found them in a
condition not likely to have resisted a much smaller Force; yet he said, that
Feebleness which had appeared upon many other occasions, showed it self
likewise here, since this great Expedition failed, and the Reproach of first
attempting it, and then Miscarrying in it, was studied to be carried off by
this, that the design was only to Chastise Genoa, at which there is not a man
in the Town that does not laugh. He upon this took a great compass for these
last twenty years backwards, to show that there was nothing extraordinary in
all this Reign, that had been the Subject of so many Panegyricks, unless this
may be reckoned extraordinary, that there has been so little progress made,
when they had the fairest opportunities possible: an Infant King of Spain, and
a feeble Council, and a Distraction in the States of Holland; so that the first
Successes that were the Effects of the weakness and surprise of those that were
attackt, are rather a Reproach than a Glory to a Reign, that has understood so
ill how to serve it self of those advantages, that had nothing of the Greatness
of a Conquering Genius in it; and where the Ministry showed rather an exactness
in executing little Projects, than a largeness of Soul in laying vast ones. I
could not but be pleased to see a Spaniard, find somewhat that entertained his
Pride in the Contempt of the French, at the same time that the low estate of
their Affairs, made him feel the depression of their own Empire as much as the
progress of the Great Monarch of France.

But now I cannot but tell you the rest of Valdyron's Story: as soon as the
French were gone, the Government of Genoa began to examine him, but he stood to
his denial, and said, he knew nothing: all his Effects were seized on and
dissipated, and he himself was four or five times put to the strapado, which
was done by tying his hands behind his back, and fetching them over his Head,
which disjoynted his Arms and Shoulder-blades, in a most terrible manner, yet
he had the firmness to stand it out: and so they could draw nothing from him:
but as soon as the Court of France understood, that both he, and several other
Frenchmen, that lived in Genoa, were put in Prison, the Resident of Genoa was
clapped up at Paris: and when the Overtures were made to accommodate this matter,
Valdyron was no more ill used, and after some Months he was set at Liberty: but
his Estate was quite lost: yet he came to France, not doubting but that so
great a Service, and such severe Suffering, would have procured him some
considerable Reward: but after he had languished there above a year, he got a
Pension, that was just enough to keep him alive, of two hundred Crowns: and
even that was stopped, as soon it was known that he was of the Religion, till he
changed. This piece of Gratitude for such a Service, that had cost him so dear,
was no extraordinary Encouragement for others to venture as he had done. Yet I
who knew him well, for almost two years, could not but admire the wonderful
Zeal he had for the Glory of his King; for in the midst of all his Misery, and
of all the Neglect he met with, having fallen from so flourishing a condition,
he could never be brought to think that he had done foolishly: but was rather
proud of it, that he had formed so sure a Scheme, for putting Genoa into his
Masters hands: and this he said often to me, when he was so poor, that he did
not know where to dine. The affinity of the matter, makes me call to mind a
conversation that I had at Rome, with two of the Old Magistrates of Messina;
who had been men that bore a great stroke in that Town, during the Revolt: and
were then reduced to the misery of accepting a Charity. They told us, that all
the Oaths, that Mr. de Vivonne, and Mr. la Fueillade, swore to them in the
Kings name, as well as in their own, never to abandon them, which were made
upon the Sacrament, besides whole Valleys of Oaths, that Mr. la Fueillade made
them from morning to night, while he was among them, it seems went for nothing,
but matters of form: yet they said, they thought the French Ministry would have
considered the Kings Interests, if they had no regard to his Honor. They
added, that if the King of France, when he found the War of Messina lay heavy
upon him, had sent to Spain, and offered to that Court, as a pledge of the
Peace that he was offering them at Nimmegen, to put Messina again in to their
hands, provided they would grant an Indemnity for what was past, and a
Confirmation of their Ancient Privileges, of which he himself would be the
Garand, this they said the Spaniards would have without doubt, accepted as
something come to them from Heaven: and if the matter had ended thus, as it
would have been highly honorable for the King, so it would have given him the
dependence both of Sicily and Naples, and have kept them still in a disposition
to throw themselves into his hands: whereas in the way that their business
ended, if there should be in any time hereafter, a provocation given in those
parts to revolt, they would sooner throw themselves into the Arms of the Turk,
if he should be again in a condition to protect them, than of those who had
abandoned them in so strange a manner, taking no care neither of the
Privileges of the Town in general, nor of those particular Persons, who had
rendered themselves unpardonable to the Spaniards. It is true, some were brought
away to France, the two that I have mentioned were of that number, and had
small Pensions assigned them, which were but ill paid: and because some of
them had not patience enough to bear such an unlooked for Usage, but complained
freely of it, a pretense was taken from thence, to banish them all out of
France; so that ever since they have suffered a great deal of Misery. I will
not digress so far as to give you an account of that whole Revolt, which they
justified to us, from the great Privileges of their Town, which were indeed
such as made it a sort of a Commonwealth: that had a right to defend it self
against those manifest Infractions with which they charged the Spaniards. They
told us, that the Confiscations of Messina had amounted to twenty Millions: and
yet for all that the King of Spain was not much the richer by their Ruin; for
the Viceroy and Government of Sicily, pretended to exhaust all by a Citadel
that they are building: and by some other public Works. In Conclusion, the two
poor Messinesses, seeing a Dutchman in our Company, turned the Discourse to
him, and wished him to warn his Countrymen, by their Fate, how much some
Courts ought to be relied on.

And now I have done with all the Political Observations, that I could make in
Italy. But as I begun this Letter with one piece of Natural History, I will end
it with another. The first was a way of preparing of Salt, and the second is a
new way of preparing of Vitriol, which was lately set up in the Sulfatara, near
Puzzolo. It has not been long enough a going, to enable one to judge how it
will succeed; but yet all things are very promising; and that which gives a
good Prospect of it, is, that all is done without the expense of any fire. The
Method of it is this. There are several Cistorns made in that great Bottom of
the Sulfatara, of great stones Cemented very close: into these all the Rain
both of that Bottom, and of the little Hills that are round it does fall, which
is impregnated with Vitriol: they do also lay a great many Tiles and Bricks
before all those Vents, that the Fire which is in this Soil makes: and where
the Smoke comes out, with so rapid a violence; so that this Smoke passing through
these Bricks, leaves a great deal of Sulphur and Vitriol upon them: and these
Bricks are washed in those Cisterns, and by this means the Water becomes
impregnated with Vitriol: then they put the Water into Coppers, which they set
over those violent hot Eruptions; so that this serves as a Fire, to evaporate
the Phlegm, and so they find quantities of Vitriol. The revenue of this goes to
the Annunciata of Naples: and they begin to promise themselves great advantages
from it: but a little time will show this, as well as greater matters. I will
add no new trouble, to that which the length of this Letter must needs have
given you: so I will conclude, without any other Formality, but that of
assuring you that I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce I added a Postscript to my two former Letters, I intend to make this so
far of a piece with them, as to conclude this likewise with one; for I find,
looking over the little Notes that I took, a Particular that had escaped me,
and yet it seems to deserve to be mentioned: and since I have not brought it
into my Letters, I have resolved to make a Postscript express for it.

There is a little Town in the Appennins, about 25 miles from Rome, called
Norcia, near which there is a considerable Abbey, which belongs now to a
Cardinal. This Town, tho it lies within the Popes Territory, yet has such great
Privileges still reserved to it, that it my pass in some sort for a free
Commonwealth. They make their Laws, and choose their own Magistrates; but
that which is the most extraordinary part of their Constitution, and that is
the most exactly observed, is, that they are so jealous of all Priests, and of
their having any share in their Government, that no man that can either read or
write is capable of bearing a share in their Government: so that their
Magistracy, which consists of 4 Persons, is alway's in the hands of Unlettered
Men, who are called there Li quatri Illiterati: for they think the least
tendency to Letters, would bring them under the ordinary Miseries that they see
all their Neighbors are brought under by the credit in which both the Robes
are among them. And they are so shy of all Churchmen, and so jealous of their
Liberty, that when the Cardinal comes during the Heats of the Summer sometimes,
to his Abbey, they take no notice of him, nor do they make any sort of Court to
him. One that has been often there, told me, that by diverse of their Customs
they seem to be of the race of the old Latins; and that their Situation and
their Poverty had at all times preserved them: yet they are not such Strangers
to the manners of the rest of the Italians as not to take pleasure in severe
revenges, of which this Instance was given me. The Abbot that was the Cardinals
Predecessor, had an Auditor who was much in his favor, that made love to the
Wife of one of the Magistrates of Norcia, which she discovered to her Husband;
he ordered her to give the Auditor an Appointment; but provided a good Surgeon
and all other things that were necessary to put the Auditor out of all danger
of breaking his Vow of Chastity: for he was a Churchman; and the Auditor not
failing to observe his rendezvous, was caught, and the operation was performed
with all possible care: and he was treated very well till he was quite cured,
and then he was sent back to his Patron. The Abbot was highly offended with
this affront that was done him: and it may be easily believed that the Auditor
was not well pleased with this forced Chastity that was now Imposed on him: so
they sent an Information of the matter to the Rota; and asked their opinion:
but the Court of the Rota was wiser than to suffer a matter of this nature to
become public. To this I shall add a pleasant thing that was told me
concerning Priests that fell under the misfortune of this Auditor. It is known,
that according to the Canon Law, the one Indelible Character defaces the other:
and that a Priest so treated can no more say Mass: yet I was told that this
distinction was used, that if the Priest had all that was taken from him
restored to him, so that he could carry it in his Pocket, he was still esteemed
entire, and might say Mass; but unless he could have the consolation of
carrying those things dead about him, that had been perhaps too quick before,
the Character was lost, or was at least under a total suspension: If all this
is a little too pleasant and too natural, a little good humor must be forgiven
to a Traveller, whose Spirits are too much in motion, to be so settled and so
grave as they ought to be.



FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 16. dele of. P. 9. l. 22. portion r. proportion. P. 16. l. 18.
after and r. upon. P. 22. l. 4. dele that. P. 27. l. 7. r. that was. P. 34. l.
23. cited r. said. P. 36. l. 19. is r. it. P. 38. l. 18. dele a. P. 47. l.
last. r. slippers. P. 48. l. 9. sling. r. sling. l. 20. hear r. bear. P. 70. l.
26. is r. were. P. 82. l. 11. strong r. strange. P. 83. l. 8. or r. of. P. 85.
l. 9. Sr. r. St. P. 87. l. 16. 235. r. 35. P. 89. l. 3. r. Damnatos. P. 130. l.
11. me. r. we. P. 157. l. 10. where r. when. P. 169. l. 18. shut r. Shot. P.
171. l. 18. in r. it.


