PRINTED By Their Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN, At WHITE HALL, ON CHRISTMAS DAY,
1689.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Thiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDC ^XC.

THE BISHOP of SALISBURY's

Sermon before the KING and QUEEN ON CHRISTMAS DAY, 1689.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN, etc.
1 TIMOTHY III. VER. 16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of
godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and receive up
into glory.
THE most venerable part of Religion consists in the Mysteries it contains: and
the more sacred and sublime that these are, the Religion to which they belong,
becomes thereby so much the more August. The minds of Men are subject to two
extremes in the matter of Mysteries: some have such a liking for every thing
that pretends to Mystery, that this alone serves to recommend all things to
them; and as if Religion were designed to give perpetual affronts to Reason,
they despise things that are intelligible, and think it is a Character of a
mean and contemptible Religion, if it is not full of unaccountable things: and
they seem to be so taken with a sickness after Mystery, that the more absurd
that any Doctrines are, they like them the better: this serving to gild or
sweeten the Pill: and perhaps they think that a fond credulity will atone for
all other faults; as if an easiness of believing might serve to compound for
the most heinous sins. But on the other hand, some have such thoughts of
themselves, and of the force and compass of their own Reasons, that they think
it an unreasonable imposing on them to expect that they should believe any
thing which they cannot quite comprehend.

The Mean between these, is to fix such sure measures in this matter as may
preserve us both from a tameness, that may expose us to be an easy Prey to
every one that will force persuasions on us, with this bugbear, that they are
Mysteries, and that therefore they ought to be believed, even before they are
examined: and also on the other hand, from such a swelling of pride, as to
reject every thing how solemnly soever attested, only because it does not agree
with our Notions. We have St. Paul here in my Text concluding a charge that he
had given to Timothy, and in him to all that should minister in holy things,
that he should from the Rules here set him, learn how he ought to behave
himself in the Church of God: for since the World that is ever apt to be
implicit in its thoughts of Religion, will judge of that which they do not
know, nor understand, I mean the Doctrine, from that which they do see and
know, I mean the lives of those who do teach and profess it; and since the
Majesty that is in some Mysteries requires a suitable authority and gravity in
those that handle and propose them; therefore the obligation that lies on
Churchmen to a great exactness of deportment, appears particularly from this,
That the Mystery of their Religion is without controversy great; and that it
is likewise a Mystery of godliness that leads to Right thoughts of God, and to
a way of worshipping him, that is suitable to his Nature and Attributes: both
which considerations agree to point out this to us, That the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church ought to be Men of a sublime pitch of mind, and of an
unaffected strictness of holiness.

In speaking to these words I shall consider,

I. What is the true and strict Notion of a Mystery in general. II. What reason
there may be for us to believe such Mysteries as may be revealed to us by God.
III. How credible the Mysteries mentioned in my Text are in themselves. IV.
What reason we have offered to us that obliges us to believe them. V. In what
sense this is a Mystery of godliness.
I. Mystery in its common and general Notion, is a Sacred Secret: and it was
chiefly applied by the Heathens who first used the word, to those Rites and
Ceremonies by which Men were either initiated into Religion, or reconciled to
the Deity: and the performance of these things, had in it many secrets which
the Priests were careful enough to conceal, and thereby to increase their
value. Among the Romans it was one of the Methods by which the People were
managed to make them believe that public misfortunes rise from some error in
the performance of the service that they paid their Gods. A Deputation of
fifteen Men who were of the most entire confidence was appointed on great
occasions; to examine the Rituals of their Religion; and these either found or
pretended they had found out, both the error that had been committed, and the
proper Remedy: upon which it was given out, that the offended Deity was
pacified, and thereupon the People that were out of heart, took new courage;
and this to be sure, contributed not a little to the procuring them better
Success. From this common use of the Term Mystery, it is applied in some places
in the New Testament, to some of the Rites and Doctrines of Christians.

Marriage is said to be a Mystery, not as if there were any thing Mysterious in
that Compact, which is founded on the Laws of Nature and Society: but St. Paul
had been showing the reciprocal tie that is between the Man and the Wife; by
which it appears that a Man can no more have two Wives, than a Wife have two
Husbands: and upon that he says, That in Ephesians. 5. 32.
this lay a Mystery relating to Christ and the Church; that is, a mystical
Argument to prove that the Gentiles were to be brought to equal privileges in
the Dispensation of the Messiah with the Jews: for the Prophecies having
expressed the Union of God with Mankind, in the Messiah, under the figure of a
Marriage, then it follows according to the Allegory of a Marriage, that all
must be called to him in an equality of privilege and dignity; and not as the
Jews imagined, that they were to have many Privileges under the Messiah above
the Gentiles, who were only to have a second share after them. Now in the
Mystical way of arguing which was in use among the Jews at that time, it was no
ill way to convince them, to show that the whole Church was to come as one Wife
under the same Privileges: otherwise a disparity in that, some having more and
some fewer, looked like the State of Polygamy, or Concubinate, and not of a
single Marriage.

But to return from this digression: The Sacraments of the Christian Religion
came to be also called Mysteries, because in these, Men were initiated and
confirmed in their Religion; yet not by any secret methods that Priests only
might know, but in actions that were plain, simple and significative.

This great Doctrine of the Christian Religion, mentioned in my Text, of God's
dwelling among us in flesh, is likewise called a Mystery, as containing in it,
not any secret which was too sacred to be trusted to Lay-hands, that Priests
only might know; but carrying in it a sublime discovery of the Divine Nature,
and of the Person and Conception of the Savior of the World.

II. And this leads me to the second point, which is to show, That if any such
extraordinary discovery is made, we ought not thereupon to be prejudiced
against it, because it contains some things, of which we can form no clear and
distinct Notion. It seems indeed at first view a hard imposition on us, to
require us to believe that of which we can form no thought at all, and which by
consequence is nothing to us. It seems also unreasonable to think that God has
given us Faculties which yet we must contradict and overrule in matters of
Religion. But all this, how much soever it may be enlarged, and how specious
soever it may appear, will have less force when it is considered, That really
our Faculties are so defective, that we do not penetrate into the Essence of
any one thing what soever; and therefore tho'we can never be obliged to believe
any thing that is contrary to our Faculties and to our simplest Conceptions,
yet we may be obliged to believe things in which we find Difficulties, through
which we cannot make our way.

The notions of Time, Space and Motion, are entangled with inextricable
difficulties; the continuity of Matter, or the admitting of Vacuities in it,
are subject to no less exceptions; but these are matters of a more remote
speculation: That which is more sensible to every one, is, That there are in us
thinking Beings, which we call Souls, that are united to Beings of a quite
different nature, which are Bodies, in so strange a manner, that the acts of
the Mind give the Body a great variety of motions: We will, we reason, we
remember, speak, or move, and immediately our animal Spirits go into the
Channels into which they are directed, without mistaking their Way or their
Errand. Now, how the acts of a Mind should give, or, at least, direct the
motion of Matter, is as unconceivable to us, as how the motions of Matter
should give a Mind Pain or Joy; yet after all, in fact we find it is so, though
we can give our selves no reasonable account how it should be so. Indeed, if we
examine Memory alone, it affords us matter enough for wonder; for it is not
conceivable, how we should have lodged in our Brain the Figures of all words,
persons, and things, which we can call up when we please, and so quick as words
come into our Mouths when we speak: Now, what the Nature, the Variety, and
Order of all these Figures should be, is that which we can as little
understand, as how the Soul should read them, (if I may so speak) and be able
to do nothing without them. Thus it appears, that in the thing which of all
others we should be like to understand best, I mean our own Souls dwelling in
our Bodies, and acting upon them, we plainly perceive, that a thing may be
true, though at the same time all the notions that we can form of it do present
to us difficulties concerning it, which we cannot overcome.

It will then be no prejudice against Religion, if it should offer some things
to us, that we can as little reconcile to our own notions, as we can do, that
of our Souls lodging in our Bodies, and governing them. It seems indeed to be
very unconceivable, how the same Person should be both God and Man; but it is
not a whit more conceivable, how the same Man should consist both of Body and
Soul, so united in one, that the Properties of both should belong to the same
man, who from the characters of his Mind, may be said to be just, wise, and
good; and from the characters of his Body, may be said to be tall, fair, or
sickly. So that though these, strictly speaking, belong only to one part of a
Man; yet the denomination from each of them, goes to the whole.

It cannot be denied, that our Souls are united to our Bodies, though we do not
conceive how it should be so; for we must consider, that all that which is
imported by this Union, is, that our Bodies being put and kept in such a
mechanical texture and disposition, our Souls act upon and govern them, both in
their vital and their free or rational Operations: And this Government is
called the Union of our Soul and Body; which is no other than the Bodies being
put and kept in such a Mechanical State, that the motion of the Animal Spirits
runs regularly through it, which way soever the Acts of the Mind do determine
and direct it; and when the structure of the Body is so disordered, that the
animal Spirits do their work imperfectly, then Pain and Sickness follow upon
it; but when they can do nothing, then Death comes, the Body being no longer in
a disposition to be subordinate to the Mind. By virtue of this Union, the Mind
receives likewise many Sensations from the Body. All which lead us very near
the forming somewhat like a notion of the Union of the Two Natures in Christ.
For, if a Body, which is a different sort of Beings from the Soul, is capable
of being brought under such an immediate and constant direction from the Mind,
as we see it is in our selves; then it is not at all absurd to think, that the
Soul of a man should be brought under an immediate and constant actuation from
the Divine Nature, which may as well denominate God and Man to be one, as the
Union of the Soul and Body denominates the Compound of both to be one Man: and
as the whole Man has the Attributes both of Soul and Body given to him, so the
whole in our Savior may also have the Attributes both of God and Man given to
him. And this is as true an Union, as is that between Soul and Body; only
whereas the Body gives sensations of Pain and Pleasure to the Mind, by virtue
of the Union between them, the perfection of the Divine Nature is such, that it
can receive no reciprocal Returns from the Humane Nature; though it does
immediately and constantly act upon and conduct it.

I do not pretend, that this does fully explain the Mystery, but it brings it
nearer to our Thoughts: So that if it does not help us to comprehend it
clearly, yet it carries us so far toward it, that we perceive that it is not
impossible: and that is all which is at present offered at.

There is somewhat in the Old Testament, that will also contribute to give us a
more distinct notion of this Mystery. There was a Mass of shining Matter that
hovered over the Cherubims, which was wrapped about with a Cloud; and it
sometimes broke through it, and gave Answers to the Israelites, when they
consulted Exodus 40. 34, 38.
God by the Highpriests. This had at first appeared to the whole Nation, in
the Wilderness, and rested on the top of the Tabernacle, and went before them
in their March, and was the lasting character of God's Presence among them. It
was the standing Miracle of their Religion, which none of their Idolatrous
Kings could ever disprove; and it continued among them till their Temple was
destroyed by the Babylonians. Now this Cloud was called God's Face, his Glory,
and the Light of his Countenance, and even God Psalm. 80. 1, 2. 2 Kin. 29. 15.
Psalm. 99. 1.
himself. O thou that dwell between the Cherubims, show thy self, and shine
forth. And yet never was there any thing more carefully managed, than the
diverting that People from every step that might have any tendency to Idolatry.
So the true account of this Cloud's being so spoken of, is, That this Mass of
pure and bright matter, as well as the thicker Cloud that was folded about it,
must have been quickly dissipated, according to the Laws of Motion, all Flame
being quickly gone, if not fed by new Fuel; but that God by an act of his
Power; kept it constantly in that fixed state, and did sometimes make it break
through the Cloud to declare his mind to his People that consulted him. So by
virtue of the constant impression that God made upon that matter, he was said
to be in it; and by virtue of that, the Cloud is said to be GOD.

Now it was prophesied, that the Glory of the second Temple should be greater
than the Glory of Hag 2. 9.
the first; and this Cloud, in which God was present, being the proper Glory of
the first, and it being wanting in the second, a higher degree of Glory was
God's not only acting upon, and appearing in a Mass of dead matter; but his
acting upon and appearing in animated matter* in a Man that had all the
Principles and Ingredients of our Nature in him. And thus this Mystery that God
was manifest in the flesh, has nothing in it that can render it any way
Incredible, either from the Principles of Reason or Philosophy, or from the
discoveries that were made concerning God in the Old Testament.

As for another part of this Mystery, that our Savior was born of a Virgin,
that carries not any thing in it, which reason shows to be absurd or
impossible. For all matter being uniform, and only different by the figure and
motion into which it is put, as God did upon the first creation of matter, put
it into what Form he pleased, he can still put any part of it, into what shape
or motion he intends to Impress upon it: so that there is no difficulty in
apprehending how God could have formed the first Principles of our Savior's
Body in the Virgin. And it being necessary that the Author of so holy a
Religion should be perfectly pure and holy, that he might be a perfect Pattern,
and so recommend his Doctrine with the more advantage, it was suitable to this,
that he should have none of those frailties in his Nature and Constitution,
which might have exposed him to the failings, into which the best Men that have
their Natures vitiated with those ill Inclinations, are apt to fall. It is
certain, that with the first Principles of our Being, there are derived to us
the Seeds of ill Dispositions, both of Body and Mind. Cronical Diseases, such
as Gout and Stone, Folly and Madness, are thus derived; and though this is in
some Instances more visible and sensible than it is in others, yet as every Man
has some particular feebleness, of which some Principles descend to those who
derive their being from him, so in all Men this is sensible, that their Bodies
and bodily Impressions grow too hard for their Minds, and do always struggle
and often revolt against them. It was then suitable both to this Holy Religion,
and to the Union unto which the Divine Nature assumed the Author of it, that he
should be free from all that disorder; and therefore the matter from which he
was to take his beginning, was to be so exactly rectified and purified, that
there should be no Principle of ill Inclination in it: for we perceive that our
Minds act so much the more perfectly, the more pure and clear, that our Bodies
are: We grow as our Bodies ripen, to be another sort of Beings, than we were
when we were first born; and a Distemper in our Brain, may so hide or disorder
all our Ideas, that we may thereby become in a moment fit for nothing: nor
shall it be a small part of our happiness in another state, that our Bodies
shall be highly rectified, and so our Minds must become both purer and sublimer
when they shall dwell in Bodies of heavenly and exalted matter. Upon all this,
it is plain, that as there is no absurdity in believing that our Savior's
first Principles were formed by Miracle, so it was highly suitable to the
design on which he was sent into the World, that his Body should be freed from
all that disorder which follows the ordinary course of Nature.

III. But yet after all this, it may still be said, why must things of this
nature be required to be believed of us? why was this Doctrine of Christianity,
which is hard enough in practice, made so much the harder, by containing in it
so many things which render it so difficult to be believed? And why were such
prejudices laid in the way, both of Jews and Gentiles, by making these
Doctrines to be parts of our Faith, which seemed to savor of their most absurd
Fables, as if there were in the Godhead a descent from Father to Son* To all
which this is to be answered, that as there was no Doctrine more ancient and
sacred among the Philosophers, than this of Three in the Deity, which is well
known to all that have well examined the matter, so nothing could more
recommend a Religion, that was to meet with great oppositions both in the
nature of Man, and from the Powers that were then in the World, than the great
Dignity of the Author of it; and therefore, as he was brought into the World
with so much Pomp, so many Prophesies going before his Birth, and so many
Miracles accompanying it, a whole Nation being selected, out of which he was to
descend, and a Religion being Instituted that was full of Types and Ceremonies
that were to be accomplished in him, so God thought fit to vest him with all
possible Glory; that so his Doctrine might not only have the more credit, but
that all Men might be the more encouraged to come into it, and to continue in
it, by the great Assistances and the mighty Protection that they were to expect
from One that was the Head of Angels: and was also the brightness of the
Fathers Glory: and since it was necessary to draw Men to think seriously of
Religion, by offering them a full and free Pardon of all past sins, it being in
vain to press Men to come into any Religion, if they are told that by their
sins they are already become miserable, past Recovery and Redemption; God
therefore as he resolved to offer a Pardon in the Gospel, so thought fit to do
it in such a manner, as should declare his hatred of sin, as well as his love
to mankind; and therefore he so ordered it, that the Author of this Holy
Religion after he had fully declared it to the World, should be seized on by
wicked Men, and be by them cruelly put to death; in the suffering of which, as
he offered himself up with all submission to the Will of God, and bore every
thing with all imaginable patience; so he felt in his mind, the most
unconceivable sense imaginable of the sins and miseries of mankind, and of the
offense done to God by sin, which raised in him the vastest Agonies possible;
all which concurring to make his Sufferings most exquisite, must have overset a
human force, if it had not been supported from a higher Principle: And as it
pleased God to accept this of him, as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World,
and to Crown him in reward of it, not only with honor and glory, Matthew. (...).
18. (...). 2.9. and 5. 9.
but by giving him all power both in heaven and on earth; so he conferred on
him, an Authority of giving eternal life to all that should believe on his
Name; and receive his Holy Gospel, and live according to it: and therefore
since the making mankind eternally happy, was a design of so high a Narure, it
was suitable to so Glorious a Project, that the Person in and by whom all this
should be wrought, should be raised up to the highest pitch of Glory possible.

Thus though it is always a bold Question to ask, why were things so ordered by
God? Since if they are declared to us by him, we ought to conclude, without any
further enquiry, that they were ordered according to the best and most
infallible Reason, even though we should not be able to find it out; yet here
even we, can discern a great sutableness in all these high Mysteries, to the
great Design of God in this Holy Religion.

IV. But yet in the next Place must be acknowledged that we ought never to be
too easy in believing things, that seem hard Impositions on us; and that
therefore there ought to be a degree of certainty and clearness in the
Revelation of any such thing, that is proportioned to the weight and the
extraordinary nature of that which is proposed to us; for as in the common
affairs of life, an ordinary degree of Evidence serves to persuade us of an
ordinary thing; but if somewhat that is very much out of the way is told us, we
then are in the right, not to believe it, till we find it is well attested to
us; and that by a very good Authority. So in Divine matters such Precepts of
Morality as agree with our Natures and the ends of human Society, may be easily
received, as needing no extraordinary authority to recommend them to us; but if
Doctrines that are more above us are laid upon us, we ought to examine well the
authority upon which they rest, that so we may not become too easy a prey, to
every one that thinks to subdue us with the terror of the word Mystery. Since
then that the acknowledging that One who as to all his outward appearance was a
Man, like unto us, was also the true and the great God, or the Son of the
living God, carries such an uncouth sound in it, that it naturally affrights
and startles us, it is necessary that though the possibility of this has been
already considered, yet that before we believe it, we be sure that it is a
Truth, which is clearly revealed to us by God; for a thing of this kind must
appear in the Scripture, if it is at all in it, with such an Evidence as must
put it past all doubt; since it is not suitable to the design and ends of
Divine Revelation, that a thing which is both so dark and yet so important, as
this must be acknowledged to be, should be revealed, so as to be proved only by
Hints, Inferences, or some Passages that are capable of a double meaning.

Now in pursuance of this, we must observe two things; 1st. That there is
nothing which is more expressly forbid in the Scriptures, than the giving Divine
Adoration to a Creature. Idolatry is no other, than the Worshipping those that
by nature are Galat 4. 8.
not Gods; and even the Old Testament for all the Compliances that were in it,
to sensible nature, yet allowed of nothing that looked like Idolatry; and this
is much less to be imagined in the New, that carries Religion in all respects,
to a higher degree of Sublimity and Purity than the Old did: This then is to be
laid down for a Principle, that nothing is proposed to us in the New Testament,
as the proper Object of our Adoration, but God himself. In the next place, it
is no less plain, that Revel. 5. 8. Heb. 1. 6. Heb. 13. 15. John 14. 1. 2 Cor.
12. 8, 9.
all the Acts of Worship, such as Adoration, Prayer, Praises, Faith, and
Confidence, and in a word, every Act by which we testify our dependence on
God, and our Homage to him, is declared to be due to Jesus Christ in the same
words, in which it is said to be due to God himself; therefore when these two
things are laid together, the result of both is, that either the New Testament
is the most Incoherent and the worst composed Legend that ever was Writ, in
which one main and essential Point is contradict by another, or that Jesus
Christ must be truly God. It is certain, that he is either such, or we
Christians that pay him Divine Adoration, in so ample a manner as we do, are
the greatest Idolaters that ever were.

And as this is contained in the New Testament, in express words, so the whole
Doctrine that is revealed in it, was attested in so eminent and so indisputable
a manner, as to leave no pretense to Infidelity; so many Prophecies concurring
in the Person of our Savior to prove him the true Messiah, promised to the
Jews many Ages before; and so many Miracles appearing, first at his Birth, and
afterward in the whole course of his Life, but above all at his Death, his
Resurrection, and Ascension.

The Apostles published the History of all this soon after it was done, and
mentioned many Circumstances that were involved in it; which, if false, might
have been authentically overthrown by the Jews, in whose Hands the Authority
was lodged at that time, and who had both Interest and Malice enough to set
them on to make the Discovery. One part of the Story was such, that it is not
possible to believe that it could have past upon the World if it was not true.
The Apostles pretended, that after the Holy Ghost was poured out on them, they
not only wrought Miracles, but had likewise the Gift of Tongues. Now this was
such a thing, that if it was false, it was in the power of every one of any
strange Nation, to make the Discovery, and by so doing, to overthrow the Credit
of the whole Gospel. We see, by what both Suetonius, Tacitus, and Pliny have
left to us, that the Christian Religion was soon spread up and down the World;
and that both in Rome, and in remote Provinces, their Numbers and their Maxims,
made them to be very considerable. We also see, in the last of these, that he
had strictly enquired into their Doctrine, their Worship, and their Course of
Life, and had put some of the Women, that were the Deaconesses in the Churches,
to the Torture, to draw from them a discovery of such things whereof they were
accused: Yet he found nothing but a great probity of Manners, and a great
steadiness in adhering to the Doctrine which was believed among them: Upon
whose enquiry the Emperor ordered a stop to be put to the Persecution, that was
then begun: So that this carries in it, not only an Apology for the Morals of
Christians, but a proof of the Doctrines of Christianity; for it being so easy
a thing to have confuted them, if these things which the Evangelists relate had
been false, since they cannot be said to be cunningly devised Fables; we cannot
conceive how it is possible that their Enemies, who were then the Governing
Party, did not discover, and so confound them. Upon the whole Matter then it
appears, that God did by a profusion of Miracles, if I may so speak, give this
Divine Doctrine its first Authority and Credit in the World; and he continued
to water what had been so planted, with a succession of miraculous Powers,
which continued for some Ages in the Church, and to which the Fathers made most
solemn Appeals, in the Apologies that they writ for their Religion; of which
some were addressed to the Emperors, and others to the Senate of Rome. If these
Things which they assert, and to which they appeal, had not been known to be
certainly true, it is not easy to determine whether their madness in venturing
upon such an Appeal, or the Heathens in not joining issue with them in it, was
the greatest.

And thus without Controversy, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, or of the
Christian Religion: God was manifest in the Flesh, that is, in the Humane
Nature of our Savior, in which he dwelt. He was also justified in the Spirit,
that is, proved to be so, in the wonderful Evidences of the Divine Power, that
were solemnly given in the confirmation of it: He was seen of Angels, the
Heavenly Host appearing visibly at his Nativity, and celebrating the Glory of
it; preached unto the Gentiles by a company of poor illiterate Fishermen, who
went about with those mighty Credentials of the Gift of Tongues, and the Power
of Miracles; attesting the Truth of what they themselves had seen, and known;
upon whose Evidence he was believed on in the World, by the Gentiles, tho
rejected by the Jews; who being possessed with false Prejudices concerning the
Messiah, could not then receive an humble and a suffering One, while they
looked for nothing but Triumphs and Conquests under him. But this loss was more
than balanced by the great Multitudes of the Gentiles; who tho they labored
under the Prejudices of their Education, and the more biassed Liberties which
the Heathen Religion allowed them, yet did in great Numbers renounce their
Idolatry, and embrace a Religion that both obliged them to a great strictness
of Life, and also exposed them to many present Sufferings, besides what the
first Planters of it warned them of, concerning a Persecution that was quickly
to overtake them. We see by Tacitus, what multitudes of them were in Rome in
Nero's Time; and by Pliny, that almost all those of Bithnia and Pontus, both in
Town and Country, were become Christian. And in conclusion, God thus made
manifest, was received up into Glory; which either relates to his Ascension,
when in the sight of his Apostles, while he was talking to them, and blessing
them, He was caught up, so that they beheld Luke 24. 51. Acts 5. 9.
him ascending up into Heaven; or this received in Glory, for so it may be
rendered, may relate to the glorious Instances of God's Power, that appeared in
the first planting of Christianity: For, as a Cloud of Glory had appeared
hovering over the Tabernacle, and leading the Israelites through the
Wilderness, which gave the chief Authority to the Law of Moses; so in this
first settling of our most Holy Faith, God seemed, as it were, to have made bare
his Arm, and showed the greatness of his Glory, as well as of his Power. Thus
he appeared to St. Stephen at his Death, and to St. Paul at his Conversion; but
above all, the wonderful Effusion of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, was such a
declaration of his Glory, as far exceeded all that ever had appeared before or
since.

V. In the last place it remains to be considered, how this is said to be a
Mystery of Godliness: The word signifies true Piety, or the right way of
worshipping God. So the meaning of this is, That the Wonders and Glories which
appeared in the Person of Christ, and at the planting of his Gospel, are not
only lofty Declarations of the Greatness and Power of God, and of the Truth of
our Religion, upon which we are to value our Selves, and our Doctrines, but
that they were all intended by God to give our Religion the more Authority,
that so it might have the more Efficacy upon us, for the reforming and
governing of our Lives: for all the use that we make of them besides, is only
to boast, that we believe a Religion to which God has given a great deal of
Credit, but to which we will give none at all.

By Godliness is comprehended the having right Notions of God, the worshipping
him suitably to these, and the framing our whole Lives according to them: And
therefore we treat this Mystery but as a sublime Cant, and not as a Mystery of
Godliness, unless it has these Effects on us. When our Minds are by this so
possessed with a noble Idea of God and of his Attributes, that we adore his
Power, we admire his Wisdom, and rejoice in his Goodness and Love: When we
compare the Prophecies that went before, with their Accomplishment in our
Savior's Person; when we observe all the Circumstances of Providence that
accompanied this Transaction; when from thence we form right Notions of the
hatefulness of Sin, and of the Purity of the Divine Nature, of his Justice as
well as of his Mercy; and when from all these laid together, our Hearts become
full of high and great Thoughts of God, which dwell upon us, and possess us,
then we make it become to us a Mystery of Godliness indeed. Besides, when this
leads us to a right Notion of the Worship of God, as not consisting in outward
Pomp nor Glory, much less in proposing to our selves visible Objects of
Worship, or in dressing it up, as if it were rather a sort of Opera, than the
Worship of that God, who has in his Gospel revealed himself to be Spirit and
Truth, and that he will be worshipped accordingly. When our Worship consists in
humble Acts of confessing our own Sins, that needed such an Expiation, in
earnest Prayers for a Share in all the Benefits of it, and in solemn
Acknowledgments of the Wonders of it, and of all those Blessings which we are
always to own as the Effects of it, flowing to us through it: When these, I
say, are our Thoughts and Exercises in the Worship of God, then does this
become to us a Mystery of Godliness. And finally, when our Minds are so
seasoned with it, that our whole Lives carry the Impressions of it upon them;
when we are afraid of departing from the Rules of it; when we are strict in
observing them; when it appears that we highly value the Blessing of the
Knowledge of the Gospel, that we are sensible of the danger of losing it, and
that we rejoice in it above all other things; and when the Honor of our
Religion does so affect us, that we are wounded at Heart, when it falls under
any Reproach or Suffering, but rejoice in all the Glory of it; when we feel a
sensible Concern in the whole Body that professes it, and in all the Accidents
that relate to it; then do we show that we make this to be, that which truly it
is, a Mystery of Godliness.

But if we are only proud of our Religion, and factious about it; if it neither
works on our Hearts, nor reforms our Lives; if we grow neither the better nor
the wiser for it; if on the contrary, it is only a Pretense to cover ill
Designs, and a handle to manage Factions by; if it makes us think that we may
compound by our Heat in point of Opinion, for our Coldness in true Piety, and
that Orthodoxy will atone for Immorality; if we lay in fuel for our ill Nature
from it; if we make use of it to serve every End, but that for which it was
appointed of God; and in a word, if, instead of growing better by it, are
really the worse for it: Then here is the most fatal reversing of the greatest
Design that ever was.

In order to the examining the Truth of all this, it is necessary for us to
consider, what Impressions have the various Scenes that we have seen, with
relation to Religion, made upon us? How did our apprehensions of losing it
affect us? Was it only with the sense of a Party, and the anger of thinking
that we were depressed, and like to be ill used? Or did that Scene make us
reflect on our Sins, that had rendered us unworthy of so great a Blessing, and
that had brought us so near the danger of losing it: did we in all that time of
Fear and Melancholy, turn to God, repent us of our Sins, and enter into solemn
Vows of living more suitably to our Religion, if God should be so gracious as
to restore it to us? Such a Preparation as this, had made our Deliverance prove
a double Blessing to us.

And how have we received it? has it been only with the joy of seeing our
Enemies fall before us, and of finding our selves now come in for a turn in the
Advantages of Fortune? Does this serve only to lift us up upon our Success and
Prosperity, and to make us remember all Quarrels, and so gratify Passion and
Revenge? Is our Ease and Abundance abused into Luxury and Vanity? Are our
Hearts lifted up, or our Passions sharpened? and instead of parting with our
old Sins, are we adding new ones to them? If our Hearts, when sincerely asked
by us, concerning all these things, tell us that they are but too true, then we
need not wonder if we see a stand made in the course of those Blessings, which
God has been holding forth to us, but that we have by our Sins not only stopped,
but turned many of them to Curses. We ought in that case to ask our selves,
what have we done? and wherein have we troubled Israel? It is but a Melancholy
Comfort when a man is full of so sad a speculation, to think that man is so
made, that it ever was, and ever will be so.

When the Christian Religion in Constantine's time, became triumphant over all
the Powers of Darkness, that had conspired its destruction, and that after many
Cruel Persecutions, had set on foot the last, that was both the bloodiest and
the longest of all that had gone before it; in which, for ten years together,
the Sword had been made drunk with the blood of the Saints; and it was so
firmly believed that the name of a Christian was extinguished, that Medals were
struck to perpetuate the memory of that Performance; when, I say, the Christian
Religion got out of all this, and had not only Edicts of Liberty in its favor,
but was also cherished by the Kindness and Protection of Emperors; One should
have expected that a Society which had been so long in the fire, as they had
been, must have come out of it freed from all its dross: and that the
Christians from the remembrance of the former Persecution, and the reflections
on their present Ease, should have been so full of a sense, both of what they
had escaped then, and what they enjoyed, that there should have been nothing to
be found among them, but Churches full of Devotion, Clergymen animated with
Zeal, and Christians that were an honor to their Profession.

But how far was it from all this! Generally Ignorant and Vicious Men were
promoted to their best and greatest Sees, who fell into most Extravagant
Disputes concerning the Dignity and Privileges of their Episcopal Sees. In
Africa a Breach arose upon no greater matter than this, Whether Cecilian, the
Bishop of Carthage, was ordained by men that had, during the Persecution,
denied the Faith, or not? This was of no great Consequence, if it had been
true; and being a matter of fact that turned upon proof, the case was judged
against Donatus, and his Party, who complained of Cecilian: but this did not
stop the Breach, which made such a fatal progress, that almost in every Town in
Africa there was a Church formed with a Bishop over it, that adhered to
Donatus: and the Division continued above 120 years, and at last grew to be a
matter of so violent an Animosity, that much Blood was shed upon it: and they
continued to be destroying one another, till the Vandals broke in upon them,
and conquered, and consumed them both.

At the same time that this Dispute began at Carthage, another was raised at
Alexandria, occasioned at first by some indiscreet Words that passed between
Alexander the Bishop, and Arius; whose Spirits being sharpened against one
another upon secret Reasons, they aggravated some mistaken Expressions too far:
as appears from the wisest Writing of that Age, the Letter which Constantine
writ to them upon this Occasion: But this was carried afterward so far, that
we may safely say the Spirit and Power of the Christian Religion was lost in
the Dispute. The Scandals given by the ill Lives, not only of Lay Christians,
but even of the chief Bishops of the Church, and those no less Scandalous
Disputes among them, brought much Shame and Infamy on that holy Profession:
which will ever suffer, when those who pretend to it, are a reproach to it.

In Conclusion, after a whole Age of God's long-suffering Patience and
Forbearance, there fell on the Church, both in the East, and in the West, a
succession of the terriblest Plagues for two Ages together, that is in History:
One Conqueror coming after another, and wasting what the former had left. And
these brought on such Famines and Pestilences upon the whole Roman Empire, that
all the History of those Ages is a continued Scene of Horror and Misery.

These are speaking things, and are set before us for our Terror, as well as
for our Instruction; to let us see what we ought to look for, it not warned by
such Terrible Examples, we should still continue to despise all the Methods of
God's Providence, as well the severity of his Judgments, as his Long-suffering
Patience, and Forbearance toward us.

If any had observed the Constancy and Zeal that appeared in this Nation, for
some years last past, when we saw our Religion in danger, and that scarce any
could be prevailed on, so much as to give way, much less, to concur or comply
with the Designs that were then on foot; from thence, one that saw the matter
at a distance, would have been tempted to think that we were full of Zeal for
our Religion, since neither Hope nor Fear could work on any considerable Number
among us; and from thence one might have been led to conclude, That if God
should have delivered us from all that Danger, with a high and uplifted hand,
and should have prevented even our Hopes and Wishes, in giving us such a quick
and cheap Deliverance, as is without Example in History; That at least all
People should have received this with all possible Acknowledgments; and that
upon it, we should all have considered, what were the causes of our late
Dangers, that threw us into them; and that we should have agreed in this, That
our Divisions had been from the beginning to the end, the chief Foundation of
all our Enemies hopes; that they had been set on, and managed by them in order
to our Ruin; that nothing made our public Councils so slow and feeble, and
that nothing did so violently distract the Minds of the People, as to see us so
broken among our selves, especially in Matters of Religion; and that we should
have studied to have healed all differences among our selves; and in
Conclusion, that the Effects of so great a Revolution, should have been a
visible Reformation among all Ranks and Conditions of People.

But what shall be said, if all this Change of Affairs, has produced no other
Change among us, but for the worse? If we are as bad as ever in all respects;
if Vices of all sorts have still their free course among us; and if those
Animorsities which were generally looked on for some years, as forgot and
extinct* are now revived with a new and greater heat; and if different
Sentiments, whether with Relation to Sacred, or to Temporal Concerns, should
now disturb us in so unseasonable a time, when the Eyes of all the World are
upon us, and that all Europe expects from hence, a Deliverance from a Tyranny,
which has now lain so long and so heavy on it. All these things are sad
Indications of our great Indifferency in the Matters of Religion; that after
all the talk that has been about them, we either believe them not, or at least,
consider them not to be as they are indeed, the most valuable of all things.
But let the World think of these things as they please, in them we see the
Power, and the Wisdom of God: And as Morality without Religion, will be found
to be but a feeble Principle; and such as will only constrain a Man to follow
his Interests, or at least his Pride, which in that Language, is called Honor;
so Religion in general, unless it is grounded on a Divine Revelation, will not
have strength enough to hold, or govern a Man, it not having foundation enough
for much Weight to be laid on it: and therefore here is a short Resolution of a
good Man's Principles. He is persuaded that God sent down this Divine Person
into the World, to declare to us the Will of God; and upon our following it, to
assure us of the Pardon of Sin, of the Favor of God, and of Eternal Happiness.
Next upon his believing these things, he sets himself to the serious
performance of all that is commanded him by God; in doing which, he finds great
inward joy in himself, since a mind reduced to a calm and quiet state, will
feel as real a Complacency in all that is good, as the Eye feels in Light, or
the Ear in Music; from this arises in a good Man, a secret Confidence in God;
for as he feels that he is conforming himself to his Will, so he grows assured
of the Favor and Love of that infinitely good God; out of that there springs
in a good mind, a perpetual source of Joy; he is walking with God, and ever
delighting himself in him; and this Joy goes far beyond Life, and all that is
present; it shoots out into another World, and gives him both a prospect of
Eternity, and also some earnests of it. This is the state of a truly Godly Man,
he feels himself happy, but rejoices because he believes he shall be infinitely
more so, when he shall be in a state where he shall perfectly comprehend that,
which is now to him the great Mystery of Godliness; To which State, God of his
infinite Mercy bring us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
JAcobi Usserii Armacbani Archiep. Historia dogmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodoxos and Pontificios de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis, nunc primum
edita. Accesserunt ejusdem dissertationes de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, and de
Epistola ad Laodicenos antehac ineditae. Descripsit, digessit, and notis atque
Auctuario locuplet avit Henricus Wharton, A. M. Reverendissimo Archiep.
Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation on Account of
the Oaths. With an Answer to the History of Passive Obedience.

A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission opened in the Jerusalem*
Chamber, October. 10. 1689.

Dr. Wakes Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions, 8vo.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Hertford, July 8. 1689. By John Strype, M.
A. Vicar of Low-Leyton in Essex.

The Bishop of Salisbury's Sermon before the House of Peers, November* 5. 1689.

-- His Sermon of Peace and Unity, 4to.


