A RELATION OF A CONFERENCE Held About RELIGION, AT LONDON, BY EDW.
STILLINGFLEET, D. D. etc.

With some Gentlemen of the Church of Rome.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
1687.

THE PREFACE.
THere is nothing that is by a more universal agreement decried, than
Conferences about Controversies of Religion: and no wonder, for they have been
generally managed with so much heat and passion, parties being more concerned
for Glory and Victory, than Truth; and there is such foul dealing in the
accounts given of them, that it is not strange to see these Prejudices taken up
against them. And yet it cannot be denied, but if Men of Candor and Calmness
should discourse about matters of Religion, without any other interest than to
seek and follow Truth, there could not be a more effectual and easy way found
for satisfying Scruples. More can be said in one hour than read in a day:
Besides that what is said in a discourse discreetly managed, does more
appositely meet with the doubtings and difficulties any body is perplexed with,
than is possibly to be found in a Book: and since almost all Books disguise the
Opinions of those that differ from them, and represent their Arguments as weak,
and their Opinions as odious; Conferences between those of different
Persuasions do remedy all these Evils. But after all the Advantages of this
way, it must be confessed that for the greater part Men are so engaged to their
Opinions by interest and other ties, that in Conferences most Persons are
resolved beforehand to yield to no conviction, but to defend every thing:
being only concerned to say so much as may darken weaker Minds that are
Witnesses, and give them some occasion to triumph; at least conceal any foil
they may have received, by wrapping up some pitiful shift or other, in such
words, and pronouncing them with such accents of assurance, and perhaps scorn,
that they may seem to come off with Victory.

And it is no less frequent to see Men after they have been so baffled, that
all discerning Witnesses are ashamed of them, yet being resolved to make up
with impudence what is wanting in Truth, as a Coward is generally known to
boast most, where he has least cause; publish about what feats they have done,
and tell every body they see how the cause in their Mouth did triumph over
their Enemies: that so the praise of the defeat given may be divided between
the cause and themselves: and though in modesty they may pretend to ascribe all
to Truth and the Faith they contended for, yet in their Hearts they desire the
greatest part be offered to themselves.

All these Considerations with a great many more did appear to us, when the
Lady T. asked us if we would speak with her Husband and some others of the
Church of Rome, as well for clearing such Scruples as the perpetual converse
with those of that Religion had raised in the Lady; as for satisfying her
Husband, of whose being willing to receive instruction she seemed confident.
Yet being well assured of the Ladies great candor and worth, and being willing
to stand up for the Vindication and Honor of our Church, whatever might follow
on it, we promised to be ready to wait on her at her House upon advertisement:
without any nice treating beforehand, what we should confer about. Therefore
we neither asked who should be there, nor what number, nor in what Method, or
on what particulars our discourse should run, but went thither carrying only
one Friend along with us for a Witness. If the Discourse had been left to our
managing, we resolved to have insisted chiefly on the Corruptions in the
worship of the Roman Church: to have showed on several Heads that there was
good cause to reform these Abuses; and that the Bishops and Pastors of this
Church, the Civil Authority concurring, had sufficient Authority for reforming
it. These being the material things in Controversy, which must satisfy every
Person if well made out, we intended to have discoursed about them; but being
put to answer, we followed those we had to deal with.

But that we may not forestall the Reader in any thing that passed in the
Ladies Chamber, which he will find in the following account, we had no sooner
left her House, but we resumed among our selves all had passed, that it might
be written down, what ever should follow, to be published if need were. So we
agreed to meet again three days after, to compare what could be written down,
with our Memories. And having met, an account was read, which did so exactly
contain all that was spoken, as far as we could remember, that after a few
Additions, we all Three Signed the Narrative then agreed to. Few days had
passed, when we found we had need of all that care and caution, for the matter
had got wind, and was in every bodies Mouth. Many of our best Friends know how
far we were from talking of it, for till we were asked about it, we scarce
opened our Mouths of it to any Person. But when it was said that we had been
baffled and foiled, it was necessary for us to give some account of it: Not
that we were much concerned in what might be thought of us, but that the most
excellent cause of our Church and Religion might not suffer by the
misrepresentations of this Conference. And the truth was, there was so little
said by the Gentlemen we spoke with, that was of weight, that we had scarce any
occasion given us of speaking about things of Importance: So that being but
faintly assaulted, we had no great cause of boasting, had we been ever so much
inclined to it. At length being weary with the Questions put to us about it, we
showed some of our Friends the written account of it. And that those of the
Church of Rome might have no pretense to complain of any foul dealing on our
part, we caused a Copy of it to be writ out, and on the 19. of April sent it
the Lady T. to be showed to them. And one of us, having the honor to meet with
her afterward, desired her to let her Husband and the others with him know,
that as we had set down very faithfully all we could remember that they had
said; So if they could except at any part of this Narrative, or would add any
thing that they either did say which we had forgot, or should have said which
themselves had forgot to say, we desired they might add it to the account we
sent them. For we looked on it as a most unreasonable thing, that the Credit of
any Cause or Party should depend on their Extemporary Faculty of speaking, the
quickness of their Invention, or the readiness of their memory who discourse
about it: though it will appear that in this Conference they had all the
advantage, and we all the disadvantage possible: Since they knew and were
resolved what they would put us to, of which we were utterly ignorant: Save
that about an hour before we went thither, we had an advertisement sent us by a
third Person, that it was like they would assault us about the Articles of our
Church, particularly that of the blessed Sacrament.

Having made this offer to the Lady of adding what they should desire, craving
only leave that if they added any thing that was not said, we might be also
allowed to add what we should have answered if such things had been said, we
resolved to publish nothing till they had a competent time given them, both to
make such Additions to the Narrative, and to consider the Paper whereby we hope
we have made out according to our undertaking, that the Doctrine of the Church
for the first seven or eight Ages was contrary to Transubstantiation: which we
sent to the Lady on the seventeenth of April to be communicated to them. And
therefore, though our Conference was generally talked of, and all Persons
desired an account of it might be published; yet we did delay it till we should
hear from them. And meeting on the twenty ninth of April with him who is marked
N. N. in the account of the Conference, I told him, the foolish talk was made
by their Party about this Conference, had set so many on us, who all called to
us to print the account of it, that we were resolved on it: But I desired he
might any time between that and Trinity Sunday, bring me what Exceptions he or
the other Gentlemen had to the account we sent them, which he confessed he had
seen. So I desired, that by that day I might have what Additions they would
make either of what they had said but was forgot by us, or what they would now
add upon second thoughts: but longer I told him I could not delay the
publishing it. I desired also to know by that time whether they intended any
answer to the Account we sent them of the Doctrine of the Fathers about
Transubstantiation. He confessed he had seen that Paper: But by what he then
said, it seemed they did not think of any answer to it.

And so I waited still expecting to hear from him. At length, on the twentieth
of May, N. N. came to me and told me some of these Gentlemen were out of Town,
and so he would not take on him to give any thing in writing; yet he desired me
to take notice of some Particulars he mentioned, which I entreated he would
write down, that he might not complain of my misrepresenting what he said. This
he declined to do, so I told him I would set it down the best way I could, and
desired him to call again that he might see if I had written it down
faithfully, which he promised to do that same afternoon, and was as good as his
word, and I read to him what is subjoyned to the Relation of the Conference,
which he acknowledged was a faithful account of what he had told me.

I have considered it I hope to the full, so that it gave me more occasion of
canvassing the whole matter. And thus the Reader will find a great deal of
Reason to give an entire credit to this Relation, since we have proceeded in it
with so much Candor, that it is plain we intended not to abuse the Credulity of
any, but were willing to offer this account to the censure of the adverse
party; and there being nothing else excepted against it, that must needs
satisfy every reasonable man that all is true that he has here offered to his
perusal.

And if these Gentlemen or any of their Friends publish different or contrary
Relations of this Conference, without that fair and open way of procedure which
we have observed toward them; we hope the Reader will be so just as to
consider, that our Method in publishing this account has been candid and plain,
and looks like men that were doing an honest thing, of which they were neither
afraid nor ashamed: which cannot in reason be thought of any surreptitious
account that like a work of Darkness may be let fly abroad, without the Name
of any Person to answer for it on his Conscience or Reputation: and that at
least he will suspend his belief till a competent time be given to show what
mistakes or errors any such relation may be guilty of.

We do not expect the Reader shall receive great Instructions from the
following Conference, for the truth is, we met with nothing but shufling. So
that he will find when ever we came to discourse closely to any head, they very
dexterously went off from it to another, and so did still shift off from
following any thing was suggested. But we hope every Reader will be so just to
us as to acknowledge it was none of our fault, that we did not canvass things
more exactly, for we proposed many things of great Importance to be discoursed
on, but could never bring them to fix on any thing. And this did fully satisfy
the Lady T. when she saw we were ready to have justified our Church in all
things, but that they did still decline the entering into any matter of weight:
So that it appeared both to her and the rest of the Company, that what
boastings soever they spread about as if none of us would or durst appear in a
Conference to vindicate our Church, all were without ground; and the Lady was
by the blessing of God further confirmed in the Truth, in which we hope God
shall continue her to her Life's end.

But we hope the Letter and the two Discourses that follow, will give the
Reader a more profitable entertainment. In the Letter we give many short hints,
and set down some select Passages of the Fathers, to show they did not believe
Transubstantiation. Upon all which we are ready to join issue to make good
every thing in that Paper, from which we believe it is apparent the Primitive
Church was wholly a stranger to Transubstantiation.

It was also judged necessary by some of our Friends that we should to purpose,
and once for all, expose and discredit that unreasonable demand of showing all
the Articles of our Church in the express words of Scripture: upon which the
first discourse was written.

And it being found that no answer was made to what N. N. said, to show that it
was not possible the Doctrine of Transubstantiation could have crept into any
Age, if those of that Age had not had it from their Fathers, and they from
theirs up to the Apostles days, this being also since our Conference laid home
to me by the same Person, it was thought fit to give a full account how this
Doctrine could have been brought into the Church, that so a change may appear
to have been not only possible, but also probable, and therefore the second
discourse was written.

If these Discourses have not that full finishing and Life which the Reader
would desire, he must regrate his Misfortune in this, that the Person who was
best able to have written them, and given them all possible Advantages out of
that vast stock of Learning and Judgment he is Master of, was so taken up with
other work cut out for him by some of these Gentlemen's Friends, of which we
shall see an excellent account very speedily, that it was not possible for him
to spare so much time for writing these; so that it fell to the others share to
do it: and therefore the Reader is not to expect any thing like those high
strains of Wit and Reason which fill all that Authors Writings, but must give
allowance to one that studies to follow him though at a great distance:
Therefore all can be said from him is, that what is here performed was done by
his Direction and Approbation, which to some degree will again encourage the
Reader, and so I leave him to the perusal of what follows.

The RELATION OF THE CONFERENCE.
D. S. and M. B. went to M. L. T's, as they had been desired by L. T. to confer
with some Persons upon the Grounds of the Church of England separating from
Rome, and to show how unreasonable it was to go from our Church to theirs.

About half an hour after them, came in S. P. T. Mr. W. and three more. There
were present seven or eight Ladies, three other Churchmen, and one or two
more. When we were all set D. S. said to S. P. T. that we were come to wait on
them for justifying our Church; that he was glad to see we had Gentlemen to
deal with, from whom he expected fair dealing, as on the other hand he hoped
they should meet with nothing from us, but what became our Profession.

S. P. said, they had Protestants to their Wives, and there were other Reasons
too to make them wish they might turn Protestants; therefore he desired to be
satisfied in one thing: and so took out the Articles of the Church, and read
these Words of the Sixth Article of the Holy Scriptures; [So that whatsoever is
not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man
that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to Salvation.] Then he turned to the twenty eighth Article of the
Lord's Supper, and read these Words, [And the mean whereby the Body of Christ
is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith:] and added, he desired to know
whether that was read in Scripture or not, and in what place it was to be found.

D. S. said, He must first explain that Article of the Scripture; for this
method of proceeding was already sufficiently known and exposed; he clearly saw
the snare they thought to bring him in, and the advantages they would draw from
it. But it was the Cause of the Church he was to defend, which he hoped he was
ready to seal with his Blood, and was not to be given up for a Trick. The
Meaning of the sixth Article was, That nothing must be Received or Imposed, as
an Article of Faith, but what was either expressly contained in Scripture, or to
be deduced and proved from it by a clear Consequence: so that if in any Article
of our Church which they rejected, he should either show it in the express
Words of Scripture, or prove it by a clear Consequence, he performed all
required in this Article. If they would receive this, and fix upon it as the
meaning of the Article, which certainly it was; then he would go on to the
proof of that other Article he had called in question.

M. W. said, They must see the Article in express Scripture, or at least in
some places of Scripture which had been so interpreted by the Church, the
Councils or Fathers, or any one Council or Father. And he the rather pitched on
this Article, because he judged it the only Article, in which all Protestants,
except the Lutherans, were agreed.

D. S. said, It had been the art of all the Heretics from the Marcionites
days, to call for express Words of Scripture. It was well known, the Arrians
set up their rest on this, That their Doctrine was not condemned by express
words of Scripture; but that this was still rejected by the Catholic Church,
and that Theodoret had written a Book, on purpose to prove the unreasonableness
of this Challenge; therefore he desired they would not insist on that which
every body must see was not fair dealing, and that they would take the Sixth
Article entirely, and so go to see if the other Article could not be proved
from Scripture, though it were not contained in express words.

M. B. Added, that all the Fathers, writing against the Arrians, brought their
proofs of the Consubstantiality of the Son, from the Scriptures, though it was
not contained in the express words of any place. And the Arrian Council, that
rejected the words Equisubstantial and Consubstantial, gives that for the
reason, that they were not in the Scripture. And that in the Council of
Ephesus, S. Cyril brought in many propositions against the Nestorians, with a
vast collection of places of Scripture to prove them by; and though the
quotations from Scripture contained not those propositions in express words;
yet the Council was satisfied from them, and condemned the Nestorians.
Therefore it was most unreasonable, and against the Practice of the Catholic
Church, to require express words of Scripture, and that the Article was
manifestly a disjunctive, where we were to choose whether of the two we would
choose, either one or other.

S. P. T. said, Or was not in the Article.

M. B. said, Nor was a negative in a disjunctive proposition, as Or was an
affirmative, and both came to the same meaning.

M. W. said, That S. Austin charged the Heretic to read what he said in the
Scripture.

M. B. said, S. Austin could not make that a constant rule, otherwise he must
reject the Consubstantiality which he did so zealously assert; though he might
in disputing urge an Heretic with it on some other account.

D. S. said, The Scripture was to deliver to us the Revelation of God, in
matters necessary to Salvation; but it was an unreasonable thing to demand
proofs for a negative in it; for if the Roman Church have set up many
Doctrines, as Articles of Faith, without proof from the Scriptures, we had
cause enough to reject these if there was no clear Proofs of them from
Scripture; but to require express words of Scripture for a Negative, was as
unjust, as if Mahomet had said, the Christians had no reason to reject him,
because there was no place in Scripture that called him an Impostor. Since then
the Roman Church had set up the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, without either express Scripture or good Proofs from it,
their Church had good cause to reject these.

M. W. said, The Article they desired to be satisfied in was, if he understood
any thing, a positive Article, and not a negative.

M. B. said, The positive Article was, that Christ was received in the Holy
Sacrament; but because they had (as our Church judged) brought in the Doctrine
of the corporal presence without all reason, the Church made that Explanation,
to cast out the other; so that upon the matter it was a negative. He added,
that it was also unreasonable to ask any one place to prove a Doctrine by; for
the Fathers in their Proceedings with the Arrians brought a great Collection of
Places, which gave light to one another, and all concurred to prove the Article
of Faith that was in Controversy: so if we brought such a consent of many
Places of Scripture as proved our Doctrine, all being joined together, we
perform all that the Fathers thought themselves bound to do in the like case.

D. S. then at great length told them, The Church of Rome and the Church of
England differed in many great and weighty points; that we were come thither to
see, as these Gentlemen professed they desired, if we could offer good reason
for them to turn Protestants, and as the Ladies professed a desire to be
further established in the Doctrine of the Church of England; In order to
which, none could think it a proper Method to pick out some words in the
obscure corner of an Article, and call for express Scriptures for them. But the
fair and fit way was to examine whether the Church of England had not very good
reason to separate from the Communion of the Church of Rome; therefore, since
it was for truth, in which our Souls are so deeply concerned, that we enquired,
he desired they would join issue to examine either the grounds on which the
Church of England did separate from the Church of Rome, or the Authority by
which she did it: for if there was both good reason for it, and if those who
did it, had a sufficient Authority to do it, then was the Church of England
fully vindicated. He did appeal to all that were present, if in this offer he
dealt not heartily and fairly, and if all other ways were not shufling. Which
he pressed with great earnestness, as that only which could satisfy all
Peoples Consciences.

M. W. and S. P. T. said, God forbid they should speak one word for the Church
of Rome; they understood the danger they should run by speaking to that.

D. S. said, He hoped they looked on us as Men of more Conscience and Honesty,
than to make an ill use of any thing they might say for their Church; that for
himself he would die rather than be guilty of so base a thing, the very thought
whereof he abhorred.

M. B. said, That though the Law condemned the endeavoring to reconcile any to
the Church of Rome, yet their justifying their Church when put to it,
especially to Divines, in order to satisfaction which they professed they
desired, could by no color be made a Transgression; And that as we engaged our
Faith to make no ill use of what should be said, so if they doubted any of the
other Company, it was S. P. his House, and he might order it to be more private
if he pleased.

S. P. said, he was only to speak to the Articles of the Church of England, and
desired express words for that Article. Upon this followed a long wrangling,
the same things were said over and over again. In the end

M. W. said, They had not asked where that Article was read; that they doubted
of it, for they knew it was in no place of Scripture, in which they were the
more confirmed, because none was so much as alleged,

D. S. said, Upon the terms in the sixth Article he was ready to undertake the
twenty eighth Article to prove it clearly by Scripture.

M. W. said, But there must be no Interpretations admitted of.

M. B. said, It was certain the Scriptures were not given to us, as Parrots are
taught to speak words; we were endued with a faculty of understanding, and we
must understand somewhat by every place of Scripture. Now the true meaning of
the words, being that which God would teach us in the Scriptures, which way
soever that were expressed, is the Doctrine revealed there; and it was to be
considered, that the Scriptures were at first delivered to plain and simple
men, to be made use of by all without distinction: therefore we were to look
unto them as they did; and so S. Paul wrote his Epistles, which were the
hardest pieces of the New Testament, to all in the Churches to whom he directed
them.

M. W. said, The Epistles were written upon emergent Occasions, and so were for
the use of the Churches to whom they were directed.

D. S. said, Though they were written upon emergent Occasions, yet they were
written by Divine Inspiration, and as a Rule of Faith, not only for those
Churches, but for all Christians.

But as M. W. was a going to speak,

M. C. came in, upon which we all rose up till he was set; So being set, after
some Civilities,

D. S. resumed a little what they were about, and told they were calling for
express Scriptures to prove the Articles of our Church by.

M. C. said, If we be about Scriptures, where is the Judge that shall pass the
Sentence who expounds them aright; otherwise the Contest must be endless.

D. S. said, He had proposed a matter that was indeed of weight; therefore he
would first show, that these of the Church of Rome were not provided of a
sufficient or fit Judge of Controversies.

M. C. said, That was not the thing they were to speak to; for though we
destroyed the Church of Rome all to naught, yet except we built up our own, we
did nothing; therefore he desired to hear what he had to say for our own
Church; he was not to meddle with the Church of Rome, but to hear and be
instructed if he could see reason to be of the Church of England, for may be it
might be somewhat in his way.

D. S. said, He would not examine if it would be in his way to be of the Church
of England, or not, but did heartily acknowledge with great Civility that he
was a very fair dealer in what he had proposed, and that now he had indeed set
us in the right way, and the truth was we were extreme glad to get out of the
wrangling we had been in before, and to come to treat of matters that were of
importance. So after some Civilities had passed on both sides,

D. S. said, The Bishops and Pastors of the Church of England, finding a great
many abuses crept into the Church, particularly in the worship of God, which
was chiefly insisted upon in the Reformation, such as the Images of the blessed
Trinity, the Worship whereof was set up and encouraged; The turning the
Devotions we ought to offer only to Christ, to the blessed Virgin, the Angels
and Saints; That the worship of God was in an unknown Tongue; That the Chalice
was taken from the People, against the express words of the Institution; That
Transubstantiation and the Sacrifice of the Mass were set up; That our Church
had good reason to judge these to be heinous abuses, which did much endanger
the Salvation of Souls; therefore, being the Pastors of the Church and being
assisted in it by the Civil Powers, they had both good reason and sufficient
Authority to reform the Church from these Abuses, and he left it to M. C. to
choose on which of these Particulars they should discourse.

M. B. said, The Bishops and Pastors having the charge of Souls were bound to
feed the Flock with sound Doctrine, according to the word of God. So S. Paul
when he charged the Bishops of Ephesus to feed the Flock, and to guard it
against Wolves or Seducers; he commends them to the word of Gods Grace, which
is the Gospel. And in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, wherein the Rules of
the Pastoral charge are set down, he commands Timothy, and in him all Bishops
and Pastors, to hold fast the Doctrine and form of sound words which he had
delivered, and tells him, the Scriptures were able to make the man of God
perfect. If then the Bishops and Pastors of this Church found it corrupted by
any unsound Doctrine, or Idolatrous Worship, they were by the Law of God and
the charge of Souls for which they were accountable, obliged to throw out these
Corruptions, and reform the Church; and this the rather, that the first
Question proposed in the Consecration of a Bishop, as it is in the Pontifical,
is, Will thou teach these things which thou understandest to be in the
Scripture, to the People committed to thee, both by thy Doctrine and Example?
To which he answers: I will.

M. C. said, We had now offered as much as would be the subject of many days
discourse, and he had but few minutes to spare: therefore he desired to be
informed what Authority those Bishops had to judge in matters which they found
not only in this Church, but in all Churches round about them, should they have
presumed to judge in these matters.

D. S. said, It had been frequently the Practice of many Nations and Provinces
to meet in Provincial Synods, and reform Abuses. For which he offered to prove
they had both Authority and President. But much more in some Instances he was
ready to show of particulars that had been defined by General Councils, which
they only applied to their Circumstances; and this was never questioned but
Provincial Synods might do.

M. C. desired to be first satisfied, by what Authority they could cut
themselves off from the Obedience of the Sea of Rome, in King Henry the VIII.
his days. The Pope then was looked on as the Monarch of the Christian World in
Spirituals, and all Christendom was one Church, under One Head, and had, been
so for many Ages; So that if a Province or Country would cut themselves from
the Body of this Nation; for instance, Wales, that had once distinct Princes,
and say we acknowledge no right William the Conqueror had, so that we reject
the Authority of those descended from him; they might have the same Plea which
this our Church had. For the day before that Act of Parliament did pass, after
the 20. of Henry the VIII. the Pope had the Authority in Spirituals, and they
were his Subjects in Spirituals: Therefore their Declaring he had none, could
not take his Authority from him, no more than the Long Parliament had right to
declare by any Act, that the Sovereign Power was in the Peoples hands, in
pursuance of which they cut off the Kings Head.

D. S. said, The first General Councils, as they established the Patriarchal
Power, so the Privileges of several Churches were preserved entire to them, as
in the case of Cyprus; that the British Churches were not within the
Patriarchal Jurisdiction of Rome; that afterward the Bishops of Rome, striking
in with the Interests of the Princes of Europe, and watching and improving all
Advantages, got up by degrees through many Ages into that height of Authority,
which they managed as ill as they unjustly acquired it, and particularly in
England; where, from King William the Conqueror's days, as their illegal and
oppressive Impositions were a constant Grievance to the People, so our Princes
and Parliaments were ever put to struggle with them. But to affront their
Authority, Thomas Becket, who was a Traitor to the Law, must be made a Saint,
and a day kept for him, in which they were to pray to God for Mercy through his
Merits. It continuing thus for several Ages, in the end a vigorous Prince
arises, who was resolved to assert his own Authority. And he, looking into the
Oaths the Bishops swore to the Pope, they were all found in a Praemunire by
them. Then did the whole Nation agree to assert their own freedom, and their
Kings Authority. And 'twas considerable, that those very Bishops, that in Queen
Mary's days did most cruelly persecute those of the Church of England, and
advance the Interests of Rome, were the most zealous Assertors and Defenders of
what was done by King Henry the VIII. Therefore the Popes Power in England,
being founded on no just Title, and being managed with so much Oppression,
there was both a full Authority and a great deal of reason for rejecting it.
And if the Mayor Generals, who had their Authority from Cromwell, might yet
have declared for the King, who had the true Title, and against the Usurper; so
the Bishops, though they had sworn to the Pope, yet that being contrary to the
Allegiance they owed the King, ought to have asserted the Kings Authority, and
rejected the Pope's.

M. B. said, It seemed M. C. founded the Popes Right to the Authority he had in
England chiefly upon Prescription. But there were two things to be said to
that; First, that no Prescription runs against a divine right. In the clearing
of Titles among Men, Prescription is in some Cases a good Title: But if by the
Laws of God the Civil Powers have a supreme Authority over their Subjects, then
no Prescription whatsoever can void this. Besides, the Bishops having full
Authority and Jurisdiction, this could not be bounded or limited by any
Obedience the Pope claimed from them. Further, there can be no Prescription in
this case, where the Usurpation has been all along contested and opposed. We
were ready to prove, that in the first Ages all Bishops were accounted
Brethren, Colleagues, and fellow-Bishops with the Bishop of Rome. That
afterward, as he was declared Patriarch of the West, so the other Patriarchs
were equal in Authority to him in their several Patriarchates. That Britain was
no part of his Patriarchate, but an exempt, as Cyprus was. That his Power as
Patriarch was only for receiving Appeals, or calling Synods, and did not at all
encroach on the Jurisdiction of other Bishops in their Sees; and that the
Bishops in his Patriarchate did think they might separate from him. A famous
Instance of this was in the sixth Century, when the Question was about the tria
Capitula, for which the Western Bishops did generally stand, and Pope Vigilius
wrote in defense of them; but Justinian the Emperor having drawn him to
Constantinople, he consented with the Fifth Council to the condemning them.
Upon which at his return many of the Western Bishops did separate from him. And
as Victor, Bishop of Tunes tells us (who lived at that time) That Pope was
Synodically excommunicated by the Bishops of Africa. It is true, in the eighth
Century the Decretal Epistles being forged, his Pretentions were much advanced:
yet his universal jurisdicton was contested in all Ages, as might be proved
from the known instance of Hincmar, Bishop of Rheims, and many more. Therefore,
how strong soever the Argument from Prescription may be in Civil things, it is
of no force here.

M. C. said, Now we are got into a contest of 1700 years story, but I know not
when we shall get out of it. He confessed there was no Prescription against a
divine right, and acknowledged all Bishops were alike in their Order, but not
in their Jurisdiction; as the Bishop of Oxford was a Bishop as well as the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and yet he was inferior to him in Jurisdiction: But
desired to know, what was in the Popes Authority that was so intolerable.

D. S. said, That he should only debate about the Popes Jurisdiction, and to
his question, for one Particular, That from the days of Pope Paschal the II.
all Bishops swear Obedience to the Pope, was intolerable Bondage.

M. C. said, Then will you acknowledge that before that Oath was imposed the
Pope was to be acknowledged? adding, That let us fix a time wherein we say the
Pope began to usurp beyond his just Authority, and he would prove by Protestant
Writers that he had as great Power before that time.

M. B. said, Whatever his Patriarchal Power was, he had none over Britain: For
it was plain, we had not the Christian Faith from the Roman Church, as appeared
from the very story of Austin the Monk.

S. P. T. said, Did not King Lucius write to the Pope upon his receiving the
Christian Faith?

M. C. said, He would wave all that, and ask, If the Church of England could
justify her forsaking the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, when all the rest
of the Christian World submitted to it?

D. S. said, He wondered to hear him speak so: Were not the Greek, the
Armenian, the Nestorian, and the Abissen Churches separated from the Roman?

M. C. said, He wondered as much to hear him reckon the Nestorians among the
Churches that were condemned Heretics.

D. S. said, It would be hard for him to prove them Nestorians.

M. C. asked, why he called them so then?

D. S. answered, Because they were generally best known by that Name.

M. W. said, Did not the Greek Church reconcile it self to the Roman Church at
the Council of Florence?

D. S. said, Some of their Bishops were partly trepanned, partly threatened into
it; but their Church disowned them and it both, and continues to do so to this
day.

M. W. said, Many of the Greek Church were daily reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and many of the other Eastern Bishops had sent their Obedience to the
Pope.

D. S. said, They knew there was enough to be said to these things, that these
Arts were now pretty well discovered: but he insisted to prove, the Usurpations
of Rome were such as were inconsistent with the supreme civil Authority, and
showed the Oath in the Pontificale, by which, for instance, If the Pope command
a Bishop to go to Rome, and his King forbid it, he must obey the Pope, and
disobey the King.

M. C. said, These things were very consistent, that the King should be Supreme
in Civils, and the Pope in Spirituals; so that if the Pope commanded a thing
that were Civil, the King must be obeyed and not he.

M. B. said, By the words of the Oath, the Bishops were to receive and help the
Pope's Legates both in coming and going. Now suppose the King declared it
Treason to receive the Legate, yet in this case the Bishops are sworn to obey
the Pope, and this was a Case that fell out often.

D. S. instanced the Case of Queen Mary.

M. C. said, If he comes with false Mandates he is not a Legate.

M. B. said, Suppose, as has fallen out an hundred times, he comes with Bulls,
and well warranted, but the King will not suffer him to enter his Dominions,
here the Bishops must either be Traitors, or Perjured.

M. C. said, All these things must be understood to have tacit Conditions in
them, though they be not expressed, and gave a Simile which I have forgot.

D. S. said, It was plain, Paschal the Second devised that Oath on purpose to
cut off all those Reserves of their Duty to their Princes. And therefore the
Words are so full and large, that no Oath of Allegiance was ever conceived in
more express terms.

M. B. said, It was yet more plain from the Words that preceed that Clause
about Legates, that they shall be an no Counsel to do the Pope any injury, and
shall reveal none of his secrets. By which a Provision was clearly made, that
if the Pope did engage in any Quarrel or War with any Prince, the Bishops were
to assist the Popes as their sworn Subjects, and to be faithful Spies and
Correspondents to give Intelligence. As he was saying this, L. T. did whisper
D. S. who presently told the Company, That the Ladies, at whose desire we came
thither, entreated we would speak to things that concerned them more, and
discourse on the Grounds on which the Reformation proceeded; and therefore
since he had before named some of the most considerable; he desired we might
discourse about some of these.

M. C. said, Name any thing in the Roman Church that is expressly contrary to
Scriptures; but bring not your Expositions of Scripture to prove it by, for we
will not admit of these.

M. B. asked, If they did not acknowledge that it was only by the Mediation of
Christ that our Sins were pardoned, and eternal Life given to us.

M. C. answered, No question of it at all.

M. B. said, Then have we not good reason to depart from that Church, that in
an Office of so great and daily use as was the Absolution of Penitents, after
the words of Absolution enjoins the following Prayer to be used (which he read
out of their Ritual) [The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Merits of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints, and whatever good thou have done,
or evil thou have suffered, be to thee for the remission of Sins, the increase
of Grace, and the reward of Eternal Life] from whence, it plainly follows, that
their Church ascribes the pardon of all Sins, and the eternal Salvation of
their Penitents, to the Merits of the blessed Virgin and the Saints, as well as
the Passion of our blessed Savior.

M. C. said, Here was a very severe Charge put in against their Church without
any reason, for they believed that our sins are pardoned, and our souls are
saved, only by the Merits of Jesus Christ; but that several things may concur
in several orders or ways to produce the same effects: so although we are
pardoned and saved only through Jesus Christ, yet, without Holiness we shall
never see God; we must also suffer whatever Crosses he tries us with. So that
these, in another sense, procure the pardon of our sins, and eternal salvation.
Thus in like manner the Prayers of the blessed Virgin and the Saints are great
helps to our obtaining these: therefore though these be all joined together in
the same Prayer, yet it was an unjust Charge on their Church to say they make
them equal in their value or efficiency.

M. B. said, The thing he had chiefly excepted against in that Prayer, was,
that these things are ascribed to the Merits of the blessed Virgin and the
Saints. Now he had only spoken of their Prayers, and he appealed to all if the
natural meaning of these words was not that he charged on them, and the sense
the other had offered was not forced.

M. C. said, By Merits were understood Prayers, which had force and merit with
God.

M. B. said, That could not be, for in another Absolution, in the Office of our
Lady, they pray for Remission of sins through the Merits and Prayers of the
blessed Virgin: so that by Merits must be meant somewhat else than their
Prayers.

M. C. said, That as by our Prayers on earth we help one another souls, so by
our giving alms for one another we might do the same; so also the Saints in
Heaven might be helpful to us by their Prayers and Merits. And as soon as he
had spoken this he got to his feet, and said he was in great haste, and much
business lay on him that day; but said to D. S. That when he pleased, he would
wait on him, and discourse of the other particulars at more length.

D. S. assured him, that whenever he pleased to appoint it, he should be ready
to give him a meeting. And so he went away.

Then we all stood and talked to one another, without any great order, near
half a hour, the Discourse being chiefly about the Nags-head Fable.

D. S. appealed to the public Registers, and challenged the silence of all the
Popish Writers all Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when such a story was fresh and
well known: and if there had been any color for it, is it possible they could
keep it up, or conceal it?

S. P. T. said, All the Registers were forged, and that it was not possible to
satisfy him in it, no more than to prove he had not four fingers on his hand:
and being desired to read Dr. Bramhali's Book about it, he said he had read it
six times over, and that it did not satisfy him.

M. B. asked him, How could any matter of Fact that was a hundred years old be
proved, if the public Registers, and the instruments of public Notaries were
rejected? and this the more, that this being a matter of fact which could not
be done in a corner, nor escape the knowledge of their Adversaries, who might
have drawn great and just advantages from publishing and proving it; yet that
it was never so much as spoken of while that Race was alive, is as ^ an
Evidence as can be, that the Forgery was on the other side.

D. S. did clear the Objection from the Commission and Act of Parliament, that
it was only for making the Ordination legal in England, since in Edw. 6. time
the Book of Ordination was not joined in the Record to the Book of
Common Prayer; from whence Bishop Bonner took occasion to deny their
Ordination, as not according to Law; and added, that Saunders, who in Queen
Elizabeth's time denied the validity of our Ordination, never alleged any such
story. But as we were talking freely of this,

M. W. said, once or twice, they were satisfied about the chief Design they had
in that meeting, to see if there could be alleged any place of Scripture to
prove that Article about the blessed Sacrament, and said somewhat that looked
like the beginning of a Triumph. Upon which,

D. S. desired all might sit down again, that they might put that matter to an
issue: so a Bible was brought, and

D. S. being spent with much speaking, desired M. B. to speak to it.

M. B. turned to the 6th Chap. of John, verse. 54. and read these words, Whose
eats my Flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal Life, and added, These
words were, according to the common Interpretation of their Church, to be
understood of the sacramental Manducation.

This M. W. granted, only M. B. had said, all the Doctors understood these
words so, and

M. W. said, That all had not done so, which

M. B. did acknowledge, but said it was the received Exposition in their
Church, and so framed his Argument. Eternal Life is given to every one that
receives Christ in the Sacrament. But by Faith only we get eternal Life;
therefore by Faith only we receive Christ in the Sacrament. Otherwise, he said,
unworthy Receivers must be said to have eternal Life, which is a contradiction,
for as such they are under Condemnation; yet the unworthy Receivers have the
external Manducation: therefore that Manducation that gives eternal Life with
it, must be internal and spiritual, and that is by Faith.

A Person, whose Name I know not, but shall henceforth mark him N. N. asked
what M. B. meant, by Faith only?

M. B. said, By Faith he meant such a believing of the Gospel, as carried along
with it Evangelical Obedience: by Faith only, he meant Faith as opposite to
sense.

D. S. asked him if we received Christ's Body and Blood by our Senses?

N. N. said, we did.

D. S. asked which of the senses, his Taste, or Touch, or Sight, for that
seemed strange to him?

N. N. said, We received Christ's Body with our senses, as well as we did the
substance of Bread; for our senses did not receive the substance of Bread: and
did offer some things to illustrate this, both from the Aristotelian and
Cartesian Hypothesis.

D. S. said, He would not engage in that Subtlety which was a digression from
the main Argument, but he could not avoid to think it a strange Assertion, to
say we received Christ by our senses, and yet to say he was so present there,
that none of our senses could possibly perceive him. But to the main Argument.

M. W. denied the Minor, that by Faith only we have eternal Life.

M. B. proved it thus, The Sons of God have eternal Life, but by Faith only we
become the Sons of God: therefore by Faith only we had eternal Life.

M. W. said, Except he gave them both Major and Minor in express words of
Scripture, he would reject the Argument.

M. B. said, That if he did demonstrate that both the Propositions of his
Argument were in the strictest Construction possible equivalent to clear places
of Scripture, then his Proofs were good; therefore he desired to know which of
the two Propositions he should prove, either that the Sons of God have eternal
Life, or that by Faith only we are the Sons of God.

M. W. said, He would admit of no consequences, how clear soever they seemed,
unless he brought him the express words of Scripture, and asked if his
consequences were infallible.

D. S. said, If the Consequence was certain, it was sufficient; and he desired
all would take notice that they would not yield to clear Consequences drawn
from Scripture, which he thought (and he believed all impartial People would be
of his Mind) was as great an advantage to any cause, as could be desired: So we
laid aside that Argument, being satisfied that the Article of our Church, which
they had called in question, was clearly proved from Scripture.

Then N. N. insisted to speak of the corporal presence, and desired to know
upon what grounds we rejected it.

M. B. said, If we have no better reason to believe Christ was corporally
present in the Sacrament, than the Jews had to believe that every time they did
eat their Pascha, the Angel was passing by their Houses, and smiting the first
born of the Egyptians; then we have no reason at all; but so it is that we
have no more reason.

N. N. denied this, and said we had more reason.

M. B. said, All the reason we had to believe it was, because Christ said, This
is my body; but Moses said of the Paschal festivity, This is the Lords
Passover; which was always repeated by the Jews in that Anniversary. Now the
Lords Passover was the Lords passing by the Israelites when he slew the first
born of Egypt. If then we will understand Christ's words in the strictly
literal sense, we must in the same sense understand the words of Moses: But if
we understand the words of Moses in any other sense, as the commemoration of
the Lords Passover, then we ought to understand Christ's words in the same sense.

The reason is clear; for Christ being to substitute this Holy Sacrament in
room of the Jewish Pascha, and he using in every thing, as much as could agree
with his blessed designs, forms as near the Jewish Customs as could be, there
is no reason to think he did use the words, this is my body, in any other sense
than the Jews did, this is the Lords Passover.

N. N. said, The disparity was great. First, Christ had promised beforehand he
would give them his body. Secondly, It was impossible the Lamb could be the
Lords Passover in the literal sense, because an action that had been past some
hundreds of years before could not be performed every time they did eat the
Lamb, but this is not so. Thirdly, The Jewish Church never understood these
words literally, but the Christian Church has ever understood these words of
Christ literally. Nor is it to be imagined that a change in such a thing was
possible, for how could any such Opinion have crept in, in any Age, if it had
not been the Doctrine of the former Age?

M. B. said, Nothing he had alleged was of any force. For the first, Christ's
promise imported no more than what he performed in the Sacramental institution.
If then it be proved that by saying, This is my body, he only meant a
Commemoration, his promise must only relate to his Death commemorated in the
Sacrament. To the second, the literal meaning of Christ's words is as
impossible as the literal meaning of Moses's words; for besides all the other
impossibilities that accompany this corporal Presence, it is certain Christ
gives us his body in the Sacrament as it was given for us, and his Blood as it
was shed for us, which being done only on the Cross above 1600 years ago, it is
as impossible that should be literally given at every Consecration, as it was
that the Angel should be smiting the Egyptians every Paschal Festivity. And
here was a great mistake they went on securely in; that the body of Christ we
receive in the Sacrament, is the Body of Christ, as he is now glorified in
Heaven; for by the words of the Institution it is clear, that we receive his
Body as it was given for us when his Blood was shed on the Cross, which being
impossible to be reproduced now, we only can receive Christ by Faith. For his
third difference, that the Christian Church ever understood Christ's words so,
we would willingly submit to the decision of the Church in the first six Ages.
Could any thing be more express than Theodoret, who arguing against the
Eutychians that the Humanity and Divinity of Christ were not confounded nor did
depart from their own substance, illustrates it from the Eucharist in which the
Elements of Bread and Wine do not depart from their own Substance.

M. W. said, We must examine the Doctrine of the Fathers not from some
occasional mention they make of the Sacrament, but when they treat of it on
Design and with Deliberation. But to Theodoret he would oppose S. Cyril of
Jerusalem, who in his fourth Mist. Catechism says expressly, Though thou see it
to be bread, yet believe it is the Flesh and the Blood of the Lord Jesus; doubt
it not, since he had said, This is my Body. And for a proof, instances Christ's
changing the Water into Wine.

D. S. said, He had proposed a most excellent Rule for examining the Doctrine
of the Fathers in this matter, not to canvase what they said in eloquent and
pious Treaties or Homilies to work on Peoples Devotion, in which case it is
natural for all Persons to use high Expressions; but we are to seek the real
sense of this Mystery when they are dogmatically treating of it and the other
Mysteries of Religion where Reason and not Eloquence takes place. If then it
should appear, that at the same time both a Bishop of Rome and Constantinople,
and one of the greatest Bishops in Africa did in asserting the Mysteries of
Religion go downright against Transubstantiation, and assert that the substance
of the Bread and Wine did remain; he hoped all would be satisfied the Fathers
did not believe as they did.

M. W. desired we would then answer the Words of Cyril.

M. B. said, It were a very unreasonable thing to enter into a verbal Dispute
about the Passages of the Fathers, especially the Books not being before us;
therefore he promised an Answer in Writing to the Testimony of S. Cyril. But
now the matter was driven to a point, and we willingly undertook to prove, that
for eight or nine Centuries after Christ the Fathers did not believe
Transubstantiation, but taught plainly the contrary: the Fathers generally call
the Elements Bread and Wine after the Consecration, they call them Mysteries,
Types, Figures, Symbols, Commemorations, and Signs of the body and blood of
Christ: They generally deliver, that the wicked do not receive Christ in the
Sacrament, which shows they do not believe Transubstantiation. All this we
undertook to prove by undeniable Evidences within a very few days or weeks.

M. W. said, He should be glad to see it.

D. S. said, Now we left upon that Point which by the Grace of God we should
perform very soon; but we had offered to satisfy them in the other grounds of
the Separation from the Church of Rome: if they desired to be farther informed
we should wait on them when they pleased.

So we all rose up and took leave, after we had been there about three hours.
The Discourse was carried on, on both sides, with great Civility and Calmness,
without Heat or Clamor.

This is as far as my Memory, after the most fixed attention when present, and
careful Recollection since, does suggest to me, without any Biass or
Partiality, not having failed in any one material thing as far as my memory can
serve me:

This I declare as I shall answer to God. Signed as follows, Gilbert Burnet.

This Narrative was read, and I do hereby attest the truth of it. Edw.
Stillingfleet.

Being present at the Conference, I do, according to my best memory, judge this
a just and true Narrative thereof. Will. Nailor.

The Addition which N. N. desired might be subjoined to the Relation of the
Conference if it were published, but wished rather that nothing at all might be
made public that related to the Conference.
THe substance of what N. N. desired me to take notice of, was, That our eating
Christ's flesh and drinking his blood does as really give everlasting life, as
Almsgiving, or any other good Works gives it, where the bare external Action,
if separated from a good Intention and Principle, is not acceptable to God. So
that we must necessarily understand these words of our Savior with this
Addition of Worthily, that whosoever eats his flesh and drinks his blood in the
Sacrament Worthily, has everlasting life; for, he said, he did not deny but
the believing the Death of Christ was necessary in communicating, but it is not
by Faith only we receive his body and blood. For as by Faith we are the sons of
God, yet it is not only by Faith, but also by Baptism, that we become the sons
of God; so also Christ says, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved;
yet this does not exclude Repentance and amendment of Life from being necessary
to Salvation: therefore the universality of the Expression, whosoever eats, does
not exclude the necessity of eating worthily that we may have everlasting life
by it. And so did conclude, that since we believe we have all our Faith in the
Holy Scriptures, we must prove from some clear Scriptures, by Arguments that
consist of a Major and Minor, that are either express words of Scripture or
equivalent to them, that Christ was no otherwise present in the Sacrament, than
spiritually, as he is received by Faith. And added, That it was impertinent to
bring Impossibilities either from sense or reason against this, if we brought
no clear Scriptures against it.

To this he also added, That when D. S. asked him by which of his senses he
received Christ in the Sacrament, he answered, That he might really receive
Christ's body at his mouth, though none of his senses could perceive him, as a
Bole or Pill is taken in a Syrup or any other Liquor; so that I really swallow
it over though my senses do not taste it: in like manner, Christ is received
under the accidents of Bread and Wine, so that though our senses do not
perceive it, yet he is really taken in at our Mouth, and goes down into our
Stomach.

ANSWER.
HAving now set down the strength of N. N. his Plea upon second Thoughts, I
shall next examine it. The stress of all lies in this, Whether we must
necessarily supply the Words of Christ with the addition of worthily: he
affirms it, I deny it, for these Reasons.

Christ in this Discourse was to show how much more excellent his Doctrine was
than was Moses's Law, and that Moses gave Manna from Heaven to nourish their
Bodies, notwithstanding which they died in the Wilderness: but Christ was to
give them Food to their Souls; which if they did eat they should never die, for
it should give them life: where it is apparent, the bread and nourishment must
be such, as the life was, which being internal and spiritual, the other must be
such also: and verse. 47. he clearly explains how that Food was received, He
that believes on me has everlasting life. Now having said before that this
bread gives life, and here saying that believing gives everlasting life, it
very reasonably follows, that believing was the receiving this Food; which is
yet clearer from verse 34. where the Jews having desired him evermore to give
them that bread, he answers, verse 35. I am the bread of Life, be that comes to
me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. Which no
man, that is not strangely prepossessed, can consider, but he must see it is an
Answer to their Question, and so in it he tells them, that their coming to him,
and believing, was the mean of receiving that Bread.

And here it must be considered, that Christ calls himself Bread, and says,
that a Man must eat thereof, which must be understood figuratively; and if
Figures be admitted in some parts of that discourse, it is unjust to reject the
applying the same Figures to other parts of it. In fine, Christ tells them this
Bread was his Flesh which he was to give for the Life of the World, which can
be applied to nothing but the offering up himself on the Cross. This did, as it
was no wonder, startle the Jews, so they murmured, and said, How can this Man
give us his Flesh to eat? To which Christ's Answer is so clear, that it is
indeed strange there should remain any doubting about it. He first tells them,
except they eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of Man, they had no
Life in them. Where on the way mark, that drinking the Blood is as necessary as
eating the Flesh; and these words being expounded of the Sacrament, cannot but
discover them extremely guilty who do not drink the Blood. For suppose the
Doctrine of the Blood's concomitating the Flesh were true; yet even in that
case they only eat the Blood, but cannot be said to drink the Blood. But from
these words it is apparent Christ must be speaking chiefly, if not only of the
spiritual Communicating: for otherwise no man can be saved, that has not
received the Sacrament. The words are formal and positive, and Christ having
made this a necessary Condition of Life, I see not how we dare promise Life to
any that has never received it.

And indeed it was no wonder that those Fathers who understood these words of
the Sacrament, appointed it to be given to Infants immediately after they were
baptized* for that was a necessary consequence that followed this exposition of
our Saviors words. And yet the Church of Rome will not deny, but if any die
before he is adult, or if a Person converted be in such Circumstances that it
is not possible for him to receive the Sacrament, and so dies without it, he
may have everlasting Life: therefore they must conclude, that Christ's Flesh may
be eaten by Faith even without the Sacrament.

Again in the next verse he says, Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood,
has eternal Life. These words must be understood in the same sense they had in
the former verse, they being indeed the reverse of it. Therefore since there is
no addition of worthily necessary to the fence of the former Verse, neither is
it necessary in this. But it must be concluded Christ is here speaking of a
thing without which none can have Life: and by which all have Life: therefore
when ever Christ's Flesh is eaten, and his Blood is drunk, which is most
signally done in the Sacrament, there eternal Life must accompany it; and so
these words must be understood, even in relation to the Sacrament, only of the
spiritual Communicating by Faith.

As when it is said, a man is a reasonable Creature: though this is said of the
whole man, Body and Soul; yet when we see that upon the Dissolution of Soul and
Body no Reason or Life remains in the Body, we from thence positively conclude
the Reason is seated only in the Soul; though the Body has Organs that are
necessary for its Operations: So when it is said we eat Christ's Flesh, and
drink his Blood in the Sacrament, which gives eternal Life; there being two
things in it, the bodily eating and the spiritual communicating; though the
eating of Christ's Flesh is said to be done in the worthy receiving, which
consists of these two, yet since we may clearly see the bodily receiving may be
without any such Effects, we must conclude that the eating of Christ's Flesh is
only done by the inward Communicating; though the other, that is the bodily
part, be a divine Organ, and conveyance of it. And as Reason is seated only in
the Soul, so the eating of Christ's Flesh must be only inward and spiritual, and
so the mean by which we receive Christ in the Supper is Faith.

All this is made much clearer by the words that follow, my Flesh is Meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Now Christ's Flesh is so eaten, as it is
meat; which I suppose none will question, it being a prosecution of the same
discourse. Now it is not meat as taken by the Body, for they cannot be so gross
as to say, Christ's Flesh is the Meat of our Body; therefore since his Flesh is
only the Meat of the Soul and spiritual Nourishment, it is only eaten by the
Soul, and so received by Faith.

Christ also says, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in him
and he in him. This is the definition of that eating and drinking he had been
speaking of; so that such as is the dwelling in him, such also must be the
eating of him: the one therefore being spiritual, inward, and by faith, the
other must be such also. And thus it is as plain as can be, from the words of
Christ, that he spoke not of a carnal or corporal, but of a spiritual eating of
his Flesh by Faith. All this is more confirmed by the Key our Savior gives of
his whole Discourse, when the Jews were offended for the hardness of his
sayings, It is the Spirit that quickneth (or gives the Life he had been
speaking of) the flesh profits nothing, the words I speak unto you are
spirit, and they are Life. From which it is plain he tells them to understand
his words of a spiritual Life, and in a spiritual manner.

But now I shall examine N. N. his Reasons to the contrary.

His chief Argument is, that when eternal Life is promised upon the giving of
Alms, or other good Works, we must necessarily understand it with this Proviso,
that they were given with a good intention, and from a good Principle:
therefore we must understand these words of our Savior to have some such
Proviso in them.

All this concludes nothing. It is indeed certain when any promise is past upon
an external Action, such a reserve must be understood. And so St. Paul tells
us, if he bestowed all his goods to feed the Poor, and had no Charity, it
profited him nothing. And if it were clear our Savior were here speaking of an
external action, I should acknowledge such a proviso must be understood; but
that is the thing in question; and I hope I have made it appear Our Savior is
speaking of an internal action, and therefore no such proviso is to be
supposed. For he is speaking of that eating of his Flesh, which must
necessarily and certainly be worthily done, and so that objection is of no
force. He must therefore prove, that the eating his Flesh is primarily and
simply meant of the bodily eating in the Sacrament; and not only by a
denomination, from a Relation to it: as the whole man is called reasonable,
though the reason is seated in the Soul only

What he says to show that by Faith only we are not the Sons of God, since by
Baptism also we are the Sons of God, is not to the purpose: for the design of
the Argument, was to prove that by Faith only we are the Sons of God, so as to
be the Heirs of eternal Life. Now the Baptism of the adult (for our debate runs
upon those of ripe years and understanding) makes them only externally, and
Sacramentally the Sons of God: for the inward and vital Sonship follows only
upon Faith. And this Faith must be understood of such a lively and operative
Faith, as includes both repentance and amendment of Life. So that when our
Savior says, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, that believing
is a complex of all evangelical Graces; from which it appears, that none of his
Reasons are of force enough to conclude that the universality of these words of
Christ ought to be so limited and restricted.

For what remains of that which he desired might be taken notice of, that we
ought to prove that Christ's Body and Blood was present in the Sacrament only
spiritually and not corporally by express Scriptures, or by Arguments whereof
the Major and Minor were either express words of Scripture, or equivalent to
them: it has no force at all in it.

I have in a full discourse examined all that is in the Plea concerning the
express words of Scripture; and therefore shall say nothing upon that head,
referring the Reader to what he will meet with on that Subject afterward. But
here I only desire the Reader may consider, our Contest in this particular is
concerning the true meaning of our Saviors words, This is my body, in which it
is very absurd to ask for express words of Scripture, to prove that meaning by.
For if that be settled on, as a necessary method of proof, then when other
Scriptures are brought to prove that to be the meaning of these words; it may
be asked how can we prove the true meaning of that place we bring to prove the
meaning of this by? and so by a progress for ever we must contend about the
true meaning of every Place. Therefore when we enquire into the sense of any
controverted place; we must judge of it by the rules of common Sense and
Reason, of Religion and Piety, and if a meaning be affixed to any Place
contrary to these, we have good reason to reject it. For we, knowing all
external things only by our Senses, by which only the Miracles and Resurrection
of Christ could be proved, which are the means God has given us to converse
with, and enjoy his whole Creation; and evidence our senses give being such, as
naturally determines our Persuasions, so that after them we cannot doubt: if
then a sense be offered to any place of Scripture that does overthrow all this,
we have sufficient reason on that very account to reject it. If also any
meaning be fastened on a place of Scripture that destroys all our Conceptions
of things, is contrary to the most universally received Maxims, subverts the
Notions of matter and accidents, and in a word, confounds all our clearest
Apprehensions; we must also reject every such gloss, since it contradicts the
evidence of that which is God's Image in us.

If also a sense of any place of Scripture be proposed that derogates from the
glorious Exaltation of the humane Nature of our blessed Savior, we have very
just reasons to reject it, even though we could bring no confirmation of our
meaning from express words of Scripture: therefore this Dispute being chiefly
about the meaning of Christ's Words, he that shows best Reasons to prove that
his sense is consonant to Truth, does all that is necessary in this case.

But after all this, we decline not to show clear Scriptures for the meaning
our Church puts on these words of Christ. It was Bread that Christ took,
blessed, brake, and gave his Disciples. Now the Scripture calling it formally
bread, destroys Transubstantiation. Christ said, This is my Body, which are
declarative, and not imperative words, such as, Let there be light, or, Be thou
whole. Now all declarative words suppose that which they affirm to be already
true, as is most clear; therefore Christ pronounces what the Bread was become
by his former blessing, which did sanctify the Elements: and yet after that
blessing it was still bread. Again, the reason and end of a thing is that which
keeps a proportion with the means toward it; so that Christ's words, Do this in
remembrance of me, show us, that his Body is here only in a vital and living
Commemoration and Communication of his Body and Blood. Farther, Christ telling
us, it was his Body that was given for us, and his Blood shed for us, which we
there receive; it is apparent, he is to be understood present in the Sacrament;
not as he is now exalted in Glory, but as he was on the Cross when his Blood
was shed for us.

And in fine, if we consider that those to whom Christ spoke were Jews, all
this will be more easily understood: for it was ordinary for them to call the
Symbol by the Name of the Original it represented. So they called the Cloud
between the Cherubims, God and Jehovah, according to these words, O thou that
dwell between the Cherubims: and all the symbolical Apparitions of God to
the Patriarchs and the Prophets, were said to be the Lord appearing to them.
But that which is more to this purpose, is, that the Lamb that was the symbol
and memorial of their Deliverance out of Egypt, was called the Lord's Passover.
Now though the Passover then was only a Type of our Deliverance by the Death of
Christ, yet the Lamb was in proportion to the Passover in Egypt, as really a
Representation of it, as the Sacrament is of the Death of Christ. And it is no
more to be wondered that Christ called the Elements his Body and Blood, though
they were not so corporally, but only mystically, and sacramentally; than that
Moses called the Lamb the Lord's Passover. So that it is apparent it was common
among the Jews to call the Symbol and Type by the Name of the Substance and
Original. Therefore our Savior's Words are to be understood in the sense and
style that was usual among these to whom he spoke, it being the most certain
rule of understanding any doubtful Expression, to examine the ordinary style
and forms of speech in that Age, People, and Place, in which such Phrases were
used.

This is signally confirmed by the Account which Maimonides gives us of the
sense in which eating and drinking is often taken in the Scriptures. First, he
says, it More Nevochim Par. 1. c. 30.
stands in its natural signification, for receiving bodily Food: Then because
there are two things done in eating, the first is the destruction of that which
is eaten, so that it loses its first form; the other is the increase and
nourishment of the substance of the Person that eats: therefore he observes
that eating has two other significations in the Language of the Scriptures: the
one is destruction and desolation; so the Sword is said to eat, or as we render
it, to devour; so a Land is said to eat its Inhabitants, and so Fire is said to
eat or consume: The other sense it is taken in does relate to Wisdom, Learning,
and all Intellectual Apprehensions, by which the form (or soul) of man is
conserved from the perfection that is in them, as the body is preserved by
food. For proof of this, he cites diverse places out of the Old Testament, as
Isa. 55. 2. come buy and eat, and Prove. 25. 27. and Prove. 24. 13. he also adds,
that their Rabbis commonly call Wisdom, eating; and cites some of their
Sayings, as, come and eat flesh in which there is much fat, and that whenever
eating and drinking is in the Book of the Proverbs, it is nothing else but
Wisdom or the Law. So also Wisdom is often called Water, Isa. 55. 1. and he
concludes, that because this sense of eating occurs so often, and is so
manifest and evident, as if it were the primary and most proper signification
of the Word, therefore Hunger and Thirst do also stand for a privation of
Wisdom and Understanding, as Amos. 8. 21. To this he also refers that of
thirsting, Psalm. 42. 3. and Isa. 12. 3. and Jonathan paraphrasing these Words,
Ye shall draw water out of the Wells of Salvation, renders it. Ye shall receive
a new Doctrine with joy from the select ones among the Just, which is farther
confirmed from the words of our Savior, John 7. 37.

And from these Observations of the Learnedest and most Judicious among all the
Rabbis, we see that the Jews understood the Phrases of eating and eating of
flesh in this spiritual and figurative sense of receiving Wisdom and
Instruction. So that this being an usual form of Speech among them, it is no
strange thing to imagine how our Savior, being a Jew according to the Flesh,
and conversing with Jews, did use these Terms and Phrases in a sense that was
common to that Nation.

And from all these set together, we are confident we have a great deal of
Reason, and strong and convincing Authorities from the Scriptures, to prove
Christ's words, This is my Body, are to be understood spiritually, mystically,
and sacramentally.

There remains only to be considered what weight there is in what N. N. says.
He answered to D. S. That Christ might be received by our senses though not
perceived by any of them, as a bole is swallowed over, though our taste does
not relish or perceive it. That Great Man is so very well furnished with Reason
and Learning to justify all he says, that no other body needs interpose on his
account. But he being now busy, it was not worth the giving him the trouble,
to ask how he would reply upon so weak an Answer, since its shallowness appears
at the first view: for is there any comparison to be made between an Object
that all my senses may perceive, if I have a mind to it, that I see with mine
eyes, and touch, and feel in my mouth, and if it be too big, and my Throat too
narrow, I will feel stick there; but only to guard against its offensive taste,
I so wrap or convey it, that I relish nothing ungrateful in it: and the
receiving Christ with my senses, when yet none of them either do, or can,
though applied with all possible care, discern him? So that it appears D. S.
had very good reason to say, it seemed indeed strange to him, to say, that
Christ was received by our senses, and yet was so present that none of our
senses can perceive him: and this Answer to it is but mere trifling.

Here follows the Paper we promised, wherein an Account is given of the
Doctrine of the Church for the first Eight Centuries in the point of the
Sacrament, which is demonstrated to be contrary to Transubstantiation; written
in a Letter to my Lady T.
Madam,
YOur Ladyship may remember, That our Meeting at your House on the Third
Instant, ended with a Promise we made, of sending you such an account of the
sense of the Fathers for the first six Ages, as might sufficiently satisfy
every impartial Person, That they did not believe Transubstantiation. This
Promise we branched out in three Propositions: first, That the Fathers did
hold, That after the Consecration the Elements of Bread and Wine did remain
unchanged in their substance. The second was, that after the Consecration they
called the Elements the Types, the Antitypes, the Mysteries, the Symbols, the
Signs, the Figures, and the Commemorations of the body and blood of Christ;
which certainly will satisfy every unprejudiced Person, That they did not
think the Bread and Wine were annihilated, and that in their room, and under
their accidents, the substance of the body and blood of Christ was there.
Thirdly, we said, That by the Doctrine of the Fathers the unworthy Receivers
got not the body and the blood of Christ; from which it must necessarily
follow, That the substance of his body and blood is not under the accidents of
Bread and Wine; otherwise all these that unworthily receive them eat Christ's
body and blood. Therefore, to discharge our selves of our Promise, we shall now
give your Ladyship such an account of the Doctrine of the Fathers on these
Heads, as we hope shall convince those Gentlemen, that we had a good warrant
for what we said.

The first Proposition is, The Fathers believed that after the Consecration the
Elements were still Bread and Wine. The Proofs whereof we shall divide into
three branches: The first shall be, That after the Consecration they usually
called them Bread and Wine. Secondly, That they expressly assert, that the
substance of Bread and Wine remained. Thirdly, That they believed the
Sacramental Bread and Wine did nourish our bodies.

For proof of the first, we desire the following Testimonies be considered:

Justin Martyr says, These who are called Deacons distribute the blessed Bread
and Wine Apolog. 2.
and Water to such as are present, and carry it to the absents, and this
nourishment is by us called the Eucharist. And a little after, We do not
receive these as common Bread, or common Drink; for as by the word of God Jesus
Christ our Savior being made Flesh, had both Flesh and Blood for our
Salvation, so we are taught, that that food by which our blood and flesh are
nourished, by its change, being blessed by the word of Prayer which he gave us,
is both the flesh and the blood of the Incarnate Jesus. Thus that Martyr, that
wrote an hundred and fifty years after Christ, calls the Elements Bread and
Wine, and the nourishment which being changed into Flesh and Blood nourishes
them. And saying, it is not common Bread and Wine, he says, that it was still
so in substance; and his illustrating it with the Incarnation, in which the
Humane Nature did not lose nor change its substance in its union with the
eternal Word, shows, he thought not the Bread and Wine lost their substance
when they became the flesh and blood of Christ.

The next Witness is Irenaeus, who writing against the Valentinians, that
denied the Lib. 4. adv. Her. c. 34.
Father of our Lord Jesus to be the Creator of the World, and also denied the
Resurrection of the Body, confutes both these Heresies by Arguments drawn from
the Eucharist. To the first he says, If there be another Creator than the
Father of our Lord, then our offering Creatures to him, argues him covetous of
that which is not his own, and so we reproach him rather than bless him. And
adds, How does it appear to any of them, that that Bread over which thanks are
given, is the body of his Lord, and the Cup of his blood, if he be not the Son
of the Creator. And he argues against their Saying, our bodies should not rise
again that are fed by the body and blood of Christ: for, says he, that bread
which is of the Earth, having had the Invocation of God over it, is no more
common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an earthly and an
heavenly; so our Bodies that receive the Eucharist are no more corruptible,
having the Hope of the Resurrection.

Tertullian (Lib. 1. adv. Marc. c. 14.) proving against Marcion, that Christ
was not contrary to the Creator, among other Proofs which he brings to show,
that Christ made use of the Creatures, and neither rejected Water, Oil, Milk,
or Honey, he adds, neither did he reject Bread, by which he represents his own
Body. And further says, (Lib. 3. adv. Marc. c. 19.) Christ calls Bread his
Body, that from thence you may understand, that he gave the Figure of his Body
to the Bread. Origin says, (Lib. 8. cont. Celsum.) We eat of the Loaves set
before us, with Thanks giving and Prayers over what is given to us, which by
the Prayer are become a certain holy Body, that sanctifies those who use them
with a sound purpose.

St. Cyprian says, (Epist. 76.) Christ calls the Bread that was compounded of
many grains joined together, his Body, to show the Union of our People which he
bore upon himself; and calls the Wine which is pressed out of many Grapes and
Berries, his Blood: he signifies our Flock which is joined together in the
mixture of an united Multitude.

And writing against those who only put Water in the Chalice, (Epist. 63.) he
says, Since Christ said, I am the true Vine, the Blood of Christ is not only
Water but Wine, neither can we see his Blood by which we are redeemed and
quickened in the Chalice when Wine is not in it, by which the Blood of Christ
is showed. And that whole Epistle is all to the same purpose.

Epiphanius (in Anchorat) says, Christ in the Supper rose and took these
things, and having given Thanks, said, This is my, etc. Now we see it is not
equal to it, nor like it, neither to his Incarnate Likeness, nor his invisible
Deity, nor the Lineaments of his Members, for it is round, and without feeling
as to its Virtue. And this he says, to show how Man may be said to be made
after the Image of God, though he be not like him.

Gregory Nyssen, (in Orat. de Bap. Christ.) showing how common things may be
sanctified, as Water in Baptism, the Stones of an Altar and Church dedicated to
God; he adds, So also Bread in the Beginning is common, but after the Mystery
has consecrated it, is said to be, and is the Body of Christ; so the Mystical
Oil, so the Wine before the Blessing, are things of little value, but after the
Sanctification of the Spirit, both of them work excellently. He also adds, That
the Priest by his Blessing is separated and sanctified; from which it appears,
he no more believed the Change of the Substance of the Bread and Wine, than of
the consecrated Oil, the Altar, or the Priest.

Ambrose (Lib. De Bened. Patriarc. cap. 9.) speaking of Bread, which was
Asher's Blessing, says, This Bread Christ gave his Apostles, that they might
divide it to the People that believed, and gives it to us to day, which the
Priest consecrates in his Words, this Bread is made the Food of the Saints.

St. Chrysostom (Homil. 24. in Epist. ad Cor.) on these Words, The Bread which
we brake, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? says, What is the
Bread? The Body of Christ. What are they made who take it? The Body of Christ.
From whence it appears, he thought the Bread was so the Body of Christ, as the
worthy Receivers are; which is not by the Change of their Substance, but by the
Sanctification of their Natures.

St. Ierom (Epist. ad Hedib.) says, Let us hear the Bread which Christ brake
and gave his Disciples, to be the Body of our Lord.

And he says, (Comment. S. Mat. c. 26.) After the Typical Pascha was fulfilled,
Christ took Bread that comforts the Heart of Man, and went to the true
Sacrament of the Pascha, that as Melchisedeck in the Figure had done offering
Bread and Wine, so he might also represent the Truth of his Body and Blood.
Where he very plainly calls the Elements Bread and Wine, and a Representation
of Christ's Body and Blood.

St. Austin (as he is cited by Fulgentius de Baptismo and diverse others) in his
Exhortation to these that were newly baptized, speaking of this Sacrament,
says, That which you see is the Bread, and the Cup which your Eyes witness: but
that which your Faith must be instructed in, is, that the Bread is the Body of
Christ, and the Cup is his Blood. And then he proposes the Objection, how that
could be? And answers it thus; These things are therefore called Sacraments,
because one thing is seen, and another is understood: What you see has a bodily
Appearance, but what you understand has a Spiritual Fruit; and if you will
understand the Body of Christ, hear what the Apostle says to the Faithful, Ye
are the Body of Christ and his Members: If therefore you be the Body and
Members of Christ, your Mystery is placed on the Table of the Lord, and you
receive the Mystery of the Lord. And at large prosecutes this, to show how the
Faithful are the Body of Christ, as the Bread is made up of many Grains; from
whence it appears, that he believed, that the conscrated Elements were still
Bread and Wine.

And speaking of St. Paul's breaking Bread at Troas, he says, (Epist. 86.)
being to break Bread that night, as it is broken in the Sacrament of the Body
of Christ. He also says, (Sermon. 9. De Diverse.) The Eucharist is our daily
Bread; but let us so receive it, that not only our Belly but our Mind be
refreshed by it. Besides, in a great many places St. Austin calls the
Eucharist, the Sacrament of Bread and Wine.

And speaking of things, made use of to signify somewhat else, he adds for one,
(Lib. 3. De Trinit. c. 10.) The Bread that is made for this, is consumed in our
receiving the Sacrament. He also says, (Lib. 17. De Civ. Dei.) To eat Bread is
in the New Testament, the Sacrifice of Christians. He likewise says, (Lib.
Cont. Donat. c. 6.) Both Judas and Peter received a part of the same Bread out
of the same hand of our Lord.

And thus from twelve Witnesses that are beyond all Exception, it does appear,
That the Fathers believed the Elements to be still Bread and Wine after the
Consecration. We have not brought any Proofs from the Fathers that are less
known or read, for then we must have swelled up this Paper beyond what we
intend it. One thing is so considerable, that we cannot forbear to desire it be
taken notice of, and that is, That we see those great Fathers and Doctors of
the Church call the consecrated Elements, without any mincing of the matter,
Bread and Wine; but when they call it the Body and Blood of Christ, they often
use some mollifying and less hardy Expression. So St. Austin says, (Sermon. 53.
De Verb. Dom.) Almost all call the Sacrament his Body. And again says, (Lib. 3.
De Trinit. c. 4.) We call that only the Body and Blood of Christ, which being
taken of the Fruits of the Earth, and consecrated by the Mystical Prayer, we
rightly receive for our Spiritual Health in the Commemoration of the Passion of
our Lord for us. And he says, (Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.) After some sort the
Sacrament of the Body of Christ is his Body, and the Sacrament of his Blood is
the Blood of Christ. And also says, (Sermon. 2. in Psalm. 33.) He carried himself
in his own Hands in some sort, when he said, This is my Body.

St. Chrysostom says, (Epist. ad Caesar.) The Bread is thought worthy to be
called the Body of our Lord. And on these Words, The Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, among the improper acceptions of Flesh, says, (Comm. in Epist. ad
Galat. c. 5.) The Scriptures use to call the Mysteries by the name of Flesh,
and sometimes the whole Church, saying, She is the Body of Christ.

Tertullian says, (Lib. 4. cont. Marc. c. 40.) Christ calls the Bread his Body,
and a little after, he names the Bread his Body.

Isidore Hispal. says, (Orig. lib. 6. c. 9.) We call this after his Command the
Body and Blood of Christ, which being made of the Fruits of the Earth, is
sanctified and made a Sacrament.

Theodoret says, (Dialog. 1.) In the giving of the Mysteries, Christ called the
Bread his Body, and the mixed Cup his Blood. And says, (Dialog. 1.) He who
called his Natural Body Corn and Bread, and also calls himself a Vine, likewise
honored these visible Symbols with the names of his Body and Blood.

But we now go to bring our Proofs for the next Branch of our first
Proposition; in which we assert, That the Fathers believed that the very
Substance of the Bread and Wine did remain after the Consecration. By which all
the Proofs brought in the former Branch will receive a further Evidence; since
by these it will appear the Fathers believed the Substance of the Elements
remained; and thence we may well conclude, that wherever we find mention made
of Bread and Wine after Consecration, they mean of the Substance, and not of
the Accidents of Bread and Wine. For proof of this, we shall only bring the
Testimonies of four Fathers, that lived almost within one Age, and were the
greatest Men of the Age. Their Authority is as generally received, as their
Testimonies are formal and decisive: And these are Pope Gelasius, St.
Chrysostom, Ephrem Patriarch of Antioch, and Theodoret, whom we shall find
delivering to us the Doctrine of the Church in their Age, with great
Consideration upon a very weighty Occasion: So that it shall appear that this
was for that Age the Doctrine generally received both in the Churches of Rome
and Constantinople, Antioch, and Asia the less.

We shall begin with Gelasius, who, though he lived later than some of the
others, yet, because of the Eminence of his See, and the Authority those we
deal with must needs acknowledge was in him, ought to be set first: He says,
(in lib. de duab. not. Christ.) The Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ
are a Divine thing; for which reason we become, by them, Partakers of the
Divine Nature; and yet the Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine does not cease
to be; and the Image and Likeness of the Body and Blood of Christ are indeed
celebrated in the action of the Mysteries: therefore it appears evidently
enough, that we ought to think that of Christ our Lord, which we profess and
celebrate, and receive in his Image, that as they (to wit, the Elements) pass
into that Divine Substance, the Holy Ghost working it, their Nature remaining
still in its own Property. So that principal Mystery, whose Efficiency and
Virtue these (to wit, the Sacraments) represent to us, remains one entire and
true Christ; those things of which he is compounded (to wit, his two Natures)
remaining in their Properties.

These words seem so express and decisive, that one would think the bare
reading them, without any further Reflections, should be of force enough. But
before we offer any Considerations upon them, we shall set down other Passages
of the other Fathers, and upon them altogether make such Remarks as, we hope,
may satisfy any that will hear Reason.

St. Chrysostom treating of the two Natures of Christ against the
Apollinarists, (Epist. ad Caesar. monach.) who did so confound them, as to
consubstantiate them, he makes use of the Doctrine of the Sacrament to
illustrate that Mystery by, in these Words; As before the Bread is sanctified,
we call it Bread; but when the Divine Grace has sanctified it by the mean of
the Priest, it is freed from the name of Bread, and is thought worthy of the
name of the Lord's Body, though the Nature of Bread remains in it: and yet it
is not said there are two Bodies, but one Body of the Son; so the Divine Nature
being joined to the Body, both these make one Son, and one Person.

Next this Patriarch of Constantinople, let us hear Ephrem the Patriarch of
Antioch give his Testimony, as it is preserved by Photius, (Cod. 229.) who says
thus: In like manner (having before treated of the two Natures united in
Christ) the Body of Christ, which is received by the Faithful, does not depart
from its sensible Substance, and yet remains inseparated from the Intellectual
Grace: So Baptism becoming wholly Spiritual, and one, it preserves its own
sensible Substance, and does not lose that which it was before.

To these we shall add, what Theodoret (Dialog. 1.) on the same occasion says
against those, who from that place, the Word was made Flesh, believed, that in
the Incarnation the Divinity of the Word was changed into the Humanity of the
Flesh. He brings in his Heretic arguing about some Mystical Expressions of the
Old Testament, that related to Christ: At length he comes to show, how Christ
called himself Bread and Corn; so also in the delivering the Mysteries, Christ
called the Bread his Body, and the mixed Cup his Blood; and our Savior changed
the Names, calling his Body by the name of the Symbol, and the Symbol by the
name of his Body. And when the Heretic asks the reason why the Names were so
changed, the Orthodox answers, That it was manifest to such as were initiated
in Divine things; for he would have those who partake of the Mysteries, not
look to the Nature of those things that were seen, but by the Change of the
names, to believe that Change that was made through Grace; for he who called
his Natural Body Corn and Bread, does likewise honor the visible Symbols with
the name of his Body and Blood; not changing the Nature, but adding Grace to
Nature: And so goes on to ask his Heretic, whether he thought the holy Bread
was the Symbol and Type of his Divinity, or of his Body and Blood? And the
other acknowledging they were the Symbols of his Body and Blood: He concludes,
that Christ had a true Body.

The second Dialogue is against the Eutychians; who believed, that after
Christ's Assumption, his Body was swallowed up by his Divinity: And there the
Eutychian brings an Argument to prove that Change from the Sacrament; it being
granted, that the Gifts before the Priest's Prayer were Bread and Wine. He asks
how it was to be called after the Sanctification? the Orthodox answers, the
Body and Blood of Christ; and that he believed he received the Body and Blood
of Christ. From thence the Heretic, as having got a great advantage, argues;
That as the Symbols of the Body and Blood of our Lord were one thing before the
Priestly Invocation, and after that were changed, and are different from what
they were: So the Body of our Lord, after the Assumption, was changed into the
Divine Substance. But the Orthodox replies, that he was catched in the Net he
laid for others; for the Mystical Symbols, after the Sanctification, do not
depart from their own Nature; for they continue in their former Substance,
Figure and Form, and are both visible and palpable, as they were before; but
they are understood to be that which they are made, and are believed and
venerated, as being those things which they are believed to be. And from thence
he bids the Heretic compare the Image with the Original, for the Type must be
like the Truth, and shows that Christ's Body retains its former Form and
Figure, and the Substance of his Body, though it be now made Immortal and
Incorruptible. Thus he.

And having now set down very faithfully the Words of these Fathers, we desire
it may be considered, that all these Words are used to the same Effect, to
prove the Reality of Christ's Body, and the Distinction of the two Natures, the
Divine and the Human, in him. For, though St. Chrysostom lived before Eutyches
his days, yet in this Point the Eutychians and the Apollinarists, against whom
he writes, held Opinions so like others, that we may well say, all these Words
of the Fathers we have set down are to the same purpose.

Now, first it is evident, that if Transubstantiation had been then believed,
there needed no other Argument to prove against the Eutychians that Christ had
still a real Body, but to have declared that his Body was corporally present in
the Eucharist; which they must have done, had they believed it, and not spoken
so as they did; since that alone well proved, had put an end to the whole
Controversy.

Further, they could never have argued from the Visions and Apparitions of
Christ, to prove he had still a real Body; for if it was possible the Body of
Christ could appear under the accidents of Bread and Wine, it was as possible
the Divinity should appear under the accidents of an Humane Body.

Thirdly, They could never have argued against the Eutychians, as they did,
from the absurdity that followed upon such a substantial mutation of the Humane
Nature of Christ into his Divinity, if they had believed this substantial
conversion of the Elements into Christ's Body, which is liable unto far greater
Absurdities. And we can as little doubt, but the Eutychians had turned back
their Arguments on themselves, with these Answers, if that Doctrine had been
then received. It is true, it would seem from the last Passage of Theodoret,
that the Eutychians did believe some such change; but that could not be, for
they denied the Being of the Body of Christ, and so could not think any thing
was changed into that which they believed was not. Therefore we are to suppose
him arguing from some commonly received expressions, which the Father explains.

In fine, The design of those Fathers being to prove, that the two Natures
might be united without the change of either of their substances in the Person
of Christ, it had been inexcusable Folly in them, to have argued from the
sacramental Mysteries being united to the Body and Blood of Christ, if they had
not believed they retained their former Substance; for had they believed
Transubstantiation, what a goodly Argument had it been, to have said, Because
after the Consecration the Accidents of Bread and Wine remain, therefore the
Substance of the Humanity remained still, tho united to the Divine Nature in
Christ? Did ever Man in his Wits argue in this fashion? Certainly, these four
Bishops, whereof three were Patriarchs, and one of these a Pope, deserved to
have been hissed out of the World, as Persons that understood not what it was
to draw a Consequence, if they had argued so as they did, and believed
Transubstantiation. But if you allow them to believe (as certainly they did)
that in the Sacrament the real Substances of Bread and Wine remained, tho after
the Sanctification, by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, they were the Body and
Blood of Christ, and were to be called so; then this is a most excellent
illustration of the Mystery of the Incarnation, in which the Human Nature
retains its proper and true Substance, tho after the Union with the Divinity,
Christ be called God, even as he was Man, by virtue of his Union with the
Eternal Word.

And this shows how unreasonable it is to pretend, that because Substance and
Nature are sometimes used even for accidental Qualities, they should be
therefore understood so in the cited places; for if you take them in that
sense, you destroy the force of the Argument, which from being a very strong
one, will by this means become a most ridiculous Sophisin. Yet we are indeed
beholden to those that have taken pains to show, that Substance and Nature
stand often for accidental Qualities; for tho that cannot be applied to the
former places, yet it helps us with an excellent Answer to many of those
Passages with which they triumph not a little.

Having so far considered these Four Fathers, we shall only add to them the
Definition of the Seventh General Council at Constantinople, Ann. 754. Christ
appointed us to offer the Image of his Body, to wit, the substance of the
Bread. The Council is indeed of no Authority with these we deal with: But we do
not bring it as a Decree of a Council, but as a Testimony, that so great a
number of Bishops did in the Eighth Century believe, That the substance of the
Bread did remain in the Eucharist, and that it was only the Image of Christ's
Body: and if in this Definition they spoke not more consonantly to the Doctrine
of the former Ages, than their Enemies at Nice did, let what has been set down,
and shall be yet adduced, declare.

And now we advance to the third Branch of our first Assertion, that the
Fathers believed that the Consecrated Elements did nourish our Bodies; and the
Proofs of this will also give a further Evidence to our former Position; that
the substance of the Elements does remain: And it is a Demonstration that these
Fathers, who thought the Sacrament nourished our Bodies, could not believe a
Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. For
the proof of this Branch we desire the following Testimonies be considered.

First, Justin Martyr, as was already cited, not only calls the Eucharist our
Nourishment, but formally calls it that Food by which our Flesh and Blood
through its transmutation into them are nourished.

Secondly, Irenaeus (Lib. 5. adv. Heret. c. 2.) proving the Resurrection of the
Body by this Argument, That our Bodies are fed by the Body and Blood of Christ,
and that therefore they shall rise again; he has these Words, He confirmed
that Cup, which is a Creature, to be His Blood, by which He increases our
Blood; and the Bread, which is a Creature, to be His Body, by which He
increases our Body: And when the mixed Cup and the Bread, receive the Word of
God, it becomes the Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Christ, by which the
substance of our Flesh is increased and subsists. How then do they deny the
Flesh to be capable of the gift of God, which is Eternal Life, that is
nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ, and is made His Member. We hope it
will be observed, that as these Words are express and formal; so the Design on
which He uses them will admit of none of those Distinctions they commonly rely
on.

Tertullian says, (Lib. de Resur. c. 8.) the Flesh is fed with the Body and
Blood of Christ.

St. Austin (Sermon. 9. de Diverse.) after he had called the Eucharist our daily
Bread, he exhorts us so to receive it, that not only our Bellies, but our Minds
might be refreshed by it.

Isidore of Sevil says, The substance of the visible Bread nourishes the
outward Man; or, as Bertram cites his Words, all that we receive externally in
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, is proper to refresh the Body.

Next, let us see what the 16th Council of Toledo says in Anno 633. condemning
those that did not offer in the Eucharist entire Loaves, but only round Crusts;
they did appoint one entire Loaf carefully prepared to be set on the Altar,
that it might be sanctified by the Priestly Benediction, and order, that what
remained after Communion, should be either put in some Bag, or, if it was
needful, to eat it up, that it might not oppress the Belly of him that took it
with the burden of an heavy surcharge; and that it might not go to the
Digestion, but that it might feed his Soul with spiritual Nourishment. From
which Words, one of two Consequences will necessarily follow; either that the
Consecrated Elements do really nourish the Body, which we intend to prove from
them; or that the Body of Christ is not in the Elements, but as they are
Sacramentally used, which we acknowledge many of the Fathers believed. But the
last Words we cited of the Spiritual Nourishment, show those Fathers did not
think so; and if they did, we suppose those we deal with will see, that to
believe Christ's Body is only in the Elements when used, will clearly leave the
Charge of Idolatry on that Church in their Processions, and other Adorations of
the Host.

But none is so express as Origin, (Comment. in Mat. c. 15.) who on these
words, It Is not that which enters within a Man which defiles a Man, says, If
every thing that enters by the Mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast into the
Draught; then the Food that is sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer,
goes also to the Belly, as to what is material in it, and from thence to the
Draught; but by the Prayer that was made over it, it is useful in proportion to
our Faith, and is the mean that the Understanding is clear-sighted and
attentive to that which is profitable; and it is not the matter of Bread, but
the Word pronounced over it, which profits him that does not eat in a way
unworthy of our Lord. This Doctrine of the Sacraments being so digested that
some parts of it turned to Excrement, was likewise taught by diverse Latin
Writers in the 9th Age, as Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Mentz, and Heribald
Bishop of Auxerre. Diverse of the Greek Writers did also hold it, whom for a
Reproach their Adversaries called Stercoranists. It is true, other Greek
Fathers were not of Origen's Opinion, but believed that the Eucharist did
entirely turn into the Substance of our Bodies. So Cyril of Jerusalem says,
(Mystic. Catech. 5.) that the Bread of the Eucharist does not go into the
Belly, nor is cast into the Draught, but is distributed thorough the whole
Substance of the Communicant, for the good of Body and Soul.

The Homily of the Eucharist, in a Dedication that is in St. Chrysostom's
Works, (Tom. 5.) says, Do not think that this is Bread, and that this is Wine;
for they pass not to the Draught, as other Victuals do: And comparing it to Wax
put to the Fire, of which no Ashes remain; he adds, So think that the M^teries
are consumed with the Substance of our Bodies.

John Damascene is of the same mind, who says, (Lib. 4. de Orthod. fide c. 14.)
That the Body and the Blood of Christ passes into the Consistence of our Souls
and Bodies, without being consumed, corrupted, or passing into the Draught, God
forbid, but passing into our Substance for our Conservation. Thus it will
appear, that tho those last-cited Fathers did not believe as Origin did, that
any part of the Eucharist went to the Draught; yet they thought it was turned
into the Substance of our Bodies, from which we may well conclude, they thought
the Substance of Bread and Wine remained in the Eucharist after the
Consecration, and that it nourished our Bodies.

And thus we hope we have sufficiently proved our first Proposition in all its
three Branches. So leaving it, we go on to the second Proposition, which is;
That the Fathers call the consecrated Elements the Figures, the Signs, the
Symbols, the Types, and Antitypes, the Commemoration, Representation, the
Mysteries, and the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Tertullian proving against Marcion, (Lib. 4 cont. Marc. c. 40.) that Christ
had a real Body, he brings some Figures that were fulfilled in Christ, and
says, He made the Bread which he took and gave his Disciples to be his Body,
saying, This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body; but it had not been a
Figure of his Body had it not been true, for an empty thing, such as a
Phantasm, cannot have a Figure. Now had Tertullian, and the Church in his time,
believed Transubstantiation, it had been much more pertinent for him to have
argued, Here is corporally present Christ's Body, therefore he had a true Body,
than to say, Here is a Figure of his Body, therefore he had a true Body; such
an escape as this is not incident to a Man of common Sense, if he had believed
Transubstantiation. And the same Father, in two other places before cited,
says, Christ gave the Figure of his Body to the Bread, and that he represented
his own Body by the Bread.

St. Austin says, (Com. in Psalm. 3) He commended and gave to his Disciples, the
Figure of his Body and Blood. The same Expressions are also in Bid, Alcuine,
and Druthmar, that lived in the Eighth and Ninth Centuries. But what St. Austin
says elsewhere (Lib. 3. de Doct. Chr. c. 16.) is very full in this matter,
where, treating of the Rules by which we are to judge what Expressions in
Scripture are figurative, and what not, he gives this for one Rule: If any
place seem to command a Crime or horrid Action, it is figurative; and to
instance it, cites these words, Except ye eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of
the Son of Man, you have no Life in you; which (says he) seems to command some
Crime, or horrid Action, therefore it is a Figure, commanding us to communicate
in the Passion of our Lord, and sweetly and profitably to lay up in our Memory,
that his Flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Which words are so express and
full, that whatever those we deal with may think of them, we are sure we cannot
devise how any one could have delivered our Doctrine more formally. Parallel to
these are Origen's words, (Homil. 7. in Lev.) who calls the understanding the
Words of our Savior, of eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood according to
the Letter, a Letter that kills.

The same St. Austin calls the Eucharist, a Sign of Christ's Body, in his Book
against Adimantus, (Lib. cont. Adimant. manich. c. 12.) who studied to prove
that the Author of the Old and New Testament was not the same God; and among
other Arguments, he uses this, That Blood in the Old Testament is called the
Life or Soul, contrary to the New Testament: To which St. Austin answers, That
it was so called, not that it was truly the Soul or Life, but the Sign of it;
and to show, that the Sign does sometimes bear the Name of that whereof it is a
Sign, he says, Our Lord did not doubt to say, This is my Body, when he was
giving the Sign of his Body. Where, if he had not believed the Eucharist was
substantially different from his Body, it had been the most impertinent
Illustration that ever was, and had proved just against him, that the Sign must
be one and the same with that which is signified by it.

For the Sacrament being called the Type, the Antitype, the Symbol and Mystery
of Christ's Body and Blood: The ancient Liturgies, and Greek Fathers use these
Phrases so frequently, that since it is not so much as denied, we judge we need
not laboriously prove it. Therefore we pass over this, believing it will be
granted; for if it be denied, we undertake to prove them to have been used not
only on some occasions, but to have been the constant Style of the Church. Now
that Types, Antitypes, Symbols, and Mysteries, are distinct from that which
they shadow forth, and mystically hold out, we believe can be as little
disputed. In this Sense all the Figures of the Law are called Types of Christ
by the Fathers, and both the Baptismal Water and the Chrism are called Symbols
and Mysteries. And tho there was not that occasion for the Fathers to discourse
on Baptism so often, which every body received but once, and was administered
ordinarily but on a few days of the Year, as they had to speak of the
Eucharist, which was daily consecrated; so that it cannot be imagined, there
should be near such a number of places about the one as about the other; yet we
fear not to undertake to prove, there be many places among the Ancients, that
do as fully express a change of the Baptismal Water, as of the Eucharistical
Elements. From whence it may appear, that their great Zeal to prepare Persons
to a due value of these holy Actions, and that they might not look on them as a
vulgar Ablution, or an ordinary Repast, carried them to many large and high
Expressions, which cannot bear a literal meaning. And since they with whom we
deal are fain to fly to Metaphors and Allegories for clearing of what the
Fathers say of Baptism, it is a most unreasonable thing to complain of us for
using such Expositions of what they say about the Eucharist.

But that we may not leave this without some Proof, we shall set down the words
of Facundus, (Desens. Conc. Chalced. lib. 9.) who says, The Sacrament of
Adoption, that is Baptism, may be called Adoption, as the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood, which is in the consecrated Bread and Cup, is called his Body and
Blood; not that the Bread is properly his Body, or the Cup properly his Blood,
but because they contain in them the Mystery of his Body and Blood; and hence
it was that our Lord called the Bread that was blessed, and the Cup which he
gave his Disciples, his Body and Blood. Therefore as the Believers in Christ,
when they receive the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, are rightly said to have
received his Body and Blood; so Christ, when he received the Sacrament of the
Adoption of Sons, may be rightly said to have received the Adoption of Sons.
And we leave every one to gather from these words, if the cited Father could
believe Transubstantiation, and if he did not think that Baptism was as truly
the Adoption of the Sons of God, as the Eucharist was his Body and Blood, which
these of Rome acknowledge is only to be meant in a moral Sense.

That the Fathers called this Sacrament the Memorial and Representation of the
Death of Christ, and of his Body that was broken, and his Blood that was shed,
we suppose will be as little denied, for no Man that ever looked into any of
their Treatises of the Eucharist, can doubt of it.

St. Austin says, (Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.) That Sacraments must have some
Similitude of these things of which they be the Sacraments, otherwise they
could not be Sacraments. So he says, the Sacrament of the Body of Christ is
after some manner his Blood. So the Sacrament of Faith (that is Baptism) is
Faith.

But more expressly, speaking of the Eucharist as a Sacrifice of Praise, he
says, (Lib. 20. cont. Faust. Manich. c. 21.) The Flesh and Blood of this
Sacrifice was promised before the coming of Christ by the Sacrifices of the
Types of it: In the Passion of Christ, it was done in the Truth it self: And
after his Ascent, is celebrated by the Sacrament of the remembrance of it. But
he explains this more fully on the 98th Psalm, where he having read, ver. 5.
Worship his Footstool; and seeking for its true meaning, expounds it of
Christ's Body, who was Flesh of this Earth, and gives his Flesh to be eaten by
us for our Salvation, which, since none eats, except he have first adored it;
He makes this the Footstool which we worship without any Sin, and do sin if we
do not worship it. So far the Church of Rome triumphs with this place. But let
us see what follows, where we shall find that which will certainly abate their
Joy; He goes on and tells us, not to dwell on the Flesh, lest we be not
quickened by the Spirit; and shows how they that heard our Lord's words were
scandalized at them as hard words; for they understood them, says he,
foolishly, and carnally, and thought he was to have cut off some parcels of his
Body to be given them: But they were hard, not our Lord's saying; for had they
been meek, and not hard, they should have said within themselves, He says not
this without a cause, but because there is some Sacrament hid there; for had
they come to him with his Disciples, and asked him, he had instructed them: For
he said it is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing: the words
that I have spoken to you are Spirit and Life. And adds, understand spiritually
that which I have said; for it is not this Body which you see, that you are not
to eat; or to drink this Blood which they are to shed, who shall crucify me:
but I have recommended a Sacrament to you, which being spiritually understood,
shall quicken you; and tho it be necessary that it be celebrated visibly, yet
it must be understood invisibly. From which it is as plain as can be, that St.
Austin believed that in the Eucharist we do not eat the natural Flesh, and
drink the natural Blood of Christ; but that we do it only in a Sacrament, and
spiritually, and invisibly.

But the force of all this will appear yet clearer, if we consider that they
speak of the Sacrament as a Memorial that exhibited Christ to us in his
absence: For tho it naturally follows, that whatsoever is commemorated must
needs be absent; yet this will be yet more evident, if we find the Fathers made
such Reflections on it.

So Gaudentius says, (Tract. in Exodus.) This is the hereditary Gift of his New
Testament, which that Night he was betrayed to be crucified, he left as the
Pledge of his Presence: this is the Provision for our Journey with which we are
fed in this way of our Life, and nourished till we go to him out of this World;
for he would have his Benefits remain with us: He would have our Souls to be
always sanctified by his precious Blood, and by the Image of his own Passion.

Primasius (Comm. in 1 Epist. ad Cor.) compares the Sacrament to a Pledge, which
one, when he is dying, leaves to any whom he loved. Many other places may be
brought, to show how the Fathers speak of Memorials and Representations, as
opposite to the Truth and Presence of that which is represented.

And thus we doubt not but we have brought Proofs, which, in the Judgment of
all that are unprejudiced, must demonstrate the truth of this our second
Proposition, which we leave, and go on to the third, which was;

That by the Doctrine of the Fathers, the unworthy Receivers did not receive
Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament. For this our first Proof is taken
from Origin, (Com. in Mat. c. 15.) who after he had spoken of the Sacraments
being eaten, and passing to the Belly, adds, These things we have said of the
typical and symbolical Body; but many things may be said of the Word that was
made Flesh, and the true Food, whom whosoever eats, he shall live for ever;
whom no wicked Person can eat: for if it were possible that any who continues
wicked, should eat the Word that was made Flesh, since he is the Word, and the
Living Bread, it had never been written, Whosoever eats this Bread, shall live for
ever. Where he makes a manifest difference between the typical and symbolical
Body received in the Sacrament, and the incarnate Word, of which no wicked
Person can partake. And he also says, (Hom. 3. in Mat.) They that are Good, eat
the Living Bread that came down from Heaven; and the Wicked eat Dead Bread,
which is Death.

Zeno, Bishop of Verona, that, as is believed, lived near Origen's time, (Tom.
2. Spir. Dach.) says, (as he is cited by Ratherius Bishop of Verona) There is
cause to fear, that he in whom the Devil dwells, does not eat the Flesh of our
Lord, nor drink his Blood, tho he seems to communicate with the Faithful; since
our Lord has said, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him.

St. Ierom on the 66th of Isaiah, says, They that are not holy in Body and
Spirit, do neither eat the Flesh of Jesus, nor drink his Blood; of which he
said, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life. And on the
8th Chapter of Hosea, he says, They eat not his Flesh, whose Flesh is the Food
of them that believe. To the same purpose he writes in his Comments on the 22d
of Jeremy, and on the 10th of Zechariah.

St. Austin says, (Tract. 26. in Joan.) He that does not abide in Christ, and
in whom Christ does not abide, certainly does not spiritually eat his Flesh,
nor drink his Blood, tho he may visibly and carnally break in his Teeth the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ: But he rather eats and drinks the
Sacrament of so great a matter to his Judgment.

And speaking of those, who by their Uncleanness become the Members of an
Harlot; he says, (Lib. 21. de Civ. Dei c. 25.) Neither are they to be said to
eat the Body of Christ, because they are not his Members. And besides, he adds,
He that says, whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, abides in me, and I in
him; shows what it is, not only in a Sacrament, but truly to eat the Body of
Christ, and drink his Blood. To this we shall add, that so often cited Passage;
(Tract. 54. in Joan.) Those did eat the Bread that was the Lord; the other (he
means Judas) the Bread of the Lord against the Lord. By which he clearly
insinuates, he did believe the unworthy Receivers did not receive the Lord with
the Bread: And that this has been the constant Belief of the Greek Church to
this day, shall be proved, if it be thought necessary, for clearing this matter.

And thus far we have studied to make good what we undertook to prove: But if
we had enlarged on every Particular, we must have said a great deal more; to
show from many undeniable Evidences, that the Fathers were Strangers to this
new Mystery. It is clear from their Writings, that they thought Christ was only
spiritually present; that we did eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood only by
Faith, and not by our bodily Senses; and that the words of eating his Flesh,
and drinking his Blood, were to be understood spiritually. It is no less clear,
that they considered Christ present only as he was on the Cross, and not as he
is now in the Glory of the Father: And from hence it was, that they came to
order their Eucharistical Forms so, as that the Eucharist might represent the
whole History of Christ from his Incarnation to his Assumption. Besides, they
always speak of Christ as absent from us, according to his Flesh and Human
Nature, and only present in his Divinity and by his Spirit; which they could
not have said, if they had thought him every day present on their Altars in his
Flesh and Human Nature; for then he were more on Earth than he is in Heaven,
since in Heaven he is circumscribed within one place. But according to this
Doctrine he must be always in above a Million of places upon Earth; so that it
were very strange to say he were absent, if they believed him thus present.

But to give yet further Evidences of the Fathers not believing this Doctrine,
let us but reflect a little on the Consequences that necessarily follow it:
which be, 1. That a Body may be, by the Divine Power, in more places at once.
2. That a Body may be in a place without Extension or Quantity; so a Body of
such Dimensions, as our blessed Lord's Body, can be in so small a room as a
thin Wafer; and not only so, but that the whole Body should be entirely in
every crumb and point of that Wafer. 3. That a Body can be made or produced in
a place that had a real Being before, and yet is not brought thither, but
produced there. 4. That the Accidents of any Substance, such as Color, Smell,
Taste, and Figure, can remain without any Body or Substance in which they
subsist. 5. That our Senses may deceive us in their clearest and most evident
Representations. 6. Great Doubts there are what becomes of the Body of Christ
after it is received; or, if it should come to be corrupted, or to be snatched
by a Mouse, or eat by any Vermin. All these are the natural and necessary
Effects of this Doctrine, and are not only to be perceived by a contemplative
and searching Understanding, but are such as stare every body full in the Face:
and hence it is, that since this was submitted to in the Western Church, the
whole Doctrine of Philosophy, has been altered, and new Maxims and Definitions
were found out, to accustom the Youth while raw and easy to any Impression, to
receive these as Principles, by which their Minds being full of those first
Prejudices, might find no difficulty to believe this.

Now it is certain, had the Fathers believed this, they who took a great deal
of pains to resolve all the other Mysteries of our Faith, and were so far from
being short or defective in it, that they rather over-do it; and that not only
about the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, but about Original Sin, the
Derivation of our Souls, the Operation of the Grace of God in our Hearts, and
the Resurrection of our Bodies, should yet have been so constantly silent in
those Mysteries, tho they ought rather to have been cleared than the other.
Because in the other Heads the Difficulties were more speculative and
abstracted, and so Scruples were only incident to Men of more curious and
diligent Enquiries. But here it is otherwise, where the matter being an Object
of the Senses, every Man's Senses must have raised in him all or most of those
Scruples: And yet the Fathers neither in their Philosophical Treatises, nor in
their Theological Writings, ever attempt the unridling those Difficulties. But
all this is only a Negative, and yet we do appeal to any one that has
diligently read the Fathers, St. Austin in particular; if he can persuade
himself, that when all other Mysteries, and the Consequences from them, were
explained with so great Care and even Curiosity, these only were things of so
easy a Digestion, that about them there should have been no Scruple at all made.

But it is yet clearer, when we find the Fathers not only silent, but upon
other occasions delivering Maxims and Principles so directly contrary to these
Consequences, without any reserved Exceptions or Provisions for the strange
Mysteries of Transubstantiation: They tell us plainly, Creatures are limited to
one place, and so argued against the Heathens believing their Inferior Deities
were in the several Statues consecrated to them: From this they prove the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, that he did work in many places at once, and so
could not be a Creature, which can only be in one place. Nay, they do
positively teach us, that Christ can be no more on Earth, since his Body is in
Heaven, and is but in one place. They also do tell us, That that which has no
Bounds nor Figure, and cannot be touched nor seen, cannot be a Body, and that
all Bodies are extended in some place, and that Bodies cannot exist after the
manner of Spirits. They also tell us in all their Reasonings against the
Eternity of Matter, That nothing could be produced that had a Being before it
was produced. They also teach us very formally, That none of the Qualities of a
Body could subsist, except the Body it self did also subsist. And for the
Testimonies of our Senses, they appeal to them on all occasions as Infallible;
and tell us, that it tended to reverse the whole state of our Life, the order
of Nature, and to blind the Providence of God; to say, he has given the
Knowledge and Enjoyment of all his Works to Liars and Deceivers, if our Senses
be false. Then we must doubt of our Faith, if the Testimony of the Eyes, Hands
and Ears were of a Nature capable to be deceived. And in their Contests with
the Marcionites and others about the Truth of Christ's Body, they appeal always
to the Testimony of the Senses as infallible: Nay, even treating of the
Sacrament, they say, it was Bread as their Eyes witnessed, and truly Wine, that
Christ did consecrate for the Memory of his Blood; telling, that in this very
particular we ought not to doubt the Testimony of our Senses.

But to make this whole matter yet plainer; It is certain, that had the Church
in the first Ages believed this Doctrine, the Heathens and Jews who charged
them with every thing they could possibly invent, had not passed over this,
against which all the Powers of Reason, and the Authorities of Sense, do rise
up. They charge them for believing a God that was born, a God of Flesh, that
was crucified and buried. They laughed at their Belief of a Judgment to come,
of endless Flames, of an Heavenly Paradise, and the Resurrection of the Flesh.
The first Apologists for Christianity, Justin, Tertullian, Origin, Arnobius,
and Cyril of Alexandria, give us a full account of those Blasphemies against
our most holy Faith; and the last has given us what Julian objected in his own
words, who having apostatized from the Faith in which he was initiated, and was
a Reader in the Church, must have been well acquainted with, and instructed in
their Doctrine and Sacraments. He then who laughed at every thing, and in
particular at the Ablution and Sanctification in Baptism, as conceiving it a
thing impossible that Water should cleanse and wash a Soul: Yet neither he, nor
Celsus, nor any other ever charged on the Christians any Absurdities from their
Belief of Transubstantiation. This is, it is true, a Negative Argument; yet
when we consider the Malice of those ingenious Enemies of our Faith, and their
Care to expose all the Doctrines and Customs of Christians, and yet find them
in no place charge the strange Consequences of this Doctrine on them; we must
from thence conclude, there was no such Doctrine then received: for if it had
been, they, at least Julian, must have known it; and if they knew it, can we
think they should not have made great noise about it?

We know some think their charging the Christians with the eating of Human
Flesh, and Thyestian Suppers, related to the Sacrament: but that cannot be, for
when the Fathers answer that Charge, they tell them to their Teeth it was a
plain lie: and do not offer to explain it with any relation to the Eucharist,
which they must have done if they had known it was founded on their Doctrine of
receiving Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament. But the truth is, those
horrid Calumnies were charged on the Christians from the execrable and
abominable Practices of the Gnostics, who called themselves Christians; and
the Enemies of the Faith, either believing these were the Practices of all
Christians, or being desirous to have others think so, did accuse the whole
Body of Christians as guilty of these Abominations. So that it appears, those
Calumnies were not at all taken up from the Eucharist, and there being nothing
else that is so much as said to have any relation to the Eucharist, charged on
the Christians, we may well conclude from hence, that this Doctrine was not
received then in the Church.

But another Negative Argument is, That we find Heresies rising up in all Ages
against all the other Mysteries of our Faith, and some downright denying them,
others explaining them very strangely; and it is indeed very natural to an
unmortified and corrupt Mind, to reject all Divine Revelation, more
particularly that which either choaks his common Notions, or the Deductions of
appearing Reasonings; but most of all, all Men are apt to be startled, when
they are told, They must believe against the clearest Evidences of Sense; for
Men were never so meek and tame, as easily to yield to such things. How comes
it then that for the first seven Ages there were no Heresies nor Heretics
about this? We are ready to prove, that from the Eighth and Ninth Centuries, in
which this Doctrine began to appear, there has been in every Age great
Opposition made to all the Advances for setting it up, and yet these were but
dark and unlearned Ages, in which Implicit Obedience, and a blind Subjection to
what was generally proposed, was much in Credit. In those Ages, the Civil
Powers being ready to serve the Rage of Churchmen against any who should
oppose it, it was not safe for any to appear against it. And yet it cannot be
denied, but from the days of the second Council of Nice, which made a great
step toward Transubstantiation, till the fourth Council of Lateran, there was
great Opposition made to it by the most Eminent Persons in the Latin Church;
and how great a part of Christendom has departed from the Obedience of the
Church of Rome in every Age since that time, and upon that account, is well
enough known.

Now, is it to be imagined, that there should have been such an Opposition to
it these nine hundred Years last past, and yet that it should have been
received the former eight hundred Years with no Opposition, and that it should
not have cost the Church the trouble of one General Council to decree it, or of
one Treatise of a Father to establish it, and answer those Objections that
naturally arise from our Reasons and Senses against it?

But in the end there are many things which have risen out of this Doctrine as
its natural Consequences, which had it been sooner taught and received, must
have been apprehended sooner, and those are so many clear Presumptions of the
Novelty of this Doctrine; The Elevation, Adoration, Processions, the Doctrine
of Concomitants, with a vast Superfaetation of Rites and Rubricks about this
Sacrament are lately sprung up. The Age of them is well known, and they have
risen in the Latin Church out of this Doctrine, which had it been sooner
received, we may reasonably enough think must have been likewise ancienter. Now
for all these things, as the Primitive Church knew them not, so on the other
hand, the great simplicity of their Forms, as we find them in Justin Martyr,
and Cyril of Jerusalem, in the Apostolical Constitutions, and the pretended
Denis the Areopagite, are far from that Pomp which the latter Ages that
believed this Doctrine brought in; the Sacraments being given in both kinds,
being put in the Hands of the Faithful, being given to the Children for many
Ages, being sent by Boys or common Persons to such as were dying, the eating up
what remained, (which in some places were burnt, in other places were consumed
by Children, or by the Clergy;) their making Cataplasms of it; their mixing the
consecrated Chalice with Ink to sign the Excommunication of Heretics. These,
with a great many more, are such Convictions to one, that has carefully
compared the ancient Forms with the Rubricks and Rites of the Church of Rome,
since this Doctrine was set up, that it is as discernable as any thing can be,
that the present Belief of the Church of Rome is different from the Primitive
Doctrine.

And thus far we have set down the Reasons that persuade us that
Transubstantiation was not the Belief of the first seven or eight Centuries of
the Church. If there be any part of what we have asserted, questioned, we have
very formal and full Proofs ready to show for them; though we thought it not
fit to enter into the particular Proofs of any thing, but what we undertook to
make out when we waited on your Ladyship.

Now there remains but one thing to be done, which we also promised; and that
was to clear the Words of St. Cyril of Jerusalem. We acknowledge they were truly
cited; but for clearing of them, we shall neither alledg any thing to the
lessening the Authority of that Father, though we find but a slender Character
given of him by Epiphanius and others: Nor shall we say any thing to lessen the
Authority of these Catechisms, though much might be said. But it is plain, St.
Cyril's Design in these Catechisms, was only to possess his Neophites with a
just and deep sense of these holy Symbols. But even in his 4th Catechism he
tells them, not to consider it as mere Bread and Wine, for it is the Body and
Blood of Christ. By which it appears he thought it was Bread still, though not
mere Bread.

And he gives us elsewhere a very formal Account in what Sense he thought it
was Christ's Body and Blood; which he also insinuates in this 4th Catechism:
For in his first Mist. Catechism, when he exhorts his young Christians to avoid
all that belonged to the Heathenish Idolatry, he tells, that on the Solemnities
of their Idols they had Flesh and Bread, which by the Invocation of the Devils
were defiled, as the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist before the holy Invocation
of the blessed Trinity was bare Bread and Wine; but the Invocation being made,
the Bread becomes the Body of Christ. In like manner, says he, those Victuals
of the Pomp of Satan, which of their own Nature are common or bare Victuals, by
the Invocation of the Devils become profane.

From this Illustration, which he borrowed from Justin Martyr his second
Apology, it appears, that he thought the Consecration of the Eucharist was of a
like sort or manner with the Profanation of the Idolatrous Feasts; so that as
the substance of the one remained still unchanged, so also according to him
must the substance of the other remain. Or, if this will not satisfy them, let
us see to what else he compares this change of the Elements by the
Consecration: In his third Mist. Catechism, treating of the Consecrated Oil, he
says; As the Bread of the Eucharist after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, is
no more common Bread, but the Body of Christ; so this holy Ointment is no more
bare Ointment, nor, as some may say, common; but it is a Gift of Christ, and
the Presence of the Holy Ghost, and becomes energetical of his Divinity. And
from these places let it be gathered what can be drawn from St. Cyril's
Testimony. And thus we have performed like wise what we promised, and have
given a clear Account of St. Cyril's meaning from himself; from whose own
words, and from these things which he compares with the Sanctification of the
Elements in the Eucharist, it appears he could not think of Transubstantiation;
otherwise he had neither compared it with the Idol-Feasts, nor the consecrated
Oil, in neither of which there can be supposed any Transubstantiation.

Having thus acquitted our selves of our Engagement before your Ladyship; we
shall conclude this Paper with our most earnest and hearty Prayers to the
Father of Lights, that he may of his great Mercy redeem his whole Christian
Church from all Idolatry; That he may open the Eyes of those, who being carnal,
look only at carnal things, and do not rightly consider the excellent Beauty of
this our most holy Faith, which is pure, simple, and spiritual: And that he may
confirm all those whom he has called to the knowledge of the Truth; so that
neither the Pleasures of Sin, nor the Snares of this World, nor the Fear of the
Cross, tempt them to make shipwreck of the Faith and a good Conscience. And
that God may pour out Abundance of his Grace on your Ladyship, to make you
still continue in the Love and Obedience of the Truth, is the earnest Prayer of,

MADAM, Your Ladyship's most Humble Servants. Edward Stillingfleet,
Gilbert Burnet.
London, Apr. 15. 1676.
A DISCOURSE, To show How unreasonable it is, To ask for Express Words of
Scripture in proving all Articles of Faith: And that a just and good
Consequence from Scripture is sufficient.
IT will seem a very needless Labor to all considering Persons, to go about
the exposing and baffling so unreasonable and ill-grounded a Pretense, That
whatever is not read in Scripture, is not to be held an Article of Faith. For
in making good this Assertion, they must either fasten their Proofs on some
other Ground, or on the words of our Article; which are these, Holy Scripture
contains all Things necessary to Salvation: So that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to Salvation.

Now it is such an Affront to every Man's Eyes and Understanding, to infer from
these Words, That all our Articles must be read in Scripture, that we are
confident every Man will cry Shame on any that will pretend to fasten on our
Church any such Obligation from them. If these unlucky Words, Nor may be proved
thereby, could be but dashed out, it were a won Cause. But we desire to know
what they think can be meant by these Words? or what else can they signify, but
that there may be Articles of Faith, which though they be not read in
Scripture, yet are proved by it. There be some Propositions so equivalent to
others, that they are but the same thing said in several Words; and these,
though not read in Scripture, yet are contained in it, since wheresoever the
one is read, the other must necessarily be understood. Other Propositions there
are, which are a necessary result either from two places of Scripture, which
joined together yield a third, as a necessary Issue; according to that eternal
Rule of Reason and Natural Logic, That wherever two Things agree in any
Third, they must also agree among Themselves. There be also other Propositions
that arise out of one single place of Scripture by a natural Deduction; as if
Jesus Christ be proved from any place of Scripture the Creator of the World, or
that He is to be worshipped with the same Adoration that is due to the Great
God, then it necessarily follows, that He is the Great God; because He does the
Works, and receives the Worship of the Great God. So it is plain, that our
Church by these Words, Nor may be proved thereby, has so declared Her self in
this Point, that it is either very great want of Consideration, or shameless
Impudence, to draw any such thing from our Articles.

But we being informed, that by this little Art, as shuffling and bare so ever
as it must appear to a just Discerner, many have been disordered, and some
prevailed on; We shall so open and expose it, that we hope it shall appear so
poor and trifling that every Body must be ashamed of it. It has already showed
it self in France and Germany, and the Novelty of it took with many, till it
came to be canvassed; and then it was found so weak, that it was universally
cried down and hissed off the Stage. But now that such decried Wares will go
off nowhere, those that deal in them, try if they can vent them in this Nation.

It might be imagined, that of all Persons in the World they should be the
furthest from pressing us to reject all Articles of Faith that are not read in
Scripture; since whenever that is received as a Maxim, The Infallibility of
their Church, the Authority of Tradition, the Supremacy of Rome, the Worship of
Saints, with a great many more must be cast out. It is unreasonable enough for
those who have cursed and excommunicated us, because we reject these Doctrines,
which are not so much as pretended to be read in Scripture, to impose on us the
reading all our Articles in these holy Writings.

But it is impudent to hear Persons speak thus, who have against the express
and formal Words of Scripture, set up the making and worshipping of Images; and
these not only of Saints, (though that be bad enough) but of the Blessed
Trinity, the praying in an unknown Tongue, and the taking the Chalice from the
People. Certainly this Plea in such Men's Mouths is not to be reconciled to the
most common rules of Decency and Discretion. What shall we then conclude of Men
that would impose Rules on us, that neither themselves submit to, nor are we
obliged to receive by any Doctrine or Article of our Church?

But to give this their Plea its full Strength and Advantage, that upon a fair
hearing all may justly conclude its Unreasonableness, we shall first set down
all can be said for it.

In the Principles of Protestants the Scriptures are the Rule by which all
Controversies must be judged. Now they having no certain way to direct them in
the Exposition of them, neither Tradition, nor the Definition of the Church:
Either they must pretend they are Infallible in their Deductions, or we have no
reason to make any account of them, as being Fallible and Uncertain, and so
they can never secure us from Error, nor be a just ground to found our Faith of
any Proposition so proved upon: Therefore no Proposition thus proved, can be
acknowledged an Article of Faith. This is the breadth and length of their Plea,
which we shall now examine.

And first; If there be any Strength in this Plea, it will conclude against our
submitting to the express Words of Scripture as forcibly: Since all words, how
formal soever, are capable of several Expositions. Either they are to be
understood literally, or figuratively; either they are to be understood
positively, or interrogatively: With a great many other Varieties, of which all
Expressions are capable. So that if the former Argument have any force, since
every place is capable of several meanings; except we be infallibly sure which
is the true meaning, we ought by the same parity of Reason to make no account
of the most express and formal Words of Scripture; from which it is apparent,
that what noise soever these Men make of express Words of Scripture; yet if
they be true to their own Argument, they will as little submit to these, as to
Deductions from Scripture: Since they have the same Reason to question the true
meaning of a place, that they have to reject an Inference and Deduction from
it. And this alone may serve to satisfy every body that this is a Trick, under
which there lies no fair dealing at all.

But to answer the Argument to all Men's Satisfaction, we must consider the
Nature of the Soul, which is a reasonable Being; whose chief Faculty is to
discern the Connection of things, and to draw out such Inferences as flow from
that Connection. Now, though we are liable to great Abuses both in our Judgments
and Inferences; yet if we apply thief Faculties with due care, we must
certainly acquiesce in the result of such reasonings; otherwise this being
God's Image in us, and the Standard by which we are to try things, God has
given us a false Standard; which when we have with all possible care managed,
yet we are still exposed to Fallacies and Errors. This must needs reflect on
the Veracity of that God, that has made us of such a Nature, that we can never
be reasonably assured of any thing.

Therefore it must be acknowledged, that when our Reasons are well prepared
according to those eternal Rules of Purity and Virtue, by which we are fitted
to consider of Divine Matters; and when we carefully weigh things, we must have
some certain means to be assured of what appears to us. And though we be not
Infallible, so that it is still possible for us by Precipitation, or undue
Preparation, to be abused into Mistakes; yet we may be well assured that such
Connexions and Inferences as appear to us certain, are infallibly true.

If this be not acknowledged, then all our Obligation to believe any thing in
Religion will vanish. For that there is a God; That he made all things, and is
to be acknowledged and obeyed by his Creatures; That our Souls shall outlive
their Union with our Bodies, and be capable of Rewards and Punishments in
another state; That Inspiration is a thing possible; That such or such Actions
were above the Power of Nature, and were really performed. In a word, all the
Maxims on which the belief, either of Natural Religion, or Revealed, is
founded, are such as we can have no certainty about them, and by consequence
are not obliged to yield to them; if our Faculty of reasoning in its clear
Deductions is not a sufficient Warrant for a sure belief.

But to examine a little more home their beloved Principle, that their Church
cannot err: Must they not prove this from the Divine Goodness and Veracity,
from some Passages of Scripture, from Miracles and other extraordinary things
they pretend do accompany their Church?

Now in yielding assent to this Doctrine upon these Proofs, the Mind must be
led by many Arguments, through a great many Deductions and Inferences.
Therefore we are either certain of these Deductions, or we are not. If we are
certain, this must either be founded on the Authority of the Church expounding
them, or on the strength of the Arguments. Now we being to examine this
Authority, not having yet submitted to it; this cannot determine our Belief
till we see good Cause for it. But in the discerning this good Cause of
believing the Church Infallible, they must say that an uncontrollable evidence
of Reason is ground enough to fix our Faith on, or there can be no certain
ground to believe the Church Infallible. So that it is apparent we must either
receive with a firm persuasion what our Souls present to us as uncontroulably
true; or else we have no reason to believe there is a God, or to be Christians,
or to be, as they would have us, Romanists.

And if it be acknowledged there is cause in some Cases for us to be determined
by the clear evidence of Reason in its Judgments and Inferences; Then we have
this Truth gained, that our Reasons are capable of making true and certain
Inferences, and that we have good Cause to be determined in our Belief by
these; and therefore Inferences from Scripture ought to direct our Belief. Nor
can any thing be pretended against this, but what must at the same time
overthrow all Knowledge and Faith, and turn us skeptical to every thing.

We desire it be in the next place considered, what is the end and use of
Speech and Writing, which is to make known our Thoughts to others; those being
artificial signs for conveying them to the understanding of others. Now every
Man that speaks pertinently; as he designs to be understood, so he chooses such
Expressions and Arguments as are most proper to make himself understood by
those he speaks to; and the clearer he speaks, he speaks so much the better:
And every one that wraps up his meaning in obscure words, he either does not
distinctly apprehend that about which he discourses, or does not design that
those to whom he speaks, should understand him, meaning only to amuse them. If
likewise he say any thing from which some absurd Inference will easily be
apprehended, he gives all that hear him a sufficient ground of Prejudice
against what he says. For he must expect that as his Hearers senses receive his
Words or Characters, so necessarily some Figure or Notion must be at the same
time imprinted on their Imagination, or presented to their Reason; this being
the end for which he speaks; and the more genuinely that his words express his
meaning, the more certainly and clearly they to whom he directs them apprehend
it. It must also be acknowledged, that all Hearers must necessarily pass
Judgments on what they hear, if they do think it of that importance as to
examine it. And this they must do by that natural Faculty of making Judgments
and Deductions, the certainty whereof we have proved to be the Foundation of
all Faith and Knowledge.

Now the chief Rule of making true Judgments, is, to see what Consequences
certainly follow on what is laid before us: If these be found absurd or
impossible, we must reject that from which they follow as such.

Further; because no Man says every thing that can be thought or said to any
Point, but only such things as may be the Seeds of further Enquiry and Knowledge
in their Minds to whom he speaks; when any thing of great Importance is spoken,
all Men do naturally consider what Inferences arise out of what is said by a
necessary Connection: And if these Deductions be made with due care, they are of
the same force, and must be as true as that was from which they are drawn.

These being some of the Laws of Converse, which every Man of common Sense must
know to be true; can any Man think, that when God was revealing by inspired Men
his Counsels to Mankind, in Matters that concerned their eternal Happiness, he
would do it in any other way than any honest Man speaks to another, that is,
plainly and dinstinctly.

There were particular Reasons why Prophetical Visions must needs be obscure:
but when Christ appeared on Earth, tho many things were not to be fully opened
till he had triumphed over Death and the Powers of Darkness; yet his design
being to bring Men to God, what he spoke in order to that, we must think he
intended that they to whom he spoke it might understand it, otherwise why
should he have spoken it to them? And if he did intend they should understand
him, then he must have used such Expressions as were most proper for conveying
this to their Understandings; and yet they were of the meaner sort, and of very
ordinary Capacities, to whom he addressed his Discourses. If then such as they
were, might have understood him; how should it come about that now there should
be such a wondrous Mysteriousness in the Words of Christ and his Apostles? (For
the same Reason by which it is proved that Christ designed to be understood,
and spoke sutably to that design, will conclude as strongly that the Discourses
of the Apostles in Matters that concern our Salvation, are also intelligible.)
We have a perfect understanding of the Greek Tongue; and, tho some Phrases are
not so plain to us which alter every Age, and some other Passages that relate
to some Customs, Opinions or Forms, of which we have no perfect Account left
us, are hard to be understood: Yet what is of general and universal concern,
may be as well understood now as it was then; for Sense is Sense still. So that
it must be acknowledged, that Men may still understand all that God will have
us believe and do in order to Salvation.

And therefore if we apply and use our Faculties aright, joining with an
unprejudiced desire and search for Truth, earnest Prayers, that God by his
Grace may so open our Understandings, and present Divine Truths to them, that
we may believe and follow them: Then both from the nature of our own Souls, and
from the design and end of Revelation, we may be well assured that it is not
only very possible, but also very easy for us to find out Truth.

We know the pompous Objection against this, is, How comes it then that there
are so many Errors and Divisions among Christians? especially those that
pretend the greatest Acquaintance with Scriptures? To which the Answer is so
obvious and plain, that we wonder any body should be wrought on by so
fallacious an Argument. Does not the Gospel offer Grace to all Men to lead holy
Lives, following the Commandments of God? And is not Grace able to build them
up, and make them perfect in every good Word and Work? And yet how does Sin and
Vice abound in the World? If then the abounding of Error proves the Gospel does
not offer certain ways to preserve us from it, then the abounding of Sin will
also prove there are no certain ways in the Gospel to avoid it. Therefore as
the Sins Mankind generally live in, leave no Imputation on the Gospel; so
neither do the many Heresies and Schisms conclude that the Gospel offers no
certain ways of attaining the Knowledge of all necessary Truth. Holiness is
every whit as necessary to see the Face of God as Knowledge is, and of the two
is the more necessary; since low degrees of Knowledge, with an high measure of
Holiness, are infinitely preferable to high degrees of Knowledge with a low
measure of Holiness. If then every Man have a sufficient help given him to be
holy, why may we not much rather conclude he has a sufficient help to be
knowing in such things as are necessary to direct his Belief and Life, which is
a less thing? And how should it be an Imputation on Religion, that there should
not be an infallible way to end all Controversies, when there is no infallible
way to subdue the corrupt Lusts and Passions of Men, since the one is more
opposite to the Design and Life of Religion than the other?

In sum; there is nothing more sure than that the Scriptures offer us as
certain ways of attaining the Knowledge of what is necessary to Salvation, as of
doing the Will of God. But as the depravation of our Natures makes us neglect
the Helps toward an holy Life; so this and our other Corruptions, Lusts and
Interests, make us either not to discern Divine Truth, or not embrace it. So
that Error and Sin are the Twins of the same Parents. But as every Man that
improves his natural Powers, and implores and makes use of the Supplies of the
Divine Grace, shall be enabled to serve God acceptably; so that tho he fail in
many things, yet he continuing to the end in an habit and course of well-doing,
his Sins shall be forgiven, and himself shall be saved: So upon the same
grounds we are assured, that every one that applies his rational Faculties to
the search of Divine Truth, and also begs the Illumination of the Divine
Spirit, shall attain such Knowledge as is necessary for his eternal Salvation:
And if he be involved in any Errors, they shall not be laid to his charge.

And from these we hope it will appear, that every Man may attain all necessary
Knowledge, if he be not wanting to himself. Now when a Man attains this
Knowledge, he acquires it, and must use it as a rational Being, and so must make
Judgments upon it, and draw Consequences from it; in which he has the same
Reason to be assured, that he has to know the true meaning of Scripture; and
therefore as he has very good Reason to reject any meaning of a place of
Scripture, from which by a necessary Consequence great Absurdities and
Impossibilities must follow: So also he is to gather such Inferences as flow
from a Necessary Connection with the true meaning of any place of Scripture.

To instance this in the Argument we insisted on, to prove the mean by which
Christ is received in the Sacrament, is Faith; from these words, Whosoever eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life. If these words have relation to
the Sacrament, which the Roman Church declares is the true meaning of them;
there cannot be a clearer Demonstration in the World. And indeed they are
necessitated to stand to that Exposition; for if they will have the words, This
is my Body, to be understood literally, much more must they assert the Phrases
of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, must be literal: for if we can
drive them to allow a figurative and spiritual meaning of these words, it is a
shameless thing for them to deny such a meaning of the words, This is my Body:
they then expounding these words of St. John of the Sacrament, there cannot be
imagined a closer Contexture than this which follows. The eating Christ's
Flesh, and drinking his Blood, is the receiving him in the Sacrament; therefore
every one that receives him in the Sacrament, must have eternal Life. Now all
that is done in the Sacrament, is either the external receiving the Elements,
Symbols, or, as they phrase it, the Accidents of Bread and Wine, and under
these the Body of Christ; or the internal and spiritual communicating by Faith.
If then Christ received in the Sacrament, gives eternal Life, it must be in one
of these ways; either as he is received externally, or as he is received
internally, or both; for there is not a fourth: Therefore if it be not the one
at all, it must be the other only. Now it is undeniable, that it is not the
external eating that gives eternal Life. For St. Paul tells us, of some that
eat and drink unworthily, that are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord,
and eat and drink Judgment against themselves. Therefore it is only the
internal receiving of Christ by Faith, that gives eternal Life; from which
another necessary Inference directs us also to conclude, that since all that
eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, have eternal Life: and since it is only by
the internal communicating that we have eternal Life, therefore these words of
eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, can only be understood of internal
communicating; therefore they must be spiritually understood.

But all this while the Reader may be justly weary of so much Time and Pains
spent to prove a thing which carries its own Evidence so with it, that it seems
one of the first Principles and Foundations of all Reasoning; for no
Proposition can appear to us to be true, but we must also assent to every other
Deduction that is drawn out of it by a certain Inference. If then we can
certainly know the true meaning of any place of Scripture, we may and ought to
draw all such Conclusions as follow it with a clear and just Consequence: and
if we clearly apprehend the Consequence of any Proposition, we can no more
doubt the Truth of the Consequence, than of the Proposition from which it
sprung: For if I see the Air full of a clear Daylight, I must certainly
conclude the Sun is risen; and I have the same assurance about the one that I
have about the other.

There is more than enough said already for discovering the vanity and
groundlesness of this Method of arguing. But to set the thing beyond all
dispute, let us consider the use which we find our Savior and the Apostles
making of the Old Testament, and see how far it favors us, and condemns this
Appeal to the formal and express words of Scriptures. But before we advance
further, we must remove a Prejudice against any thing may be drawn from such
Presidents, these being Persons so filled with God and Divine Knowledge, as
appeared by their Miracles and other wonderful Gifts, that gave so full an
Authority to all they said, and of their being Infallible, both in their
Expositions and Reasonings, that we whose Understandings are darkened and
disordered, ought not to pretend to argue as they did.

But for clearing this, it is to be observed, that when any Person divinely
assisted, having sufficiently proved his Inspiration, declares any thing in the
Name of God, we are bound to submit to it; or if such a Person, by the same
Authority, offers any Exposition of Scripture, he is to be believed without
farther dispute. But when an inspired Person argues with any that does not
acknowledge his Inspiration, but is enquiring into it, not being yet satisfied
about it; then he speaks no more as an inspired Person: In which case the
Argument offered is to be examined by the Force that is in it, and not by the
Authority of him that uses it. For his Authority being the thing questioned, if
he offers an Argument from any thing already agreed to; and if the Argument be
not good, it is so far from being the better by the Authority of him that uses
it; that it rather gives just ground to lessen or suspect his Authority, that
understands a Consequence so ill, as to use a bad Argument to use it by. This
being premised.

When our Savior was to prove against the Sadducees the Truth of the
Resurrection from the Scriptures, he cites out of the Law, that God was the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; since then God is not the God of the Dead, but of
the Living: Therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did live unto God. From which he
proved the Souls having a Being distinct from the Body, and living after its
Separation from the Body, which was the principal Point in Controversy. Now if
these new Maxims be of any force, so that we must only submit to the express
words of Scripture, without proving any thing by Consequence; then certainly
our Savior performed nothing in that Argument: For the Sadducees might have
told him, they appealed to the express words of Scripture. But alas! they
understood not these newfound Arts, but submitting to the evident force of
that Consequence, were put to silence, and the Multitudes were astonished at
his Doctrine.

Now it is unreasonable to imagine that the great Authority of our Savior, and
his many Miracles made them silent; for they coming to try him, and to take
advantage from every thing he said, if it were possible to lessen his Esteem
and Authority, would never have acquiesced in any Argument because he used it,
if it had not Strength in it self; for an ill Argument is an ill Argument, use
it whosoever will. For instance; If I see a Man pretending that he sits in an
Infallible Chair, and proving what he delievers by the most impertinent
Allegations of Scripture possible; as if he attempt to prove the Pope must be
the Head of all Powers Civil and Spiritual from the first words of Genesis;
where it being said, In the Beginning, and not in the Boniface the 8th, Extrav.
lib. 1. c. 1. de Majoritate and Obedientia. After he had studied to prove that
the temporal and material Sword, as well as the spiritual, was in the Power of
St. Peter, from these words, Behold two Swords, and our Savior's Answer, It is
enough. In the end he concludes Whosoever therefore resists this Power thus
ordained of God, resists the Ordinance of God: except with Manichee he make two
Beginnings, which we define to be false and heretical: For Moses testifies,
that not in the Beginnings, but in the Beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth. Therefore we declare, say, define and pronounce, that it is of necessity
to Salvation to every human Creature, to be subject to the Pope of Rome: And it
is plain this Subjection must be, that he had been pleading thorough that whole
Decretal, which is the Subjection of the Temporal Sword to the Spiritual.
Beginnings, in the plural, (from which he concludes there must be but one
Beginning and Head of all Power, to wit, the Pope.) I am so far from being put
to silence with this, that I am only astonished how any Man of common Sense,
tho he pretended not to Infallibility, could fall into such Errors: for an ill
Argument, when its Fallacy is so apparent, must needs heap Contempt on him that
uses it.

Having found our Savior's way of arguing to be so contrary to this new Method
these Gentlemen would impose on us; let us see how the Apostles drew their
Proofs for matters in Controversy from Scriptures: The two great Points they
had most occasion to argue upon, were, Jesus Christ being the true Messiah, and
the freedom of the Gentiles from any Obligation to the observance of the
Mosaical Law. Now let us see how they proceeded in both these.

For the first: In the first Sermon after the effusion of the Holy Ghost, S.
Peter proves the truth of Christ's Resurrection from these words of David, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption.
Now he shows that these words could not be meant of David, who was dead and
buried; therefore being a Prophet, he spoke of the Resurrection of Christ. If
here were not Consequences and Deductions, let every one judge. Now these being
spoken to those who did not then believe in Christ, there was either sufficient
force in that Argument to convince the Jews, otherwise these that spoke them
were very much both to be blamed, and despised, for offering to prove a Matter
of such Importance by a Consequence. But this being a degree of Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, we must acknowledge there was strength in their
Argument; and therefore Articles of Faith, whereof this was the Fundamental,
may be proved from Scripture by a Consequence. We might add to this all the
other Prophecies in the Old Testament, from which we find the Apostles arguing
to prove this Foundation of their Faith, which every one may see do not contain
in so many words that which was proved by them. But these being so obvious, we
choose only to name this, all the rest being of a like nature with it.

The next Controversy debated in that time, was the Obligation of the Mosaichal
Law. The Apostles by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost made a formal Decision
in this matter: yet there being great Opposition made to that, St. Paul sets
himself to prove it at full length in his Epistle to the Galatians, where,
besides other Arguments, he brings these two from the Old Testament; one was,
that Abraham was justified by Faith before the giving the Law; for which he
cites these words, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
Righteousness: From which, by a very just Consequence, he infers, that as
Abraham was blessed, so all that believe are blessed with him; and that the Law
of Moses, that was 430 Years after, could not disannul it, or make the Promise
of none effect; therefore we might now be justified by Faith without the Law,
as well as he was. Another place he cites, is, The Just shall live by Faith,
and he subsumes, the Law was not of Faith; from which the Conclusion naturally
follows: Therefore the Just lives not by the Law. He must be very blind that
sees not a Succession of many Consequences in that Epistle of St. Paul's; all
which had been utterly impertinent, if this new Method had any ground for its
Pretension, and they might at one dash have overthrown all that he had said.
But Men had not then arrived at such Devices as must at once overturn all the
Sense and Reason of Mankind. We hope what we premised will be remembered, to
show that the Apostles being infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost, will not at
all prove, that tho this way of arguing might have passed with them, yet it
must not be allowed us: For their being infallibly directed, proves their
Arguments and way of proceeding was rational and convincing, otherwise they had
not pitched on it. And the Persons to whom these Arguments were offered, not
acquiescing in their Authority, their Reasonings must have been good, otherwise
they had exposed themselves and their Cause to the just Scorn of their Enemies.

Having therefore evinced that both our Savior and his Apostles did prove by
Consequences drawn from Scripture, the greatest and most important Articles of
Faith; we judge that we may with very great assurance follow their Example. But
this whole matter will receive a further Confirmation: If we find it was the
Method of the Church of God in all Ages to found her Decisions of the most
important Controversies on Consequences from Scriptures. There were very few
Heretics that had Face and Brow enough to set up against express Words of
Scripture; for such as did so, rejected these Books that were so directly
opposite to their Errors; as the Manichees did the Gospel of St. Matthew.

But if we examine the Method either of Councils in condemning Heretics, or of
the Fathers writing against them, we shall always find them proceeding upon
Deductions and Consequences from Scripture, as a sufficient Ground to go upon.
Let the Epistle both of the Council of Antioch to Samosatenus, and Denis of
Alexandria's Letter to him, be considered; and it shall be found how they drew
their Definitions out of Deductions from Scripture. So also Alexander,
Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Epistle, in which he condemned Aerius, proceeds
upon Deductions from Scripture; and when the Council of Nice came to judge of
the whole matter, if we give Credit to Gelasius, they canvassed many places of
Scripture, that they might come to a decision; and that whole Dispute, as he
represents it, was all about Inferences and Deductions from Scripture. It is
true, F. Maimbourg in his Romantic History of Arrianism (Hist. de L. Arrian.
L. 1.) would persuade us, that in that Council the Orthodox, and chiefly the
great Saints of the Council, were for adhering closely to what they had
received by Tradition, without attempting to give new Expositions of Scripture,
to interpret it any other way than as they had learned from these Fathers, that
had been taught them by the Apostles. But the Arrians, who could not find among
these that which they intended to establish, maintained on the contrary, that
we must not confine our selves to that which has been held by Antiquity, since
none could be sure about that. Therefore they thought that one must search the
Truth of the Doctrine only in the Scriptures, which they could turn to their
own meaning by their false Subtilties. And to make this formal Account pass
easily with his Reader, he vouches on the Margin, Sozom. cap. 16. When I first
read this, it amazed me to find a thing of so great Consequence not so much as
observed by the Writers of Controversies; but turning to Sozomen, I found in
him these words, speaking of the Dispute about Arrius his Opinions, The
Disputation being, as is usual, carried out into different Enquiries; some were
of Opinion that nothing should be innovated beyond the Faith that was
originally delivered; and these were chiefly those whom the Simplicity of their
Manners bad brought to Divine Faith without nice Curiosity. Others did
strongly, or earnestly contend that it was not fit to follow the ancienter
Opinions, without a strict trial of them. Now in these words we find not a word
either of Orthodox or Arrian; so of which side either one or other were, we are
left to conjecture. That Jesuit has been sufficiently exposed by the Writers of
the Port Royal, for his foul dealing on other occasions; and we shall have
great cause to mistrust him in all his Accounts, if it be found that he was
quite mistaken in this; and that the Party which he calls the Orthodox were
really some holy, good Men; but simple, ignorant, and easily abused: And that
the other Party which he calls the Arrian, was the Orthodox, and more
judicious, who readily foreseeing the Inconvenience which the Simplicity of
others would have involved them in, did vehemently oppose it; and pressed the
Testimonies of the Fathers might not be blindly followed.

For proof of this, we need but consider that they anathematized these, who say
that the Son was the Work of the Father, as Athanasius (De Decret. Synod.
Nicen.) tells us, which were the very words of Denis of Alexandria, of whom the
Arrians (Athan. Epist. de sententia Dion. Alex.) boasted much, and cited these
words from him; and both Athanasius (De Synod. Arim.) and Hilary (Hill. lib. de
Synod.) acknowledge that those Bishops that condemned Samosatenus, did also
reject the Consubstantial, and St. Basil (Epist. 41.) says, Denis sometimes
denied, sometimes acknowledged the Consubstantial. Yet I shall not be so easy
as Petavius and others of the Roman Church are in this matter, who acknowledge
that most of the Fathers before the Council of Nice said many things that did
not agree with the Rule of the Orthodox Faith; but am fully persuaded, that
before that Council, the Church did believe that the Son was truly God, and of
the same Divine Substance with the Father: Yet on the other hand it cannot be
denied, but there are many Expressions, in their Writings which they had not so
well considered; and thence it is that St. Basil (Epist. 14.) observes how
Denis in his opposition to Sabellius had gone too far on the other hand.
Therefore there was a necessity to make such a Symbol as might cut off all
equivocal and ambiguous Forms of Speech. So we have very good reason to
conclude it was the Arrian Party, that studied under the pretense of not
innovating, to engage many of the holy, but simpler Bishops, to be against any
new Words or Symbols, that so they might still lurk undiscovered.

Upon what Grounds the Council of Nice made their Decree and Symbol, we have no
certain account, since their Acts are lost. But the best Conjecture we can
make, is from St. Athanasius, who, as he was a great Assertor of the Faith in
that Council, so also he gives us a large account of its Creed, in a particular
Treatise (Lib. de Decret. Council. Nicen.) in which he justifies their Symbol at
great length out of the Scriptures, and tells us very formally they used the
word Consubstantial, that the Wickedness and Craft of the Arrians might be
discovered, and proves by many Consequences from Scripture, that the words were
well chosen; and sets up his rest on his Arguments from the Scriptures, tho all
his Proofs are but Consequences drawn out of them. It is true, when he has done
that, he also adds, that the Fathers at Nice did not begin the use of these
words, but had them from those that went before them; and cites some Passages
from Theognistus, Denis of Alexandria, Denis of Rome, and Origin. But no body
can imagine this was a full Proof of the Tradition of the Faith. These were but
a few later Writers, nor could he have submitted the Decision of the whole
Controversy to two of these, Denis of Alexandria and Origin, (for the other
two, their Works are lost) in whose Writings there were diverse Passages that
favored the Arrians, and in which they boasted much. Therefore Athanasius only
cites these Passages, to show the Words of these Symbols were not first coined
by the Council of Nice. But neither in that Treatise, nor in any other of his
Works, do I ever find that either the Council of Nice, or he who was the great
Champion for their Faith, did study to prove the Consubstantiality to have been
the constant Tradition of the Church: But in all his Treatises he at full
length proves it from Scripture. So from the Definition of the Council of Nice,
and Athanasius his Writings, it appears the Church of that Age thought that
Consequences clearly proved from Scripture were a sufficient Ground to build an
Article of Faith on.

With this I desire it be also considered, that the next great Controversy,
that was carried on chiefly by S. Cyril against the Nestorians, was likewise
all managed by Consequences from Scripture, as will appear to any that reads S.
Cyril's Writings, inserted in the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, chiefly his
Treatise to the Queens; and when he brought Testimonies from the Fathers
against Nestorius, which were read in the Council, (Act. Conc. Ephesians. Action 1.)
they are all taken out of Fathers that lived after the Council of Nice, except
only S. Cyprian, and Peter of Alexandria. If then we may collect from S.
Cyril's Writings the Sense of that Council, as we did from S. Athanasius that
of the Council of Nice; we must conclude that their Decrees were founded on
Consequences drawn from Scripture; nor were they so solicitous to prove a
continued Succession of the Tradition. In like manner, when the Council of
Chalcedon condemned Eutyches, Pope Leo's Epistle to Flavian was read, and all
assented to it: So that upon the matter, his Epistle became the Decree of the
Council, and that whole Epistle from beginning to end, is one entire Series of
Consequences proved from Scripture and Reason: (Act. Conc. Chalced. Action 1.)
And to the end of that Epistle are added in the Acts of that Council,
Testimonies from the Fathers, that had lived after the days of the Council of
Nice. Theodoret (Theod. in Dial.) and Gelasius also (Gelas. de Diab. naturis.)
who wrote against the Eutychians, do through their whole Writings pursue them
with Consequences drawn from Scripture and Reason, and in the end set down
Testimonies from Fathers: And to instance only one more, when S. Austin wrote
against the Pelagians, how many Consequences he draws from Scripture, every one
that has read him, must needs know.

In the end let it be also observed, that all these Fathers when they argue
from Places of Scripture, they never attempt to prove that those Scriptures had
been expounded in that Sense they urge them in by the Councils or Fathers who
had gone before them; but argue from the Sense which they prove they ought to
be understood in. I do not say all their Consequences or Expositions were
well-grounded; but all that has been hitherto set down, will prove that they
thought Arguments drawn from Scripture, when the Consequences are clear, were
of sufficient Authority and Force to end all Controversies. And thus it may
appear that it is unreasonable, and contrary to the practice both of the
ancient Councils and Fathers, to reject Proofs drawn from Places of Scripture,
though they contain not in so many Words that which is intended to be proved by
them.

But all the Answer they can offer to this, is, That those Fathers and Councils
had another Authority to draw Consequences from Scripture, because the
extraordinary Presence of God was among them, and because of the Tradition of
the Faith they builded their Decrees on, than we can pretend to, who do not so
much as say we are so immediately directed, or thar we found our Faith upon the
successive Tradition of the several Ages of the Church.

To this I answer; First, It is visible, that if there be any strength in this,
it will conclude as well against our using express Words of Scripture, since
the most express Words are capable of several Expositions. Therefore it is
plain, they use no fair Dealing in this Appeal to the formal Words of
Scripture, since the Arguments they press it by, do invalidate the most express
Testimonies as well as Deductions.

Let it be further considered, that before the Councils had made their Decrees,
when Heresies were broached, the Fathers wrote against them, confuting them by
Arguments made up of Scripture-Consequences; so that before the Church had
decreed, they thought private Persons might confute Heresies by such
Consequences. Nor did these Fathers place the strength of their Arguments on
Tradition, as will appear to any that reads but what St. Cyril wrote against
Nestorius, before the Council of Ephesus; and Pope Leo against Eutyches, before
the Council of Chalcedon; where all their Reasonings are founded on Scripture.
It is true, they add some Testimonies of Fathers to prove they did not innovate
any thing in the Doctrine of the Church: But it is plain, these they brought
only as a Confirmation of their Arguments, and not as the chief Strength of
their Cause; for as they do not drive up the Tradition to the Apostles Days,
setting only down some later Testimonies; so they make no Inferences from them,
but barely set them down. By which it is evident, all the use they made of
these, was only to show that the Faith of the Age that preceded them, was
conform to the Proofs they brought from Scripture; but did not at all found the
strength of their Arguments from Scripture, upon the sense of the Fathers that
went before them. And if the Council of Nice had passed the Decree of adding
the Consubstantials to the Creed, upon evidence brought from Tradition chiefly,
can it be imagined that St. Athanasius, who knew well on what grounds they
went, having born so great a share in their Consultations and Debates, when he
in a formal Treatise justifies that Addition, should draw his chief Arguments
from Scripture and Natural Reason; and that only toward the end, he should
tell us of four Writers, from whom he brings Passages to prove this was no new
or unheard of thing.

In the end, when the Council had passed their Decree, does the method of their
dispute alter? Let any read Athanasius, Hilary, or St. Austin writing against
the Arrians: They continue still to ply them with Arguments made up of
Consequences from Scripture; and their chief Argument was clearly a Consequence
from Scripture, That since Christ was, by the Confession of the Arrians, truly
God, Then he must be of the same Substance, otherwise there must be more
Substances, and so more Gods, which was against Scripture. Now, if this be not
a Consequence from Scripture, let every Body judge. It was on this they chiefly
insisted, and waved the Authority of the Council of Nice, which they mention
very seldom, or when they do speak of it, it is to prove that its Decrees were
according to Scripture.

For proof of this, let us hear what St. Austin says (Lib. 3. Cont. Max. 19.)
writing against Maximinus an Arrian Bishop, proving the Consubstantiality of
the Son: This is that Consubstantial which was established by the Catholic
Fathers in the Council of Nice, against the Arrians; by the Authority of Truth,
and the Truth of Authority, which Heretical Impiety studied to overthrow, under
the Heretical Emperor Constantius, because of the newness of the Words, which
were not so well understood, as should have been: Since the ancient Faith had
brought them forth; but many were abused by the Fraud of a few. And a little
after he adds, But now neither should I bring the Cou^il of Nice, nor yet the
Council of Arrimini, thereby to prejudg in this matter; neither am I bound by
the Authority of the latter, nor you by the Authority of the former. Let one
Cause and Reason contest and strive with the other from the Authorities of the
Scriptures, which are Witnesses common to both, and not proper to either of us.

If this be not our Plea, as formally as can be, let every Reader judge; from
all which we conclude, That our Method of proving Articles of Faith by
Consequences drawn from Scripture, is the same that the Catholic Church in all
the best Ages made use of: And therefore it is unreasonable to deny it to us.

But all that has been said will appear yet with fuller and more demonstrative
Evidence, if we find, that this very pretense of appealing to formal Words of
Scriptures, was on several occasions taken up by diverse Heretics, but was
always rejected by the Fathers as absurd and unreasonable. The first time we
find this Plea in any Bodies Mouth, is upon the Question, Whether it was lawful
for Christians to go to the Theaters, or other public Spectacles? which the
Fathers set themselves mightily against, as that which would corrupt the Minds
of the People, and lead them to heathenish Idolatry. But others that loved
those diverting Sights, pleaded for them upon this ground, as Tertullian (Lib.
de Spect. c. 3.) tells us in these Words; The Faith of some being either
simpler or more scrupulous, calls for an Authority from Scripture, for the
discharge of these Sights; and they became uncertain about it, because such
abstinence is nowhere denounced to the Servants of God, neither by a clear
Signification, nor by Name; as, Thou shall not kill, Nor worship an Idol: But
he proves it from the first Verse of the Psalms; for though that seems to
belong to the Jews, yet (says he) the Scripture is always to be divided broad,
where that Discipline is to be guarded according to the sense of whatever is
present to us. And this agrees with that Maxim he has elsewhere, (Lib. adv.
Gnost. c. 7.) That the Words of Scripture are to be understood, not only by
their Sound, but by their Sense; and are not only to be heard with our Ears,
but with our Minds.

In the next Place, the Arrians designed to shroud themseles under general
Expressions; and had found Glosses for all Passages of Scripture. So that when
the Council of Nice made all these ineffectual, by putting the Word
Consubstantial into the Creed; then did they in all their Councils, and in all
Disputes, set up this Plea, That they would submit to every thing that was in
Scripture, but not to any Additions to Scripture. A large account of this we
have from Athanasius, who (De Synod. Arim. and Seleuc.) gives us many of their
Creeds. In that proposed at Arimini, these Words were added to the Symbol, For
the Word Substance, because it was simply set down by the Fathers, and is not
understood by the People, but breeds Scandal, since the Scriptures have it not,
therefore we have thought fit it be left out, and that there be no more mention
made of Substance concerning God, since the Scriptures nowhere speak of the
Substance of the Father and the Son. He also tells us, that at Sirmium they
added Words to the same purpose to their Symbol, rejecting the Words of
Substance or Consubstantial, because nothing is written of them in the
Scriptures, and they transcend the Knowledge and Understanding of Men.

Thus we see how exactly the Plea of the Arrians agrees with what is now
offered to be imposed on us.

But let us next see what the Father says to this: He first turns it back on
the Arrians, and shows how far they were from following that Rule which they
imposed on others. And if we have not as good reason to answer those so, who
now take up the same Plea, let every one judge. But then the Father answers, It
was no matter though one used Forms of Speech that were not in Scripture, if he
had still a sound or pious Understanding; as on the contrary an her^tical
Person, though be uses Forms out of Scripture, he will not be the less
suspected, if his Understanding be corrupted; and at full length applies that
to the Question of the Consubstantiality. To the same Purpose, St. Hillary (de
Synod. adv. Arrian.) setting down the Arguments of the Arrians against the
Consubstantiality, the third Objection is, That it was added by the Council of
Nice, but ought not to be received, because it is nowhere written. But he
answers; it was a foolish thing to be afraid of a Word, when the thing
expressed by the Word has no difficulty.

We find likewise in the Conference St. Austin had with Maximinus the Arrian
Bishop, (Lib. 1. cont. Max. Arr. Epist.) in the very beginning the Arrian tells
him, That he must hearken to what he brought out of the Scriptures, which were
common to them all; but for Words that were not in Scripture, they were in no
case received by them. And afterward he says, (Lib. 3. c. 3.) We receive with
a full Veneration every thing that is brought out of the Holy Scriptures, for
the Scriptures are not in our Dominion that they may be mended by us. And a
little after adds, Truth is not gathered out of Arguments, but is proved by
sure Testimonies, therefore he seeks a Testimony of the Holy Ghost's being God.
But to that St. Austin makes answer, That from the things that we read, we must
understand the things that we read not.

And giving an account of another Conference (Epist. 72.) he had with Count
Pascentius that was an Arrian, he tells, that the Arrian did most earnestly
press that the Word Consubstantial might be showed in Scripture, repeating this
frequently, and canvassing about it invidiously. To whom St. Austin answers,
Nothing could be more contentious than to strive about a Word, when the Thing
was certain; and asks him where the Word Unbegotten (which the Arrians used)
was in Scripture? And since it was nowhere in Scripture, he from thence
concludes, There might be a very good account given why a Word that was not in
Scripture, might be well used. And by how many Consequences he proves the
Consubstantiality we cannot number, except that whole Epistle were set down.

And again, in that which is called an Epistle, (Epist. 78.) but is an account
of another Conference between that same Person and St. Austin, the Arrian
desired the Consubstantiality might be accursed, Because it was nowhere to be
found written in the Scriptures; and adds, That it was a grievous trampling on
the Authority of the Scripture, to set down that which the Scripture had not
said; for if any thing be set down without Authority from the Divine Volumes,
it is proved to be void; against which St. Austin argues at great length, to
prove that it necessarily follows from other places of Scripture.

In the Conference between Photinus, Sabellius, Arrius, and Athanasius, first
published by Cassander, (Oper. Cass.) as a work of Vigilius, but believed to be
the work of Gelasius an African; where we have a very full account of the Pleas
of these several Parties. Arrius challenges the Council of Nice for having
corrupted the Faith with the Addition of new Words, and complains of the
Consubstantial, and says, the Apostles, their Disciples, and all their
Successors downward, that had lived in the Confession of Christ to that time,
were ignorant of that Word: And on this he insists with great vehemence, urging
it over and over again, pressing Athanasius either to read it properly set down
in Scripture, or to cast it out of his Confession; against which Athanasius
replies, and shows him how many things they acknowledged against the other
Heretics, which were not written; Show me these Things, (says he) not from
Conjectures or Probabilities, or things that do neighbor on Reason, not from
things that provoke us to understand them so, nor from the Piety of Faith,
persuading such a Profession; but show it written in the pure and naked
Property of Words, that the Father is Unbegotten, or Impassible. And then he
tells Arrius, that when he went about to prove this, he should not say, the
Reason of Faith required this, Piety teaches it, the Consequence from Scripture
forces me to this Profession. I will not allow you, says he, to obtrude these
things on me; because you reject me when I bring you such like things, for the
Profession of the Consubstantial.

In the end he says, Either permit me to prove the Consubstantial by
Consequences, or if you will not, you must deny all those things which you your
self grant. And after Athanasius had urged this further, Probus, that fate Judge
in the Debate, said, Neither one nor other could show all that they believed
properly and specially in Scripture: Therefore he desired they would trifle no
longer in such a childish Contest, but prove either the one or the other by a
just Consequence from Scripture.

In the Macedonian Controversy against the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, we find
this was also their Plea; a hint of it was already mentioned in the Conference
betwixt Maximinus the Arrian Bishop, and St. Austin, which we have more fully
in St. Greg. Nazianz. (Orat. 37.) who proving the Divinity of the Holy Ghost,
meets with that objection of the Macedonians, that it was in no place of
Scripture, to which he answers, Some things seemed to be said in Scripture that
truly are not, as when God is said to sleep; some things truly are, but are
nowhere said, as the Fathers being Unbegotten, which they themselves believed,
and concludes, that these things are drawn from those things out of which they
are gathered, though they be not mentioned in Scripture. Therefore he upbraids
those for serving the letter, and joining themselves to the wisdom of the Jews,
and that leaving Things, they followed Syllables: And shows how valid a good
consequence is; As if a man, says he, speaks of a living creature that is
reasonable, but mortal; I conclude it must be a man: Do I for that seem to
rave? not at all; for these words are not more truly his that says them, than
his that did make the saying of them necessary: So he infers, that he might,
without fear, believe such things as he either found or gathered from the
Scriptures, though they either were not at all, or not clearly in the
Scriptures.

We find also in a Dialogue between an Orthodox and a Macedonian, that is in
Athanasius's Works, but believed to be written by Maximus, after he had proved
by a great many Arguments that the attributes of the Divine Nature, such as the
Omniscience and Omnipresence were ascribed to the Holy Ghost. In end the
Macedonian flies to this known refuge, that it was nowhere written, that he
was God, and so challenges him for saying, that which was not in Scripture. But
the Orthodox answers, that in the Scriptures the Divine Nature was ascribed to
the Holy Ghost, and since the Name follows the Nature, he concludes, if the
Holy Ghost did subsist in himself, did sanctify, and was increated, he must be
God whether the other would or not. Then he asks, where it was written, That
the Son was like the Father in his Essence? The Heretic answers, That the
Fathers had declared the Son Consubstantial as to his Essence But the Orthodox
replies, (which we desire may be well considered) Were they moved to that from
the sense of the Scripture, or was it of their own authority or arrogance, that
they said any thing that was not written. The other confesses it was from the
sense of the Scripture, that they were moved to it; from this the Orthodox
infers, that the sense of the Scripture teaches us, that an uncreated Spirit
that is of God, and quickens and sanctifies, is a Divine Spirit, and from
thence he concludes, He is God. Thus we see clearly, how exactly the
Macedonians and these Gentlemen agree, and what arguments the Fathers furnish
us with against them.

The Nestorian History followed this tract, and we find Nestorius both in his
Letters (Act. Syn. Ephesians.) to Cyril of Alexandria, to Pope Celestin, and in these
writings of his that were read in the Council of Ephesus, (Action 1.) gives
that always for his reason of denying the Blessed Virgin to have been the
Mother of God, because the Scriptures did nowhere mention it, but call Her
always the Mother of Christ, and yet that General Council condemned him for all
that; and his friend John, Patriarch of Antioch, earnestly pressed him by his
Letters not to reject but to use that word, since the sense of it was good, and
it agreed with the Scriptures; and it was generally used by many of the
Fathers, and had never been rejected by any one.

This was also Eutyches his last refuge, (Act. 6. Syn. Constantin. in Act. 2.
Chalcedon.) when he was called to appear before the Council at Constantinople,
he pretended sickness, and that he would never stir out of his Monastery; but
being often cited, he said to those that were sent to him, In what Scripture
were the two Natures of Christ to be found? To which they replied, In what
Scripture was the Consubstantial to be found: Thus turning his Plea back on
himself, as the Orthodox had done before on the Arrians. Eutyches also when he
made his appearance, he ended his defense with this, That he had not found that
(to wit, of the two Natures) plainly in the Scripture, and that all the Fathers
had not said it. But for all that, he was condemned by that Council which was
afterward ratified by the Universal Council of Chalcedon. Yet after this
repeated condemnation the Eutychians laid not down this Plea, but continued
still to appeal to the express words of Scripture; which made Theodoret write
two Discourses to show the unreasonableness of that pretense, they are
published in Athanasius his Works (Tom. 2. op. Athan.) among these Sermons
against Heretics: But most of these are Theodoret's, as appears clearly from
Photius (Bibl. Cod. 46.) his account of Theodoret's Works; the very titles of
them lead us to gather his opinion of this Plea: The 12th Discourse, which by
Photius's account, is the 16th, has this title, To those that say we ought to
receive the Expression, and not look to the Things signified by them, as
transcending all men. The 19th, or according to Photius, the 23d, is, To those
who say we ought to believe simply as they say, and not consider what is
convenient or inconvenient.

If I should set down all that is pertinent to this purpose, I must set down
the whole Discourses; but I shall gather out of them such things as are most
proper. He first complains of those who studied to subvert all humane things,
and would not suffer men to be any longer reasonable, that would receive the
words of the Sacred Writings without consideration, or good direction, not
minding the pious scope for which they are written: For if (as they would have
us) we do not consider what they mark out to us, but simply receive their
words, then all that the Prophets and Apostles have written, will prove of no
use to those that hear them, for then they will hear with their ears, but not
understand with their hearts; nor consider the consequence of the things that
are said, according to the Curse in Isaias. -- And after he had applied this to
those who misunderstood that place, the Word was made Flesh, he adds, Shall I
hear a saying, and shall I not enquire into its proper meaning, where then is
the proper consequence of what is said, or the profit of the hearer? Would they
have men changed into the nature of bruits? If they must only receive the sound
of words with their ears, but no fruit in their soul from the understanding of
them. Contrariwise did St. Paul tell us, They who are perfect have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil; but how can any discern aright, if he do
not apprehend the meaning of what is said? And such he compares to beasts, and
makes them worse than the clean beasts, who chew the cud; and, as a man is to
consider what meats are set before him, so he must not snatch words stripped of
their meaning, but must carefully consider what is suitable to God, and
profitable to us, what is the force of Truth, what agrees with the Law, or
answers to Nature; he must consider the genuineness of Faith, the firmness of
Hope, the sincerity of Love, what is liable to no Reproach, what is beyond
Envy, and worthy of Favor; all which things concur in Pious Meditations. And
concludes thus, The sum of all is, he that receives any words, and does not
consider the meaning of them, how can he understand those that seem to
contradict others? where shall he find a fit answer? How shall he satisfy
those that interrogate him, or defend that which is written?

These passages are out of the first Discourse, what follows is out of the
second. In the beginning he says, Though the Devil has invented many grievous
Doctrines, yet he doubts if any former age brought forth any thing like that
then broached. Former Heresies had their own proper errors; but this that was
now invented renewed all others, and exceeded all others. Which, says he,
receives simply what is said, but does not enquire what is convenient, or
inconvenient: But shall I believe without judgment, and not enquire what is
possible, convenient, decent, acceptable to God, answerable to Nature,
agreeable to Truth, or is a consequence from the scope, or suitable to the
mystery, or to piety; or what outward reward, or inward fruit accompanies it;
or must I reckon on none of these things. But the cause of all our adversaries
errors, is, that with their ears they hear words, but have no understanding of
them in their hearts; for all of them (and names diverse) shun a trial, that
they be not convinced, and at length shows what absurdities must follow on such
a method. Instancing those places about which the Contest was with the Arrians,
such as these words of Christ, The Father is greater than I. And shows what
apparent contradictions there are, if we do not consider the true sense of
places of Scripture that seem contradictory, which must be reconciled by
finding their true meaning; and concludes, So we shall either persuade, or
overcome our adversary; so we shall show that the Holy Scripture is consonant
to its self; so we shall justly publish the glory of the Mystery, and shall
treasure up such a full assurance as we ought to have in our souls; we shall
neither believe without the Word, nor speak without Faith.

Now I challenge every Reader, to consider if any thing can be devised, that
more formally, and more nervously overthrows all the pretenses brought for his
appeal to the express words of Scripture.

And here I stop; for though I could carry it further, and show that other
Heretics shrouded themselves under the same pretext, yet I think all Impartial
Readers will be satisfied, when they find this was an artifice of the first
four grand Heresies, condemned by the first four General Councils, And from all
has been said, it is apparent how often this very pretense has been baffled by
Universal Councils and Fathers. Yet I cannot leave this with the Reader,
without desiring him to take notice of a few particulars that deserve to be
considered.

The first is, that which these Gentlemen would impose on us has been the Plea
of the greatest Heretics have been in the Church. Those therefore who take up
these weapons of Heretics, which have been so often blunted and broken in their
hands, by the most Universal Councils, and the most Learned Fathers of the
Catholic Church; till at length they were laid aside by all men, as unfit for
any service, till in this age some Jesuits took them up in defense of an often
baffled Cause, do very unreasonably pretend to the Spirit or Doctrine of
Catholics, since they tread a path so often beaten by all Heretics, and
abhorred by all the Orthodox.

Secondly, We find the Fathers always begin their answering this pretense of
Heretics, by showing them how many things they themselves believed, that were
nowhere written in Scripture. And this I believe was all the ground M. W. had
for telling us in our Conference that St Austin bade the Heretic read what he
said.

I am confident that Gentleman is a man of Candor and Honor, and so am
assured he would not have been guilty of such a fallacy, as to have cited this
for such a purpose, if he had not taken it on trust from second hands. But he
who first made use of it, if he have no other Authority of St. Austin's, which
I much doubt, cannot be an honest man; who, because St. Austin, to show the
Arrians how unjust it was to ask words for every thing they believed, urges
them with this, that they could not read all that they believed themselves,
would from that conclude, St. Austin thought every Article of Faith must be
read in so many words in Scripture. This is such a piece of Ingenuity as the
Jesuits used in the Contest about St. Austin's Doctrine, concerning the
efficacy of Grace: When they cited as formal passages out of St. Austin, some
of the Objections of the Semipelagians, which he sets down, and afterward
answers, which they brought without his answers, as his words, to show he was
of their side. But to return to our purpose; from this method of the Fathers we
are taught to turn this appeal to express words, back on those who make use of
it against us; and to ask them where do they read their Purgatory, Sacrifice of
the Mass, Transubstantiation, the Pope's Supremacy, with a great many more
things in the express words of Scripture.

Thirdly, We see the peremptory answer the Fathers agree in, is, that we must
understand the Scriptures, and draw just consequences from them, and not stand
on words or phrases; but consider things: And from these we are furnished with
an excellent answer to every thing of this nature they can bring against us. It
is in those great Saints, Athanasius, Hilary, Gregory Nazianzen, Austin, and
Theodoret, that they will find our answer as fully and formally as need be; and
to them we refer our selves.

But, Fourthly, To improve this beyond the particular occasion that engaged us
to all this enquiry, we desire it be considered that when such an objection was
made, which those of the Church of Rome judge is strong to prove, we must rely
on somewhat else than Scripture, either on the Authority of the Church, or on
the certainty of Tradition. The first Councils and Fathers had no such
apprehension.

All considering men, chiefly when they are arguing a nice Point, speak upon
some hypothesis or opinion with which they are prepossessed, and must certainly
discourse consequently to it. To instance it in this particular; If an
Objection be made against the drawing consequences from Scripture, since all
men may be mistaken; and therefore they ought not to trust their own
reasonings. A Papist must necessarily upon his hypothesis say, it is true, any
man may err, but the whole Church, either when assembled in a Council with the
Holy Ghost in the midst of them, or when they convey down from the Apostles,
through age to age, the Tradition of the Exposition of the Scriptures cannot
err, for God will be with them to the end of the World.

A Protestant must on the other hand, according to his Principles, argue, that
since man has a reasonable soul in him, he must be supposed endued with a
faculty of making Inferences: And when any consequence is apparent to our
understandings, we ought and must believe it as much as we do that from which
the consequenee is drawn. Therefore we must not only read, but study to
understand the true meaning of Scripture: And we have so much the more reason
to be assured of what appears to us to be the true sense of the Scriptures, if
we find the Church of God in the purest times, and the Fathers believing as we
believe. If we should hear two persons that were unknown to us, argue either of
these two ways, we must conclude, the one is a Papist, the other a Protestant,
as to this particular.

Now I desire the Reader may compare what has been cited from the Fathers upon
this subject: And see if what they write upon it does not exactly agree with
our hypothesis and principles. Whence we may very justly draw another
conclusion that will go much further than this particular we now examine; that
in seeking out the decision of all Controversies, the Fathers went by the same
Rules we go by, to wit, the clear sense of Scriptures, as it must appear to
every considering man's understanding, backed with the opinion of the Fathers
that went before them.

And thus far have I followed this Objection; and have, as I hope, to every
Reader's satisfaction made it out, that there can be nothing more unreasonable,
more contrary to the Articles and Doctrine of our Church, to the nature of the
soul of man, to the use and end of words and discourse, to the practice of
Christ and his Apostles, to the constant sense of the Primitive Church, and
that upon full and often renewed Contest with Heretics upon this very head:
Then to impose on us an Obligation to read all the Articles of our Church in
the express words of Scripture.

So that I am confident this will appear to every considering person, the most
trifling and pitiful Objection that can be offered by men of common sense and
reason. And therefore it is hoped, that all persons who take any care of their
souls, will examine things more narrowly than to suffer such tricks to pass
upon them, or to be shaken by such Objections. And if all the scruple these
Gentlemen have, why they do not join in Communion with the Church of England,
lies in this; we expect they shall find it so entirely satisfied, and removed
out of the way, that they shall think of returning back to that Church where
they had their Baptism and Christian Education, and which is still ready to
receive them with open arms, and to restore such as have been overreached into
Error and Heresy, with the spirit of meekness. To which I pray God of his
great mercy dispose both them and all others, who upon these or such like
scruples have deserted the purest Church upon Earth; and have turned over to a
most impure and corrupt Society. And let all men say,

Amen.
A Discourse to show that it was not only possible to change the Belief of the
Church concerning the Manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament; but that it
is very reasonable to conclude, both that it might be done, and that it was
truly changed.
THere is only one Particular of any importance, that was mentioned in the
Conference, to which we forgot to make any Answer at all, which was spoken by
N. N. to this purpose; How was it possible, or to be imagined that the Church
of God could ever have received such a Doctrine as the belief of
Transubstantiation, if every age had not received it, and been instructed in it
by their Fathers, and the age that went before it?

This by a pure forgetfulness was not answered; and one of these Gentlemen took
notice of it to me, meeting with me since that time, and desired me to consider
what a friend of N. N. has lately printed on this Subject, in a Letter
concerning Transubstantiation, Directed to a Person of Honor: In which, a
great many pretended Impossibilities of any such Innovation of the Doctrine are
reckoned up; to show it a thing both inconceivable and unpracticable, to get
the Faith of the Church changed in a thing of this nature.

This same Plea has been managed with all the advantages possible, both of Wit,
Eloquence, and Learning, by Mr. Arnaud of the Sorbon; but had been so exposed
and baffled by Mr. Claud, who, as he equals the other in Learning, Eloquence,
and Wit, so having much the better of him in the Cause and Truth he vindicates,
has so foiled the other in this Plea, that he seeing no other way to preserve
that high reputation which his other Writings, and the whole course of his Life
had so justly acquired him; has gone off from the main Argument on which they
begun, and betaken himself to a long and unprofitable Enquiry into the belief
of the Greek Church, since her schism from the Latin Church.

The Contest has been often renewed, and all the ingenious and learned persons of
both sides, have looked on with great expectations.

Every one must confess, Mr. Arnaud has said all can be said in such a Cause;
yet it seems he finds himself often pinched, by the bitter (I had almost said
scurrilous) reproaches he casts on Mr. Claud, which is very unbecoming the
Education and other Noble Qualities of that great man, whom for his Book of
Frequent Communion, I shall ever honor. And it is a thing much to be lamented,
that he was taken off from these more useful Labors, wherein he was engaged so
much to the bettering this Age, both in discovering the horrid corruption of
the Jesuits and other Casuists, not only in their Speculations about
Casuistical Divinity, but in their hearing Confessions, and giving easy
Absolutions, upon trifling Penances, and granting Absolutions before the
Penance was performed, and in representing to us the true Spirit of Holiness
and Devotion was in the Primitive Church.

But on the other hand, as Mr. Claud leaves nothing unsaid in a method fully
answerable to the excellence of that truth he defends; so he answers these
reproaches in a way worthy of himself, or rather of Christ and the Gospel. If
those excellent Writings were in English, I should need to say nothing to a
point that has been so canvassed; but till some oblige this Nation by
translating them, I shall say so much on this Head, as I hope shall be
sufficient to convince every body of the emptiness, weakness and folly of this
Plea.

And first of all, In a matter of fact concerning a change made in the Belief
of the Church, the only certain method of enquiry, is, to consider the Doctrine
of the Church in former Ages; and to compare that with what is now received;
and if we see a difference between these, we are sure there has been a change;
though we are not able to show by what steps it was made; nay, though we could
not so much as make it appear probable that such a change could be made.

To instance this in a plain case, of the change of the English Language since
the days of William the Conqueror; that there has no such swarm of Foreigners
broke in upon this Island, as might change our Language: One may then argue
thus; Every one speaks the Language he heard his Parents, his Nurses, and
others about him speak, when he was a Child; and this he continues to speak all
his life, and his Children speak as they heard him speak: Upon which, a man of
wit and fancy might say a great many things, to show it impossible any such
change should ever have been made, as that we now should speak so as not to
understand what was said five or six hundred years ago. Yet if I find Chaucer,
or any much ancienter Book, so written, that I can hardly make a shift to
understand it, from thence, without any further reasoning how this could be
brought about, I naturally must conclude our Language is altered. And if any
man should be so impertinent, as to argue, that could not be; for Children
speak as their Nurses and Parents taught them, I could hardly answer him in
patience; but must tell him it is altered, without more ado.

If a Child were amused with such pretended Impossibilities, I would tell him,
that Strangers coming among us, and our traveling to parts beyond the Seas,
made us acquainted with other Languages; and Englishmen finding in other
Tongues, some words and phrases, which they judged more proper than any they
had, being also fond of new words, there was an insensible change made in every
Age, which, after five or six Ages, is more discernible. Just so, if I find
most of all the Fathers either delivering their Opinions clearly in this
matter, against the Doctrine of the Roman Church, or saying things utterly
inconsistent with it, I am sure there has been a change made; though I could
not show either the whole progress of it, or so much as a probable account how
it could be done.

If men were as Machines or necessary Agents, a certain account might be given
of all the events in all Ages; but there are such strange Labyrinths in the
minds of men, that none can trace them by any rational computation of what is
likely.

There is also such a diversity between Men and Men, between Ages and Ages,
that he should make very false accounts, that from the tempers and dispositions
of men in this Age, should conclude what were possible or impossible many years
ago.

In this Age, in which Printing gives notice of all things so easily and
speedily, and by the laying of Stages for the quick and cheap conveying
Pacquers, and the publishing Mercuries, Gazets, and Iournals, and the education
of almost all persons to read and write Letters, and the curiosity by which all
people are whetted to enquire into every thing; the state of Mankind is quite
altered from what it was before, when few could read or write, but Clergymen;
so that they must be the Notaries of all Courts; who continue from that, to be
called Clerks to this day; and that some Crimes, otherwise capital, were not
punished with death, if the guilty person could but read.

When people were so ignorant of what was doing about them, when neither
Printing, nor Stages for Pacquets, were in being, at least in Europe, and when
men were fast asleep in their Business, without amusing themselves what was
doing about them in the world; it is the most unjust and unreasonable thing in
nature, to imagine, that such things as are now next to impossible, were not
then not only possible, but easy. So that all such calculations of
Impossibilities from the state and temper of this Age, when applied to the Ages
before ours, is the most fallacious way of reckoning that can be.

For instance, How improbable, or next to impossible, is this following story,
That the Bishops of the Imperial City of the Roman Empire, whose first true
worth, together with the greatness of that City, which was the Head and
Metropolis of the Roman Empire, got them much esteem and credit in the world,
should from small and low beginnings, have crept up to such a height of power,
that they were looked on as the Head of all Power, both Civil and Spiritual;
and that as they overthrew all other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Bishops
of that See engrossing it to themselves: so they were Masters of almost all the
Crowns of Europe, and could change Governments, raise up, and assist new
pretenders, call up, by the preachings of some poor beggarly Friars, vast
Armies, without pay, and send them whither they pleased: That they could draw
in all the Treasure and Riches of Europe to themselves; that they brought
Princes to lie thus at their feet, to suffer all the Clergy, who had a great
interest in their Dominions, by the vast endowments of Churches and Abbeys,
beside the power they had in all Families and Consciences, to be the sworn
Subjects of these Bishops, and to be exempted from appearing in Secular Courts,
how criminal soever they were?

That all this should be thus brought about without the expense of any vast
Treasure, or the prevailing force of a conquering Army, merely by a few tricks,
that were artificially managed, of the belief of Purgatory, the power of
Absolving, and granting Indulgences, and the opinion of their being St. Peter's
Successors, and Christ's Vicars on earth. And that all this while when on these
false colors of Impostures in Religion, those designs were carried on, the
Popes were men of the most lewd and flagitious lives possible; and those who
served them in their designs, were become the scandal and scorn of Christendom;
and yet in all these Attempts, they prevailed for above seven or eight Ages.

Now if any man will go about to prove this impossible, and that Princes were
always jealous of their Authority and their Lives, People always loved their
Money and Quiet, Bishops always loved their Jurisdiction, and all Men when they
see Designs carried on with colors of Religion, by men, who in the most
public and notorious instances, show they have none at all, do suspect a
Cheat, and are not to be wheedled. Therefore all this must be but a Fable and a
Forgery, to make the Popes and their Clergy odious. Will not all men laugh at
such a person, that against the faith of all History, and the authority of all
Records, will deny a thing that was set up over all Europe for many Ages?

If then all this change in a matter that was Temporal, against which the
Secular Interests of all men did oppose themselves, was yet successful, and
prevailed; how can any man think it unreasonable, that a speculative opinion
might have been brought into the Church, by such arts, and so many degrees,
that the traces of the change should be lost?

We find there have been many other changes in Sacred Things, which will seem
no less strange and incredible; but that we are assured whatsoever really has
been, may be: and if things full as unaccountable have been brought about, it
is absurd to deny, that other things might not have run the same fate.

It is known, that all people are more uneasy to changes in things that are
visible, and known to every body, than in things that are speculative, and
abstracted, and known and considered but by a few: they are likewise more
unwilling to part with things they are in possession of, and reckon their
Rights, than to suffer new Opinions to be brought in among them; and let their
Religion swell by additions. For it is undoubted that it is much more easy to
imagine how a new Opinion should be introduced, than how an ancient Practice
and Right should be taken away. If then it be apparent, that there have been
great changes made in the most visible and sensible parts of Religious Worship,
by taking away some of the most ancient Customs and Rights of the people, over
the whole Western Church, then it cannot be thought incredible, that a new
speculative Opinion might have by degrees been brought in. This I shall
instance in a few particulars.

The receiving the Chalice in the Sacrament, was an ancient constant custom, to
which all the people had been long used; and one may very reasonably on this
Hypothesis, argue, that could not be; for would the people, especially in dark
Ages, have suffered the Cup of the Blood of Christ to be taken from them, if
they had not known that it had been taken from their Fathers?

Upon which it is easy to conceive how many speculative Impossibilities an
ingenious man may devise; and yet we know they were got to part with it by
degrees; first, the Bread was given dipped in the Cup, for an Age or two; and
then the people judged they had both together: This step being made, it was
easy afterward to give them the Bread undipt, and so the Chalice was taken
away quite from the Laity, without any great opposition, except what was made
in Bohemia.

Next to this, let us consider how naturally all men are apt to be fond of
their Children, and not to suffer any thing to be denied them, by which they
conceive they are advantaged: Upon which one may reckon, once we are sure it
was the universally received custom, for many Ages, over the whole Latin
Church, that all Children had the Eucharist given them immediately after they
were baptized. And the Rubric Ord. Romans in Pascha.
of the Roman Missal ordered, they should not be suffered to suck after they
were baptized, before they had the Eucharist given them, except in in cases of
necessity. This Order is believed to be a work of the eleventh Century; so
lately was this thought necessary in the Roman Church.

All men know how careful most Parents, even such as have not much Religion
themselves, are, that nothing be wanting about their Children; and it was
thought simply necessary to salvation, that all persons had the Eucharist. How
many imaginary difficulties may one imagine might have obstructed the changing
this Custom? One would expect to hear of tumults and stirs, and an universal
conspiracy of all men to save this Right of their Children? Yet Hugo de Sancto
Victore tells us, how it was wearing out in his time; and we find not the least
opposition made to the taking it away.

A third thing, to which it is not easy to apprehend how the Vulgar should
have consented, was, the denying them that right of Nature and Nations, that
every body should worship God in a known Tongue. In this Island, the Saxons had
the Liturgy in their Vulgar Tongue; and so it was also over all the world: And
from this might not one very justly reckon up many high improbabilities, to
demonstrate the setting up the Worship in an unknown Tongue, could never be
brought about, and yet we know it was done.

In end, I shall name only one other particular, which seems very hard to be
got changed, which yet we are sure was changed; This was, the popular Elections
of the Bishops and Clergy, which, as is past dispute, were once in the hands of
the people; and yet they were got to part with them, and that at a time when
Church-Preferments were raised very high in all secular advantages; so that it
may seem strange, they should then have been wrought upon to let go a thing,
which all men are naturally inclined to desire an interest in; and so much the
more, if the dignity or riches of the function be very considerable; and yet
though we meet in Church History many accounts of tumults that were in those
Elections, while they were in the peoples hands; yet I remember of no tumults
made to keep them, when they were taken out of their hands.

And now I leave it to every Reader's Conscience, if he is not persuaded by all
the conjectures he can make of Mankind, that it is more hard to conceive, how
these things, that have been named, of which the people had clear possession,
were struck out, than that a speculative Opinion, how absurd soever, was
brought in, especially in such Ages as these were, in which it was done.

This leads me to the next thing, which is, to make some Reflections on those
Ages, in which this Doctrine crept into the Church. As long as the miraculous
effusion of the Holy Ghost continued in the Church, the simplicity of those
that preached the Gospel, was no small confirmation of that authority that
accompanied them; so that it was more for the honor of the Gospel, that there
were no great Scholars or Disputants to promote it: But when that ceased, it
was necessary the Christian Religion should be advanced by such rational means
as are suitable to the Soul of man: If it had begun only upon such a
foundation, men would not have given it a hearing; but the Miracles which were
at first wrought, having sufficiently alarmed the world, so that by them men
were inclined to hearken to it: Then it was to be tried by those Rules of Truth
and Goodness, which lie engraven on all men's Souls. And therefore it was
necessary, those who defended it, should both understand it well, and likewise
know all the secrets of Heathenism, and of the Greek Philosophy.

A knowledge in these being thus necessary, God raised up among the
Philosophers diverse great persons, such as Justin, Clement, Origin, and many
others, whose minds being enlightened with the knowledge of the Gospel, as well
as endued with all other humane Learning, they were great supports to the
Christian Religion. Afterward many Heresies being broached about the Mysteries
of the Faith, chiefly those that relate to the Son of God, and his Incarnation,
upon which followed long contests: for managing these, a full understanding of
Scripture was also necessary; and that set all persons mightily to the study of
the Scriptures.

But it is not to be denied, great corruptions did quickly break in, when the
Persecutions were over; and the Church abounded in peace and plenty; not but
that the Doctrine was preserved pure long after that: There were also many
shining Lights, and great Fathers, in that and in the following Age; yet Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 1. Apol. and 20. Orat. Chrisost. l. 2. de sacr. c. 10.
from the Fathers of these two Ages, and from the great disorders were in some
of their Councils, as in the case of Athanasius, and the second Ephesin
Council, we may clearly see how much they were degenerating from the primitive
purity.

Many Contests were about the precedence of their Sees, great Ambition and
Contention appeared in their Synods, which made Nazianzen hate and shun them,
expecting no good from them. These and such like things brought very heavy
Judgments and Plagues on the Church, and the whole Roman Empire, in the fifth
Century: For vast swarms of Armies out of Germany and the Northern Nations
brake in upon the Western Empire, and by a long succession of new Invaders all
was sacked and ruined.

The Goths were followed by the Vandals, the Alains, the Gepides, the Franks,
the Sweves, the Huns, and, in the end, the Lombards. Those Nations were for the
greatest part Arrians, but all were barbarous and rude; and their hatred of the
Faith, joined to the barbarity of their tempers, set them with a strange fury
on destroying the most Sacred things. And to that we owe the loss of most of
the Primitive Writings, and of all the Authentical Records of the first
Persecutions; scarce any thing remaining, but what Eusebius had before gathered
together out of a former destruction was made of such things under Dioclesian.

Nor did the Glory of the Eastern Empire long survive the Western, that fell
before these Invaders: But in Europe, by the Impression of the Bulgars; and in
Asia, by the Conquests made, first by the Saracens, then by the Turks, their
Greatness was soon broken; though it lasted longer under that oppressed
condition, than the other had done.

Thus was both the Greek and the Latin Church brought under sad oppression and
much misery. And every body knows, that the natural effect that state of life
brings over the greatest minds, when there is no hope of getting from under it,
is to take them off from study and learning; and indeed to subdue their Spirits
as well as their Bodies. And so it proved, for after that, an ignorance and
dullness did to that degree overspread all Europe, that it is scarce to be
expressed. I do not deny, but there might be some few Instances of considerable
Men, giving an allowance for the time they lived in.

For the Laity, they were bred up to think of nothing but to handle their Arms,
very few could so much as read; and the Clergy were not much better; read they
could, but in many that was all; a corrupt Latin they understood, which
continued to be the Vulgar Tongue in Italy a great while after: They had heard
of Greek and Hebrew, but understood them as little as we do the Mexican or
Peruvian Tongue.

They had scarce any knowledge of the Greek Fathers; a few very ill
Translations of some of them was all they had. The Latin Fathers were read by
some of the more learned, but for any distinct understanding of Scriptures, or
the natures of things, God knows they had it not. I design a short Discourse,
and therefore shall not stay to make this out, which every body that has but
looked a little on the Writings of these Ages, knows to be true.

Another Effect of their Ignorance was, that they were easily imposed on by
suppostitious Writings, that went under the Names of the Fathers, but were none
of theirs. Gelasius threw out a great many that were breaking out in his time;
but the Trade was prosperous, and went on to that height, that it cost the
Critics of these two last Ages much pains to distinguish true from forged, and
the genuine from what was interpolated. And indeed the Popes were much beholden
to the forgery of the Decretal Epistles, in which Work a great many Epistles
were published by Isidore in the Eighth Century, as the Epistles of the Popes
of the first four Centuries after Christ: By which they were represented as
giving orders, and making definitions over the whole Church in a full form, and
with the style of an absolute Authority.

These were rejected by many, but mightily supported by all the Flatterers of
the Court of Rome: So that they were in the end, after some contest, generally
received, and held Presidents to the succeeding Popes, who wrote very skilfully
after that Copy. Many other Forgeries were also much cherished, which I shall
instance only in one other particular, that relates to what is now in my eye.

A Sermon of Arnold of Bonneval (which is now proved clearly to be his) was
published in St. Cyprian's Works as his Sermon of the Supper of our Lord,
though this Arnold lived about nine hundred years after him. Now such a Sermon
being generally read as St. Cyprian's, no wonder it gave that Doctrine of
Transubstantiation great credit.

These Writings are now discovered to be such forgeries, that all considering
Men of their own Church are ashamed of them, and disown them. So do Baronius
and Bellarmin the Decretals; and Sirmondus, Launnoy, and many more, reject
other forgeries. Yet here is a high pitch of Impudence that most of all their
Writers of Controversy are guilty of, to cite these very Writings (which are
now universally agreed to be spurious) still under those great Names, which
forgery gave them.

As the Author of that Letter about Transubstantiation, cites a passage from
St. Cyprian's Sermon De Coena Domini, though it is agreed to by Sixtus
Senensis, Possevin, Bellarmin, Raynaud, and Labbe, to be none of his; and the
Publishers of the Office of the Sacrament, in the Table at the end of it,
acknowledge it was written by Arnold of Bonneval, a Friend of St. Bernard's.
After these Authorities it is indeed strange, that such sophisticated stuff
should be over and over again offered to us. And it was no wonder, such
forgeries were generally received, when that Church gave them such Authority,
as to take many Lessons out of the most spurious Legends and put them in their
Breviary.

Of all these dark Ages, the tenth was certainly the midnight of the Church: We
have scarce any Writer for that whole Age, so that it is generally called the
Iron Age, an Age of Darkness and Wickedness; and therefore a very fit time for
Superstition and Error to work in. And thence we may well infer, that in Ages
that were so exceeding ignorant, and in which men scarce thought of Religion,
it was no hard thing to get any Error received and established.

But this is not all. These were also Ages of great licentiousness and
disorder; for though the barbarous Nations were afterward converted to the
Orthodox Faith, (though by the way it were easy to show these Conversions had
nothing like the first Conversion of the World to Christianity in them) yet
their Barbarity remained with them, and the Churchmen became so corrupt and
vicious, that they could not have a face to reprove them for those Vices of
which themselves were scandalously guilty.

From the Sixth Century downward what a race of Men have the Popes been?
chiefly in the Ninth and Tenth Century. And indeed any Religion that remained
in the World had so retired into Cloisters and Monasteries, that very little of
it remained. These Houses were Seminaries of some Devotion, while they were
poor and busied at work, according to their first foundation; but when they
were well endowed, and became rich, they grew a scandal to all Christendom. All
the primitive Discipline was laid down, Children were put into the highest
Preferments of the Church, and Simony overrun the Church. These are matters of
fact, that cannot be so much as questioned, nor should I, if put to prove them,
seek Authorities for them any where else than in Baronius; who, for all his
design to serve the Interest of that Church, yet could not prevaricate so far,
as to conceal things that are so openly and uncontestedly true.

Now, from the Darkness and Corruption of these Ages, I presume to offer some
things to the Readers consideration.

First, Ignorance always inclines people to be very easy to trust those, in
whom they have confidence; for being either unwilling to trouble themselves
with painful and sollicitous enquiries, or unable to make them, they take
things on trust, without any care to search into them* But this general Maxim
must needs be much more certain, when subjection to the Church, and the belief
of every thing established, was made a very substantial part of Religion, or
rather that alone which might compense all other defects.

Secondly, Ignorance naturally inclines people to Superstition, to be soon
wrought on, and easily amused, to be full of fears, and easy to submit to any
thing that may any way overcome these fears. A right sense of God and Divine
Matters, makes one have such a taste of Religion, that he is not at all subject
to this distemper, or rather Monster, begotten by the unnatural commixture of
some Fear of God and Love of Sin, both being disordered by much ignorance;
hence sprang most of the Idolatrous Rites of Heathenism, and all people so
tempered are fit for the like humor to work upon.

Thirdly, The Interests of Churchmen, led them mightily to study the setting
this Opinion on foot. This alone set them as high, as mortal Men could be, and
made them appear a most sacred sort of a Creature. All the wonders of the
Prophets and Apostles were but sorry matters to it: What was Moses calling for
Manna from Heaven and Water fromm the Rock? Elijah's bringing sometimes Fire
and sometimes Rain from Heaven? what ^^re the Apostles raising the dead, giving
sight to the blind, and feet to the lanie? To the annihilating the substance of
Bread and Wine, and bringing in their stead, not some other common matter, but
the Flesh and Blood of the Ever-Blessed Jesus. He who could do this, no wonder
he were reverenced, enriched, secure from all danger, exempt from all Civil
Jurisdiction, and cherished with all imaginable respect and kindness. So that
it is no strange thing, that Churchmen were much inclined to favor an Opinion,
that favored their Interests so much.

Fourthly, The Churchmen of these Ages were very likely to be easily drawn to
anything, which might so much advance their designs; that were grown very high,
especially from the days of Pope Gregory the Great. They were struggling with
the Civil Powers for dominion, and pursued that for many years, and spared
neither labor nor the lives of Men to attain it. And it is not to be thought,
but Men who did prodigally throw away many thousands in a quarrel, would
without very nice disputing, cherish any opinion that might contribute toward
that end. And as this was of great use to them, so they very much needed both
it, and all such like shifts; for they had none of that sublime Sanctity, nor
high Learning, or lofty Eloquence, which former Churchmen had, and by which
they had acquired great esteem in the World.

Now the Churchmen in these days, having a great mind to preserve or rather to
increase that esteem; but wanting those qualities which on a reasonable account
might have acquired it, or preserved it, must needs think of somewhat else to
do it by; and so found out many Arts for it, such as the Belief of Purgatory,
the Priestly Absolution upon Confession, together with the reserved Cases,
Indulgences, and the Pope's Power of taking Souls out of Purgatory. And if it
be not full as unreasonable, to think the Pope should be believed vested with a
power of pardoning Sin, and redeeming from Purgatory, as that
Transubstantiation should have been received, let any Man judge.

Fifthly, There was such a vast number of Agents and Emissaries sent from Rome,
to all the Parts of Europe, to carry on their designs, that we can hardly think
it possible any thing could have withstood them. In such Ages, by giving some
terrible name to any thing, it was presently disgraced with the Vulgar; a clear
instance of this was the Fate of the Married Clergy.

Gregory the Seventh, who as Cardinal Benno (who knew him) represents him, was
one of the worst Men that ever was born, and first set on foot the Pope's
Pretensions to the Civil Authority, and the Power of deposing Princes, and
putting others in their places; did prosecute the Married Clergy with great
vehemence. This he could not do on any pious or chaste account, being so vile a
Man as he was: But being resolved to bring all Princes to depend on him, there
was no way so like to attain that, as to have all the Clergy absolutely subject
to him: This could not be hoped for, while they were married, and that the
Princes and several States of Europe had such a pawn of their fidelity, as
their Wives and Children; therefore because the persons of the Clergy were
accounted sacred, and liable to no punishment, that there might be nothing so
nearly related to them, wherein they might be punished, as their Wives and
Children, he drove this furiously on; and, to give them some ill-favored Name,
called them Nicolaitans, which are represented in the Revelation so vile and
odious.

This was the most unjust thing in the World: They might have called them
Pharisees or Sadducees as well, for all the ancient Writers tell us, that
Nicolas having a beautiful Wife was jealous, and the Apostles challenging him
of it, he said, he was so far from* it; that he was willing to make her common,
and thence some set up the community of Wives, and were from him called the
Nicolaitans.

But because Women and Marriage were in the case, and it was a hateful word,
this was the Name by which the married Clergy were every where made so odious;
and though it was much the Interest of Princes to have had the Marriage of the
Clergy to be left free, yet the Popes were too hard for them in it. Thus were
the Agents of Rome able to prevail in every thing they set then selves to. So
the Opposers of this Doctrine were called by the hateful names of Stercoranists
and Panites.

Sixthly, When all Religion was placed in Externals, and splendid Rites and
Ceremonies came to be generally looked on as the whole business of Religion,
peoples minds were by that much disposed to receive any thing, that might
introduce external pomp and grandeur into their Churches; being willing to make
up in an outward appearance of worshipping the Person of Christ, what was
wanting in their obedience to his Gospel.

And now I appeal to any honest Man, if upon the suppositions I have laid down,
it be at all an unaccountable thing, that a great company of ignorant and
debauched Clergymen, should set themselves to cherish and advance a belief,
which would redeem them from all the Infamy their other Vices were ready to
bring upon them; and they resolving on it, if it was hard for them, especially
in a course of some Ages, to get an ignorant, credulous, superstitious, and
corrupt multitude, to receive it without much noise or ado.

I believe no man will deny, but upon these suppositions the thing was very
like to succeed. Now that all these suppositions are true (to wit) that both
Clergy and Laity in those Ages, chiefly in the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh
Centuries, were ignorant, and vicious to the height; is a thing so generally
known, and so universally confessed by all their own Historians, that I hardly
think any man will have brow enough to deny it.

But there are many other things, which will also show how possible, nay
feasible such a change may be.

First, This having never been condemned by a formal Decision in any former
Age, it was more easy to get it brought in; for no Council or Father could
condemn or write against any Error, but that which was maintained or abetted
by some man, or company of men, in or before their time. Since then this had
not been broached in the former Ages, the promoters of it had this advantage,
that no former Decision had been made against them; for none ever thought of
condemning any Heresy before it had a being.

Secondly, This Error did in the outward sound agree with the words of the
Institution, and the forms used in the former Liturgies, in which the Elements
were said to be changed into the true and undefiled Body of Christ. A Doctrine
then that seemed to establish nothing contrary to the ancient Liturgies, might
easily have been received, in an Age, in which the outward sound and appearance
was all they looked to.

Thirdly, The passage from the believing any thing in general, with an
indistinct and confused apprehension, to any particular way of explaining it,
is not at all hard to be conceived, especially in an Age, that likes every
thing the better, the more mysterious it seem. In the preceding Ages, it was in
general received, that Christ was in the Sacrament, and that by the
Consecration the Elements were changed into his Body and Blood. And although
many of the Fathers did very formally explain in what sense Christ was present,
and the Elements were changed; yet there having been no occasion given to the
Church, to make any formal decision about the manner of it, every one thought
he was left at liberty to explain it as he pleased. And we may very reasonably
suppose, that many did not explain it at all, especially in these Ages, in
which there was scarce any preaching or instructing the people. By this means
the people did believe Christ was in the Sacrament, and that the Elements were
changed into his Body and Blood, without troubling themselves to examine how it
was, whether spiritually or corporally. Things being brought to this, in these
Ages, by the carelessness of the Clergy, the people were by that, sufficiently
disposed to believe any particular manner of that presence, or change, their
Pastors might offer to them.

Fourthly, There being no visible change made in any part of the Worship, when
this Doctrine was first brought in, it was easy to innovate, in these Ages, in
which people looked only at things that were visible and sensible: Had they
brought in the Adoration, Processions, or other consequences of this Doctrine
along with it, it was like to have made more noise; for people are apt to be
startled when they see any notable change in their Worship: But this belief was
first infused in the people, and Berengarius was condemned. The Council of
Lateran had also made the Decree about it, before ever there were any of those
signal alterations attempted.

And after that was done, then did Honorius decree the adoration; (Greg.
Decret. lib. 3. tit. 42. cap. 10.) and Urban the fourth, upon some pretended
Visions of Eve, Julian, and Isabella, did appoint the Feast of the Body of
Christ, called now generally, The Feast of God, or Corpus Christi Feast, which
was confirmed by Pope Clement the fifth, (lib. 3. tit. 16.) in the Council of
Vienna; and ever since that time they have been endeavoring by all the devices
possible, to increase the devotion of the people to the Host.

So that Mr. Arnaud in many places acknowledges they are most gross Idolaters
if their Doctrine be not true; which I desire may be well considered, since it
is the opinion of one of the most considering and wisest, and most learned
persons of that Communion, who has his whole life set his thoughts chiefly to
the examining of this Sacrament, and knows as well as any man alive, what is
the real sense of the Worshippers in that Church.

But to return to that I am about, it is very unreasonable to think that the
people in those dark Ages, did concern themselves in the speculative opinions
were among Divines, so that the vulgar could not busy themselves about it, but
when this Opinion was decreed, and generally received and infused in the Laity,
for almost one age together, then we need not wonder to see notable alterations
following upon it, in their worship, without any opposition or contest; for it
was very reasonable such Consequences should have followed such a Doctrine.

But that before that time there was no adoration of the Elements, is a thing
so clear, that it is impudence to deny it; there was no prostration of the
body, or kneeling to be made, either on Lords days, or all the time between
Easter and Pentecost, by the twentieth Canon of the Council of Nice.

None of the ancient Liturgies do so much as mention it; but the contrary is
plainly insinuated by S. Cyril of Jerusalem. None of that great number of
Writers about Divine Offices, that lived in the seventh, eighth, ninth, and
tenth Centuries, published by Hittorpius, so much as mention it: Though they be
very particular in giving us an account of the most inconsiderable parts of the
Divine Offices, and of all the circumstances of them. Honorius when he first
decreed it, does not allege presidents for it; but commands the Priests to
tell the people to do it; whereas, if it had been appointed before, he must
rather have commanded the Priests to have told the people of their sacrilegious
contempt of the Body of Christ, notwithstanding the former Laws and Practice of
the Church: But it is apparent his way of enjoining it, is in the style of one
that commands a new thing, and not that sets on the execution of what was
sormerly used: Yet this was more warily appointed by Honorius, who enjoined
only an inclination of the Head to the Sacrament; but it was set up barefaced
by his Successor Gregory the ninth, who appointed (as the Historians tell us,
(Naucler. ad an. 1240. Krantz. sex. lib. 8. cap. 10.) though it be not among
his Decretals) A Bell to be rung, to give notice at the consecration and
elevation, that all who heard it, might kneel, and join their hands in adoring
the Host. So that any passages of the Fathers that speak of Adoration or
Veneration to the Sacrament, must either be understood of the inward Adoration
the Communicant offers up to God the Father, and his blessed Son, in the
commemoration of so great a mystery of Love, as appeared in his death, then
represented and remembered. Or these words are to be taken in a large sense, and
so we find, they usually called the Gospels, their Bishops, Baptism, the
Pascha, and almost all other sacred things, venerable.

And thus from many particulars it is apparent, that the bringing in the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is no unaccountable thing.

But I shall pursue this yet further, for the Reader's full satisfaction, and
show the steps by which this Doctrine was introduced.

We find in the Church of Corinth the receiving the Sacrament was looked on,
but as a common entertainment, and was gone about without great care or
devotion, which S. Paul charges severely on them; and tells them what heavy
judgments had already fallen on them, for such abuses, and that heavier ones
might be yet looked for, since they were guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, by their unworthy receiving.

Upon this the whole Christian Church was set to consider, in very good
earnest, how to prepare themselves aright for so holy an action; and the
receiving the Sacrament, as it was the greatest Symbol of the Love of
Christians, so it was the end of all Penitence, that was enjoined for public
or private sins, but chiefly for Apostasy, or the denying the Faith, and
complying with Idolatry in the times of Persecution. Therefore the Fathers
considering both the words of the Institution, and S. Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians, did study mightily to awaken all to great preparation and
devotion, when they received the Sacrament. For all the primitive devotion
about the Sacrament, was only in order to the receiving it; and that modern
worship of the Church of Rome, of going to hear Mass without receiving, was a
thing so little understood by them, that as none were suffered to be present in
the action of the Mysteries, but those who were qualified to receive; so if any
such had gone out of the Church without participating, (9 Apost. Cnn. and 2
Can. Antioch) they were to be separated from the Communion of the Church, as
the Authors of disorder in it.

Upon this Subject the Fathers employed all their Eloquence; and no wonder, if
we consider that it is such a commemoration of the death of Christ as does
really communicate to the worthy Receiver his crucified Body, and his Blood
that was shed, (Mark, not his glorified Body, as it is now in Heaven) which is
the Fountain and Channel of all other blessings, but is only given to such, as
being prepared according to the Rules of the Gospel, sincerely believe all the
mysteries of Faith, and live suitably to their Belief, both the advantages of
worthy receiving, and the danger of unworthy receiving being so great, it was
necessary for them to make use of all the faeulties they had, either for
awakening reverence and fear, that the contemptible Elements of Bread and Wine,
might not bring a cheapness and disesteem upon these holy Mysteries, or for
persuading their Communicants to all serious and due preparation, upon so great
an occasion.

This being then allowed, it were no strange thing, though in their Sermons, or
other devout Treatises, they should run out to Meditations that need to be
mollified with that allowance that must be given to all Panegyricks or
Perswasives: where many things are always said, that if right understood, have
nothing in them to startle any body; but if every phrase be examined
Grammatically, there would be many things found in all such Discourses, that
would look very hideously. Is it not ordinary in all the Festivities of the
Church, as S. Austin observed on this very occasion, to say, This day Christ
was born, or died, or rose again in? and yet that must not be taken literally.
Beside, when we hear or read any expressions that sound high or big, we are to
consider the ordinary style of him that uses these expressions; for if upon all
other occasions he be apt to rise high in his Figures, we may the less wonder
at some excesles of his Style. If then such an Orator as S. Chrysostom was,
who expatiates on all subjects, in all the delighting varieties of a fertile
Fancy, should on so great a Subject, display all the beauties of that
ravishing Art in which he was so great a Master, what wonder is it? Therefore
great allowances must be made in such a case.

Further, we must also consider the tempers of those to whom any Discourse is
addressed. Many things must be said in another manner to work on Novices, or
weak persons, than were fit or needful for men of riper and stronger
understandings. He would take very ill measures, that would judge of the future
state, by these Discourses in which the sense of that is infused in younger or
weaker capacities; therefore though in some Catechisms that were calculated for
the understandings of Children and Novices, such as S. Cyril's, there be some
high expressions used, it is no strange thing; for naturally all men on such
occasions, use the highest and biggest words they can invent.

But we ought also to consider, what persons have chiefly in their eye, when
they speak to any point. For all men, especially when their Fancies are
inflamed with much servor, are apt to look only to one thing at once; and if a
visible danger appear of one side, and none at all on the other, then it is
natural for every one to exceed on that side, where there is no danger. So that
the hazard of a contempt of the Sacrament being much and justly in their eye,
and they having no cause to apprehend any danger on the otherside, of excessive
adoring or magnifying it: No wonder, if in some of their Discourses, an
immoderate use of the counterpoise, had inclined them to say many things of the
Sacrament, that require a fair and can did interpretation.

Yet after all this, they say no more, but that in the Sacrament they did truly
and really communicate on the Body and Blood of Christ; which we also receive
and believe. And in many other Treatises, when they are in colder blood,
examining things, they use such expressions and expositions of this, as no way
favor the belief of Transubstantiation; of which we have given some account in
a former Paper. But though that were not so formally done, and their Writings
were full of passages that needed great allowances, it were no more than what
the Fathers that wrote against the Arrians, confess the Fathers before the
Council of Nice, were guilty of; who writing against Sabellius, with too much
veliemence, did run to the opposite extreme. So many of S. Ciril's passages
against Nestorius, were thought to favor Eutychianism. So also Theodoret, and
two others, writing against the Entychians, did run to such excesses, as drew
upon them the condemnation of the Fifth General Council.

The first time we find any Contestor canvassing about the Sacrament, was in
the Controversy about Images, in the eighth Century, That the Council of
Constantinople, in the condenming of Images, declared, there was no other Image
of Christ to be received, but the Blessed Sacrament; in which, the substance of
Bread and Wine was the Image of the Body and Blood of Christ; making a
difference between that which is Christ's Body by nature, and the Sacrament,
which is his Body by Institution.

Now it is to be considered, that whatever may be pretended of the violence of
the Greek Emperors overruling that Council in the matter of condemning Images;
yet there having been no Contest at all about the Sacrament, we cannot in
reason think they would have brought it into the dispute, if they had not known
these two things were the received Doctrine of the Church: The one, that in the
Sacrament, the substance of Bread and Wine did remain; the other, that the
Sacrament was the Image or Figure of Christ; and from thence they acknowledged,
all Images were not to be rejected, but denied any other Images besides that in
the Sacrament.

Now the second Council of Nice, being resolved to quarrel with them as much as
was possible, do not at all condemn them for that which is the chief testimony
for us (to wit) That the Sacrament was still the substance of Bread and Wine;
and Damascene, the zealous Defender of Images, clearly insinuates his believing
the substance of Bread and Wine remained, and did nourish our Bodies. Let it be
therefore considered, that when that Council of Nice was in all the bitterness
imaginable canvassing every word of the Council of Constantinople, they never
once blame them for saying, The substance of Bread and Wine was in the
Sacrament. It is true, they condemned them for saying the Sacrament was the
Image of Christ, denying that any of the Fathers had called it so; alleging
that the Symboles were called Antit pes by the Fathers, only before the
consecration, and not after; in which they followed Damascene, (De Fid. orth.
lib. 4. cap. 14.) who had fallen in the same Error before them. But this is so
manifest a mistake in matter of fact, that it gives a just reason for rejecting
the authority of that Council, were there no more to be said against it: For
this was either very gross ignorance, or effronted impudence, since in above
twenty Fathers that were before them, the Sacrament is called the Figure and
Antitype of Christ's Body; and at the same time, that Damascene, who was then
looked on as the great Light of the East, did condemn the calling the
Sacrament, the Figure of Christ's Body. The venerable Bede, (Bed. in Psalm. 3.
and Mark 14.) that was looked on as the great Light of the West, did according
to the style of the Primitive Church, and in S. Austin's words, call it, The
Figure of Christ's Body.

I shall not trace the other forgeries and follies of that pretended General
Council, because I know a full account of them is expected from a better Pen;
only in this particular I must desire the Reader to take notice, that the
Council of Constantinople did not innovate any thing in the Doctrine about the
Sacrament, and did use it as an Argument in the other Controversy concerning
Images, without any design at all about the Eucharist. But on the other hand,
the second Council of Nice did innovate and reject a form of speech, which had
been universally received in the Church, before their time; and being engaged
with all possible spite against the Council of Constantinople, resolved to
contradict every thing they had said, as much as could be: So that in this we
ought to look on the Council of Constantinople, as delivering what was truly
the Tradition of the Church, and on the second Council of Nice, as corrupting
it.

About thirty years after that Council, Paschase Radbert Abbot of Corbie, wrote
about the Sacrament, and did formally assert the Corporal Presence, in the
Ninth Century. The greatest Patrons of this Doctrine, such as Bellarmin and
Sirmondus, both Jesuits, confess, he was the first that did fully and to
purpose explain the verity of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist. And
Paschase himself, in his Letter to his Friend Frudegard, regrates that He was
so flow in believing and assenting to his Doctrine; and does also acknowledge,
that by his Book he had moved many to the understanding of that Mystery; and it
is apparent by that Letter, that not only Frudegard, but others were
scandalized at his Book, for he writes, I have spoken of these things more
fully, and more expressly, because I understand that some challenge me, that in
the Book I have published of the Sacraments of Christ, I have ascribed either
more or some other thing than is consonant to Truth to the words of our Lord.
Of all the Writers of that Age, or near it, only one (and his Name we know not,
the Book being anonymous) was of Paschase's opinion.

But we find all the great men of that Age were of another mind, and did
clearly assert, that in the Sacrament, the Substance of Bread and Wine
remained, and did nourish our Bodies as other meats do. These were Rabanus
Maurus, Archbishop of Mentz, Amalarius, Archbishop of Treves, or as others say,
Metz, Heribald, Bishop of Auxerre, Bertram, John Scot Erigena, Walafridus
Strabo, Florus and Christian Druthmar. And three of these set themselves on
purpose to refute Paschase. The anonymous Writer that defends him, says, That
Raban did dispute at length against him in an Epistle to Abbot Egilon, for
saying it was that Body that was born of the Virgin, and was crucified, and
raised again, that was daily offered for the life of the World. That is also
condemned by Raban in his Penitential, cap. 33. who refers his Reader to that
Epistle to Abbor Egilon. And for Bertram, he was commanded by Charles the Bald,
then Emperor, to write upon that matter, which in the beginning of his Book he
promises to do, not trusting to his own wit, but following the steps of the
Holy Fathers. It is also apparent by his Book, that there were at that time
different Persuasions about the Body of Christ in the Sacrament; some believing
it was there without any Figure; others saying, it was there in a Figure and
Mystery. Upon which he apprehended, there must needs follow a great Schism. And
let any read Paschase's Book, and after that Bertram's, and if he have either
honesty, or at least, shame remaining in him, he must see it was in all points
the very same Controversy that was canvassed then between them, and is now
debated between the Church of Rome and Us.

Now that Raban and Bertram were two of the greatest and most learned men of
that Age, cannot be denied: Raban passes without contest amongst the first men
of the Age; and for Bertram, we need neither cite what Trithemius says of him,
nor what the Disciples of S. Austin, in the Port Royal, have said to magnify
him, when they make use of him to establish the Doctrine of the efficacy of
Grace. It is a sufficient evidence of the esteem he was in, that he was made
choice of by the Bishop of France, to defend the Latin Church against the
Greeks; and upon two very important Controversies that were moved in that Age;
the one being about Predestination and Grace, the other, that which we have now
before us, He, though a private Monk, raised to no dignity, was commanded by
the Emperor to write of both these; which no man can imagine had been done, if
he had not been a man much (...) and esteemed; and way in which he writes, is
solid and worthy of the reputation he ha(...)quired: He proves both from the
words of Institution, and from St. Paul, that the Sacrame^^ was still Bread and
Wine. He proves from S. Austin, that these were Mysteries and Figures of
Christ's Body and Blood. And indeed considering that Age, he was an
extraordinary writer.

The third that did write against Paschase, was John Scot, otherwise called
Erigena, who was likewise commanded to write about the Sacrament, by that same
Emperor. He was undoubtedly the most learned and ingenious man of that Age, as
all our English Historians tell us, chiefly William of Malmsbury: He was in
great esteem both with the Emperor, and our great King Alfred. (Lib. 2. de
Gest. Reg.) He was accounted a Saint and a Martyr; his memory was celebrated by
an Anniversary on the tenth of November. He was also very learned in the Greek,
and other Oriental Tongues, which was a rare thing in that Age. This Erigena
did formally refute Paschase's Opinion, and assert ours. It is true, his Book
is now lost, being 200 years after burned by the C. of Vercel; but though the
Church of Lions does treat him very severely in their Book against him, and
fastens many strange opinions upon him, in which there are good grounds to
think they did him wrong; yet they no where challenge him for what he wrote
about the Sacrament; which shows they did not condemn him for that; though they
speak of him with great animosity, because he had written against
Predestination and Grace efficacious of it self, which they defended. It seems
most probable that it was from his Writings, that the Homily read at Easter by
the Saxons here in England, does so formally contradict the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. And now let the Reader judge, if it be not clear that
Paschase did innovate the the Doctrine of the Church in this point, but was
vigorously opposed by all the great men of that Age.

For the following Age, all Historians agree, it was an Age of most prodigious
Ignorance and Debauchery, and that amongst all sorts of people, none being more
signally vicious than the Clergy; and of all the Clergy, none so much as the
Popes, who were such a succession of Monsters, that Baronius cannot forbear
making the saddest exclamations possible concerning their cruelties,
debaucheries, and other vices: So that, then, if at any time, we may conclude
all were asleep, and no wonder if the tares Paschase had sown, did grow up; and
yet of the very few Writings of the Age that remain, the far greater number
seem to favor the Doctrine of Bertram. But till Berengarius his time, we hear
nothing of any contest about the Eucharist. So here were 200 years spent in an
absolute ignorance and forgetfulness of all divine things.

About the middle of the 11th Cent. Bruno Bishop of Angiers, and Berengarius,
who was born in Tours, but was Archdeacon and Treasurer of the Church of
Angiers, did openly teach, that Christ was in the Sacrament only in a Figure.
We hear little more of Bruno; but Berengarius is spoken of by many Historians,
(Sigebert, Platma, Antonin. Sabellicus, Chron. Mont. Cassin. Sigonius, Vignier,
Guitmond, and chiefly William of Malmsbury) as a man of great Learning and
Piety, and that when he was cited to the Council at Rome, before Nicolaus the
Second, none could resist him; that he had an excellent faculty of speaking,
and was a man of great Gravity; that he was held a Saint by many: He did abound
in Charity, Humility, and Good Works, and was so chaste, that he would not look
at a beutiful woman. And Hildebert Bishop of Man's, whom S. Bernard commends
highly, made such an Epitaph on him, that notwithstanding all the abatements we
must make for Poetry, yet no man could write so of an ordinary person.

This Berengarius wrote against the Corporal Presence, calling it a stupidity
of Paschase's and Lanfrank's, who denied that the substance of Bread and Wine
remained after Consecration. He had many followers, as Sigebert tells us,
(Edit. Antwerp. 1608.) And William of Malmsbury, and Matthew Paris, tell us his
Doctrine had overspred all France. It were too long to show with what impudent
corrupting of Antiquity those who wrote against him, did stuff up their Books.
Diverse Councils were held against him, and he through fear, did frequently
waver; for when other Arguments proved too weak to convince him, then the
Faggot, which is the sure and beloved Argument of that Church, prevailed on his
fears; so that he burnt his own Book, and signed the condemnation of his own
Opinion at Rome; this he did, as Lanfrank upbraids him, not for love of the
Truth, but for fear of Death: which shows he had not that love of the truth,
and constancy of mind he ought to have had. But it is no prejudice against the
Doctrine he taught, that he was a man not only subject to, but overcome by so
great a temptation; for the fear of death is natural to all men.

And thus we see, that in the 9th Century our Doctrine was taught by the
greatest writers of that time, so that it was then generally received, and not
at all condemned either by Pope or Council. But in the 11th Century, upon its
being defended, it was condemned. Can there be therefore any thing more plain,
than that there was a change made, and that what in the one Age was taught by a
great number of writers, without any censure upon it, was in another Age
anathematized? Is there not then here a clear change? And what has been done,
was certainly possible, from whence we conclude with all the justice and reason
in the world, that a change was not only possible, but was indeed made. And yet
the many repeated condemnations of Berengarius, show, his Doctrine was too
deeply rooted in the minds of that Age, to be very easily suppressed; for to
the end of the 11th Century, the Popes continued to condemn his Opinions, even
after his death.

In the beginning of the 12th Century, Honorius of Autun, who was a
considerable man in that Age, did clearly assert the Doctrine of the Sacraments
nourishing our Bodies, and is acknowledge by Thomas Waldensis, to have been a
follower of Berengarius his Heresy. And about the 18th year of that Age, that
Doctrine was embraced by great numbers in the South of France, who were from
there several Teachers called Petrobrusrans, Henricians, Waldenses, and from the
Country, where their number were greatest, Albigenses; whose Confession, dated
the year 1120, bears, That the eating of the Sacramental Bread, was the eating
of Jesus Christ in a figure; Jesus Christ having said, as often as ye do this, do
it in remembrance of me.

It were needless to engage in any long account of these people; the Writers of
those times have studied to represent them in as hateful and odious Characters,
as it was possible for them to devise; and we have very little remaining that
they wrote. Yet as the false Witnesses that were suborned to lay heavy things
to our Blessed Savior. Charge, could not agree among themselves; so for all
the spite with which these Writers prosecute those poor Innocents, there are
such noble Characters given, even by these enemies, of their piety, their
simplicity, their patience, constancy, and other virtues; that as the
Apologists for Christianity, do justly glory in the testimonies Pliny, Lucian,
Tacitus, Josephus, and other declared Enemies give; so any that would study to
redeem the memory of those multitudes, from the black aspersions of their
foul-mouthed Enemies, would find many passages among them to glory much in, on
their behalf, which are much more to be considered than those virulent
Calumnies with which they labor to blot their Memories: But neither the death
of Peter de Bruis, who was burnt, nor all the following Cruelties, that were as
terrible as could be invented by all the fury of the Court of Rome, managed by
the Inquisitions of the Dominicans, whose Souls were then as black as their
Garments, could bear down or extinguish that light of the Truth, in which what
was wanting in Learning, Wit, or Order, was fully made up in the simplicity of
their Manners, and the constancy of their Sufferings. And it were easy to
show, that the two great things they were most persecuted for, were their
refusing subjection to the Sea of Rome, and their not believing the Doctrine of
the Corporal Presence; nor were they confined to one corner of France only, but
spread almost all Europe over.

In that Age Steven Bishop in Eduen is the first I ever find cited to have used
the word Transubstantiation, who expressly says, (De Sacram. Altar. c. 13.) That
the Oblation of Bread and Wine is Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of
Christ: Some place him in the beginning, some in the middle of that Age; for
there were two Bishops of that See, both of the same Name; the one, Anno 1112.
the other 1160. And which of the two it was, is not certain; but the Master of
the Sentences was not so positive, and would not determine, (Lib. 4. did. 11.)
whether Christ was present formally, substantially, or some other way. But in
the beginning of the 13th Century, one Amalric, or Almaric, who was in great
esteem for Learning, did deny Transubstantiation, saying, That the Body of
Christ was no more in the Consecrated Bread, than in any other Bread, or any
other thing; (Anno 1215. c. 1.) for which he was condemned in the 4th Council
of Lateran, and his Body, which was buried in Paris, was taken up and burnt;
and then was it decreed, That the Body and Blood of Christ were truly contained
under the kinds (or Species) of Bread and Wine, the Bread being
transubstantiated into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood.

All the while this Doctrine was carried on, it was managed with all the ways
possible, that might justly create a prejudice against them who set it forward;
for besides many ridiculous lying wonders, that were forged to make it more
easily believed by a credulous and superstitious multitude, the Church of Rome
did discover a cruelty and blood-thirstiness which no Pen is able to set out to
the full. What Burnings and Tortures, and what Croissades as against Infidels
and Mabumetans, did they set on against those poor innocent Companies, whom
they with an enraged, wolvish and barbarous bloodiness studied to destroy? This
was clearly contrary to the Laws of Humanity, the Rules of the Gospel, and the
Gentleness of Christ: How then could such companies of Wolves pretend to be the
followers of the Lamb? In the Primitive Church, the Bishops that had prosecuted
the Priscillanists before the Emperor Maximus, to the taking away their lives,
were cast out of the Communion of the Church; but now did these that still
pretended to be Christ's Vicars, show themselves in Antichrist's Colors, dipped
in blood.

If then any of that Church that live among us, plead for pity, and the not
executing the Laws, and if they blame the severity of the Statutes against
themselves, let them do as becomes honest men, and without disguise, disown and
condemn those Barbarities, and them that were the promoters and pursuers of
them; for those practices have justly filled the world with fears and
jealousies of them, that how meekly soever they may now whine under the
pretended oppression of the Laws, they would no sooner get into power, but that
old Leaven not being yet purged out of their hearts, they would again betake
themselves to fire and faggot, as the unanswerable Arguments of their Church:
and so they are only against persecution, because they are not able to
persecute; but were they the men that had the power, it would be again a
Catholic Doctrine and Practice: But when they frankly and heartily condemn
those Practices and Principles, they will have somewhat to plead, which will in
reason prevail more than all their little Arts can do to procure them favor.

It was this same Council of Lateran, that established both Cruelty,
Persecution and Rebellion into a Law, appointing, that all Princes should
exterminate all Heretics, (this is the mercy of that Church which all may look
for, if ever their power be equal to their malice) and did decree, (Cap. 3.)
That if any Temporal Lord, being admonished by the Church, did neglect to purge
his Lands, he should be first excommunicated, and if he continued a year in his
contempt and contumacy, notice was to be given of it to the Pope, who from that
time forth should declare his Vassals absolved from the Fidelity they owed him,
and expose his Lands to be ivaded by Catholics, who might possess them without
any contradiction, having exterminated the Heretics out of them, and so
preserve them in the purity of the Faith. This Decree was made on the account
of Raimond Count of Toulouse, who favored the Albigenses, that were his
Subjects; and being a Peer of France according to the first constitution under
Hugo Capet King of France, was such a Prince in his own Dominions, as the
Princes of Germany now are. He was indeed the King of France his Vassal; but it
is clear from the History of that time, that the King of France would not
interpose in that business.

Yet the Popes in this same Council of Lateran, did, by the advice of the
Council, give to Simon Montfort (who was General of the Croissade, that the
Pope sent against that Prince) all the Lands that were taken from the Count of
Toulouse. So that there was an Invasion both of the Count of Toulouse, and of
the King of France his Rights. For if that Prince had done any thing amiss, he
was only accountable to the King, and the other Peers of France.

This Decree of the Council is published by Dom. Luc. Dachery; (Tom. 7. Spic.
and Tom. 11. of the Council, Print. Anno 1672. p. 233.) so that it is plain,
that the Pope got here a Council to set up Rebellion by authority, against the
express Rules of the Gospel. This almost their whole Church accounts a General
Council, a few only among us excepted, who know not how io approve themselves
good Subjects, if they own that a General Council, which does so formally
establish treasonable and seditious Principles. For if it be true, that a
General Council making a definition in an Article of Faith, is to be followed
and submitted to by all men, the same Arguments will prove that in any
controverted practical opinion, we ought not to trust our own Reasons, but
submit to the Definition of the Church; for if in this Question a private
person shall rest on his own understanding of the Scriptures, and reject this
Decree, why may he not as well in other things assume the same freedom? It is
true, the words of the Decree seem only to relate to Temporal Lords that were
under Sovereign Princes, such as the Count of Toulouse; and therefore Crowned
Heads need fear nothing from it: But though the Decree runs chiefly against
such, yet there are two Clauses in it that go further; one is in these words,
Saving always the Right of the Principal Lord, provided he make no obstacle
about it, nor cast in any impediment. Whence it plainly follows, that if the
Sovereign, such as the King of France, in the case of Toulouse, did make any
Obstacle, he forfeited his Right. The other clause is in these words, The same
Law being nevertheless observed about those who have no principal Lords. In
which are clearly included all those Sovereigns, who depend and hold their
Crowns immediately from God.

Now it is apparent, the design of these words so couched, was once to bring
all Sovereigns under that lash, before they were aware of it; for had they
named Emperors and Kings, they might reasonably have expected great opposition
from them; but insinuating it so covertly, it would pass the more easily: Yet
it is plain, nothing else can be meant, or was intended by it; so that it is
clear, that the 4th Council of Lateran, as it established Transubstantiation,
so did also Decree both Persecution and Rebellion: Therefore the Reader may
easily judge, what account is to be made of that Council, and what security any
State can have of those who adhere to it.

Our Savior when he states the opposition between the Children of God, and the
Children of the Devil, he gives this for the Character of the latter, that they
did the works of their Father; and these he mentions are Lying and Murdering:
We have seen sufficient evidence of the murdering Spirit which acted in that
Church, when this Doctrine was set up. But to complete that black Character,
let us look over to the Council of Constance, which decreed that bold violation
of the Command of Christ, Drink ye all of it; by taking the Chalice from the
Laity: And there we find Perfidy, which is the basest and worst kind of Lying,
also established by Law: For it was Decreed by them, (Sess. 19.) That all safe
Conducts notwithstanding, or by what Bonds soever any Prince had engaged
himself, the Council was no way prejudiced, and that the Judge competent might
enquire into their Errors; and proceed otherwise duly against them, and punish
them according to Justice, if they stubbornly refuse to retract their Errors,
although trusting to their safe Conduct, they had come to the place of
Judgment, and had not come without it; and Declare, That whoever had promised
any such thing to them, having done what in him lay, was under no further
Obligation. Upon which, Sigismund broke his Faith to John Hus and Jerome of
Prague, and they were burnt.

So that their Church, having in General Councils Decreed both Perfidy and
Cruelty, it is casie to infer by what Spirit they are acted, and whose Works
they did. If then they did the Works of the Devil, who was a Liar and Murderer
from the beginning, they cannot be looked on as the Children of God, but as the
Children of the Devil.

If this seem too severe, it is nothing but what the force of Truth draws from
me, being the furthest in the world from that uncharitable temper of
aggravating things beyong what is just; but the Truth must be heard, and the
Lamb of God could call the Scribes and Pharisees, a Generation of Vipers and
Children of the Devil. Therefore if a Church be so notoriously guilty of the
most Infamous Violation of all the Laws of Humanity, and the security which a
public faith must needs give, none is to be blamed for laying open and
exposing such a Society to the just censure of all impartial persons, that so
every one may see what a hazard his Soul runs by engaging in the Communion of a
Church that is so foully guilty: for these were not personal failings, but were
the Decrees of an authority which must be acknowledged by them Infallible, if
they be true to their own principles. So that if they receive these as General
Councils, I know not how they can clear all that Communion from being involved
in the guilt of what they Decreed.

Thus far we hope it has been made evident enough, that there are no
impossibilities in such a change of the Doctrine of the Church about this
Sacrament, as they imagine. And that all these are but the effects of wit and
fancy, and vanish into nothing when closely canvassed. I have not dwelt so long
on every step of the History I have vouched, as was necessary, designing to be
as short as was possible, and because these things have been at full length set
down by others, and particularly in that great and learned work of Albertin a
French Minister concerning this Sacrament; In which the Doctrines of the
Primitive Church, and the steps of the change that was made, are so laid open,
that no man has yet so much as attempted the answering him: and those matters
of fact are so uncontestedly true, that there can be little debate about them,
but what may be very soon cleared, and I am ready to make all good to a tittle
when any shall put me to it.

It being apparent then, that the Church of Rome has usurped an undue and
unjust authority over the other States and Nations of Christendom, and has made
use of this Dominion to introduce many great corruptions both in the Faith, the
Worship, and Government of the Church; nothing remains but to say a little to
justify this Churches Reforming these abuses.

And, First, I suppose it will be granted, that a National Church may judge a
Doctrine to be Heretical, when its opposition to the Scripture, Reason, and the
Primitive Doctrine is apparent: for in that case the Bishops and Pastors being
to feed and instruct the Church, they must do it according to their
Consciences, otherwise how can they discharge the Trust, God and the Church
commit to their charge? And thus all the ancient Heretics, such as
Samosatenus, Arrius, Pelagius, and a great many more were first condemned in
Provincial Councils.

Secondly, if such Heresies be spread in places round about, the Bishops of
every Church ought to do what they can to get others concur with them in the
condemning them; but if they cannot prevail, they ought nevertheless to purge
themselves and their own Church, for none can be bound to be damned for
company. The Pastors of every Church owe a Charity to their neighbor Churches,
but a Debt to their own, which the Stubborness of others cannot excuse them
from. And so those Bishops in the Primitive Church, that were environed with
Arrians, did reform their own Churches when they were placed in any Sees that
had been corrupted by Arrianism.

Thirdly, No time can give prescription against truth, and therefore had any
error been ever so anciently received in any Church, yet the Pastors of that
Church finding it contrary to truth ought to reform it: the more ancient or
inveterate any error is, it needs the more to be looked to. So those Nations
that were long bred up in Arrianism, had good reason to reform from that
erronr. So the Church of Rome will acknowledge that the Greek Church, or our
Church ought to forsake their present Doctrines, though they have been long
received.

Fourthly, No later Definitions of Councils or Fathers ought to derogate from
the ancienter Decrees of Councils, or opinions of the Fathers; otherwise the
Arrians had reason to have justified their submitting to the Councils of
Sirmium, Arimini, and Millan, and rejecting that of Nice: therefore we ought in
the first place to consider the Decrees and Opinions of the most Primitive
Antiquity.

Fifthly, No succession of Bishops how clear soever in its descent from the
Apostles, can secure a Church from error. Which the Church of Rome must
acknowledge, since they can neither deny the succession of the Greek Church,
nor of the Church of England.

Sixthly, If any Church continues so hardened in their errors that they break
Communion with another Church for reforming; the guilt of this breach must lie
at their door who are both in the Error, and first reject the other, and
refuse to reform or communicate with other Churches.

Upon every one of these particulars (and they all set together, complete the
Plea for the Church of England) I am willing to join Issue, and show they are
not only true in themselves, but must be also acknowledged by the Principles of
the Church of Rome: So that if the grounds of Controversy, on which our
Reformation did proceed, were good and justifiable, it is most unreasonable to
say our Church had not good right and authority to make it.

It can be made appear that for above two hundred years before the Reformation,
there were general complaints among all sorts of persons, both the subtle
Schoolmen, and devout Contemplatives, both Ecclesiastics and Laics did
complain of the corruptions of the Church, and called aloud for a Reformation
both of Faith and Manners: even the Council of Pisa a little before Luther's
days, did Decree, There should be a Reformation both of Faith and Manners, and
that both of the Head and Members. But all these complaints turned to nothing,
abuses grew daily, the interests of the Nephews and other corrupt intrigues of
the Court of Rome was always obstructing good motions and cherishing ill
Customs, for they brought the more Grist to their Mill. When a Reformation was
first called for in Germany, instead of complying with so just a desire, all
that the Court of Rome thought on, was how to suppress these complaints, and
destroy those who made them.

In end, when great Commotions were like to follow, by the vast multitudes of
those who concurred in this desire of Reforming, a Council was called, after
the Popes had frequently prejudged in the matter, and Pope Leo had with great
frankness condemned most of Luther's opinions. From that Council no good could
reasonably be expected, for the Popes had already engaged so deep in the
Quarrel, that there was no retreating, and they ordered the matter so, that
nothing could be done but what they had a mind to: all the Bishops were at
their Consecration their sworn vassals: nothing could be brought into the
Council without the Legates had proposed it. And when any good motions were
made by the Bishops of Spain or Germany, they had so many poor Italian Bishops
kept there on the Pope's charges, that they were always masters of the vote:
for before they would hold a Session about any thing, they had so canvassed it
in the Congregations, that nothing was so much as put to the hazard. All these
things appear even from Cardinal Pallavicini's History of that Council.

While this Council was sitting, and some years before, many of this Church
were convinced of these corruptions, and that they could not with a good
Conscience join any longer in a worship so corrupted; yet they were satisfied
to know the truth themselves and to instruct others privately in it, but formed
no separated Church; waiting for what issue God in his Providence might bring
about. But with what violence and cruelty their enemies, who were generally
those of the Clergy, pursued them, is well enough known: Nor shall I repeat any
thing of it, lest it might be thought an invidious aggravating of things that
are past. But at length, by the death of King Henry the eight, the Government
fell in the hands of persons well affected to the Reformation. It is not
material what their true motives were, for Iehu did a good work when he
destroyed the Idolatry of Baal, though neither his motives nor method of doing
it are justifiable: nor is it to the purpose to examine, how those Bishops that
reformed could have complied before with the corruptions of the Roman Church
and received orders from them. Meletius, and Felix, were placed by the Arrians,
the one at Antioch in the room of Eustatbius, the other at Rome, in Liberius
his room, who were both banished for the Faith: and yet both these were
afterward great Defenders of the truth; and Felix was a Martyr for it, against
these very Heretics with whom they complied in the beginning. So whatever
mixture of carnal ends might be in any of the Secular men, or what allay of
humane infirmity and fear might have been in any of the Ecclesiastics; that
can be no prejudice to the cause: for men are always men, and the power of God
does often appear most eminently, when there is least cause to admire the
instruments he makes use of.

But in that juncture of affairs the Bishops and Clergy of this Church seeing
great and manifest corruptions in it, and it being apparent that the Church of
Rome would consent to no reformation to any good purpose, were obliged to
reform, and having the Authority of King and Parliament concurring, they had
betrayed their Consciences and the charge of Souls for which they stood
engaged, and were to answer at the great day, if they had dallied longer, and
not warned the people of their danger, and made use of the inclinations of the
Civil Powers for carrying on so good at work. And it is the lasting glory of
the Reformation, that when they saw the Heir of the Crown was inflexibly united
to the Church of Rome, they proceeded not to extreme courses against her; for
what a few wrought on by the ambition of the Duke of Northumberland were got to
do, was neither the deed of the Nation, nor of the Church, since the
Representatives of neither concurred in it. But the Nation did receive the
righteous Heir: and then was our Church crowned with the highest glory it could
have desired, many of the Bishops who had been most active in the Reformation,
sealing it with their Blood, and in death giving such evident proofs of holy
and Christian constancy, that they may be justly matched with the most Glorious
Martyrs of the Primitive Church. Then did both these Churches appear in their
true colors, That of Rome weltring in the Blood of the Saints and insatiately
drinking it up: and our Church bearing the Cross of Christ and following his
example. But when we were for some years thus tried in the fire, then did God
again bless us with the protection of the rightful and lawful Magistrate. Then
did our Church do as the Primitive Church had done under Theodosius, when she
got out from a long and cruel persecution of the Arrians under those enraged
Emperors Constantius and Valens. They reformed the Church from the Arrian
Doctrine, but would not imitate them in their persecuting spirit. And when
others had too deep resentments of the ill usage they had met with under the
Arrian Tyranny, Nazianzen and the other holy Bishops of that time did mitigate
their Animosities: So that the Churches were only taken from the Arrians, but
no storms were raised against them.

So in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, it cannot be denied that those
of that Church were long suffered to live at quiet among us with little or no
disturbance, save that the Churches were taken out of their hands. Nor were
even those who had bathed themselves in so much blood made examples, so
entirely did they retain the meekness and lenity of the Christian spirit. And
if after many years quiet, those of that Religion when they met with no trouble
from the government, did notwithstanding enter into so many plots and
conspiracies against the Queen's person and the established government, was it
any wonder that severe Laws were made against them, and those Emissaries who
under a pretense of coming in a mission, were sent as spies and agents among us
to fill all with blood and confusion? Whom had they blame for all this but
themselves? or was this any thing but what would have been certainly done in
the gentlest and mildest government upon earth? For the Law of
self-preservation is engraven on all men's natures, and so no wonder every State
and Government sees to its own security against those who seek its ruin and
destruction: and it had been no wonder if upon such provocations there had been
some severities used which in themselves were uniustifiable: for few take
reparation in an exact equality to the damage and injury they have received.
But since that time they have had very little cause to complain of any hard
treatment; and if they have met with any, they may still thank the officious
insolent deportment of some of their own Church, that have given just cause of
jealousy and fear.

But I shall pursue this discourse no further, hoping enough is already said
upon the head that engaged me to it, to make it appear, that it was possible
the Doctrine of the Church should be changed in this matter, and that it was
truly changed. From which I may be well allowed to subsume, that our Church
discovering that this change was made, had very good reason and a sufficient
authority to reform this corruption, and restore the Primitive Doctrine again.

And now being to leave my Reader, I shall only desire him to consider a little
of how great importance his eternal concerns are, and that he has no reason to
look for endless happiness, if he does not serve God in a way suitable to his
will. For what hopes soever there may be for one who lives and dies in some
unknown error, yet there are no hopes for those that either neglect or despise
the truth, and that out of humor or any other carnal account give themselves
up to errors, and willingly embrace them,

Certainly God sent not his Son in the world, nor gave him to so cruel a death,
for nothing. If he has revealed his Counsels with so much solemnity, his
designs in that must be great and worthy of God: The true ends of Religion must
be the purifying our Souls, the conforming us to the Divine Nature, the uniting
us to one another in the most tender bonds of Love, Truth, Justice and
Goodness, the raising our minds to a heavenly and contemplative temper, and our
living ^s Pilgrims and Strangers on this Earth, ever waiting and longing for
our change. Now we dare appeal all men to show any thing in our Religion or
Worship, that obstructs any of these ends; on the contrary, the sum and total
of our Doctrine is, the conforming our selves to Christ and his Apostles, both
in faith and life, So that it can scarce be devised what should make any body
that has any sense of Religion, or regard to his Soul, forsake our Communion,
where he finds nothing that is not highly suitable to the Nature and Ends of
Religion, and turn over to a Church that is founded on and cemented in carnal
Interests: the grand design of all their attempts being to subject all to the
Papal tyranny, which must needs appear visibly to every one whose eyes are
opened. For attaining which end they have set up such a vast company of
additions to the simplicity of the Faith and the purity of the Christian
Worship, that it is a great work even to know them.

Is it not then a strange choice? to leave a Church that worships God so as all
understand what they do and can say, Amen; to go to a Church where the worship
is not understood, so that he who officiates is a Barbarian to them: A Church
which worships God in a spiritual and unexceptionable manner; to go to a Church
that is scandalously (to raise this charge no higher) full of Images and
Pictures, and that of the blessed Trinity, before which prostrations and
adorations are daily made.: A Church that directs her devotions to God, and his
Son Jesus Christ; to go to a Church that without any good warrant not only
invocates Saints and Angels, but also in the very same form of words, which
they offer up to God and Jesus Christ, which is a thing at least full of
scandal, since these words must be strangely wrested from their natural
meaning, otherwise they are high blasphemies: A Church that commemorates
Christ's death in the Sacrament, and truly communicates in his Body and Blood,
with all holy reverence and due preparation; to go to a Church that spends all
her devotion in an outward adoring the Sacrament, without communicating with
any due care, but resting in the Priestly absolution allows it upon a single
attrition: A Church that administers all the Sacraments Christ appointed, and
as he appointed them; to go to a Church that has added many to those he
appointed, and has maimed that he gave for a pledge of his presence when he
left this earth. In a word, that leaves a Church that submits to all that
Christ and his Apostles taught, and in a secondary order to all delivered to us
by the Primitive Church; to go to a Church that has set up an Authority that
pretends to be equal to these sacred oracles, and has manifestly cancelled most
of the Primitive Constitutions.

But it is not enough to remain in the Communion of our Church; for if we do
not walk conform to that holy Faith taught in it, we disgrace it. Let all
therefore: that have zeal for our Church, express it chiefly in studying to
purify their hearts and lives, so as becomes Christians, and reformed
Christians, and then others that behold us, will be ashamed when they see such
real confutations of the calumnies of out adversaries, which would soon be
turned back on them with a just scorn, if there were not too many advantages
given by our divisions, and other. But nothing that is personal ought to be
charged on our Church: and whoever object any such things, of all persons in
the world, they are the most inexcusable, who being so highly guilty
themselves, have yet such undaunted brows, as to charge those things on us
which if they be practiced by any among us, yet are disallowed; but among them
have had all encouragement and Authority possible from the corruptions both of
their Popes, and Casuists. But here I break off, praying God he may at length
open the eyes of all Christendom that they may see and love the truth, and walk
according to it.

Amen.
FINIS.

