A VINDICATION OF THE ORDINATIONS OF THE Church of ENGLAND.

IN WHICH It is Demonstrated that all the Essentials of Ordination, according
to the Practice of the Primitive and Greek Churches, are still retained in Our
Church.

IN ANSWER To a Paper written by one of the Church of Rome to prove the Nullity
of our Orders; And given to a Person of Quality.

By GILBERT BURNET.

LONDON: Printed by E. H. and T. H. for R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

IMPRIMATUR
Hic Liber, cui Titulus (A Vindication of the Ordinations, etc.)

Guil. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

THE PREFACE.
THE Agents of the Church of Rome studying to accommodate their Religion to
every Man's taste and inclinations, use their endeavors with all persons, in
those things wherein they think they may most likely succeed. If they find some
that love to live at their ease, and to reconcile their hopes of pardon, and
Heaven with a lewd life, then they offer to secure them by slight Confessions,
easy Penances, cheap Pardons, and Indulgences, and the communication of the
merits of other persons: If they fall on others of a sowrer composition, the
severities of some Religious Orders and unmerciful Penances are laid before
them: If they meet with those that can easily believe every thing that is told
them with much assurance, then many Miracles and other wonderful Stories are
mustered up: If others seem not so tractable and credulous, then they study to
show them there is no certainty at all about Religion; if all their Traditions
be not believed: And so they can but shake them from our Church, they car^ not
whither such doubts may drive them, were it headlong to Atheism: If they fin^
others that are fanciful and Enthusi^stical in their Religion, then they tell
the^ of Visions, Raptures, and Ecstasies, with out number: Or if they fall on
other that love the order and gravity of the Church, then they think the Game
is eas^ and sure, they tell them of the Antiqu^ty, Universality, and continued
Succe^sion of their Church, and of the novelt^ the narrowness and want of
Succession i^ ours. And though the fallaciousness these Objections have been so
often laid pen, that by this time it might have be^ reasonably expected, men of
ingenuity a^ probity should have been ashamed of continuing them; yet these
Gentlemen (...) proof against all discoveries.

The Reader will easily discern h^ guilty the Writer of the following Paper
(...) of going in the beaten tract of asserti^ things confidently, which, if he
be a man of learning, he must needs know they have no strength in them: And if
he be not acquainted with Ecclesiastical Learning, (which in Charity to him I
am bound to believe) it is very presumptuously done of him to give out Papers
of this Importance, in a point that no man ought to engage in but he that has
studied Antiquity to some competent degree. For to charge any person, much more
a whole Church, with the basest Sacriledg and Forgery, unless one be well
assured in his conscience that he is able to make it good, is such a piece of
uncharitableness and high presumption, that I know no excuse it can admit of:
And if our Church be bringing Souls to Christ in the method proposed in the
Gospel, how much has the Writer of this Paper, or any other that manages these
Arguments to answer for, that study to raise such scruples as tend to cross and
defeat so good a design?

But this Paper, weak as it is, was thought fit to be copied out, and given
about, and was brought to a person of Quality, that had been educated under a
deep sense of the reverence due to the Church and Churchmen; So that they hoped
if such a one could be once induced to believe that we had no Orders, nor
Churchmen duly called, among us, it had been easy to have prevailed further.
But that Person being sincerely pious and devout, and not easily shaken with
every story that was made, and being desirous to be fully satisfied in this
matter, conveyed the Paper into my hands, and I was put upon the answering it.

I quickly saw that the Arguments were so weak and trifling, that they were
very easily answered; Yet since I was to engage in such a subject, I resolved
to do it with as much care and industry as the importance of the Matters
required: And finding that, for all that had been written on this Controversy,
there remained a great deal to be said, I have so fully considered it, as I
hope no scruple will remain with discerning persons, and for the endless
doubtings of weaker minds, and the restless endeavors of busy Emissaries,
nothing can satisfy or silence those.

It may seem too great a presumption in one that is a stranger in this Church
to engage in a Question that so much concerns it. But though I had not my
Orders in this Church, yet I derive them from it, being Ordained by a Bishop
that had his Ordination in this Church; so that I am equally concerned in the
issue of the Question: And I am confident no body shall have cause to imagine
that I engage in it with design to betray or give it up.

Among the many unjust and spiteful Calumnies, with which the Clergy of the
Roman Communion, study to asperse and disgrace the Reformation, there are none
more frequently made use of, than these, That there are no Pastors Lawfully
called or Ordained among us, That we have not the Power of making God present
on our Altars, as they have, nor the power of Absolving from sins, much less of
Redeeming Souls from the miseries they are under in another state. They tell
their Credulous followers, that we were all at first no better than a Company
of Tub-Preachers, and that all the disorders we saw of that sort during the
late Wars, were as justifiable as the first beginnings of the Reformation. And
tho the ridiculous Fable of the Nags-head, be so manifest a Forgery, supported
by no good Evidence and overthrown by the Authority of so many public Records,
besides many other clear presumptions from the state of things, and the time in
which that was said to be done, that one might very reasonably expect that all
sober or discreet persons should be ashamed of so foul an Imposture; yet it
serves them still for many a good turn, and so they will never lay it down: tho
I dare boldly say there is no matter of Fact of which there are no surviving
witnesses, that can be Demonstrated with clearer Evidences than the Regularity
and Canonicalness of the Ordination of Arch Bishop Parker. Others, that are not
so lost in impudence, yet say that tho we have a shadow of a Succession among
us, yet we show how little regard we have to Orders, when we acknowledge the
Protestant Churches beyond the Seas to be true Churches, tho many of them do
not so much as pretend to a continued succession of Pastors.

For the foreign Churches, they are able to speak for themselves; nor is it
needful for me here to show what grounds there are for our Churches holding
Communion with them. But it must be acknowledged to be a high pitch of boldness
and injustice to charge us, as if we did not ascribe all due honor to holy
Orders and the Succession of Pastors. We know and assert, That no man can take
this honor (of Priesthood) to himself, but See the 23. Art. of our Church.
he that is called of God as was Aaron: so also Christ glorified not himself to
be made an high Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. We reject the extravagant and bold pretenses of
hotheaded or factious Enthusiasts, and have learned out of the Gospel, that a
public calling was necessary, even to those who had the most extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost. Our Savionr sent his Disciples as his Father had sent
Him; and laid his hands on them and gave them the Power of binding and loosing.
And tho God had by his Spirit called Saul and Barnabas, to the Apostleship of
the Gentiles, yet they did not enter upon the discharge of that Function, till
by the direction of the Holy Ghost, (whether by a voice formed in the Air, or
by a secret Inspiration, it matters not,) they were separated, for the work of
the Ministry by Prayer and Imposition of hands. And tho Timothy was by some
Prophesies marked out as a Sacred Person, yet he was received into that
Function by the Imposition of S. Paul's hands. From these sacred Authorities,
backed with the constant Doctrine and practice of the Churches of God, in all
Ages, we do hold a visible Vocation and Ordination of Pastors necessary in the
Church.

But whether the Roman Pontifical, or our Ordinal comes nearer the Rules and
Instances in Scripture, and the forms of the Primitive times, for at least
Eight hundred years, any that will compare them, will easily discern, and it is
the chief subject of the following Work, fully to evince the advantage of our
forms beyond theirs.

It is true, we do not extol the Office of Priesthood to that height as to say,
the Priest can by a few words work the greatest miracle that ever was, and can
make God present, (as they love to Phrase it) this we think is the honoring
the Creature more than the Creator. Nor do we exalt the Priest above Gods
Vicegerent on Earth our Lawful Sovereign, whom (according to the Doctrine of
the Primitive Church, even when Persecuted by their Emperors,) we honor as
next to God and one who is inferior to God only. And therefore we reject the
Seditious comparing of the Dignity of the Priestly Office, with the Kingly,
which has not satisfied the Ambition of the Romish Clergy since Hildebrands
days, but the one must be preferred to the other. Nor do we pretend that our
Character gives us an Immunity to commit Crimes, and an Exemption from the
Civil Courts, when they are Committed. This were to make the Altar a Sanctuary
for the most Criminal, and the house of Prayer a Den of Thieves and Robbers.

It is true Christian Princes granted these Immunities at first that Churchmen
might not be disturbed in their Callings, nor vexed with troublesome sute^. But
afterward that would not suffice, but the Doctrine of Ecclestastical
Jurisdiction and Immunity, was set up, as a thing most sacred: and no wonder
was it that men durst not presume to lay hands on him, who could bring down not
only Legions of Angels, but God himself with a word. And in the beginning of
this Century, Italy had almost been imbroiled in a War of the Popes making; for
which he pretended this for one cause, that the State of Venice had apprehended
two notoriously Hist. Interdict. Venet.
l^ud and flagitious Priests, and were proceeding against them according to
Law. But he saw other Princes were not very ready to second him, and yet he did
not lay down the quarrel till the Frocess of the Priests was discharged, and
they were set at liberty. Such Exemptions are very profitable for a corrupt
Clergy, but if any such be among us, we claim no such Protection, being willing
to leave them to the Law.

We know as little ground for thinking the Priest, by his saying Mass can bring
Souls out of Purgatory, the Scriptures have made no discoveries either of
Purgatory, or the ways to escape from it, or get out of it: The Primitive
Church continued still as Ignorant as the Holy Penmen had been; but in the
darkest Ages, (the night being a fit time for Dreams,) this other world was
discovered, which has brought greater returns of Power and Riches to that
Prince, under whose Protection the discovery was made, than the world Columbus
discovered, has sent to the Crown of Castile. And tho the trade is not of that
advantage that it was, yet in gratitude for past services it must never be
neglected, or as when the vein of a Mine fails, they dig on through the hardest
Rocks till they find it again, for the works must still go on. But we, poor
souls, have nothing to do with that gainful Traffic, and therefore the Glory
of the discovery and the Monapoly of the Trade, we freely resign up to them,
and acknowledge the profits of new Inventions, by the Rules of all Government,
are only due to the Inventors; so that they have no reason to quarrel with us
for leaving this entirely to them.

For the power of binding and loosing, we do assert that as our Savior vested
his Disciples with it, so it is still in the Church: but if the vigor and
exercise of it be much weakened, we have none to blame for it but the Church of
Rome: who have now in a course of many ages, laid down all open and public
penance. So that the world being once delivered from that which to licentious
men seemed a heavy Bondage, it is not to be wondered at, if the Primitive
strictness could not be easily retrieved. It Is true, this is a defect in our
Church, it is confessed by her in the Office of Commination, and she wishes it
may be restored; but the decay and disuse of it begun in the Church of Rome;
and every body knows that what is severe and uneasy to Flesh and Blood, is not
soon submitted to, when the practice of it is for any considerable time
intermitted.

But the Clergy of that Communion, thought they had made a good bargain, when
the necessity of Auricular Confessors, and private Absolution was received: to
which the Laity did more easily submit, that they might be freed from the shame
of open penance: and they knew how to deal with their Priests, when the penance
was secret, none knew either the heinousness of their sins, or the nature of
the penance: so it was more safe for the Priest to enjoin what he listed, and
give Absolution on what terms he pleased. And then because it was painful to
have the Absolution delayed, till the penance was fulfilled, which was the rule
of the Primitive Church, Absolution Lib. de Fregn. Comun.
was granted immediately upon Con^ession, without more ado: as Arnaud has fully
discovered to the world.

Certainly every body that considers these things must discern what merchandise
the Roman Clergy have made of the power of the Keys, to make themselves Masters
of all men's secrets, and of their Consciences, then was the necessity of secret
Confession set up; tho there be nothing in Scripture that favors it: any
places that look that way, being only meant of Confessing our Faults to those
against whom they are Committed, or of a public Confession in the Cases of
public Offenses. Nor can it be pretended with any Color of truth or reason,
that the Primitive Church did set up or Authorize Confession, in any other way
than as our Church does, recommending it only as an excellent mean, toward the
quieting the Conscience and the avoiding of all Scruple and Doubtfulness.

Penitence is also a mean for humbling the sinner more, for possessing him with
deeper apprehensions of the guilt and evil of sin, and of the Justice of God,
and for engaging him to more diligence and watchfulness for the future, and by
these Rules all the Primitive Discipline was contrived and managed; that it
might be a wholesome Medicine for the reforming the World: and every honest
Priest ought to consider these as the end he must drive at in all his dealings
with Penitents, and for this end the Absolution is to be withheld till it
appears that the person is truly penitent: and that both for the Priests sake
that he may not give the Comforts of the Gospel, nor make use of his
Ministerial power of loosing sins without good grounds: and also for the
sinners sake that he may be kept under the fear of the wrath of God; and be
excluded from the comfortable Privileges of the Christian Church, till he had
given some convincing proofs, that he is a penitent indeed. For if he be freed
from these fears by a hasty absolution, it is very like he will be slight in
his Repentance. There must be also some proportion between the penance and the
sin committed; such as fasting for sins of Intemperance, bodily severities for
Inordinate pleasures, Almsgiving for sins of Covetousness, great and frequent
Devotions for sins of Omission, that so the penance may prove Medicinal indeed,
for purging out the ill humors, and recovering the sinner, and to make the sin
more Odious to him. Therefore such slight penances as saying the Penitential
Psalms, and abstaining from some meats, with other trifling things of that
Nature, are a betraying the power of the Keys, which was given for Edification
and not for Destruction, and tend to an exposing of Religion and the Priestly
Function to Contempt.

These practices are common, and avowed in that Church, and by these and such
like have the Jesuits got all the world to make their Confessions to them: of
which such discoveries have been made by the Writers of the Port Royal, that we
need say nothing but only look on with Astonishment, and see the Impudent
partiality of the Court of Rome, and how obstinately they are resolved to
reform nothing, For tho the practice of the whole Church in all the Councils
that were held for many ages, be clearly of the side of the Iansenists, yet
they must be condemned, their Books censured, and the practices of the Jesuits
encouraged and supported.

After all this of what Undanted Consciences must they be, who charge our
Church as opening a Sanctuary for Vice and Impurity: because we retain not the
necessity of secret Confession, and Absolution. Which (whatever they may prove
if well managed,) are according the practices of that Church, and the
Casuistical Divinity that is in greatest Credit there, and by which their
Priests are directed, Engines for beating down all Religion and common Honesty.

But our Church owns still the power of Art. 33.
the Keys, which is not only Doctrinal, when the Mercies of God are declared,
or his Judgments denounced; but is also Authoritative and Ministerial, by which
all Christians are either admitted to, or rejected from the Privileges of
Church Communion, and their sins are bound or loosed. With this we assert the
Pastors of the Church are Vested.

For the Rites of our Ordinations, we still retain those which are mentioned in
the Scriptures, which are Imposition of Hands and Prayer. As for the forms of
Prayer, the Catholic Church never agreed on any, nor decreed what were to be
used. Every Church had their own forms. And though the Church of Rome did
unmercifully enough impose diverse things on the Greek Churches, and because
they would not yield to her Tyranny, she left them to be a Prey to the Turk,
and did not interpose her Authority with the Princes of the West, over whom she
was then Absolute, to arm them for the assistance and defense of the Greeks;
yet amidst all this desire of Rule, they were never so unreasonable as to
impose their Liturgies, Rituals, or Missals on them, but in these they left
them to their own Forms, and so continue to do to this day. Anciently they had
no more Jurisdiction over the British Churches than over the Greek Churches. So
that by the division of Provinces confirmed by General Councils, and by a
particular decree of the Act. 7.
Council of Ephesus, no new Authority over any other Churches was to be assumed
by any See, but all were to be determined by the former practices and customs
of the Church. It is certain that before that time the Bishops of Rome had no
Patriarchal Jurisdiction in Britain; so that if the Decrees of General Councils
will bind them, they ought not to claim any Authority over us.

But if the Popes build new Pretentions on Austin the Monk's being sent hither
by Pope Gregory the Great. We are ready to refer this matter to his decision,
and will stand to his award, for he being consulted by Austin about some
particulars, one of these was.

Since there is one Faith, how comes it 3. Inter.
that the Customs of the Churches are so different, and that one form of
Missals is in the Roman Church, and another is in the Churches of the Gauls or
of France.

From this Question it appears that even France, which was undoubtedly within
the Patriarchat of Rome, had Forms different from those used in Rome: But let
us now hear what Answer is given by Pope Gregory, which may be reasonably
believed ex Cathedra, and so of great Authority, with all who acknowledge the
Infallibility of that See.

You know the custom of the Church Epist. 31. l. 12. Ind. 7.
of Rome in which you were educated, but my opinion is, that whatever you find
either in the Holy Roman, the Gallican, or any other Church that may be more
pleasing to Almighty God, you shall diligently choose out that: and infuse in
the English Church, which is yet but young in the Faith by careful Instruction,
what you can gather from many Churches; for we ought not to love things for the
sake of a place, but places for the sake of good things; therefore choose from
all Churches the things that are Pious, Religious and Right, and gather all
these in one bundle and leave them with the English, that they may become
familiar to them.

It will be hard for the Agents of that Church to find out a Reason why Austin
Bishop of Canterbury might make such changes in the Liturgies by gathering out
of the several Rituals that were then in the World what he thouhgt fit, and yet
to deny the same power to Archbishop Cranmer and the Bishops in King Edward's
days, why might not they as well as Austin the Monk, compare the Rituals of the
Church of Rome with other more ancient Forms, and gather together what they
found most Pious, Religious, and Right, not loving things for the sake of a
place (whether Rome or Sarum) but loving places rather for the sake of good
things.

So that in this we have on our side the decision of a Pope who was both more
learned and more pious than any of all his Successors; but this is not the only
particular in which they will decline to be tried by his Judgment.

And in the changes that were made, i^ is very clear that our Reformers did no^
design to throw out every thing that was in the Roman Rituals right or wrong;
but made all the good use that was possible o^ the Forms that were then
received in the Western Church; and in this our Church followed our Saviors
method, who thoug^ he had the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him, and was
to Antiquate the Jewis^ Religion, and to substitute his more Divine Precepts to
those of Moses; Yet he did accommodate his Institutions as near a^ could be, to
the Customs of the Jews, not only in lesser matters, but even in those two
great Sacraments by which his Church is knit together (as has been fully made
out by many learned Writers.) If then the customs of a Religion that was ready
to perish, were made use of, and by new and more sacred Benedictions were
consecrated to higher ends; Our Church showed her Prudence and Moderation, in
not destroying Root and Branch, but reserving such things as were good, and by
being cleansed from some Excrescencies might prove still of excellent use. This
though it has given some color to many peevish complaints, yet is that in
which we have cause still to glory.

This care and caution does eminently appear in our Ordinal, the Ceremonies
which were invented by the latter Ages we laid aside, the more Ancient and
Apostolical are retained. And for the formal words used in the Imposition of
Hands, though the saying Receive the Holy Ghost was a latter addition without
any Ancient Authority; yet because this comes nearer the practice of our
Savior, it was retained as the form of giving Orders. For since it is consest
on all hands that the Form of Orders is in the power of the Church, we had good
reason to prefer that which our Blessed Savior made use of to any other, and
it had been a sullen and childish peevishness to have changed this, because it
was used in the Church of Rome. So that I cannot imagine what should move them
to show so much dislike to our Forms, except it be the old Quarrel of hating
them, because they are better and their own are worse; and so because their
deeds are evil they envy and revile us.

In this whole matter we are willing to be tried both by the Scriptures and the
first eight Ages, even of the Roman Church, by the Greek Church to this day,
and by the Doctrine that is most commonly received even in their own Church.

There is but one Objection that may seem to have any force in it, which can be
made from the practices of the Primitive Church against the Ordinations in this
Church, which is, that we have not the inferior degrees of Subdeacons,
Acolyths, Exorcists, Readers and Porters in our Church; and indeed if the Popes
Infallibility be well proved, this will be of force sufficient to invalidate
our Orders. The case of Photius Patriarch of Contantinople, is well known, whom
Pope Nicolaus denied to be lawfully Ordained, because he was suddenly raised up
from being a Layman to be made a Patriarch, and though he passed through the
Ecclesiastical Degrees, yet that was not thought sufficient by that Pope, who
certainly would have been more severe to us who have none of these Degrees
among us.

But these Orders cannot be looked on as either of Divine or Apostolical
Institution, the Scripture mentions them not, St. Clemens, St. Ignatius, and
St. Polycarp, say nothing of them, Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus, are as silent
about them; so that, till the third Century we find no footsteps of them, the
first mention that is made of them is in the Canons and Constitutions called
Apostolical (of whose Antiquity I shall now say nothing) Can. 42.
In the Canons mention is often made of the rest of the Clergy, as distinct from
Bishops, Lib. 8. cap. 21. and 23.
Priests and Deacons, and particularly they mention Readers, Subdeacons, and
Singers. In the Constitutions there are Rules given about the Ordination of
Subdeacons and Readers. And though there is mention made of Exorcists, yet it
Cap. 26.
is plainly said there, that they were not Ordained, but were believed to have
that power over Spirits by a free gift of God, and that they were then Ordained
when Inter Epi. Cypr. Ep. 75.
they were made Bishops and Priests. Firmilian who lived in the midst of the
third Century, speaks of Exorcists, but it does not appear from his words, if
they were a distinct or an inferior Order of Churchmen, and they may be well
enough understood of such as had an extraordinary power over Spirits. Yet in
the beginning of the fourth Century we find in the Greek Can. 64.
Church more inferior Orders for the Council of Laodicea reckons up Servants
(who it is like were Acolyths) Readers, Singers, Exorcists, Porters, and (...),
who were it seems, Monks, or some persons that were employed in servile works,
such as the diggers of Craves. And by the Council of Antioch the Chorepiscopi
Can. 10.
might Ordain Subdeacons, Readers, and Exorcists* And if the Epistle to the
Church of Antioch, said to be written by Ignatius, was forged in the same
Century, by it it appears that there were then in the Greek Church, Subdeacons,
Readers, Singers, Porters, and Exorcists, for all these are saluted in that
Epistle, from which it appears that all these Orders were then in the Church of
Antioch.

But there is no small difficulty about these Orders in the Greek Churches, for
in all their Rituals we find no inferior Orders but Subdeacons, and Readers, to
whom in some Churches they have added Singers; upon which it is that Morinus
confidently pronounces there were never any other inferior Orders in the Greek
Church, but these two; but it does not appear that he had considered well those
Canons of Laodicea and Antioch which mention other Orders. Abraham
Ecchellensis, Not. 18. in Can. Nic. Arab.
according to his usual way of flattering the Court of Rome in all his
Writings, is not a little puzzelled with this, he confesses that in the Greek
Church they have no other inferior Orders but Subdeacons and Readers, but says,
some thought those other lower degrees were included in the Order of Readers,
but he thinks they were included in the Subdeacons Orders, and strains all the
wit he had to give some colors for this conceit of his. In sum it is clear,
Exorcists were an inferior Office in the Greek Church once, and afterward it
was laid aside. It were an impertinent digression here to give an account of
their Office: but in a word they were Catechists, who prepared the Catechumens
for Baptism; and by the Catechisms in the Sea Nazianz. Orat. in Bapt. Cyr.
Pref. ad Catech. Balsam. in Schol. in Con. Laod. and Ant. Harmen in Con.
Antioch.
Church, all that came from Heathenism to be Christians were often adjured to
renounce the Devil and all Heathenish Idolatry. Which Adjurations were called
Exorcisms, and from these the Catechists were called Exorcists: of which he
that desires further satisfaction may be directed to it by what he will find in
the Margin. But when, or upon what occasion this Office fell in disuse in the
Greek Church, does not appear. I shall only suggest that it is reasonable to
conclude that upon the general suppression of Heathenism in the Greek Empire,
when there were no more Catechumens, there being no further use of Exorcists
the Function was no longer continued. It appears likewise from the Name
Acolyth, that it was begun in the Greek Church, from whence it is probable, the
Latin Church had that Order.

In the Latin Church St. Cyprian is the first that speaks of these Inferior
Orders, and we find them frequently mentioned in his Epistles, he speaks of Ep.
24. and 21.
Subdeacons, Ep. 28.
Acolyths, Ep. 24. 33. and 34.
Readers, and Ep. 76.
Exorcists, and contemporary with him was Cornelius, who Apud. Eus. lib. 6.
cap. 43.
giving an account of the Clergy of Rome, says there were forty six Priests,
seven Deacons, forty two Acolyths, fifty Exorcists, Readers, and Porters. So it
seems, there were no Subdeacons then in Rome, nor does St. Cyprian mention the
Porters. So that in that Century all these these Orders were not looked on as
necessary in the Western Church, much less was Great. did. 77. cap. 1. and 2.
there a certain number of years determined for every one of them, as was
afterward done by the Popes, who appointed that before any might be made a
Priest, he should be five years a Reader and Exorcist, and fourteen years an
Acolyth and Subdeacon. In the fourth Council of Carthage we have the full
Catalogue of the sacred Functions (as they are called in Can. 14. and 62.
the Apostolical Canons) with the rules and forms of Ordaining them, and there
Can. 5.
Subdeacons, Can. 6.
Acolyths, Can. 7.
Exorcists, Can. 8.
Readers, Can. 9.
Porters, and Can. 10.
Singers, are set down.

But besides these we find another Order of Fossarii, or the diggers of Graves,
mentioned by St. Jerome, who calls them the first Order of the Clergy; they are
also mentioned in that supposititious Letter of St. Ignatius to the Church of
Antioch, and are spoken of by Epiphamus, by which it appears they were reckoned
among the Clergy both in the Greek and Latin Churches. But there is no mention
of them in any latter Writers. We find mention of Vit. Pontif. in vita
Silvestri.
another office in an Author, to whom indeed little credit is due, who are
called the Keepers of the Martyrs, who had the keeping of the Vault or
Burying-place, where the Martyrs bodies were laid up in those Churches that
were built to their honor, but we meet with these no where else. And though the
Order of Singers continued for several Ages in the Western Church, and is
mentioned by most of the Writers on the Roman Rituals in Hittorpius his
Collection, and also in the Ordo Romanus, yet is now left out in the Roman
Pontifical.

From all which it appears, that there was no settled Order agreed on or
received in the Catholic Church about these Inferior Degrees; some of them
that were received in some Churches were not in other Churches, and what was
generally received in one Age was laid aside in another, and therefore there is
no Obligation lying on us to continue those still.

But as the number of these Orders was different, so the ways of Ordaining were
not the same. In the Eastern Church they were (and are to this day) conferred
by Imposition of Hands, which was perhaps taken from the custom of the Jews
among whom all Offices were given with that Rite. But in the Western Church
they were conferred by the delivery of a Book, Vessel, or Instrument that
related to their Function, which perhaps was taken from the Roman custom of
granting Offices by the Tradition of somewhat that belonged to it, as Trajan
made the Prefects by giving them a Sword.

The occasion of setting up all these Inferior Offices was certainly very just
and good, that there might be taken in them a long and full probation of all
such as were to be admitted to the Offices that were of Divine Institution, and
so none might be admitted to any of them before there had been a full trial and
discovery made of their merit and good behavior, and were indeed like degrees
in Universities. But after that Constantine granted such Immunities and
Exemptions to Churchmen, then it is probable that many who desired to share in
these, and yet had no mind to be Initiated in the Offices of Divine
Appointment, came and entered in these lower degrees: to regulate which,
Justinian made a Law that none who had been Soldiers or had any Offices about
their Courts ( Curiales and Nove. 123. cap. 15. Great. Did. 53.
obstricti curiae) might be Ordained, till they had got their Dimission and had
been fifteen years in a Monastery; and perhaps some of these offices were laid
aside, because of the complaints the Prefects made of the Interruption of
Justice by the great numbers of the Clergy, who pleaded the Exemptions that
were granted to them.

Upon the whole matter it is clear that all these Orders were only of
Ecclesiastical Institution. So that the want of them cannot be charged on our
Church as an essential defect, and our Church had as good Authority to lay all
these aside, as other Churches had to lay down sometimes one, sometimes more of
them. And in the Church of Rome, though these are still kept up, yet all except
the Subdeacons are merely for Forms-sake, for Acolyths, Exorcists, Readers, or
Porters, never discharge any part of the Service that belongs to their Office,
and the Exorcisms are quite taken out of the hands of the Exorcists, and are
made only by Priests. So that this whole Objection comes to nothing.

But we have much more material Objections against the Church of Rome upon this
head. For whereas by Divine Institution and the practice of the Primitive
Church, all Bishops were equal both in Order and Jurisdiction. They have robbed
the Bishops of the greatest part of their Jurisdiction; of which I shall give
some Instances.

Monks by their Original were Laymen and were under the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of the Diocese, this at first was not so much as disputed; but when they
grew insolent and factious, it was declared by the General Council of Chalcedon
that Cap. 4.
they were and ought to be subject to their Con. Agath. can. 37, 38. Con.
Aurel. can. 19.
Bishops; and so it continues in the Greek Church to this day. The same was
also decreed in some Western Councils, but when the Order of the Benedictines
grew very considerable, and many persons of Quality retired into it, and it
became a great piece of Religion to build and enrich Abbeys; then the Founders
moved their Kings to obtain Privileges for them from their Bishops; for the
most ancient of these that I have met with, is the Exempof the Abbey of St.
Denis, granted by the An. 659. An. 664.
Bishop of Paris; the next to that is the exemption of the Abbey of Corbie
granted by the Bishop of Amiens, which presidents were soon followed by a great
many others. By these Grants the Bishops did renounce their share of the
Revenues of the Abbey, of which, according to the Ancient Division, the fourth
part did belong to the Bishop: and for the further quiet of those Religious
Houses, the Bishops did exempt them from all Visitations, and gave up the power
they had over them wholly to the Abbot; and these exemptions, which at first
were only for the Monasteries, were afterward extended further to all the
Lands and Churches that belonged to the Abbeys, of which some were exempted
from the Visitations of the Archdeacons, and the Bishops Vicars; others were
also exempted from the Bishops visiting in person.

But the Popes from the 8th. Century downwards, finding how much Abbeys wese
enriched, and it being a grateful thing in all places, to favor the Monks,
they granted them fuller and larger Privileges, they gave many Abbots a right
to a Miter and a Staff, and declared them Prelates. And the truth of it was,
the secular Clergy were for the most part both so ignorant and so corrupt, that
it was no wonder if all the World favored the Monks, whose vices being
committed within their Cloisters, were not so notorious, and did not occasion
so much scandal as the disorders of the Clergy did, which were more public.
And the very name Religious or Regular, which the Monks took to themselves, and
the name Secular, with which they loaded the Clergy, did them great service;
for in ignorant Ages specious Titles and ill sounding Names affect the Vulgar
mightily. And the Monks of the Order of St. Austin being also possessed of most
of the Prebends, from whence they were called Canons Regular, those Chapter^
had exempted Jurisdictions given them. From hence sprung all the peculiar
Exemptions that are among us, for in the suppressing of the Monasteries, the
Bishop^ were not fully restored to their Ancient Jurisdiction; so that those
Exemption^ do still continue, from whence the most scandalous disorders in our
Clergy have risen. So much are they mistaken who complain of the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, since the foulest Enormities among us flow from the want of it,
and from a Corruption brought in by the Popes, which is not yet sufficiently
purged out.

These Monasteries were so many separated and independent Congregations which
did chose their own Pastors, and this only difference in the point of
Government, is between our Modern Independents, and them; that these will
depend on none in the rules of their Policy, but upon Christ alone, without
acknowledging any superior Jurisdiction or Subordination, and those did depend
on Christ's Vicar, without submitting to any other Authority.

But the Popes designing to subject the Episcopal Authority wholly to
themselves, used another Method toward that end, which was to raise the Dignity
of the Abbots very high, and whereas by the Primitive Can. ^. Apost. Con. Nic.
can. 4. Con. Arel. 1. can. 21. Arel. 2. can. 5. Carth. 2. Can. 12. See Great.
Did. 64.
Canons three Bishops were to concur in the Consecration of a Bishop, the Pope^
brought in a custom of allowing two Mitered Abbots to assist a Bishop in those
Consecrations, which is acknowledged both by In Can. 1. Apost.
Binnius and Bell. de notis Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Bellarmine. And this with the Title Prelate, and the use of the Miter and the
Pastoral Staff, raised them to an equality with the Bishops.

This was not all, they were next brought to sit in General Councils.
Originally Abbots were but Laymen, but now they must all be Priests; yet it was
never before heard of, that Priests did sit in Ecumenical Councils. It is
true, the Rural-Bishops (or Chorepiscopi) did subscribe the Canons of the
Council of Nice and other General Councils; but whatever Morinus and some
others have said, to prove that they were no more than Priests, yet if it were
not an impertinent Digression, ^ think it could be easily made appear that they
were Bishops; so that it is most certain that no Priests did subscribe and si^
in General Councils for many Ages in their own Names, for what they did by
Proxy from their Bishops, has no relation to this matter. But when the Popes
were setting up their Monarchy in the West, they resolved to balance the Votes
of the Bishops by bringing in Abbots to vote in their General Councils, who
were obliged by their Interest to support the Exaltation of the Papal power,
and suppressing of Episcopal Jurisdiction.

In the first General Council that was held by Calistus the second, in the
Lat^ran, Sugerius, An. 1123.
who was present, says, there were 300 and more Bishops, but Pandulphu^ says,
there were present 997. partly Bishops, Tom. Con. 10. page 893.
partly Abbots; so that above 600. of these must have been Abbots. In the third
Council of Lateran we hear of none but Bishops, but to make amends for that,
the Tom. Con. 11. par. 1. page 127.
Writs that summoned the fourth Council of Lateran, were sent to Abbots as well
as to Bishops, and a vast number of them came. The Writs for the second Council
of Lions, were issued out, not only to Abbots, but to inferior Prelates by Pope
Gregrory the Tenth, and Aquinas, and Bonaventure, being then in great esteem,
were also called to that Council, though they were only Friars. But Pope
Clement An. 1311.
the Fifth took care to have a full Assembly, Tom. Con. 11. par. 2. page 1550.
when he called the General Council at Vienna, for the Writs were not only to
Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, as had
been done before, but to all Priors, Deans, Provosts, Archdeacons, Archpriests,
and all other Prelates of Monasteries and Churches exempted, and non-exempted.
And thus the Popes were sure to carry things in such Assembles as they pleased.
And it is no unpleasant thing to observe what were the Contests between the
Popes and the Bishops, which are plainly the same, and have been managed by the
same Arts and Intrigues, that the Contests in Political matters between
Prerogative and Privilege have been. For near five Ages the matter was
contested by the Prelates, but the power of the Abbots, and the other
exemptions of the Deans and Chapters did much weaken the Bishops Authority* and
the Secular Princes did join with the Popes to bear down the Bishops, who
having great Revenues, did generally join with the People for the asserting of
public Liberty. But the Popes gave them up as Sacrifices to their Princes,
till they forced them afterward to seek to them for shelter from the severity
of their Princes, and then the Tables were turned.

All this was not a little set forward by the credit which the begging Friars
got every where in the 13th. Century, for the Monks were then become as
scandalous as the Secular Clergy had ever been, and were generally very
ignorant; so that they could not serve the ends of the Papacy any more, but the
austere lives of the Franciscans, their poverty and coarse Garments girt about
An. 1214.
with Ropes, their bare Legs and seeming Humility gained them great esteem; and
the Zealous Dominicans, whose course of life was not so severe, yet were as
poor* An. 1209.
and Preached much; and Aquinas, Scotus, and Bonaventure, brought in among the
Friars the learning of the School^ which was then in great esteem in the World,
all which concurred to dispose the People to receive them with great
Veneration. These were also employed by the Popes every where, and were also
exempted from Episcopal Visitation, and had Privileges to build Churches, and
Seminaries, to Preach, hear Confessions, and Administer the Sacraments every
where, and by these means the Episcopal Jurisdiction was quite overthrown, and
the Papacy became absolute and those Orders of Mendicant Friars were clearly a
Presbytery, they being a company of Priests that acknowledged no Episcopal
Jurisdiction over them, and their Great Chapter was their General Assembly, and
their Annual, or Triennial Generals and Provincials, who are chosen by them,
were like the elected Moderators of Provincial and National Assemblies. In this
only did that Presbytery differ from the Geneva Form, that it was subject only
to Christ's pretended Vicar, the other claims to be only subordinate to Christ
himself, but both did equally rebel against their Bishops. Yet the Schism of
the Papacy had almost overturned all, for the Bishops met in a General Council
at Constance (I call all those Councils General, according to the style of the
Church of Rome, for I know there was not a Conncil truly General among them
all) and there they thought to retrieve their Authority, and to be quit with
the Popes for bringing in Abbots and other inferior Prelates, they brought in
Deputies from Universities, to sit and judge with them, and they thought they
had made sure work of all by their Acts, that regulated the Popes Election,
restrained his power, subjected him to the judgment of a General Council, and
above all, by their Act for a Decennial General Council, with such provisions
in it, that one would think the Act for Triennial Parliaments was copyed from
that Original: But alas, all this proved to no purpose, for as Aeneas Sylvius
wisely said, that since all Preferments were given by the Pope, and none by the
Council, he must certainly have the better of it at long run, which as it made
himself turn about, so it brought off many more; and at length the Pope became
Master of All, and at the Council of Florence the Generals of Orders were
brought in to have Votes there.

There was another great Engine also made use of, by which all the rules of the
Primitive Church was overturned, which was the Popes assuming a power to hear,
and judge all causes originally. All that the Popes pretended to for many Ages
was to be the highest Tribunal to which the last Appeal did lie. And this was
not only never yielded to by the Eastern Churches, but even the African
Churches, though a part of the Latin Church, would never submit to it, and yet
the receiving an Appeal had a very favorable plea, that a person who had been
oppressed by a faction, perhaps in his own Country, might find relief and
protection elsewhere: But after the 8th. Century, and that the forged and now
universally acknowledged spurious Decretals were received, they set up a new
pretension of Judging Causes Originally, taking matters out of the hands of the
Judge Ordinary, and bringing the Cognizance of them to Rome, and setting up many
reserved Cases which could only be judged by the Pope; and the Canonists that
were a servile sort of people, who wrote chiefly for Preferment, did upon all
occasions find new Distinctions for enlarging the Popes power. But because it
was intolerable tedious and expensive to carry all such matters to Rome;
therefore that it might not be too heavy a burden to the World, Legantine
Courts were every where set up, where all those Trials were made. By all these
ways were the Primitive Rules broken, and such a confusion was brought in upon
all Ecclesiastical Offices, that no Ancient Landmark or Boundary was thought so
sacred, that they did not either leap over or change it. I will not enlarge
further on this Subject, and having already transgressed the bounds of a
Preface, I will not lay open the other Violations of the Sacred Offices at the
full length, but as the value of every thing is no less prejudiced by exalting
it too high, than by depressing it too much, for a string over bended must
crack; So the Popes did as much wrong these Functions by exalting them out of
measure, as they had done by encroaching* so far upon them. And this was done
by the Croissades, Indulgences, Privileged Places, Jubilees and Redemptions
from Purgatory, with other things of that nature, which the Monks and Friars
did every where preach and proclaim; these things did savor of Interest so
palpably, that it was no wonder if most people were so alienated from them,
that the first Reformers found all persons disposed to forsake the Communion of
a Church that had so long deceived them by such gross Impostures.

Many had groaned long under all these Corruptions, and of such the greater
part received the Reformation, others hoping to have got things brought about
to a better pass, continued still in that Communion; but how little either
Erasmus, (...), C^ssander, or many more such could prevail, the event showed;
for in the Council of Trent (which was not obtained, but after many years suit;
frequent Addresses not without threatenings, at length extorting it) how little
could be carried appears even from Cardinal Pallavicini's own History, two
grand points, upon which the Bishops that had honest designs, intended to raise
the Reformation of Discipline and Manners were the declaring the Episcopal
Jurisdiction to be of Divine Right; and that the Residence of all
Ecclesiastical Incumbents, was also of Divine Right, but these could not be
carried. Lainez the General of the Jesuits, and the whole Court Party,
appearing with great Vehemence against the first of these, asserting that all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was wholly and only in the Pope. And from this one
thing it may appear how little Justice or Fair-dealing was to be expected from
that Council, toward those whom they called Heretics, when the Bishops
themselves being Judges, in a thing in which they were also parties, I mean
about the Divine Right of their own Jurisdiction, they could not carry it, for
it was never heard of before, that where (...) was both Judge and Party, he was
cast. And in the other trifling Reformations that were Enacted there, what care
was taken by Distinctions and Reservations, chiefly that grand and General one
of Saving the Dignity of the Apostolical See, to leave a door open by which
those very Corruptions which they seemed to condemn and cast out, might be
again taken up as most of them have been since. So that the issue of that
Assembly was to establish the Papal Authority, to cut off all possible hopes of
abating an ace of the errors of that Church (when all controverted points were
turned to Articles of Faith, and the contrary Opinions condemned by
Anathematisms) to disover how in possible it is to get the Abuses of that
Church effectually Reformed; and in fine, to cure all people of their
expectations of any great good from such meetings for the future; and this has
since appeared very visibly. For as it is not to be expected that the Popes
should call any General Councils, ex motu proprio, so no Christian Princes have
thought i^ worth the while to solicit that Court for a new Council.

And thus I have hinted at several particulars from which it may appear how
much the Church of Rome has confounded those holy Functions, how she has robbed
some of them of the power and Jurisdiction which they have from Christ, and*
has put a power in the hands of others which they never had from Christ. And if
the vigor of Ecclesiastical Discipline is not set up among us as it ought to
be, we owe it for the greatest part to those Corruptions which they brought in,
and being once received, are not easily to be rooted out of the minds of the
people.

But to a great many all that can be said of the disorders that have been
brought in or kept up in that Church by the Popes, will seem slight and of no
force: for they will plainly tell us, that they do not all believe the Pope is
Infallible, but are satisfied there are many things done by him that are amiss,
and need to be amended: they only adhere to the Catholic Church, to whose
definitions and decrees they submit and resign themselves: and yet no body
writes more sharply against the Reformation and the Protestant Churches than
these men do, charging them with Heresy and Schism, and every thing that is
hateful to mankind. This way of writing was begun in the Sorbon, and never more
pompously than at this time, by the Writers of the Port*Royal, and has been
taken up here by some whom their adversaries call Blackloists, who speak almost
with equal indignation of the Court of Rome, and the Reformation. This I know
works great effects on some, and has a very specious appearance; therefore I
hope the Reader will pardon me if I hold him yet a little longer in the
Preface, to unmask this pretension of some which otherwise may impose upon him.

I shall then make it appear that the maintainers of these principle must
either be men of no conscience at all, and suc^ as stick not at mocking both
God and man at perjury and the foulest kind of equivo^tion; or if they be true
to these principles they must on many occasions do the sam^ things for which
they condemn us, an* count us Heretics and Schismatics. An* this I shall
instance in three things which are of the greatest consequence to a Church
namely, Doctrine, Worship, and Government.

For the first of these, When the Po^ makes a decision in any controverted
poin^ if I do not think him infallible, I retai^ still my own freedom to judge
as I am con* vinced, and so I may perchance be of another mind; but if the Pope
will have (...) Churchmen, or all Bishops (as was late^ done in the case of the
Five Proposition of Jansenius) to condemn the contrary opinions, or subscribe
Formularies about i^ they must either do what is commanded and so act against
their conscience, ^ quivocate and be perjured: or if they do it not, they must
be proceeded against, first for contempt and contumacy, and next for Heresy;
and then they shall be Heretics as well as we are: And if in one point a man
reserves his private sentiments, notwithstanding the Popes decision, why not in
a great many; and if it be no fault to have different opinions, then, since a
man's actions must be governed by his persuasions, it will be no fault to
maintain and teach them, if they be of great importance, at least it is a great
sin to renounce and deny them. Therefore if Pope Leo the X. was not Infallible,
Luther was no Heretic, though condemned by him, especially a great many of the
Articles for which he was condemned, having never been decided by any of their
pretended General Councils: nor do these men think that the present practice of
the Church is a forcible Argument, for those of the Port Royal have both
complained of it, and studied to change it in the matter of Penance and
Absolution; so that it will not be easy, nay not possible for them to prove
that Luther was a Heretic, since he was never condemned by any Infallible
power: Therefore it is not the Authority of the condemnation, but the merit of
the cause, that makes one a Hereti^k, which is what we plead for. From which it
is evident, that, let the Pope decree what he will, all of that Communion must
either acquiesce in it, or they shall become Heretics. This to such as believe
the Pope is Infallible, is no matter of difficulty, for if I be once persuaded
of that, all his decisions do captivate my reason, but if I am not, I must
either subdue my Conscience to my Interest, or be that Monster which is called
an Heretic.

It is true, both Civil and Ecclesiastical Government punishes all obstinate
and refractory persons, who stand out against public conclusions, but still
the Subject, if these Laws be Injust, has a clear Conscience amidst his
sufferings; therefore this is not parallel to their Doctrine, who make all that
comply not with their decisions, Heretics, which is a matter of great guilt
before God. Let them give an Argument that will make a Protestant a Heretic,
which will not infer the same against a Jansenist. And if they go to the merits
of the cause, it is a trial we have never declined* So till these men learn to
try all their reasonings together, there is no great account to be made of
them.

The second particular in which I shall show the fallaciousness of these men's
Reasonings, is in the matter of Divine Worship, which of how great consequence
it is, needs not be made out, it must be a sin of a high nature, either to
profane the name of God by any piece of Worship which I judge sinful, or to use
any Devotions about which I am not at all or at least not fully persuaded. Now
the whole Worship of their Church coming Originally and only from the Popes,
who have given authority to what Offices they will, have made Saints and added
devotions to them as they pleased; All persons in that Communion must either by
a blind resignation accept of every thing in their Worship which the Pope
imposes, believing him infallible; or if they are not of that persuasion, but
give themselves leave to examine the Offices whether they do it by the
Scriptures, the Fathers and Tradition, or by the Rules of Reason, they must
needs see there are many injustifiable things in their Offices, many Saints are
in the Breviary, about whose Canonisation they are not at all assured: And in a
word, one shall not speak with one of these Principles, but they will
acknowledge there is great need of Reforming their Offices; Yet they must
worship God according to them, as they are, otherwise they are Schismatics,
and fall under that same condemnation, for which they are so severe upon us.

Therefore it must either be the merits of the Cause that makes a Schismatic,
or if a Condemnation for separating from Authorized Offices does it, then they
must resolve to be guilty of it, or worship God, contrary to their Consciences:
They have no rules for their Offices, but the Popes pleasure, for Councils
never made any; and indeed it is the most unreasonable thing that can be, to
put the direction of the whole worship of God in one Man, or a succession of
Men's power, unless they be believed Infallible.

The last thing I shall mention to show how unreasonable they are, who deny the
Popes Infallibility, and yet condemn the Reformation so severely, is in the
point of Government, which though it be not of so high, nor so universal a
Nature as the two former are; yet it must be acknowledged to be of great
Importance. And that the Prelates of that Church are fast tied to the Pope,
without any Reserves or Exceptions, unless it be that ( of saving See page 176.
my Order) the sense whereof is not fully understood, will appear from the Oath
they make to the Pope before they are Ordained: From the consideration of which
it was that King Henry the 8th. laid it Hall fol. 205.
out to his Parliament that they were but half his Subjects, and by the Oath
then taken by the Bishops of England, as is set down by Hall; it appears that
since that time there are very considerable Additions made to that Oath, which
any that will compare them together, will easily discern.

If men make Conscience of an Oath, they must be in a very hard condition that
believe the Pope to be Infallible, and yet are so bound to him by such a Bond.
If the Superior be Infallible, the Subject may without any trouble in his
Conscience, swear Obedience in any terms that can be conceived. But when the
Superior is believed subject to error and mistake, then their swallow must be
very large that can swear to preserve, defend, increase, and promote the
Rights, Honors, Privileges, and Authority of the Holy Roman Church of our
Lord the Pope, and his Successors foresaid. -- The Decrees, Orders, or
Appointments, Reservations, Provisions, or Mandates Apostolical; I shall
observe with all my strength, and make them to be observed by others. -- And I
shall according to my power, persecute and oppose all Heretics, Schismatics,
and Rebels, against the said our Lord and his Successors. -- And I shall
humbly receive, and diligently execute the Apostolical Commands.

Which words being full, and without those necessary and just reserves of the
Obedience promised to Ecclesiastical Superiors, in all things Lawful and Honest
all the Prelates of the Roman Communion are as fast tied to the Pope, as if
they believed him Infallible; for if they believed him such, they could be tied
to nothing more than absolute and unlimited Obedience. Therefore they are in so
much a worse estate than others be, which hold that opinion, because they have
the sa^* Obligation bound upon them by Oath. And let the Pope command what he
will, the^ must either obey him, or confess themselves guilty of breach of Oath
and Perjur^* And I hope the Reader will observe wh^ mercy, all, whom they
account Heretics, Schismatics, and Rebels, again^ their Lord the Pope, are to
expect at their hands, who make their Bishops swear (...) persecute all such
according to their power; so that we may by this be abundantly satisfied of
their good Intention^ and Inclinations, when ever it shall be i^ their power to
fulfill the Contents of thi^ Oath; for let any of them speak ever (...) softly
or gently, if he comes to be Consecrated a Bishop, he must either be Perjured*
or turn a persecuter of all Protestants, wh^ are in their opinion the worst
sort of Heretics and Schismatics.

And certainly it is much more reasonble to calculate what in reason we ought
to expect from the Prelates of that Church, if ever our sins provoke God to
deliver us over to their Tyranny, from the Oath they swear at their
Consecration, than from all the meek and good natured words with which they now
study to abuse some among us, which is so common an Artifice of all who aspire
to Power and Government, that one might think the trick should be tried no
more; but some love to be cheated a hundred times over.

From these Instances it is apparent, that the Pope has every whit as much
Authority in that Church, and over all in it, as if he were believed
Infallible, since both the Doctrine, Worship, and Government of their Church
are determined by him, to whose award all must not only submit, but be
concluded by it in their Subscriptions, Worship, and other practices.

So that the opinion of the Popes being fallible, gives such persons no ease
nor freedom (except it be to their secret thoughts) but brings them under
endless scruples and perplexities by the Obligations and Oaths that are imposed
upon them* which bind them to a further obedience and compliance than is
consistent with a fallible Authority.

And therefore their Principles being so Incoherent that they cannot maintain
both their charge against us of Heresy and Schism, and their opinion of the
Pope^ Fallibility, and keep a good Conscience withal: There is one of three
things to be expected from men of that Principle, either that they shall quite
throw off the Popes tyrannical Yoke, and assert their own liberty, reserving
still their other Opinions, as was done in the days of King Henry the Eighth,
or that they shall joyn^ in Communion with us, or that they shall continue as
they are, complying with every thing imposed on them by the Court o^ Rome,
preferring Policy to a good Conscience, studying by frivolous Distinctions to
reconcile these Compliances with their Principles, which any man easily see are
Inconsistent.

That those of the Port Royal have done the last, is laid to their charge, both
by Calvinists and Jesuits; and as I am credibly informed by some of their own
number, who do complain of their subscribing Formularies, and every thing else
sent from Rome, which they have opposed as long as they could; but when the
Court o^ Rome gets their Conquering King on their side, so that they can
withstand no longer unless they will suffer for their Conscience, then they
subscribe as formally and fully as others do. And this Compliance is to be
looked for from all the men of those Principles, if they do not prefer their
Conscience to their Interest; and God knows there be many such, for either they
must comply, though against their Conscience, or retire themselves from that
Communion; and if they do this last, then all that they accuse us for, and all
those common Topics, with which they ply the Vulgar, against separating from
the Catholic Church, the setting up of private Judgments against public, the
multiplying new Errors by appealing to Scriptures, or other Books, which is the
way of all Heretics: These I say, with many more of the like nature, will all
fall as heavily upon themselves.

Nor is there any reason to think they will throw off the Pope, as was done
under King Henry the 8th. for though a great and high spirited King was able to
bring that about; yet is it possible that a few Priests, though they had the
honesty and boldness to design such a thing, could ever compass it: Their
followers would look upon them, if they should but set about it, as Heretics,
and hate them no less (if not more) than they do us; So that it seems a weak
and too sanguine an Imagination, to think such a design can ever come to any
thing* Therefore these persons must either turn* over quite to the Intrigues of
the Court o^ Rome (with what Conscience let them se^ to it) or join themselves
to us.

And of this last there is no great cause to have any hope, since we see none
write more bitterly against us than they do, as if they would thereby redeem
their credit* either with the Court of Rome, or with their party here, who
being possessed withsome suspicions of them, they to clear these* use the common
shift of railing foully (...) those, with whom it is insinuated they have some
correspondence. This style Mr. Arnaud has thought fit to write in more than any
body, which was the more unseemly in him, considering both his Noble Education,
and his other excellent and gentile Qualities; and indeed I am heartily glad to
find the grows ashamed and out of love with that way of writing, in which none
has more grossly exceeded all the bounds of Moderation than he has done.

They having declared themselves so fully and formally concerning the
Reformation, there is no reason to expect they should ever join with us, and
they are neither so numerous nor so considerable, as to be able ^o form
themselves into a Society distinct from Rome. Therefore what is it o^ be looked
for from them, but that for the most part shall herd in with the rest, and
comply even against their Consciences, with all the corruptions of the Papacy.
And as a Noble and Ingenious person said, the long Whip of Rome must bring in
all these Straglers; and if two or three will stand out and lie under their
Censures, they shall have little credit, and small interest with their own
party. So that there is nothing to be expected from any thing they can do or
signify.

And therefore all the noise some make of the difference between the Court and
Church of Rome, is only a pretty Notion, by which such as are speculative, and
consider not the World, may be taken a little, but when they examine it
further, they must see that it will be nothing in practice. The Interest,
Favor, and Preferments, lie wholly the other way, and the greatest part is led
by these; and such honest men as despise these, are either thought Fools or
Knaves; some further design being suspected, as the reason of why they pursue
not present Advantages. But Preferments being bountifully given by the Court of
Rome to their creatures; others who are loaded with their Censures, can never
be imagined so considerable, as either to have great Interest at home with
their party (which being generally made up of Ignorance, and Zeal, hates those
moderate men a^ Tamperers, and love none so much as the thorough-paced Papist.)
much less can they ever have any power in the Seminaries and Nurseries beyond
Sea: So that all that come over in the Mission shall be well leavened before
they come among us, with the high Principles of the Court of Rome. Therefore I
cannot apprehend any Advantage that can be reasonably looked f^r from the
cherishing the men of those Principles, though I am very well satisfied some of
them are honest men; but as they be very few who will openly own and stick to
them, so I doubt not but if the owning these Maxims turned to a matter of
Advantage, and ease, abundance that are not honest would pretend to be of the
same persuasion. We see that generally (a few Inst^nces only excepted) they
join together in the same Intrigues and Designs, and why we should think it
possible to draw off any considerable party from the rest, I see no reason; for
as it were undoubtedly both wise and good to cherish any motions that might
disjoynt them one from another; so a few individual Persons, how deserving
soever they may be, cannot be of that Importance, that for their sakes a
Settlement should be altered, and color given for a great many to deceive and
abuse us.

And I freely acknowledge that the plain dealing Papists, who owns the Popes
Infallibility and absolute Authority, as he speaks, and acts most sutably to
the other Principles of their Church, so is less to be suspected and feared,
since he goes roundly to work, than others who speak more softly, and yet are
in the same designs, and so may more safely and cunningly catch unwary persons,
who either are not much on their guard, or are not well acquainted with their
Artisices; but the other are more open and less dangerous.

It is now high time for me to quit this Digression, and to wind up a Preface
that is already too long. I shall only, before I make an end, lay before the
Reader, a few of the Arts of the Missionaries among us, in the dispersing their
Papers and Books.

They write them with great confidence, and swell up the Arguments they offer,
with the biggest words and severest expressions that are possible, which works
mightily upon the Gentle Reader, for tho modesty in Writing has great art in it
to work upon an ingenuous mind; yet that to the weak and credulous, is a feeble
and dispirited thing, and they are never so apt to believe any thing as when it
is confidently averred with great Pomp and much Vehemence.

If their Books be well written, they want not Printing Presses neither beyond
Sea nor in England, and we shall soon hear of them; if they find themselves so
baffled (as they have been of late by some great Writers in this Church) that
they cannot answer with any tolerable show of Learning and Honesty, then they
spread it about that there is an Answer ready, but the Visitors of the Press
are so careful, that nothing can escape their diligence. But if either their
Papers be too barefaced to be owned, or if they know them to be so weak that
they dare not put them to a trial, then instead of Printing them, they Copy
them out and give them about.

Of the former sort, the World has got Jesuits Loyalty.
a good Evidence in the Discourses lately published about the Oath of
Allegiance, which they intended to whisper in corners, but are now Proclaimed
openly.

And of the latter sort is the following Paper, which begins and ends with the
highest confidence that is possible, but is so extremely defective in the point
of Argument, that they did very wisely, not to adventure on publishing it. But
they must write and do somewhat to keep Spirit in their party; and since the
defending their own Church, has succeeded so ill with them, they do wisely to
change the Scene, and carry in the War to our own Church, and make her the
Scene of it, but they are as ill at attacquing, as defending; and if we be but
safe from their Mines, we need not fear their Batteries, but their underground
work is a better game, and if they cannot wast us with Destruction at Psalm. 92.
5, 6.
Noontide, nor make their Arrows fly by day, then they study to infect us with
a Pestilence that walks in darkness, and by secret Contrivances and Concealed
Papers, to compass that which they know can never be brought about by
fairdealings and avowed practices. But truth is great (and the God of truth is
greater) and will prevail over the fraud of the Serpent, as well as the force
of the Lion.

And if we study to adorn our Profession, and walk worthy of our Holy Calling,
we need not fear our Cause, nor all the endeavors of those that study to
defame us.

Without this the most labored Apologies will not signify much to support our
Credit; for the World is more affected with lively Instances and great
Examples, than with the most Learned Composures. Every Man's Understanding is
wrought on by the one, the other only prevail on considering and judicious
persons. And any charge that is put in against the Pastors or Orders of a
Church, will be but little regarded, when those that bear Office in it, chiefly
in the highest degrees, are burning and shining Lights, few will then stumble
or be shaken with any thing that can be said to Eclipse their brightness.

It Is for the most part want of Merit in Churchmen, that recommends any
Arguments that are levelled at their persons or functions, to the World. And
though Malice, and Spite ferments with the more rage, the worthier the persons
are against whom it works; yet all attempts must needs be, not only
unsuccessful, but fall back with shame on the Authors, when all the World sees
the Unjustice of them.

The Contents.
ARguments to prove the Invalidity of the Orders of the Church of England, page
2. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England, in Answer to the
former Paper, p. 19. An Appendix about the Forms of Ordaining Priests and
Bishops in the Latin Church, p. 107.
Errata.
The first Paper is printed exactly according to the Copy that was sent me, but
these that follow seem to be the errors (...) the Transcriber.

PAge 3. line 24. for such a Form, Read to such a Power, p. 8. l. 27. for 1662.
r. 1558.

Page 28. l. 19. dele and, p. 29. l. 26. for of r. for, p. 38. l. 4. for are r.
were, p. 87. l. 15. for too soon r. too late, p. 105* l. 25. after ground r.
for, p. 112. l. 19. for leges r. legis, l. 22. for divum r. Deum, p. 123. l.
12. for Sanctifica r. Sanctificat^* p. 126. l. 8. for novis r. novei, p. 133.
l. 26. dele as.

ARGUMENTS To prove the Invalidity of the ORDERS OF THE Church of England.
FIRST then I prove that the Ministers of the Church of England are no Priests,
through the defect of the Form of Ordination, which was this, pronounced to
every one of them when they came to be Ordained: Receive the Holy Ghost, whose
sins thou forgivest they are forgiven, whose sins thou retainest, they are
retained; and be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and his Holy
Sacraments, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
Amen. After which the Bishop delivers a Bible to him, saying, Take thou
authority to Preach the Word, and Minister the Holy Sacraments, in the
Congregation where thou shall be so appointed.

And my first Reason is, Because this Form wants one essential part of
Priesthood, which is to Consecrate the most Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood, giving only power to Administer this Sacrament, which any Deacon may do.
That to Consecrate and make present Christ's Body and Blood is necessary, Dr.
Bramhal the Bishop of Derry, one of the chief Abettors of the Protestant
Ordination, grants, in his Book of the Consecration and Succession of
Protestant Bishops, saying, The Form of words whereby men are made Priests,
must express Power to Consecrate or make present Christ's Body and Blood: And a
little after, They who are Ordained Priests ought to have Power to Consecrate
Christ's Body and Blood, that is, to make it present, page 226. which it is
evident by the very terms themselves that this Form expresses, nor gives not,
having not one word expressing that Power which it cannot give without
expressing it.

Secondly, Because it wants another essential part, which is, to offer
Sacrifice, which the Apostle requires, Heb. 5. 1. saying, Every High Priest
taken from among men is Ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he
may offer both Gifts and Sacrifice for sins. Even according to the Protestant
Bible, and which cannot be meant only of Christ, as some Protestants would have
it; for in the 3. verse he says, And by reason hereof he ought as for the
people, so also for himself to offer for sins: whereas Christ had no sins of
his own to offer for.

Thirdly, Because those words, Whose sins, etc. at most gave Power to forgive
sins, and not to Consecrate and offer Sacrifice, having nothing to signify
that which is the chief Office of Priesthood.

Fourthly, Because none could Institute the Form of a Sacrament to give Grace
and Power to make present the Body and Blood of Christ, but the Author of
Grace, and who had power over that Sacred Body and Blood: But those that
Instituted this Form, were neither Authors of Grace, nor had power over the
Sacred Body and Blood: therefore they could not Institute such a Form. That
they who Instituted this Protestant Form had no such Power is proved by the Act
of Parliament, the 3. 4. of Edward the VI. Cap. 12. (which could not pretend
such a (...)) in these words,

Forasmuch as to Concord and Unity to be had within the Kings Majesty's
Dominions, it is requisite to have one Uniform fashion and manner for making
and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, etc. Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings
Highness, with the Assents of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
of this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same ( mark
by which Authority they are made) that such Form and manner of making and
Consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. as by six Prelates and six
other men of this Realm, learned in Gods Law by the Kings Majesty ( who was but
a Child) to be appointed and assigned, or by the most number of them shall be
devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great Seal of England, before
the first day of April next coming, and shall by virtue of this present Act (
see what virtues) be lawfully exercised, and used, and none other, any Statute,
Law, or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. By Authority whereof
those Prelates, and me^ learned in the Law invented and made the Form before
mentioned, never heard of before either in Scripture or Church of God.

From which I thus argue and prove my Minor. They that instituted the Form were
the King and Parliament, 3. 4. Edward VI. Bu^ that King and Parliament were
neither Authors of Grace, not had power over the Body and Blood of Christ:
therefore they that Instituted this Form, were neither Authors o^ Grace, nor
had power over the Body and Blood of Christ, nor consequently could make it
present.

Fifthly, They are no true Priests, because the Bishops that made them were no
true Bishops, nor so much as Priests; and no man can give power to another
which he has not himself. That they were no true Bishops nor Priests who
pretended to make these Priests (which shall be the second part of my
Discourse) I prove thus. PROTESTANT BISHOPS NO BISHOPS, NOR SO MUCH AS PRIESTS.

First, They are no Priests, because made by the same Form which other English
Ministers were, which I have clearly proved to be null.

That they are no true Bishops, I prove, first out of this very Principle
already laid; because they are no true Priests; for as Master Mason, a chief
Champion of theirs says, Epist. Ded. ad Episcop. Paris. Seeing he cannot be a
Bishop who is not a Priest, if it can be proved we are no Priests, there is an
end to our English Church. And the great Doctor of the Church St. Jerome, Dial.
cum Lucifero, cap. 8. says. Ecclesia non est quae non habet Sacerdotem, It is
no Church that has no Priests. The Protestant Bishops therefore being no
Priests can be no true Bishops, nor their Church a Church at all.

Secondly, They are no Bishops, because their Form of Ordination is essentially
invalid and null, seeing it cannot be valid, (no more than that of Priesthood)
unless it be in fit words, which signifies the Order given; as Mr. Mason says
in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae lib. 1. c. 16. n. 6. in these terms, Not
any words can serve for this Institution, but such as are fit to express the
power of the Order given. And the reason is evident, because Ordination being a
Sacrament (as the same Author says, lib. 1. n. 8. and Doctor Bramhal, page 96.
of the Consecration of Protestant Bishops) that is a visible sign of invisible
Grace given by it. There must be some visible sign or words in the Form of it,
to signify the Power given, and to determine the matter (which is the
Imposition of hands of it self a dumb sign, and common to Priests and Deacons,
Confirming, Curing, etc.) to the Grace of Episcopal Order; otherwise it were
sufficient to say at the Imposition of hands Be thou a Constable, or God make
thee an honest man. But there is no such visible sign or words in the
Protestant Form, expressing this Episcopal Power given; therefore no such power
is given. That there is no such sign or words in the Protestant Form, I prove
out of the Form it self, which is this (made in King Edward the VI. time, and
continued till the happy Restoration of his Majesty that now is) Take the Holy
Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the Grace of God that is in thee by
Imposition of hands; for God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of
Power, and of Love, and Soberness. In which is not any word signifying
Episcopal Power or Ordination; and therefore for this defect in their Form they
are no true Bishops.

Against what has been said you will object first, That I prove them to be no
Priests, because they are no Bishops that made them: and on the other side I
prove them no Bishops, because they are no Priests; which is a vicious Circle.
But I easily answer this, because I first prove a priori, that is, from the
essential which ought to give being to each of them tat they are severally
null; and each of them being null for that reason, it is evident, that it is a
cause of Invalidity in the other: for as he can be no Bishop who is proved to
be no Priest, so he can make no Priest, who is proved to be no Bishop.

Secondly, You will object and salve up all the Defects aforementioned in one
word, to wit, That although the Form used in the Church of England were invalid
in King Edward' s, Queen Elizabeth's, King James' s, and King Charles the
First's time, for want of a valid Form of Ordination, yet now it is valid in
our Sovereign King Charles the Second's, with whom the Parliament now sitting
has appointed a true Form: Enacting, that for the future, to wit, after St.
Bartholomew's Day, 1662. the Form of Ordaining a Priest should be, Receive the
Holy Ghost for the Office of a Priest: and of a Bishop, Receive the Holy Ghost
for the Office and work of a Bishop.

But to this I Will answer you in another word, That the salve is worse than the
sore; because by this change of the Form before established, they acknowledge
it to be null; for why else need they change it. Secondly, By it they in effect
acknowledge all their Bishops and Priests till that time to be null, because
Ordained by a Form that was null, and could not give Power it had not, nor
signified. Thirdly, Because being no Bishops already, they cannot Ordain
validly by any Form whatsoever; for no man can give what he has not, as has
been said before.

Lastly, Whatsoever Power this Act gives to Ordain, is from the Parliament, and
not from Christ; which is what I first undertook to show, and destroys their
Orders root and branch.

Now although the Bishops of the Church of England, and their Ministers grant
this change of their Form of Ordination, yet if any one should deny it, you
need only look upon the Form of making Bishops, and Priests, made (...). and
which was only used in the Church of England for an hundred years, to be found
in every Booksellers Shop, authorized and commanded in the Act of Uniformity,
made 1662. to be only used to St. Bartholomew' s Day of that Year; and that
other Enacted to be only used from thenceforward, and Printed in the
Common-Prayer-Books of Cathedral Churches, out of which I have found it hard to
be got; the Bishops, as most think, suppressing it for shame, and leaving it
only in those places where it was necessary to be made use of, and not
permitting it to be otherwise dispersed abroad, although the Act of Uniformity
which made it, commands upon forfeiture of 3 l. for every Month after St.
Bartholomew's Day, 1662. that every Church, Chapel, Collegiate Church,
College, and Hall should have a true printed Copy of it.

Thus I hope I have fully proved that the Church of England has no true Priest
or Bishop for want of Ordination. Now I shall also show that they have no
Jurisdiction or Authority to Teach, Preach, exact Tithes, inflict Censures, to
be Pastors, or to exercise any Ecclesiastical Function whatsoever from Christ,
but only from the Parliament: and my third Conclusion is,

That Protestant Ministers and Bishops have no Power to Preach, etc. from
Christ, but only from the Parliament.

This I prove, because they have no more Power than the first Protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker had, who was the Chief, and from whom
(as it were the Conduit of all) Jurisdiction was derived to the rest.

That he had no such Power or Jurisdiction I prove, first* because they that
Confirmed and Consecrated him had no such Power to confer upon him of
themselves, to wit.

William Barlow, late Bishop of Bath and Wells, now Elect of Chichester, John
Scory, late of Chichester, now Elect of Hereford; Miles Coverdale, late of
Exeter, and John Hodgskins Bishop Suffragan, who were none of them actual
Bishops of any See, but two Elect only, and another quondam only, and so had no
actual Jurisdiction at all, the fourth only Suffragan to Canterbury, and who
had no Jurisdiction, but what he had from the Arshbishop of Canterbury, much
less Authority to give him Jurisdiction over himself, and all the Bishops in
the Land, as the other three had no Power at all to give him, much less so
transcendent an one, because none can give what he has not.

Secondly, Because they had their sole Power from the Queen, and she (besides
the incapacity of her Sex) had no Power of her self, but only according to the
Statutes in that case provided, as appears by her Letters Patent yet extant,
and to be seen in the Rolls in these words, Elizabetha Regina, etc. Elizabeth
Queen, etc. To the Reverend Father in Christ, William, etc. Whereas the
Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury, being lately void by the natural death of my
Lord Reginal Pool Cardinal, the late and immediate Archbishop and Pastor of it,
at the humble Petition of the Dean and Chapter of our Cathedral and
Metropolitan Church in Canterbury, called Christ's Church, we did by our Letters
Patents grant License to them to choose to themselves another for Archbishop
and Pastor of the Sea aforesaid, and they have chosen Matthew Parker, etc. We
have given our Royal assent and favor to the said Election; and we signify
this to you by the tenor of these presents, requiring, and by the fidelity and
love wherein you are bound to us, firmly enjoining, commanding you, that you,
or four of you effectually Confirm the said Matthew Parker, Archbishop and
Pastor Elect of the said Church, and Confirm the said Election, and Consecrate
him Archbishop and Pastor of the said Church, and do all other things which in
this behalf are incumbent on your Pastoral Office, according to the Form of the
Statutes in this case made and provided.

Out of which words, first, I note that the Queen here, and all the Clergy with
her, acknowledge Cardinal Pool the true and rightful Archbishop of Canterbury,
by which they own Catholic Ordination and Jurisdiction to be valid, lawful, and
good.

Secondly, I note (and confirm the main assertion) That the Queen knowing the
Common Law, and ancient Laws of the Kingdom, required the Authority, Consent,
and Commission (or Bull) of the Pope, to empower the Confirmers and
Consecrators of the Archbishop of Canterbury as the only Superior of that See;
and withal that he would not grant and give it to make a Protestant Archbishop;
she by her Supreme Authority as Head of the Church of England not only
authorized them that were to Confirm and Consecrate him, but also (Pope-like)
supplied all defects, whether in Quality, faculty, or any other thing wanting
and necessary in the Consecrators for that performance by the Laws of the
Church or Kingdom: for so it followed in the same Patent, Supplying
nevertheless by our Supreme Regal Authority, if any thing in you, or any of
you, or in your condition, state, or faculty, to the performance of the
Premises is wanting of these things, that by the Statutes of our Realm, or the
Ecclesiastical Laws in this behalf are requisite or necessary ( which she
therefore supposed and knew well enough to be necessary and wanting, for
otherwise it had been in vain for her to supply them) the condition of the time
and necessity of things requiring it.

By which you see they could do neither of these Acts of Confirming or
Consecrating him Archbishop of Canterbury without her Commission, which was not
only necessary to empower them, but also to dispense with them, and make their
Acts valid non obstante, notwithstanding the Laws of the Land.

That these Letters Patents Authorized them is clear out of the Instrument of
his Confirmation, to be seen in the Records at Lambeth in their own words
following.

In the name of the Lord, Amen. We William Barlow, John, Miles, etc. by the
Queens Commissional Letters specially and lawfully deputed Commissioners, etc.
by the Supreme Authority of the Queen to us in this behalf committed, confirm
the said Election of Matthew Parker, etc. supplying by the Supreme Authority of
the Queen to us delegated, if any thing be wanting in us, or any of us, or in
our Condition, State, or Faculty to the performance of the Premises of these
things, that by the Statutes of the Realm, or the Ecclesiastical Laws in this
behalf are requisite or necessary, etc. as above.

And whereas the Popes Commission (or Bull) used to be produced, by authority
of which all Archbishops of Canterbury were Consecrated, and their Election
confirmed. Now in place of that, says the Act of it upon Parker's Records,
Proferebatur Regium Mandatum pro ejus Consecratione. The Queens Mandate or
Commission for Consecrating him, was produced as the Authority for what they
did.

Lastly, I prove that the Queen had her Authority from the Parliament. First,
from the Statute 25. Henry 8. cap. 20. where the Parliament repeats out of
another Act made that present Parliament, That if any Elected by the King, and
presented to the Sea of Rome to be Archbishop or Bishop should be delayed, then
he should be Consecrated by two Bishops appointed by the King: and then in the
same Statute grants further, that all recourse be forbidden to Rome, and
Archbishops and Bishops be Confirmed and Consecrated by Bishops to be assigned
by the King.

Secondly, Out of the Act of 8. Eliz. 1. made purposely to set forth the
Authority next under God, by which Matthew Parker and the other first
Protestant Bishops in the beginning of the Queens Reign were made, by reciting
how they were made by the Authority of her Majesty, and how she was authorized
to that end by the aforesaid Statute of Henry VIII. and the Statute of 1. Eliz.
1. in these words,

First, It is well known to all the degrees of this Realm, that the late King
Henry the Eighth was as well by all the Clergy then of this Realm in their
several Convocations, as also by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in diverse of his Parliaments justly and rightfully recognized and
acknowledged to have the Supreme Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority over the
Ecclesiastical State of the same, and that the said King did in the twenty
fifth year of his Reign set forth a certain order of the Manner and Form, how
Archbishops and Bishops should be made, etc. And although in the Reign of the
late Queen the said Act was repealed, yet nevertheless at the Parliament 1.
Eliz. the said Act was revived, and by another Act they made all Jurisdiction,
Privileges, etc. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has hitherto been, or lawfully may be used
over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm is fully and absolutely by
Authority of the same Parliament ( mark by what Authority) united and annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm ( mark here how she is made Pope) and by
the same Statute there is also given to the Queen ( mark Given) Power and
Authority by Letters Patents to Assign and Authorize such Persons as she shall
think fit ( whether Clergymen, Lawyers, Merchants, Cobblers, or any other, so
they be naturally born Subjects of the Realm, for the Statute requires no more)
to exercise under her all manner of Jurisdiction in any wise touching or
concerning any Spiritual Jurisdiction in this Realm. Whereupon the Queen having
in her order and disposition all the said Jurisdictions, etc. has by her
Supreme Authority caused diverse to be duly made and consecrated Archbishops and
Bishops, according to such Order and Form, and with such Ceremonies in and
about their Consecration, as were allowed and set out by the said Acts, etc.
And further, her Highness has in her Letters Patents used diverse special words
whereby, by her Supreme Authority she has dispensed with all causes and doubts
of imperfections or disability, etc. as is to be seen more a^ large in the same
Act.

In which you see declared by the Queen, Matthew Parker himself, and the whole
Parliament: That Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury
was made Archbishop (as all the other Protestant Bishops in her time were) by
Authority of the Queen, and that she had her Authority for it from the
Statutes, 25. Henry 8. 20. and 1. Eliz. 1. from whom all our Protestant Bishops
since spring and descend, and derive all the Power and Authority that they have.

From which you see clearly that Protestant Bishops have no Authority to teach,
Preach, or to be Bishops, but what originally they have from the Parliament.
Which is still more evidently confirmed by this Parliament now in being, which
in the year 1662. by the Act of Uniformity, annulled the forementioned Forms of
Ordination of Priests and Bishops (as being deficient) and appointed new ones
by their own Authority. So from the first to the last, all the Protestant
Priests and Bishops both heretofore and at this present, are only Parliamentary
Priests and Bishops, and not so from Christ and his Church, but only from their
Kings, Queen, and Parliaments.

I must confess this present Parliament may easily answer the Parliaments of
Edward the VI. and Queen Elizabeth, why it has lately altered the Form of
Ordination, instituted and used by them; to wit, because their Forms were null
and invalid, but what Authority either of them had to make, alter, or use any
Form of Ordination, or to give Power to Teach, Preach, Minister Sacraments, or
the like, of themselves, without Authority from Christ our Savior, there I
must leave them to answer him.

From the Premises I infer,

First, That they being no Priests nor Bishops, theirs is no Church; as Mr.
Mason and St. Jerome grant.

Secondly, If no Church, no part of the Catholic Church, out of which, and
without whose Faith kept entire and inviolate, no man can be saved; as their
own Common Prayer Book affirms.

Thirdly, They can never eat the Flesh of Christ our Lord, nor drink his Blood,
without which they cannot have life in them, John 6. 54.

Fourthly, They commit a most heinous Sacrilege as often as they attempt to
Consecrate or Minister the most Holy Sacrament, having no such Power.

Fifthly, They commit the like Sacrilege in presuming to hear Confessions, or
forgive Sins.

Sixthly, All that Communicate with them, and follow the same Religion, are
involved in the same sins, so that the blind leading the blind they must
necessarily both fall into the ditch of eternal perdition, foretold by our
Savior, Matthew. 15. 14.

Lastly, It is to be noted, that although I conceive I have clearly proved the
Ordination and Jurisdiction of their Priests and Bishops to be invalid by every
argument I have used to those ends, yet to my purpose it is sufficient to have
proved it by any one: For as to prove a man to be a Thief or Forger, it is
sufficient to prove he has stolen one Horse, or forged one Deed, to hang him for
the one, or set him on the Pillory for the other; so to prove by one argument
alone that they are no Priests, nor Bishops, nor have any Jurisdiction, is
sufficient to prove them guilty of Sacramental Forgery, and by that means of
deluding and stealing away innumerable souls.

A VINDICATION OF THE ORDINATIONS OF THE Church of ENGLAND, In answer to the
former Paper.
THis Paper which you sent me being only a Repetition of those Objections which
were long ago refuted by Master Mason, with great learning and judgment, and
more lately by the most Ingenious Lord Primate of Ireland, D. Bramhall, there
needs nothing else be said to it, but only to refer the Reader to those learned
and solid Writings on this Subject. The same Plea was again taken up by the
Writers of two little Books published since his Majesty's Restoration,
entitled Erastus Senior and Erastus Junior; which was thought so unreasonable
even to some of that Communion, that one of the learned Priests they had in
England did answer them; and though he did not adventure on saying our
Ordination was good and valid, knowing how ungrateful that would have been to
his Party, yet he did overthrow all those Arguments against it that are brought
in this Paper, and showed they were of no force. This Writing of his has not
been yet Printed, but I have perused it in the Manuscript. Yet that this may
not seem to be a declining of the task you have invited me to, and because the
Books I have mentioned are not perhaps in your hands, I shall say as much in
answer to it as I hope may fully satisfy you or any impartial Reader.

The Substance of the first argument to prove that our Ministers are not
Priests, is, That by the form of our Ordination the Power of Consecrating the
Sacrament of Christ's most holy body and blood, is not given: the words only
importing a Power to dispense the Sacraments which any Deacon may do: Therefore
the power of consecrating or making Christ's Body and Blood present, being
essential to the Priesthood and our form not expressing it, and by consequence
not giving it, it wants one essential requisite to the Priesthood, and
therefore those that are ordained by it, are not true Priests.

To which I answer,

1. If our Form be the same in which Christ ordained his Apostles, we may be
very well satisfied that it is good and sufficient. Now when our Savior
Ordained them, S. John tells us that he said, S. Ioh. 20. 22.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted to them,
and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained: this being that Mission
which he gave them (as the preceding words do clearly import; As the Father
has sent me, so send I you) we can think no Form so good and so full as that
he made use of. It is true, we do not judge any Form so essential as to annul
all Ordinations that have been made by any other, for then we should condemn
both the Ordinations of the Primitive Churches, and of the Eastern Churches at
this day.

And this is the reason why even according to the ancient and most generally
received Maxims of the Schools, Orders can be no Sacrament (tho in the general
sense of the word Sacrament, it being no term used in Scripture, but brought
into the Church, we shall not much dispute against its being called so) for by
their Doctrine both Matter and Form of the Sacrament must be instituted by
Christ, and are not in the power of the Church Vasques in 3. part, D. 129. c.
5. n. 71, 72. Says it is the constant opinion of the Catholics, that the
Sacraments consist of some things and words Instituted by God, which men cannot
alter or change, and that Christ delivered both the words and things of which
the Sacraments consist. Which he says are necessary in all Churches, and
rejects the Opinion of Pope Innocent the 4th. and others who pretend that some
things are necessary to the Sacraments in some Churches, which are not
necessary in other Churches, and Disp. 239. in 3. p. c. 4. n. 36. He again
resumes the same thing, and refutes Tapperus who thought that in some
Sacraments in which Christ did not determine the Matter and Form, he left the
power of assigning these with his Church. Which he denies, and says, no Power
about the determination of the Matter and Form was left with the Church; but
the assignation of those is believed, done by Christ, for since the institution
of the Sacrament is by Divine right, the matter and form must be assigned by
the same right; for proving which, he cites the Council of ^rent.
. Now they cannot but acknowledge that the Form of giving Orders in their
Church, was not instituted by Christ, nor received in the Church for diverse
Ages, which made Pope Innocent say that the Forms of Ordination were ordered
and invented by the Church, and were therefore to be observed, otherwise it was
sufficient in giving Orders, to say, Be thou a Bishop, or be thou a Priest;
therefore though we do not annul Orders given by any other Form, yet we have
all reason to conclude that used by our Savior, to be not only sufficient, but
absolutely the best and fittest.

It is without all color of reason, that the writers of that Church will have
the words our Savior pronounced, after he had instituted the Eucharist, This
do in remembrance of me, to be the form by which he ordained them Priests; for
This do, must relate to the whole action of the Sacrament, the Receiving and
Eating, as well as the Blessing and Consecrating; therefore these words are
only a Command to the Church to continue the use of the Holy Sacrament in
Remembrance of Christ. Nor do those of the Church of Rome think these were the
words by which Christ ordained them Priests, otherwise they would use them and
think them sufficient; but they use them not, but instead of them, say, Receive
thou Power to offer Sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Mass both for the Living
and the Dead.

2. If this be ane essential defect in our Ordination, then there were no true
Priests in the Primitive Church for diverse Ages, and there are no true Priests
at this day in the Greek Church; and yet neither of these can be acknowledged
by the Church of Rome, for if they annul the Ordinations of the Primitive
Church, they likewise annul their own which are derived from them. They do also
own the Orders of the Greek Church to be valid, as appears by their receiving
them into their Communion at the Council of Florence, and by their practice
ever since; which Morinus has in the first part of his Work so fully proved
from the decrees of Popes and Councils, that the thing can no more be doubted;
and at this day there are Greek Churches at Rome, maintained at the Popes
charge, in which Orders are given according to the Greek Pontificals, as he
informs us.

That in the Primitive Forms there were no express words of giving power to
consecrate the Sacrament; I appeal to the Collection of the most Ancient Forms
of Ordination, that Morinus a Priest De ord. Sac.
of that Church, and a Penitentiary in great esteem at Rome, has made, where it
will be found that for many Ages this power was not given expressly, or in so
many words. The most ancient Rubric about this, is in the 4th. Council of
Carthage, if those Canons be genuine, When Can. 3.
a Priest is ordained, the Bishop blessing him and laying his hand on his head,
all the Priests that are present shall likewise lay their hands on his head
about the Bishops hand: Where we see that the Imposition of hands and the
Bishop's blessing, was all the matter and form of these Orders. Denis (called
the Areopagite) tells De Eccles. Hierar.
us that the Priest that was to be Ordained, kneeled before the Bishop, who
laid his hand on his head and did Consecrate him with a holy Prayer, and then
marked him with the sign of the Cross; and the Bishop and the rest of the
Clergy that were present, gave him the Kiss of Peace. Here we find nothing but
imposition of Hands and Prayer. Now there being no general Liturgies nor
Ordinals then in the World, but every Country (or perhaps every Diocese)
having their own Forms, it was never defined in what form of words this Prayer
and Benediction should be used; but was left indifferent, so the substance of
the Blessing were preserved. It is true, the Author of those Constitutions that
are ascribed to the Apostles, sets down the Prayer of Ordination, for which he
vouches Saint John Author; which is, That the Priest Lib. 8. Cap. 16.
might be filled with the spirit of Grace and Wisdom to help and govern the
Flocks with a pure heart, that he might meekly teach the people, being full of
healing Operations and instructive Discourses, and might serve God sincerely
with a pure mind and willing soul, and might through Christ perfect the sacred
Services for the people, in which there is nothing that gives in express words,
the power of Consecration.

In the most ancient Ritual that Morinus could find, which belonged to the
Church of Poictiers, and has been composed about the middle of the 6th.
Century; there is no mention in the Prayer of Consecration of any such power.

The same Prayer of Consecration is also in another Ritual which he believes
900 years old: and also in another, that he believes 800 years old. It is true,
in these Rituals there is a Blessing added, in which among other things the
Consecrator Prays, that by the obedience of the people the Priest may
transform the Body and Blood of thy Son by an undefiled Benediction; but here
is no power given, nor is this Prayer essential to the Orders so given, but a
subsequent Benediction: Therefore the want of it cannot annul Orders. And in
another MSS. Ritual belonging to the Abbey of Corbey, written about the middle
of the 9th. Century, there is nothing but the Prayer of the Consecration of a
Priest, which is the same with what is in the other Rituals, but the blessing
which mentions the transforming of the Body of Christ, is not in it, by which
it appears that it was not looked on as essential to Orders. And in another
Ritual compiled for the Church of England, now lying in the Church of Rouen,
believed to be about 800 years old, the Form of Consecration is the same that
it is in the other Rituals. The ancient Ritual of the Church of Rhemes, about
the same age, and diverse other ancient Rituals agree with these. But the first
mention of this power of saying Mass, given in the Consecration of Priests, is
in a Ritual believed to be 700 years old, compiled by some near Rome, in which
the Rite of delivering the Vessels, with these words, Receive power to offer
Sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Masses, etc. is first set down; yet that is
wanting in a Ritual of Bellay, written about the Thousandth year, so that it
was not universally received for near an Age after it was first brought in. Now
in all these Rituals the Prayer of Consecration is that which is now in the
Pontifical only one of the Prayers of the Office *, D^s Sanctification.
but is not the Prayer of Consecration, from which two things clearly follow;
First, that no Form of Ordination is so essential, but that the Church may
change it and put another in its room, and if the other be apposite and fit,
there is no fault committed by the Change, much less such a one as invalidates
the Orders so given. Secondly, It is clearly made out, that in the Ordinations
of the Primitive Church for 900 years after Christ, there was no power of
consecrating Christ's Body and Blood expressly given in the forms and words of
Ordination. So that if the want of such words annuls our Ordinations, it will
do the same to theirs; the consequence of which, will be; that there were no
true Orders in the Church of God till the latter Rites in the Roman Pontifical
were invented; and if that be true, then the Orders of the Roman Church which
have descended from them, are not true, since they flow from men not truly
ordained. And at this day the Greek Church (as is set down by Discourse sur les
Ordres Sacres.
the Learned and Pious Bishop of Vence treating of the matter and form of
Orders) when they ordain (...) give no such power, but the Bishop lays on his
right hand on the Priest's head, and says, The grace of God that always heals
the things that are weak, and perfects things that are imperfect, promotes this
very Reverend Deacon to be a Priest: Let us therefore pray for him that the
grace of the most Holy Spirit come upon him. Then those that assist, say thrice
for him, Kyrie Eleison. Then the Bishop makes the Sign of the Cross, and prays
for the grace of God on the Priest thus ordained, holding his hand all the
while over his head; then he puts the Priestly Vestiments on him, and gives him
the Kiss of Peace, which is also done by the rest of the Clergy there present.

And Habert a Doctor of Sorbonne, who has published the Greek Pontifical with
learned Observations on it, gives us this same account of their Ordinations
which Morinus has confirmed by the several ancient Greek MSS. which he has
published one of them being 800 years old, which agrees with it; and neither in
the first Prayer, nor second (during both which the Bishop holds his hands over
the head of him that is to be Consecrated) is there any mention made of this
power of consecrating Christ's Body and Blood. And in the Rituals of the
Maronites, Nestorians, and Copthites (all which Morinus proves are held good
and valid by the Church of Rome) there is no such Power given in the words of
Consecration: their Forms being almost the same with those used in the Greek
Church: so that we generally find Imposition of hands with a Prayer of Grace,
and a Blessing, were looked on as sufficient for Ordination: and this was taken
from the practices of the Apostles, who ordained by Prayer and Imposition of
Hands, as appears from the places cited in the Margent; and that these Prayers
were, that God might pour out the Acts 6. 6. Whom they see before the Apostles,
and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. Acts 13. 3. And when
they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away*
Acts 14. 23. And when they had Ordained (or literally imposed Hands) them
Elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not
the gift that is in thee which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man,
neither be thou partaker of other men's sins. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 7. Wherefore I put
thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the
putting on of my hands. For God has not given us the spirit of Fear, but of
Power, and of Love, and of a sound mind.
gifts and graces of his Spirit on them: both the nature of the thing and some
of the cited places do fully prove. From all which it appears, that either our
Ordinations are valid, or there are no true Orders in the whole Christian
Church; no not in the Church of Rome it self.

3. The very Doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome shows, that the
essentials of Ordination remain still with us. By the Maxims of the Schools
there must be matter and form in every Sacrament; the Matter is some outward
sensible action or thing; the Form are the words applied to that action or
thing which hallow it, and give the Character, when (as they say) the indelible
Character is impressed (which they believe is done by Orders) The imposition of
hands is held to be the Matter by almost all their Doctors, as is acknowledged
by Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Sac. Ord. cap. 9.
Vasques, and most of the Schoolmen are of this mind. It is true, Eugenius in
his Instruction to the Armenians, set down in the Council of Florence, declares
that the giving the Sacred Vessels, is the Matter in Orders; but the Council of
Trent (which was a far more learned and cautious Assembly than the other was,
in which there was nothing but Ignorance and Deceit) determined that Priests
have their Orders by the Imposition of hands; for treating of extreme Unction,
they decreed that the Minister of it was either Cap. de extr. Unct.
the Bishop or Priests lawfully ordained by them, by the Imposition of the
hands of the Presbytery. And Bellarmine both from the Scriptures and the
Fathers, proves that the Imposition of hands must be the Matter of this
Sacrament, since they speak of it, and of it only. Now if this be the Matter of
this Sacrament, then the Form of it must be the words joined with it in their
Pontifical, Receive the De Sacr. Ord. Can. 4.
Holy Ghost. And the Council of Trent does clearly insinuate, that this is the
form of Orders in these words; If any man say that in Ordination, the H. Ghost
is not given; and therefore that the Bishop says in vain, Receive the H. Ghost,
or by it a Character is not impressed -- Let him be an Anathema. It is true,
their Doctors to reconcile the disagreement of those two Councils, have devised
the distinction of the power of Sacrificing and of the power of Jurisdiction in
a Priest: The last they confess, is given by the Imposition of hands; the
former, they say, is given by the delivering of the Sacred Vessels.

And indeed, as Morinus does often observe, the Schoolmen being very ignorant
both of the more Ancient Rites of the Church, and of the practice of the
Eastern Churches, and looking only on the Rituals then received in the Latin
Church, have made strange work about the matter and form of Ordination; but now
that they begin to see a little further than they did, then they are of a far
different opinion; so Vasques, whom the Schoolmen of this Age, look on a^ an
Oracle, treating of Episcopal Orders, Tom. 3. m. 3. Disp. 24. c. 3.
says in express words, That the Imposition of hands is the Matter, and the
words uttered with it, are the Form of Orders, and that the Sacramental Grace
is conferred in and by the application of the Matter and Form.

It is true, He joins in with the commonly received Doctrine of the Schools
about the two powers given to Priests by a double matter and form, yet he cites
Disp. 239. Cap. 2. n. 5.
Lib. de Iu. Sacer. Lect. 5. de Sacr.
Bonaventure; and In 4. Disp. 24. pract. quaest. 4.
Petrus Sotus, for this opinion that the Imposition of hands, and the words
joined with it, were the matter and form of Priestly Orders; and though Vasques
himself undertakes to prove the other Opinion, as that which agrees best with
the principles of their Church, yet it is visible he thought the other Opinion
truer; for when he proves Disp. 235. c. 3.
Orders to be a Sacrament, he lays down for a Maxim, that the outward Rite and
Ceremony, the promise of Grace, and the command for the continuance, must be
all found in Scripture before any thing is to be acknowledged a Sacrament: and
when pursuant to this, he proves that the Rite of Orders is in Scripture, he
assigns no other but the Imposition of hands: so that according to his own
Doctrine, that is the only Sacramental Rite or the matter Orders.

And Cardinal de Lugo says, The giving Disp. de Sacr. 5. n. 87.
the Bread and the Wine we know is not determinately required by any divine
Institution, since the Greeks are ordained without it; therefore it is to be
confessed that Christ only intended there should be some proportioned Sign for
the matter of Orders, either this or that. And it is now the most commonly
received Oponion, even amongst the Schoolmen; that Christ neither determined
the Matter nor the Form of Orders, but left both to the Church. And Habert
proves that the Greek form of Ordination is sufficient to Observe. 1. and 2. de
ord. Pres.
express the grace of God then prayed for, which is the chief thing in
Ordination; and though the Greek Fathers do not mention these words that are
now used as the Form in their days, yet he cites many places out of their
writings, by which they seem to allude to those words, though the custom then
received of speaking mystically and darkly of all the Rites of the Church, made
that they did not deliver themselves more plainly about it; but he concludes
his second Observation in these words: In those Tit. 8. de Cons. Pres.
Sacraments where the Matter and Form are not expressed in Scripture, it must
be supposed that Christ did only in general institute both to his Apostles,
leaving a power with the Church to design, constitute, and determine these in
several ways; so that the chief Substance, Intention, and Scope of the
Institution, were retained with some general fitness and analogy for signifying
the effect of this Sacrament.

And if both the Eastern and Western Churches have made Rituals, which though
they differ one from another, yet are good and valid; it seems very
unreasonable to deny the Church of England, which is as free and independent a
Church as any of them, the same right; for it is to be observed that the
Catholic Church did never agree on one Uniform Ritual, or Book of Ordination,
but that was still left to the freedom of particular Churches; and so this
Church has as much power to make or alter Rituals, as any other has: Therefore
the substantials of Ordination being still retained, which are Imposition of
hands with fit Prayers and Blessings. It is most unreasonable to except against
our Forms of Ordination.

Let it be also considered, that it is indeed true, that the last Imposition of
hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost appointed in the Pontifical, is
not above 400 years old, nor can any Ancienter MSS be showed in which it is
found; yet that is now most commonly received in the Church of Rome, to be the
matter and form of Ordination; for all their Doctors hold, that either the
delivering the Vessels, and saying, Receive Power to offer Sacrifice, etc. or
the Imposition of hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. is the
Matter and Form of Orders. Against the former, Morinus has said so much Exerc.
7. cap. 1.
that I need add nothing; for by unanswerable Arguments, he proves that i^ not
essential to Orders, since neither the Primitive Church, the Eastern Churche^*
nor the Roman Rituals; or the Writers o^ the Roman Offices, ever mention it ti^
within these 700 years, and at first i^ was only done in the Consecration o^
Bishops, and afterward (by custom, no^ decree of Council or Pope being to b^
found about it) it was used in the Ordination of Priests.

The same Author does also study to Exerc. 7. cap. 2.
prove, that the Imposition of the Bishop^ hands, with the words, Receive the
Holy Ghost, is not essential to Ordination, bu^ is only a Benediction
superadded to it* and shows that it was not used in the Primitive Church, nor
mentioned by any ancient Writer; and therefore he is o^ opinion that the first
Imposition of hands gives the Orders in which both Bishop^ and Priests lay on
their hands, and pray that God would multiply his Gifts o^ those whom he had
chosen to the sunction o^ a Priest, that what they received by hi^ savor, they
might attain by his help* through Christ our Lord. If this b^ true, then two
things are to be well observed. First, That the Prayer, which according to his
opinion, is the Prayer of Consecration, was not esteemed so by the Ancient
Rituals, in which it is only called a Prayer for the Priests that were to be
Ordained; after which, the Prayer of Consecration followed; from which it
appears that there was no constant rule in giving Orders; and that what the
Church once held to be but a preparatory Prayer, was afterward made the Prayer
of Consecration; and that which they esteemed the Prayer of Consecration, was
afterward held but a Prayer of Benediction. Secondly, That in the formal words
of Consecration (if his Opinion be true) there is no power given of
consecrating the Sacraments.

But Morinus is alone in this opinion, and it is certain that the general
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is, that the last Imposition of hands is the
Matter of these Orders, and parallel to this is the Imposition of hands in the
consecration of a Bishop, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, which is
undoubtedly the matter of Episcopal Orders: Therefore that same Rite with these
words, is also the matter of the Priestly Orders. And it is a foolish and
groundless Conceit, to pretend there are two distinct power^ essential to the
Priesthood to be conferred by two several Rites; for then a^ who (...) ordained
by one of these Rite^ without the other (as were all the Priests of the
Christian World, till within these 700 years) had not the Priestly Office
entire and complete. And further, according to their own Principles* the
Character is an Indivisible thing, an^ inseparably joined to the Sacrament;
Therefore that which gives the Character, gives the Sacrament. Now according to
their Doctrine, the Character is given by the Imposition o^ hands: Therefore
the Sacrament consists in that. And all the other Rites are only Ceremonies
added to it, which are not of the essence of it; from which i^ follows that we
who use Imposition o^ hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. use
all that according to the Doctrine of that Church is necessary to it; and
therefore they have no reason to except against the validity of our Orders,
even according to their own Principles.

Fourthly, If by consecrating, o^ making present Christ's blessed Body, they
understand the incredible Mystery of Transubstantiation, we very freely confess
there is no such power given to our Priests by their Orders: But I shall not
digress from this Subject to another; therefore I may confine my Discourse to
it; I acknowledge that we do receive by our Orders, all the power of
consecrating the Sacraments which Christ has left with his Church.

First, When we are ordained to be Priests, there is given us all that which
our Church declares, inseparable to the Priesthood; and such is the
Consecrating the Eucharist: Therefore it being declared and acknowledged on all
sides; what Functions are proper to the Priesthood if we be ordained Priests,
though there were no further Declaration made in the form of Ordination, yet
the other concomitant actions and offices, showing that we are made Priests,
all that belongs to that function is therein given tous; this made Pope
Innocent define that, Be thou a Priest, was a sufficient Form in it self.

Secondly, The great end of all the Priestly Functions, being to make
reconciliation between God and Man; for which cause Saint Paul calls it the
Ministry of Reconciliation; whatever gives the power for that, must needs give
also the means necessary for it; therefore the Sacrament being a Mean
instituted by our Savior for the Remission of Sins, which he intimated in
these words. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood for the Remission of
Sins; and the death of Christ being also the great Mean in order to that end
the power of forgiving sins Ministerially, must carry with it the power of
doing all that is instituted for attaining that end.

Thirdly, The power of consecrating the Sacraments, is very fully and formally
given in our Ordination, in these words. Be thou a faithful dispenser of the
Word of God, and of his Holy Sacraments; where they bewray great
inconsideration, that think Dispensing is barely the distributing the
Sacrament, which a Deacon may do; the word is taken from the Latin, and is the
same by which they render those words of Saint Paul, Stewards of the Mysteries
of God; or according 1 Cor. 4. 1.
to the Style of the Church of Rome, which translates Mystery Sacrament;
Dispensers of the Sacraments of God; Therefore this being a phrase wherein St.
Paul expressed the Apostolical Function, one might think it could serve to
express the office of a Priest well enough, so that Dispensing is more than
Distributing; and is such a power as a Steward has, who knows and considers
every ones condition, and prepares what is fit and proper for them; therefore
the blessing of the Sacraments being a necessary part of the Dispensing of
them, they being Blessed for that end and the Dispensing them, including the
whole Office in which the Church appoints the Sacraments to be dispensed, of
which Consecration is a main part; these words do clearly give and manifestly
import the power of consecrating the Sacraments.

Now the Question comes to this? what is meant by the word Dispensing; they say
it is only to distribute the Elements; we say it is to administer the Sacrament
according to the Office. If what we say be the true signification of it; then
the power of consecrating the Elements, is formally given with our Orders. And
that this is the true meaning of it, appears both from common use; which makes
it more than barely to Distribute; and from the declared meaning of those who
use it, which is the only rule to judge of all doubtful expressions: Now the
declared meaning of our Church in the use of this word being so express and
positive; from thence it follows, that by Dispense must be understood, to give
the Sacrament according to the whole office of the Church.

The same is also to be said of the words, Take thou Authority to preach the
Word of God, and to minister the Holy Sacraments; for tho Minister and Serve in
the Greek Tongue, be the same; yet Minister in our common acceptance, is all
one with Administer, only Minister is more usual when the thing Ministered is
Sacred or Holy; therefore this takes also in it the whole Office of the
Sacrament: And as in the former words the Power is given; so in these words it
is applied and restrained in its exercise to a due vocation, to cut off idle it
inerant and for the most part, scandalous Priests.

And thus far I have considered this first Argument at great length, both
because it is that of which they make most use to raise Scruples in the
thoughts of unlearned persons; and the clearing of it will make way for
answering the rest. Therefore leaving this, I go to the second Argument; which
is, That the offering of Sacrifice is an essential part of Priesthood. So Heb.
5. 1. and 3. therefore we having no such power conferred on us, cannot be true
Priests.

To this I Answer.

First, It is strange Inconsideration to argue from the Epistle to the Hebrews,
that the Pastors of the Christian Church ought to be Priests in the sense that
is mentioned in that Epistle; the scope of which is to prove, That Christ is
the only Priest of this New Dispensation: And the notion of a Priest in that
Epistle, is a person called and consecrated to offer some living Sacrifice, and
to slay it, and by the shedding of the blood of the Sacrifice slain, to make
reconciliation: This being the sense in which the Jews understood it; the
Apostle among other Arguments to prove the death of Christ to be the true
Sacrifice, brings this for one, that there was to be another Priesthood after
the Order of Melchisedeck. For proving this, he lays down in the first four
Verses of the 5th. Chapter, the Jewish notion of a Priest; then he goes on to
prove that Christ was such a Priest called of God and Consecrated; this he
prosecutes more fully in the 7th. Chapter, where he asserts that Christ was
that other Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck, and v. 15. he calls him
another Priest, and v. 23. and 24. makes this plainer in these words; And they
truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason
of death; but this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood: From which it is apparent that the Apostles design in these places,
is to prove that there is but one Priest in that sense mentioned chap. 5. v. 1.
under the New Testament. And had the Writer of this paper read over that
Epistle, he must needs have seen this, but this is one of the effects of their
not reading the Scriptures carefully, that they make use of places of
Scripture, never considering any thing more than the general sound of some
words, without examining what goes along with them.

But as it is clear from that Epistle, that there is but one Priest in the
strict notion of it; so it is no less clear that there is but one propitiatory
Sacrifice among Christians in its strict notion, for having mentioned the
frequent Oblations to take away sins under the Mosaical Law, chap. 5. v. 3. he
makes the opposition clear, chap. 7. v. 27. in these words. Who needs not
daily as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins and
then for the people; for this he did once when he offered up himself. And chap.
9. v. 7. having mentioned the High Priest's annual entering into the most Holy
place; he sets in opposition to it v. 12. Christ's entering in once to the Holy
place, having made Redemption for us by his own Blood. And v. 22. he says,
Without shedding of Blood there was no Remission; by which he does clearly put
down all unbloody Sacrifices that are propitiatory: And v. 28. he says, Christ
was offered once to bear the sins of many. And chap. 10. v. 2. he says, That
when the worshippers are once purged, then would not Sacrifices cease to be
offered? To prove that the Sacrifices of the Law had not that virtue: Therefore
we being purged by the Blood of Christ, must offer no more propitiatory
Sacrifices; and all this is made yet clearer, v. 11. and 12. And every Priest
stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices which can
never take away sins. But this man after he had offered up one Sacrifice for
sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. From all which you may see
it is as plain as can be, that there is but one Priest and one propitiatory
Sacrifice under the New Testament, for the places I have cited, are not some
ambiguous or dark Expressions, but full and formal Proofs, by which in a long
Series of Discourse and Argument, the thing is put out of doubt. Therefore
those of that Church do very unwisely ever to mention that Epistle, or to say
any thing that may oblige people to look upon it; So that, except to such as
they are sure will read no more of it than they will show them or cite to them,
they had best speak of it to no body else.

Secondly, Though we deny all propitiatory Sacrifices, but that which our
Blessed Savior offered for us once on the Cross; yet we acknowledge that we
have Sacrifices in the true strict and Scriptural notion of that word; for
propitiatory ones are but one sort of Sacrifice, which in its general notion
stands for any Holy Oblations made to God; and in this sense, Thank-Offerings,
Peace Offerings, and Free Will Offerings, were Sacrifices under the Law; so
were also their Commemorative Sacrifices of the Paschal Lamb, which were all
Sacrifices, though not Propitiatory. And in this sense Psalm. 142. 2. Let my
Prayer be set forth beforethee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as
the Evening Sacrifice. Psalm. 52. 27. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit,
a broken and a contrite heart, O God thou will not despise. Hebr. 13. 15. By
him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is
the fruit of our lips, giving Thanks to his Name. Romans 12. 1. I beseech you
therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
Philip. 4. 18. But I have all, and abound; I am full, having received of
Epaphroditus, the things which were sent from you, an Odor of a sweet smell, a
Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God.
our prayers and praises; a broken heart, and the dedicating our lives to the
service of God, are Sacrifices, and are so called in Scripture; so also is the
giving of Alms. And in this sense we deny not but the Holy Eucharist is a
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; and it is so called in one of the
Collects. It is also a Commemoration of that one Sacrifice which it represents,
and by which the worthy receivers have the virtue of that applied to them. The
Oblation of the Elements of Bread and Wine to be Sanctified, is also a kind of
Sacrifice; and in all these Senses we acknowledge the Sacrament to be a true
Sacrifice, as the Primitive Church did.

But as we do not allow it to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for the living, much
less can we believe it such for the dead; or that the Priests consecrating and
consuming of it, is a Sacrifice for the people; it being a Sacrifice as it is a
Sacrament, which is only to those who receive it. And in these three points;
First, That it is no propitiatory Sacrifice: 2. That the dead receive no good
from it: 3. That the Priests taking it alone, does no good to the people who
receive it not: We are sure we have all Antiquity of our side. But to digress
upon that, were to go too far out of the way; and the Writers of Controversies
have done it fully. Therefore the power of Dispensing the Word of God and of
his Holy Sacraments gives all the Authority that is in the Christian Church for
offering of Sacrifices. And if they deny this, they must deny the validity of
all the ancient Ordinations, for they can show no such Form in any of their
Ordinals.

Thirdly, What was said before of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome about the
matter and form of Orders, as they are a Sacrament, shows that the power they
give in the Ordination of Priests, of offering Sacrifices, is not essential to
it, but only a Rite they have added to it; the want whereof can be no essential
defect, and so can never annual our Orders: What was said before in Answer to
the first Argument, is again to be remembered here, that in all the Ancient
Rituals there is no power of offering propitiatory Sacrifices given in the form
of Ordination. It is true in the M SS. which lies in the Monastery of St.
German; there is a new Rite set down of delivering the Priestly Vestments, in
which among other words these are added: And Do thou offer Propitiatory
Sacrifices for the Sins and Offenses of the People, to Almighty God. Which
words are now omitted in that part of the Roman Pontifical, and made a part of
the final Blessing given at the end of the Office, but this at most is but 800
years old; and therefore cannot be essential to Orders since there were true
Priests in the Christian Church 800 years before this was used. And to this day
in the Greek Church there is no power given by the Consecration to offer
propitiatory Sacrifices; for though in the second Prayer said in Ordinations in
which God's Holy Spirit is prayed for upon the Priest, That he may be worthy to
stand before the Altar of God without blame, and may preach the Gospel of his
Kingdom, and holily administer the Word of his Truth: It is added, And may
offer to thee Gifts and Spiritual Sacrifices, but there is no reason to gather
from these words that they give power for offering Propitiatory Sacrifices. We
acknowledge that we offer Gifts and Sacrifices in the Holy Eucharist; but we
reject Propitiatory ones, and these words do not at all import them. And the
truth of it is when the Writers of the Roman Church are pressed with the
Arguments before mentioned, that the Eucharist can be no Propitiatory
Sacrifice: Since 1. there no Blood shed in it: 2. No Destruction is made of the
Sacrifice; for it is only the Accidents and not the Blessed Body of Christ that
the Priest consumes: 3. That Christ's Cross is called one Sacrifice once
offered: 4. That his being now exalted at the Father's right hand, shows his
Body can no more be subject to be Sacrificed or mangled; When these with many
Authorities from the Father's are brought, they are forced to fly to some
Distinctions by which their Doctrine comes to differ little from ours; but
still those high and indecent Expressions remain in their Rituals and Missals,
which they are forced to mollify, as they do those Prayers in which the same
things, and in the same manner and words are asked of the Blessed Virgin and
the other Saints, which we ask of God. And though they would stretch them to a
bare Intercession, which the genuine sense of the words will not bear, yet they
will never change them, for it is the standing Maxim of that Church never to
confess an error, nor make any change to the better.

The third Reason against our Orders of Priesthood, is a Repetition of the
first, and is already answered.

The fourth Argument is, That none can Institute the Form of a Sacrament, to
give Grace and make present Christ's Body and Blood, but the Authors of Grace,
and those that had power over his Body and Blood; but they that Instituted this
Form, had only their Authority from the Parliament; as appears by the Act it
self, by which some Prelates and other Learned men being empowered, did Invent
the Form before mentioned, never before heard of either in Scripture or the
Church of God.

To this I Answer.

First, It is certain the Writer of this Paper did never think it would have
been seen by any body that could examine it, but intended only to impose on
some Illiterate persons; otherwise he would never have said that a Form which
Christ himself used when he ordained his Apostles, and which is used in their
own Church as the proper Form of Ordination, was never before heard of in the
Scripture or the Church of God.

Secondly, Those who compiled the Liturgy and Ordinal, had no other Authority
from the Parliament than Holy and Christian Princes did before give in the like
cases. It is a common place and has been handled by many Writers; How far the
Civil Magistrate may make Laws and give Commands about Sacred things? It Is
known what Orders David and Solomon, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, gave in
such cases, They divided the Priests into several Courses, gav^ 1 Chro. 23. 6.
1 Chro. 24. 19. ^ Kings 2. 27. 2 Chro. 17. 7, 8, 9. 2 Chro. 29. 4. 5. 15. and
27. Verse. 30. 2 Chro. 30. 2.
Rules for their attendance, turned out ^ High Priest and put another in his
stead* sent the Priests over the Cities to teach the People; gathered the
Priests and commanded them to Sanctify themselves, and the house of the Lord,
and offer Sacrifices o^ the Altar. And gave orders about the Forms of their
Worship, that they should praise God in the words of David and Asaph: and gave
orders about the time (...) observing the Passover, that in a case o^ Necessity
it might be observed on the second Month; though by their Law it w^ to be kept
the first Month. And for the Christian Emperors, let the Code or the Novels, or
the Capitulars of Charles the Great, be read, and in them many Law^ will be
found about the Qualification^* Elections, and Consecrations of Churchmen made
by the best of all the Roman Emperors, such as Constantine, Theod^* sius, etc.
They called Councils to jud^ of the greatest points of Faith, which met and
sat on their Writ, whose determinations they confirmed, and added the Civil
Sanction to them. And even Pope Leo, though a higher spirite^ Ep. 43.
Pope than any of his Predecessors were did entreat the Emperor Martian to
annul the second Council of Ephesus, an^ to give order that the Ancient Decrees
of the Council of Nice should remain in Force. Now it were a great Scandal on
those Councils to say, that they had no Authority for what they did, but what
they derived from the Civil Powers; So it is no less unjust to say, because the
Parliament Empowered some Persons to draw Forms for the more pure
Administration of the Sacraments; and Enacted that these only should be
lawfully exercised in this Realm, which is the Civil Sanction; that therefore
these persons had no other Authority for what they did: Let those men declare
upon their Consciences if there be any thing they desire more earnestly than
such an Act for Authorizing their own Forms and would they make any Scruple to
accept of it, if they might have it: Was it ever heard of that the Civil
Sanction which only makes any constitution to have the force of a Law, gives it
another Authority than a Civil one; and such Authority the Church of Rome
thinks fit to accept of in all States and Kingdoms of that Religion.

Thirdly, The Prelates and other Divines that compiled our Forms of Ordination,
did it by virtue of the authority they had from Christ, as Pastors of his
Church which did empower them to teach the people the pure Word of God, and to
administer the Sacraments and perform all other holy Functions according to the
Scripture; the practice of the Primitive Church, and the rules of Expediency
and Reason; and this they ought to have done though the Civil Powers had
opposed it; in which case their duty had been to have submitted to whatever
severities or persecutions they might have been put to for the Name of Christ,
and the Truth of his Gospel. But on the other hand, when it pleased God to turn
the hearts of those that had the chief Power, to set forward this good Work,
then they did (as they ought) with all Thankfulness, acknowledge so great a
Blessing, and accept and improve the Authority of the Civil Powers for adding
the Sanction of a Law to the Reformation, in all the parts and branches of it.
So by the authority they derived from Christ, and the Warrant they had from
Scripture and the Primitive Church, these Prelates and Divines, made those
Alterations and Changes in the Ordinal; and the King and the Parliament, who
are vested with the Supreme Legislative Power, added their Authority to them to
make them Obligatory on the Subjects. Which is all that is imported by the word
Lawful in the Act of Parliament; the ordinary use whereof among Lawyers, is, A
thing according to Law.

The ^th. Argument against the Validity of our Priestly Orders, is, That we
have them from those that are not Bishops; which carries him to the next
Conclusion, that our Bishops are not Bishops.

But before I follow him to that, I must desire you would consider with how
much disingenuity this Paper is framed, that would impose on the easy Reader
the belief of our first Reformers not being true Bishops, when the Writer
cannot but know that Arch Bishop Cranmer was a Bishop as truly Consecrated and
Invested, as any of the Roman Church were, and was confirmed by the Pope, who
sent him the Pall, and to satisfy you that they knew him to be such, they
degraded him with the usual Ceremonies before his Martyrdom. So that he being
the Fountain of our Clergy that succeeded him, and being truly Consecrated
himself, all those he Ordained, are by the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
Bishops or Priests, since Orders according to their Doctrine leave an Indelible
Character, which can never be taken away. So that by their Principles no
following sentence could deprive him of the power of Ordaining. It is true,
there were many disorderly practices of some Popes in the latter Ages, in
annulling Orders and re-ordaining those ordained by others; for Pope Urban the
second appointed those who were ordained Simoniacally, to be re-ordained. And
Stephen the 4th. in a Synod, Decreed that all the Ordinations his predecessor
Pope Constantine had made, were null and void, because he from a Layman was
chosen a Pope, and though he passed through the Intermedial degrees of Priest
and Deacon, yet he stopped not so long in them, as was appointy by the Canons,
and upon the same account it was also judged, that Photius (the Learned
Patriarch of Constantinople, who in six days went through all the
Ecclesiastical Decrees, from a Layman to a Patriarch) had no power of Ordaining
lawfully, and all the Orders he gave, were annulled by Pope Nicolaus. And to
mention no more, the Orders given by Pope Formosus, were annulled by his
Successor Pope Stephen the 6th. upon the pretense of some Crimes and
Irregularities with which he was charged; these practices as they gave great
Scandal, so they gave occasion to much disputing about the Legality and
Canonicalness of these proceedings, for the Canonists and Schoolmen being
generally very ignorant, and prepossessed with an opinion of the Popes
Infallibility, studied to flatter the Court of Rome, all that was possible. Yet
on the other hand there was so much to be said against these proceedings, that
as appears by Petrus Damiani, Auxilius, and other Writers of that time, there
was great perplexity and many different Opinions about them. But the ignorance
and passion of those Ages appears evidently in this particular, for there is
nothing more manifest than that the Ancient Church was of another opinion; and
as in the debate between Pope Stephen and Saint Cyprian about the re-baptizing
of Heretics, the constant opinion and practice of the following Ages, was
against re-baptizing such as were baptized by those Heretics who retained the
essentials of Baptism: So by the same parity of reason, and upon the same
Arguments they held the Ordinations of Heretics valid, that retained the
essentials of Ordination.

In the case of Heretics we have these Instances, Faelix was consecrated
Bishop Ath. Ep. ad Solit. Bar. ad An. 355. n. 56, 57. Bar. ad An. 357. n. 63,
64.
of Rome by the Arians in the room of Liberius, whose banishment they had
procured, and yet he was acknowledged a righteous Pope, and his Ordinations
were accounted valid. In the General Council of Ephesus the Priests of the
Messalian Heresy were appointed to be received into the Church, and continue
Priests upon renouncing their Heresy. The same was also granted to Nestorians,
Pelagians, Eutychians, Monothelites, and diverse other Heretics, as Morinus
Cap. 10, 11. Exerc. 5.
proves at length. And at this day though the Greek Church is condemned by the
Roman, as Heretical in the point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, yet they
are received according to their Orders into their Communion when they renounce
their Heresy. And their great Disp. 141. cap. 1.
Vasques says, that all the Schoolmen and Summists agree, that an heretical
Excommunicate or suspended Bishop has still the power of giving Orders, for
which he cites many Schoolmen; and he likewise N. 8.
proves, that a Bishop after degradation retains the same power: And the case
of Schismatics is no less clear, for to wave the Decision of the Council of
Nice (which seems somewhat dubious) in the case of the Novatian Ordinations we
find frequently in St. Austins Treatises and Conferences with the Donatists,
Collat. 2. cum Donat. and Ep. 50.
that they offered to them, if they would return to the Unity of the Church, to
receive them according to their Orders. So that they did not think Schism did
take away the power of giving Orders. And in the case of that long and
scandalous Schism of the Papacy for fifty years together, when the one sat at
Rome and the other at Avignon, though beside their Schism, Depositions,
Excommunications and Censures of all sorts passed on both sides by each of
those Popes against the other, and it must be confessed that one of them was
the Schismatic, and by consequence the Censures fell justly on him; Yet both
their Ordinations were held valid, and when the matter was settled at the
Council of Constance, the Ordinations on no side were annulled or renewed. And
though Petrus de Lunay who was called Benedict the 13th. refused to submit to
them and lay down his pretensions as the others did, yet when Sect. 3^.
they gave sentence against him, there is not a word in it of annulling Orders
given by him. From all which it follows, that neither the pretense of Heresy,
Schism, nor Censures will according to the practice either of the Primitive
Church, or of the Church of Rome even in these latter Ages, be of any force to
invalidate our Orders.

Which was well seen by Morinus; and though he does not write upon this head
with so much ingenuity, as he does on other points; yet he lays this down as a
Maxim, That all the Ordinations of a Heretics Cap. 8. Exer. 5. number. 7.
and Schismatiques made according the forms of the Church, and where the
Heretics that gave them were also rightly Ordained according to the forms of
the Church, are valid as to their Substance, and are not to be repeated though
they be unlawful; and both he that gave, and he that received them, sinned
grievously; nor is it in any case lawful for a Catholic to receive Orders from
Heretics or Schismatiques; Therefore in those Ordinations, if all other
things be done according to the form of the Church, and only the Crime of
Heresy be charged on the Orders given, the substance of it is not thereby
vitiated, but there is a perfect and entire Character begotten, only the use of
it is forbidden; yet he that neglects that Interdict, though he becomes very
guilty, begets a new Character on the person Ordained by him: Therefore
Heretics or Schismatiques so Ordained, need no new Ordination, but only a
Reconciliation; and what is said of Heretics and Schismatiques, does hold
much more of those who are Ordained by persons that are Excommunicated, deposed
or degraded. And for those things that are essential to Ordination, enough has
been said already to demonstrate what they be; to which I shall only add what
that Author the most learned of all that ever treated of this Subject, says in
the beginning of the next Chapter. In the Rite of Holy Ordination, there are
some things of Divine Institution and Tradition, which do always and in all
places belong to holy Orders; such as Imposition of hands, and a convenient
Prayer which the Scripture has delivered, and the universal practice of the
Church has confirmed. Now these our Church has retained; and therefore from all
that has been said, I may with good reason conclude that all the Ordinations
that were derived from ArchBishop Cranmer, having (as has been already showed)
the essentials of Ordination; and being done with the due numbers of Ordainers
(as can be proved Authentically from the public Registers) must be good and
valid. And though we have separated from many errors and corruptions of the
Church of Rome, and in particular have thrown out many superstitious Rites out
of the Forms of Ordination, that we might reduce these to a primitive
simplicity; yet as we acknowledge the Church of Rome holds still the
fundamentals of the Christian Religion; so we confess she retains the
essentials of Ordination, which are the separating of persons for sacred
employments, and the authorizing them with an Imposition of hands, and a Prayer
for the effusion of the Holy Ghost; therefore we do not annul their Orders, but
receive such as come from that Church, and look on them as true Priests by the
Ordination they got among them, and such were our first Reformers, from whom we
have derived our Ordination.

Having followed this Paper through the first Conclusion, and the Arguments
brought to confirm it; I come now to the second; which is, That our Bishops are
not true Bishops. For which his first Argument is,

That our Bishops being no Priests, they can be no Bishops. This he thinks he
has already proved, therefore he sets himself to prove that none can be a
Bishop till he be first a Priest: About this I shall not dispute much; for we
acknowledge that Regularly and Canonically it must be so, and assert that ours
were truly such; therefore we need not contend further about this; though he
must be very ignorant of Antiquity if he does not know that there are diverse
instances in Church History of Laymen, nay, and Catechumens chosen Bishops; and
we do not find those Intermedial steps were made of ordaining them first
Deacons and then Priests, but by what appears to us, they at once made them
Bishops. But I shall wave this, only I must put this Author in mind of a great
Oversight he is guilty of, when he goes about to prove our Bishops not to be
true Bishops, because they were not true Priests: Does he not know that Bishop
Ridley, and the other Bishops of King Edward's days, were Ordained Priests by
the Rites of the Church of Rome. And this was acknowledged by themselves, when
they degraded them at Oxford, before they suffered; if those then were Priests,
this is no Argument why they might not be Bishops: For in this matter, that
which we ought to enquire into most carefully, is what they were; for if they
were both Priests and Bishops, and if the Forms by which they ordained others,
retained all the essential Requisites, then we who are derived from them, are
also true Priests and Bishops.

His second Argument is, No Ordination is valid, unless there be fit words used
to determine the outward Rites, to signify the Order given, which he says our
own Writers (Mr. Mason and Dr. Bramhall) do acknowledge. But the words of
Consecration do not express this, they being only, Take the Holy Ghost, and
remember that thou stir up the Grace, etc. which do not express the office of a
Bishop; and having proposed these Arguments, that the unlearned Reader may
think he deals fairly, he goes on to set down our Objections, and answer them.

First, It has been already made out that the Form, Receive the Holy Ghost, was
that which our Savior made use of when he ordained the Apostles, without
adding, To the office of an Apostle. For which it is to be considered, that all
Ecclesiastical Orders being from the influence and operation of the Holy Ghost,
which being one, yet has different 1 Cor. 12. 5, 6.
Operations for the different Administrations; therefore the concomitant
Actions, Words and Circumstances must show, for which Administration the Holy
Ghost is prayed for, since that general Prayer is made for all; but the
Functions being different, the same Holy Ghost works differently in them all.
Therefore it is plain from the practice of our Savior, that there is no need
of expressing in the very words of Ordination, what power is thereby given
since our Savior did not express it, but what he had said both before and
after, did determine the sense of those general words to the Apostolical
Function.

Secondly, The whole Office of Consecrating Bishops, shows very formally and
expressly what power is given in these words. Now though the Writers of the
Church of Rome, would place the Form of Consecration in some Imperative words;
yet we see no reason for that, but the complex of the whole Office is that
which is to be chiefly considered, and must determine the sense of those words;
So that a Priest being presented to be made a Bishop, the King's Mandate being
read for that effect, he swearing Canonical obedience as Bishop Elect, Prayers
being put up for him as such, together with other circumstances which make it
plain what they are about; those general words are by these qualified and
restrained to that sense.

We do not fly here to a secret and unknown Intention of the Consecrators, as
the Church of Rome does, but to the open and declared intention of the Church
appearing in this: So that it is clear that the sense of those general words is
so well explained, that they do sufficiently express and give the power and
office of a Bishop.

Thirdly, In the Church of Rome the Consecration of a Bishop is made with these
words, Receive the Holy Ghost. This being all that is said at the Imposition of
hands, which as has been already proved, is the matter or sensible sign of
Orders. And in the Prayer that follows these words, there is no mention made of
the Episcopal Dignity or Function, and all the other Ceremonies used in the
Consecration of a Bishop, are but Rites that are added for the more Solemnity,
but are not of the essence of Ordination according to what is now most
generally received, even in their own Church. And Vasques does set down this
very Objection Disp. 240. c. 5. n. 60.
against the form of their Episcopal Ordination, as not sufficient, because it
does not specify the Episcopal power; to which he answers, that though the
words express it not, yet the other circumstances that accompany them do it
sufficiently; by which it appears that this Argument is as strong against their
Ordination as ours; and that they must make use of the same Answers that we
give to it.

Fourthly, The ancient Forms of Consecrating Bishops, differing so much one
from another, and indeed agreeing in nothing but in an Imposition of hands,
with a convenient Prayer; it has been already made out that there is no
particular Form so necessary, that the want of it annuls Orders, and that the
Church has often changed the words of these Prayers upon several occasions, and
it was ever thought that if the words do sufficiently express the mind of the
Church, there was no more scruple to be made of the validity of the Orders so
given; for if the Episcopal Character were begotten by any of those Rites which
the Church of Rome has added of late such as the Chrism, the giving the
Gospels, the Ring, the Staff, or any other set down in the Pontifical, then
there were no true Bishops in the Church for many Ages. In the most Ancient
Latin Ritual now to be found, there is nothing in the Consecration of a Bishop,
but the Prayer which is now marked for the Anthem after the Consecration in the
Pontifical. In a Ritual believed to be Deus Honorum omnium 7.
800 year old, the anointing is first to be found, but there is no other Rite
with it in another Ritual somewhat later than the former; the giving the Ring
and the Staff, were used, which at first were the Civil Ceremonies of
Investiture, and in the Greek Church, none of those Rites were ever* used, they
having only an Imposition of hands, and saying with it, The Divine Grace that
heals the things that are weak^ and perfects the things that imperfect;
promotes this very Reverend Priest to be (...) Bishop: Let us therefore pray
that the grace of the Holy Ghost may come upon him, then all that are
assisting, say thrice, Kyrie Eleison. Then the Consecrato^ lays the Gospels on
the head and neck of him that is Consecrated, having before Signed his head
thrice with the sign of the Cross; and all the other Bishop^ touch the Gospels,
and there is a Prayer said. And thus it is clear, that if those Rites in the
Pontifical be essential to Episcopal Orders, neither the Primitive Church nor
the Greek Churches gave them truly, which are things they cannot admit:
Therefore it is most dising^nuously done of them to insinuate (...) unlearned
persons, that our Orders an^ not good, when in their Conscience^ they know that
they have all those Requisites in them, which by the Principle^ of the most
Learned men of their ow^ Church, are essentially and absolutely necessary to
make them good and valid.

But I go next to see what Ingenuity there is in the Objections which he sets
down in our Name against the former Arguments. There is nothing in which any
man that writes of Controversy, shows his candor and fair dealing more, than
in proposing the Arguments of the adverse party with their full and just weight
in them: And it is a piece of Justice and Moral honesty, to which men are
obliged, for to pretend that one brings what may be objected against his
Opinion, and then not to set down any strong and material Arguments; but on the
contrary, to bring some trifling and ridiculous things that no Learned persons
did ever make use of, is to Lie: and really I cannot think the Writer of this
Paper has common honesty in him, that will pretend to set down our Objections,
and yet passes them over every one. Our Arguments are drawn, 1. From Christ's
own practices. 2. From the practice of the Apostles and the Primitive Church.
3. From the practice of the Greek Church at this day. 4. From the Doctrine and
the practice of the Church of Rome. These are the Arguments on which our Cause
does rest, and upon these Authorities we are ready to put the thing to an
Issue. But he was wiser than to mention any of those, for he knew he could not
get of^ them so well; and therefore that he might deceive those that are ready
to take any thing off his hands upon trust, he brings Objections which he knows
none of us will make.

To the first I need say nothing, having* I presume, said enough already, to
show that both our Priestly and Episcopal Orders are good and valid.

But his second, is such a piece of for dealing, that really he deserves to be
very sharply reproved for it. In it he makes us object, That though the form of
our Ordination since King Edward the 6th* his days, till his Majesty's happy
Restoration was invalid; yet that is s^lved by the Parliament that now sits,
that appointed the words of Ordination to be, Receive the Holy Ghost, for the
Office of a Priest or for the office of a Bishop. And having set up this Man of
Straw, he runs unmercifully at him, he stabs him in at the heart, he shoots him
through the head, and then to make sure work of him, he cuts him all to pieces
that he shall never live nor speak again; and all this out of pure Chivalry to
show his valor. He tells us the Salve is worse than the Sore, that by the
change, the Form used before is confessed to be invalid, else why did they
change it? He tells us, Secondly, By this we acknowledge all our Bishops and
Priests till that time to be null. Thirdly, That they not being true Bishops,
cannot Ordain validly, for no man can give what he has not. And fourthly, The
power that Act gives, is only from the Parliament and not from Christ; and this
destroys our Orders, Root and Branch. So there is an end of us, we are all
killed upon the spot, never to live more. Yet there is no harm done, nor blood
spilt, all is safe and sound. But to satisfy any person whom such a scruple
may trouble. Let it be considered,

First, That we pretend not that there is any greater validity in our Orders
since the last Act of Uniformity, than was before; for those words that are
added are not essential to the Ordination, but only further and clearer
Explanations of what was clear enough by the other parts of these Offices
before: Therefore there is no change made of any thing that was essential to
our Ordinations, an Explanation is not a change; for did the Fathers of the
Councils of Nice and Constantinople change or annul the Faith and Creeds that
the Church used before, when they added Explanations to the Creed. Therefore
the adding of some explanatory words for cutting off the occasions of
Cavilling, is neither a change nor an annulling our former Orders.

Secondly, The change of the Form of Consecration does not infer an annulling
of Orders given another way, for then all the Ordinations used in the Primitive
Church, are annulled by the Roman Church at this day, since the forms of
Ordination used by them now, were not used in the former Ages; and the Forms
used in the former ages are not looked on by them now to be the Forms of
Consecration, but are only made parts of the Office, and used as Collects or
Anthems; and yet here is a real change, which by their own Principles cannot
infer a nullity of Orders given before the Change made.

Thirdly, If the addition of a few explanatory words invalidates former Orders,
then the adding many new Rites, which were neither used by Christ nor his
Apostles, nor the Primitive nor Eastern Churches, will much more invalidate
former Orders, especially when these are believed to be so essential as that
they confer the power of consecrating Christ's Body and Blood, and of offering
Sacrifices, and were for diverse Ages universally looked on in that Church to be
the Matter and Form of Orders, as was already observed of the Rite of giving
the Sacred Vessels with the words joined to it, which Pope Eugenius in express
words, calls the matter of Priestly Orders, and the words joined to them the
Form (in his Decree for the Armenians in the Council of Florence) and even the
Form he mentions is also altered now, for the celebrating Masses are not in the
Form he mentions, but are now added to that part of the Office in the Roman
Church. Let the Pontifical be considered, in the Ordination of Priests; we find
the Priestly Vestiments given, both the Stole and the Casula, then their hands
are anointed, then the Vessels of the Sacrament are delivered to them, with
words pronounced in every of those Rites, besides many other lesser Rites that
are in the Rubric. In the Consecration of a Bishop, his head is Anointed, then
his hands, then his Pastoral Staff is blessed and put in his hands; next the
Ring is blessed, and put on his singer, then the Gospels are put in his hands,
then the Mitre is blessed, and put on his head; next the Gloves are blessed,
and put on his hands, and then they se^ him on his Throne: Besides many lesser
Rites to be seen in the Rubric. Now with what face can they pretend that our
adding a few explanatory words, can infer the annulling all Orders given before
that addition, when they have added so many material Ceremonies in which they
place great significancy and virtue. Is not this to swallow a Camel and to
strain at a Gnat, and to object to us a Mote in our eye, when there is a Beam
in their own eye.

Fourthly, This Addition was indeed confirmed by the authority of Parliament,
and there was good reason to desire that, to give it the force of a Law, but
the authority of these changes is wholly to be derived from the Convocation,
who only consulted about them and made them and the Parliament did take that
care in the Enacting them, that might show they did only add the force of a Law
to them; for in passing them, it was Ordered that the Book of Common Prayer and
Ordination should only be read over (and even that was carried upon some
debate, for many as I have been told, moved that the Book should be added to
the Act, as it was sent to the Parliament from the Convocation without ever
reading it; but that seemed indecent and too implicit to others) and there was
no change made in a Tittle by the Parliament. So that they only Enacted by a
Law what the Convocation had done.

As for what he adds that the Book of Ordination, is not to found in every
Edition of the Common Prayer Book, with his gloss upon it, that most think the
Bishops for shame suppress it. Really the Writer of this Paper must pardon me,
to say, it seems he has no shame, that can set down in writing such a
disingenious Allegation: Pray who are these most that think so? [ Most] in our
Language stands for the [ greater part] now how many can he find that agree
with him in this Gloss? I doubt, very few; for I am sure, not all his own
Party, and not one of ours. So that upon a Calculation those Most think will be
found to be no more but himself and a very few ignorant persons on whom he has
imposed this conceit. Every body knows that when a Book is once printed by
public Authority, and universally sold in the Shops, those in Authority cannot
out of shame study to suppress it. But the use of the Book of Ordination not
being so universal as are the other Offices of the Church; the Stationers and
Printers, who do chiefly consider their Interest in the ready sale and vent of
Books, do not print so many of them as of the other, there being at least 500
that use the Common Prayer, for one that needs the other, and a
Common Prayer Book without it, will sell cheaper than with it; therefore a
great many Copies have it not. This is not as Most think, but as every body
knows, the true reason why in many Copies of the Common Prayer Book, the
Ordinal is wanting. Let him name one Bishop that would not permit it to be
dispersed abroad or let him be looked on as a bold and impudent Slanderer.

Thus far I have followed this Paper in the two first Conclusions; and now I
come to the Third; which is,

That Protestant Ministers and Bishops have no power to Preach, etc. from
Christ, but only from the Parliament.

And this he proves, because they have no more power than the first Protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker had, from whom all Jurisdiction was
derived to the rest; Now he had no power from Christ; for first, They that
Consecrated him had no such Jurisdiction, being no actual Bishops, two of them
were only Elect and not actual Bishops, and a third only a quondam Bishop, but
had no actual Jurisdiction, and a fourth was a Suffragan Bishop to Canterbury,
who had no Jurisdiction but what he had from the Archbishop of Canterbury,
much less Authority to give him Jurisdiction over himself and all the other
Bishops of the Land, because none can give what he has not.

This I must confess is such a piece, that no man can read it but he must
conclude the Writer of it has no sort of Ecclesiastical Learning, or else has
very little Moral honesty. I need not tell him that Matthew Parker was not the
first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury; he knows Archbishop Cranmer was
both a Protestant and Archbishop of Canterbury; but this may be easily passed
over, there being more material Errors in this period. And

First, Does he believe himself, when he says that none can instal a Bishop in
a Jurisdiction above himself? Pray then who invests the Popes with their
Jurisdiction? Do not the Cardinals do it, and are not they as much the Popes
Suffragans as Hodgskins was Canterburi^. So that if inferiors cannot invest one
with a superior Jurisdiction, then the Popes can have none legally, since they
have theirs from the Cardinals that are inferior in Jurisdiction. This also
holds in all the Patriarchal Consecrations. For Instance, when John commonly
called Chrysostom, a Priest of Antioch, was chosen Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Consecrated by the Bishops of that Province according to
the Canons, if there be any force in this Argument, it will annul his Orders as
well as Archbishop Parker's, for the Writer must needs see the case is
parallel.

Secondly, Or if he insists upon their being Elect to others Sees, and that one
of them had no See at all. Let me ask him, if when St. Athanase was banished
out of Alexandria, and others thrust in his place; or when Liberius was
banished out of Rome, and Felix (whom they acknowledge a righteous Bishop) put
in his place, they had ordained Priests and Bishops had these Orders been null,
because they were violently thrust out of their Sees? Certainly Persecution and
Violence rather makes the glory of Ecclesiastical Functions shine more
brightly, but cannot be imagined to strip them of their Character, and to
disable them for exercising the Offices of their function.

Thirdly, There are two things to be considered in the consecration of a
Primate, the one is the giving him the Order of a Bishop, the other is the
investing him with the Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan, for the former, all
Bishops are equal in Order, none has more or less than another: therefore any
Bishop duly Consecrated, how mean soever his Diocese be, is no less a Bishop
than the greatest; the Bishop of Man is a Bishop as well as the Archbishop of
Canterbury; so that the Consecrators of Matthew Parker being Bishops by their
Order, they had sufficient power and authority to Consecrate him. By which it
appears there can be no question made of his being truly a Bishop. And as for
his Jurisdiction: Two things are also to be considered; the one is, The
Jurisdiction annexed to that See. The other is his being rightly clothed and
invested with it. For the former it cannot be denied but the Jurisdiction of
Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, has no Divine Institution: for all
that any Bishop has by divine Institution, is to seed the flock of his own
Diocese, but the Canons and practice of the Church and the Civil Laws, have
introduced a further Jurisdiction over the Bishops of a District or Province;
this did rise by Custom upon the division of the Provinces of the Roman Empire,
and was settled over the World before any general Council did meet to make
Decrees about it: And therefore the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus
and Chalcedon, only approved what they found practiced, and confirmed some new
Divisions of Provinces, that were made by the Emperors; and so the Kings in the
Western Church did first give those Preheminences to some Towns and Sees; for
the original Dignity of Sees rose out of the Dignity of the Towns, which
appears clearly in all the Patriarchats, chiefly in that of Rome and
Constantinople. This is a thing so fully inquired into by many, but chiefly by
the most Learned Petrus de Marca Archbishop of Paris, De Concor. Imp. and
Sacer.
that I need say no more of it. And the Dignity of the Sea of Canterbury was
from King Ethelbert, who first Erected that See. It is true, the Popes did
afterward usurp a new Jurisdiction over all Churches; they took upon them to
Judge of the Dignity of all Sees, to send the Pall, to have reserved Cases, to
grant Exemptions to the Regulars, with many other Encroachments on the
Episcopal Jurisdiction, which has been very fully inquired into, not only by
Protestant Writers, but by many of the Roman Communion, chiefly those of the
Gallicane Church, and many of the Bishops at the Council of Trent, studied to
recover their Liberties that were trodden under foot by the Court of Rome, but
the Intrigues and cunning of that Court were too hard for them.

The other thing in Episcopal Institution, is the Installing or Inthroning the
Metropolitan, that this was always done by the Bishops of the Province, is a
thing so clear in Antiquity, that I am sure no man ever questioned it. Was not
the famous Decision of the Council of Ephesus in the case of the Cypriotic
Bishops a full proof of this, when upon Action. ^
the pretension of the Patriarch of Antioch, the thing was examined, and it was
found that he had never used to Ordain Bishops there; and therefore the Rites
of the Bishop of Constantia the Metropolitan were confirmed to him by that
General Council: nor can one Instance be showed in the first three Ages of a
Metropolitan coming to be Ordained by a Patriarch, as was afterward for Orders
sake appointed. And this appears more Can. ^
evidently by a Canon of the Council of Orleans, where it was decreed, That in
the Ordination of Metropolitans the Ancient Custom should be renewed, which was
generally neglected and lost, that a Metropolitan being Elected by the Bishops
of the Province with the Clergy, and the People, should be Ordained by all the
Bishops of the Province met together; This was Anno 538. By which we see they
thought not of any Bull or Confirmation from Rome, but that Bishops, though
subject to the Metropolitan's Jurisdiction, might Ordain him.

It is true, afterward the Patriarchs chose the Metropolitans, but the
Patriarchs were either chosen, or at least confirmed by the Emperor; and though
they sent Circulatory Letters to the Pope and the other Patriarchs to confirm
their Elections (which the Bishops of Rome did likewise to them) this was only
for keeping up the Unity of the Church, and for a more friendly and brotherly
Correspondence, but was not of necessity or as an homage which they owed the
Pope; much less did they delay their Consecrations till they obtained his
Mandate, or abstain from any Act of Jurisdiction till they had his
Confirmation, as is now appointed by the Pontifical, till they get ^e Pallio.
the Pall. I have not given you the trouble of enlarging on many Proofs for
making these things out, for they are so clear and uncontested, that I am
confident no man is so disingenuous as to deny them under his hand, whatever
some may whisper among illiterate persons who cannot contradict them. And
though there has been so much already written to make those particulars out,
that more needs not, and indeed cannot be said; yet if these things be
questioned by any body, I shall make them out fully.

And now I come to his Second Argument; which is, That Matthew Parker (and all
the other Protestant Bishops since his days) had his power of Jurisdiction only
from the Queen, as appears by the Queens Letters Patents, and the Form of his
Ordination, which was done upon the Queens Mandate without any Bull from the
Pope (in which she acknowledges Cardinal Pool to have been a righteous
Archbishop; and so confesses Catholic Ordination and Jurisdiction to be
lawful, valid, and good) which was necessary by the Laws of England; as appears
from her Mandate in which she supplies any Defects they might have been under.
Now all the Authority the Queen had, flowed from the Parliament, which annexed
all Jurisdiction Spiritual or Temporal over the Ecclesiastical State of this
Realm to the Crown, by which they made her Pope: So that by the very words of
the Act, Matthew Parker had his Jurisdiction from the Queen, and she hers from
the Parliament: Therefore the Protestant Priests and Bishops are only
Parliamentary Priests and Bishops, and are not from Christ and his Church, but
from their Kings, Queen, and Parliaments.

Here is such a heap of things so unjustly and weakly said, that it must needs
grieve all honest men to see a company of Priests going up and down the Kingdom
studying to abuse weak and unlearned persons with such disingenuous Stories or
Writings. Which I hope will appear more fully if you consider the following
particulars.

First, It is certain that King and Parliament have the Supreme Legislative
Authority in this Realm; and this they have from the Laws of God, Nature, and
Society, confirmed by the Gospel which commands us to be subject to the Higher
Powers. Therefore whatever they Enact that is within the Limits of their
Jurisdiction, is Law; and if it be not sinful, is to be obeyed; if it be
sinful, it is to be submitted to. For instance, if they set up a false Religion
by Law, it does not make it a true Religion, but adds the sanction of Law, and
is the civil Warrant and Security for the Subject, therefore the Civil Power
cannot change the nature of things to make Good Evil, or Evil Good; but only
gives Authority and Security; and in this they are restrained in things Civil
as well as Spiritual, for if they make unjust Laws in Civil things, the case is
the same with their unjust Laws about Spirituals. Therefore it is to be
concluded as the Fundamental Maxim of Civil Government, that whatever may be
done lawfully and without Sin, ought to be done when the Supreme Civil
Authority commands it, and that the Subjects ought to obey.

Secondly, Whosoever is empowered by the King and Parliament to execute this
their Supreme Authority, has a full Right and Title to apply that Power so
given or committed to him, having the execution of that Law put in his hands;
and if any shall without their Warrant or Authority from them usurp, or assume
any sort of Power or Jurisdiction within this Kingdom, they are Intruders and
Usurpers, and the success they have in it does no more justify that Force than
a Robber's does his Title to Goods unjustly taken. And although some weak
Princes in hard times did yield it up to the Pope; yet both the Clergy
themselves and the Parliaments, did often assert their own Authority, which was
most eminently done by King Edward the First, and King Edward the Third; So
that the Popes power here had no just Title but was a violent Invasion; for
that they neither had it from Christ nor Saint Peter, nor by any Decree of
General Councils; and that for 800 years after Christ it was never allowed
them: that they never had it in the Eastern Churches, and that what they had in
the Western Churches was only extorted by force and fraud from the Princes and
States of Europe, and that they had no Law for it in England, are things so
certain, that for proof of this, I shall refer my self to the Writers of their
own Church, De Marca, Launoy, and Balusius, with many others. And at this very
day the Pope has neither more nor less power in the other Kingdoms of Europe,
than the Connivence of Princes or the Laws give him: Therefore the Pope had no
power in England but what was unjustly usurped from the King and Parliament.

Thirdly, When the Supreme Authority the King and Parliament have long endured
an Encroachment upon them, that gives no just Title to it, nor hinders them
from asserting their own Rights when they find a fit opportunity for it, and
neither devests them of their Authority nor the Subjects of their due Rights
and Freedoms: Therefore the Government of the Kingdom and all the exercise of
coercive Jurisdiction being inseparably annexed to the Supreme Authority; it
was incumbent on them to shake off all Foreign Jurisdict: they should have done
it sooner but could never do it too soon.

Fourthly, The King and Parliament asserting their Authority in this
Particular, and condemning the Popes Usurpations, they might commit the
execution of it to whom they would: Therefore they putting it into the Queens
hands and her Successors, she had a good Right to exercise it, having a Law for
it. This then being annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm by the Supreme
Authority of King and Parliament, the King has the power of exercising it
fully and only in his hands, and is to be obeyed in all his Injunctions (that
are not sinful) by the Laws of the Supreme Authority in this Kingdom which
comes from God, and is confirmed by the Gospel.

Fifthly, Though the power of the Ministers of the Gospel comes only from
Christ, yet the exercise of that Power and this or that person being put in
this or that Living or Preferment, and having the right to the Tithes, and all
the Jurisdiction of the Spiritual and Prerogative Courts, being things not
appointed in the Gospel, the King having the Supremacy over the Ecclesiastical
State, does not exceed his Limits when he reserves to himself such power that
no person shall be vested with the Legal Authority for those things, but by his
knowledge or upon his Order. It is true, he cannot make a man a Bishop or a
Priest, nor can he take away Orders, for if Bishops should Ordain or Consecrate
without or against his pleasure, he may proceed against both the Ordainers and
Ordained, and can hinder their exercising any Function in his Dominions by
Banishing or Imprisoning them, but ^he cannot destroy or annul their Orders. So
that the power of Ordination comes from Christ, and has a Spiritual Effect,
whatever opposition the King may make, but the exercise of that power must be
had from him. If the King commands an Heretic or a Scandalous person to be
Elected or Ordained, Churchmen may well demur and offer their reasons why they
cannot give Obedience, not for the want of Authority in the King, but because
the matter is Morally evil: As they must also do, if the King should command
them, to commit Theft or Murder. So that all Consecrations in this Land are
made by Bishops, by the power that is inherent in them, only the King gives
orders for the execution of that their power: Therefore all that the Queen did
in the Case of Matthew Parker, and the Kings do since, was to command so many
Bishops to exercise a power they had from Christ in such or such instances,
which command was just and good, if the persons to be Ordained were so
qualified as they ought to have been according to the Scriptures.

Sixthly, Though the Command were unjust, yet that cannot be imagined a
sufficient ground to annul the Ordination, for otherwise all the Ordinations
appointed by the Anti-Popes of Avignon were null, since done upon Mandates from
a false Pope who had not power, which will annul all the Ordinations of the
Gallicane Church which did submit to these Popes. And yet this cannot be
admitted by the Church of Rome. unless they also annul all the Eastern Bishops;
for the Patriarch of Constantinople is made by order from the Grand Signior,
and is upon that installed. If this therefore invalidates our Ordinations, it
will do theirs much more, except they will allow a greater power to the Turk
than to the King. So that this at most might prove the Church to be under an
unjust violence, but cannot infer an invalidating of Acts so done: therefore if
Matthew Parker was duly consecrated, though it was done upon the Queens
Mandate, he was a true and lawful Bishop. For let me suppose another case
parallel to this: if the Clergy should resolve they will no more administer the
Sacraments upon the pretense perhaps of Interdicts, Censures, or some such
thing. And the Prince or State commands them to administer the Sacraments (as
was done by the Venetians in the time of the Interdict, and by many Kings in
the like cases) can it be pretended that the Sacraments they administer upon
such Commands are not the Sacraments of Christ, but only of the King. So in
like manner Orders given upon the Kings Mandate by persons empowered to it by
Christ and the Church, are true Orders, even though the Mandate for them were
unjust, tyrannical, and illegal.

Seventhly, Besides all that has been said, it is to be considered, that the
power of choosing Bishops was in all Ages thought at most a mixed thing in
which Laymen as well as Churchmen, had a share. It is well enough known, that
for the first three Centuries, the Elections were made by the people, and the
Bishops that came to assist in those Elections did confirm their Choice and
Consecrate the person by them Elected. Now whatever is a Right of the people
they can by Law transfer it on another. So in our case the people of this
Realm, having in Parliament annexed the power of choosing Bishops to the Crown,
by which their Right is now in the King's person; Consecrations upon his
Nomination must either be good and valid, or all the Consecrations of the first
ages of the Church shall likewise be annulled, since he has now as good a Right
to name the persons that are to be Consecrated, as the people then had. It is
true, the Tumults and other disscandal orders in those Elections, brought great
scandal on the Church, and so they were taken away and Synodical Elections were
set up; but as the former Ordinations were good before these were set up, so it
cannot be said that these are indispensibly necessary, otherwise there are no
good Ordinations at at this day in the Church of Rome; these being all now put
down, the Pope having among his other Usurpations taken that into his own hands.

Eighthly, It is also known how much Christian Princes, Emperors and Kings, in
all ages and places, have meddled in the Election of Bishops; I need not tell
how a Synod desired Valentinian to choose a Bishop at Millan when Saint Ambrose
was chosen, nor how Theodosius chose Nectarius to be Patriarch of
Constantinople, even when the second General Council was sitting. Nor need I
tell the Law Justinian made, that there should be Three presented to the
Emperor in the Elections of the Patriarch, and he should choose one of them.
These things are generally known, and I need not insist on them. It is true, as
there followed great confusions in the Greek Empire till it was quite overrun
and destroyed; so there was scarce any one thing in which there was more doing
and undoing than in the Election of the Patriarchs, the Emperors often did it
by their own Authority; Synodal Elections were also often set up, at length the
Emperors brought it to that, that they delivered the Pastoral Staff to the
Bishop by which he was invested in his Patriarchat; but it was never pretended
neither by the Latin Church nor by the contrary Factions in the Greek Church
that Orders so given were Null. And yet the Emperors giving the Investiture
with his own hand, is a far greater thing than our King's granting a Mandate
for Consecrating and investing Tit. 17. Rit. Elec. Patr.
them. For proof of this about the Greek Church, I refer it to Habert who has
given a full Deduction of the Elections in that Church, from the days of the
Apostles to the last Age.

For the Latin Church, the Matter has been so often examined, that it is to no
purpose to spend much time about In vita Silverii*
it. It is known and confessed by Platina, that the Emperors Authority
interveened when the Popes were created. And Onuphrius tells, that by a Decree
In Plat. in Pelag. 2.
of Vigilius the Custom had got in, that the Elected Pope should not be
Consecrated till the Emperor had confirmed it, and had by his Letters Patents
given the Elect Pope leave to be Ordained, and that License was either granted
by the Emperors themselves or by their Lieutenants [or Exarchs] at Ravenna: And
One and twenty Popes were thus Consecrated, Pelagius the second only excepted,
who being chosen during the Siege of Rome, did not stay for it, but he sent
Gregory (afterward Pope) to excuse it to the Emperor, who was offended with
it: it continued thus till the days of Constantine, called Pogonatus, who first
remitted it to Benedict the second, and the truth of it was, the power of the
Greek Emperors was then fallen so low in Italy, that no wonder he parted with
it. But so soon as the Empire was again set up in the West by Charles the
Great, Pope Adrian with a Synod, gave him the power of creating Did. 63.
the Pope (as is set down in the very Canon Law it self) and of investing all
other Archbishops and Bishops and an Anathema was pronounced against any that
should Consecrate a Bishop that was not named and invested by him. This is
likewise told by Platina In Pasch. 1.
out of Anastasius. It is true, though some Popes were thus chosen, yet the
weakness of Charles the Great's Son, and the divisions of his Children, with
the degeneracy of that whole Race served the ends of the growing power of the
Papacy. Yet Lewis laid it down not as an Usurpation, but as a Right of which he
divested himself, but his Son Lothaire reassumed it, and did confirm diverse
Popes, and Anastasius tells that they durst not Consecrate In Leo. 4.
the Pope without the Imperial Authority, and the thing was still kept up at
least in a shadow till Hadrian the Third, who appointed that the Emperors
Concurrence or License should not be thought necessary in the creating of a
Pope. And from Hadrian the First, who dyed Anno 795. till Hadrian the Third,
there were 89 years; and from Vigilius his days, who dyed Anno 555. there were
330 years. So long were the Popes made upon the Emperors Mandates. Nor did the
Emperors part easily with this Right, but after that the Otho's and the Henry's
kept up their Pretension, and came often to Rome and made many Popes, and though
most of the Popes so made were generally reckoned Anti-Popes and Schismatics,
yet some of them, as Clement the Second, are put in the Catalogue of the Popes
by Baronius and Binnius, and by the late publishers of the Councils Labbee and
Cossartius: There was indeed great Opposition made to this at Rome; but let
even their own Historians be appealed to, what a Series of Monsters and not
Men, those Popes were; how infamously they were Elected, often by the Whores of
Rome, and how flagitious they were, we refer it to Barronius himself, who could
not deny this for all his partiality in his great Work. But in the end Pope
Gregory the Seventh got the better of the Emperors in this particular.

And now let the ingenuity of those Men be considered, who endeavor to
Invalidate our Orders, and call our Priests and Bishops Parliamentary Priests
and Bishops, because they are made upon the King's Mandate according to the Act
of Parliament. When it is clear that for near 500 years together, their own
Popes were Consecrated for the most part upon the Emperors Mandate. And it is
certain the Kings of England have as much power to do the same here, as the
Emperors had to do it at Rome.

The Emperors were wont also to grant the Investitures into all the Bishoprics
by giving the Ring and the Staff, which were the Ceremonies of the Investiture,
and so they both named and invested all the Bishops and Abbots. This Pope
Gregory the Seventh thought was no more to be suffered than their creating the
Popes, both being done by the same Authority: Therefore he resolved to wring
them out of the Emperors hands, and take them into his own; and it was no
wonder he had a great mind to bring this about, for the Bishoprics and Abbeys
were then so richly endowed, that it was the Conquest of almost the third part
of the Empire, to draw the giving of them into his own hands. Therefore he
first disgraced these Laical Investitures by an ill name to make them sound
odiously, and called all so Ordained, Simoniacks, as he also called the Married
Clergy, Nicolaitans. Now every body knows how much any thing suffers by a
scurvy Nickname raised on it. But he went more roundly to work, and deposed the
Emperor, and absolved his Subjects from their obedience. What bloody Wars and
unnatural Rebellions of the Children against the Father, followed by the Popes
instigation, is well enough known. In the end, his Son that succeeded him was
forced to yield up the matter to the Pope.

In Spain it appears both from the Can. 6. Can. 12.
12th. and 16th. Councils of Toledo, that the Kings there did choose the
Bishops, Ad Anno 681. numb. 60.
which Baronius does freely confess.

And Gregory of Tours through his whole History, gives so many Instances of the
Kings of France of the Merovinian Race, choosing and naming the Bishops, that
it cannot be questioned; all the Writers of the Gallicane Church do also assert
that their Kings gave the Investitures from the days of Charles the Great. But
the Popes were still making inroads upon their Authority, for securing which
Charles the Seventh caused the Pragmatic Sanction to be made. It is true,
afterward, Pope Leo the Tenth got Francis the First to set up the Concordate
in its place, against which the Assembly of the Clergy at Paris did complain
and appealed to a General Council, and yet by the Concordate the King retains
still the power of naming the Bishops.

In England there are some Instances of the Saxon Kings choosing Bishops, and
though so little remains of the Records or Histories of that time, that it is
no wonder if we meet but few. Yet it is clear that King William the Conqueror
and both his Sons, did give the Investitures to the Bishops, and though upon a
Contest between King Henry the First and Anselm about them, the King did yield
them to him; yet upon Anselm's death he did reassume that power: I need not
say more to show what were the Rights of the Crown in this matter, nor how often
they were asserted in Parliament, nor how many Laws were made against the
Encroachments and tyrannical Exactions of the Court of Rome; these are now so
commonly known, and have been so often printed of late, that I need add nothing
about them. Only from all I have said I suppose it is indisputably clear; That
if Ordinations or Consecrations upon the Kings Mandate, be invalid, which this
Paper drives at; then all the Ordinations of the Christian Church are also
annulled, since for many Ages they were all made upon the Mandates of Emperors
and Kings. By all which you may see the great weakness of this Argument.

I shall to this add some Remarks on a few particulars of less weight that are
insinuated in this Argument.

First, The Writer of it would infer from the Queens, calling Cardinal Pool the
late and immediate Archbishop and Pastor of Canterbury, that we acknowledge
Catholic Ordination valid, lawful, and good. If by Valid, Lawful, and Good, be
understood that which retained the Essentials of Ordination, and was according
to the then Law, there is no doubt to be made of it, but if he mean that all
the Forms and Ceremonies of their Ordination are acknowledged to be Good, he
will never draw that inference from these words.

Secondly, From the Clause of the Patents, that is for supplying all defects,
considering the necessity of the times, he would infer, there was somewhat
wanting in them, which was thereby supplied. If by that [ Want] he means an
essential Defect, there was none such, for they were true Bishops. If he means
only that some things were not according to what the Law required, it is of no
Force, for whoever makes a Law, can also dispense with it: Therefore the
execution of these Laws being put in the Queens hands, she might well dispense
with some particulars; all which the Parliament did afterward confirm, and any
defect in the point of Law might make them liable to the Civil powers, but it
can by no means be pretended that this should annul the Ordinations, though
illegally gone about.

Thirdly, He would infer from the Act of Parliament, that the Queen is made
Pope, when he knows that both by one of the Articles of the Church and another
Act of Parliament, it is declared otherwise express words as follows, where we
attribute Article 37. of the Civil Magist.
to the Queens Majesty, the chief Government, by which Titles we understand the
minds of some slandrous folks to be offended; we give not to our Princes the
Ministry either of God's Word or of the Sacraments; the which thing the
Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly
testify: But that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to
all godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself; that is, that they should
Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and
evil doers. So that there is nothing of the Spiritual, much less of the Papal
and Tyrannical Power given to the King by the Law.

Fourthly, From the power given to the Queen to Authorize such persons as she
shall think fit to exercise that Jurisdiction, he infers, they may be either
Clergymen, Lawyers, Merchants, or Cobblers, since the Statute requires no more
but that they be born Subjects of the Realm. But this is as well grounded as
all the rest, for though that Statute does not name the qualification of the
persons, yet the other Statutes that Enacted the Book of Common Prayer and the
Ordinal, do fully specify what sort of persons these must be, and it is not
necessary that all things be in every Statute.

Fifthly, He in the end of this Paper pretends that the reason why this present
Parliament altered the Ancient Forms; was, because they were null and invalid.
The weakness and injustice of which was before showed; so that nothing needs to
be repeated. And in fine, it has been also proved, that as both the Greek and
Latin Churches have made many alterations in their Rituals, so the Church of
England which made these Alterations, had as good an Authority to do it by, as
they had: To which I shall only add the words of the Council of Trent
concerning the power of the Church for making such Changes when they give the
reason for taking away ^ess. 21. cap. 2.
the Chalice. The Church has power in the Sacraments, retaining the substance
of them to change or appoint such things which she shall judge more expedient
both for the profit of the Receivers, and for the Reverence due to the
Sacraments, according to the variety of things, times, and places. Where, by
their own confession it is acknowledged, the Church may make alterations in the
Sacraments See what Vasques has said of Changes in the forms of the Sacraments.
: So that it is a strange confidence in them to charge on us an annulling of
former Orders, because of a small addition of a few explanatory words. And so
much for his Paper.

Now having sufficiently answered every thing in it; I hope I may be allowed to
draw a few conclusions in opposition to his. And

First, We having true Priests and true Bishops, are a true Church, since we
believe all that Christ and his Apostles delivered to the World.

Secondly, We being thus a part of the Catholic Church, every one that lives
according to the Doctrine professed a mong us, mayand shall be saved.

Thirdly, We do truly eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, having the
Blessed Sacrament administered among us according to our Savior's Institution.

Fourthly, We have as much power to Consecrate the Holy Sacrament as any that
were Ordained in the Church for near a thousand years together.

Fifthly, We have the Ministerial power of giving Absolution, and the Ministry
of Reconciliation, and of forgiving Sins, given us by our Orders.

Sixthly, All men may (and ought to) join with us in the profession of the
Faith we believe, and in the use of the Sacraments we administer, which are
still preserved among us according to Christ's Institution; and that whosoever
repents and believes the Gospel, shall be Saved.

Seventhly, All and every of the Arguments he has used, are found to be weak
and frivolous, and to have no force in them.

And thus far I have complied with your desires of answering the Paper you sent
me, in as short and clear terms as I could. But I must add, that this
ransacking of Records about a succession of Orders, though it adds much to the
luster and beauty of the Church; yet is not a thing incumbent on every body to
look much into, nor indeed, possible for any to be satisfied about: for a great
many Ages, all those Instruments are lost; So that how Ordinations were made in
the Primitive Church, we cannot certainly, know, it is a piece of History and
very hard to be perfectly known. Therefore it cannot be a fit Study for any,
much less for one that has not much leisure. The condition of Christians were
very hard, if private persons must certainly know how all Ministers have been
Ordained since the Apostles days; for if we will raise scruples in this matter,
it is impossible to satisfy them, unless the Authentic Registers of all the
ages of the Church could be showed, which is impossible; for tho we were
satisfied that all the Priests of this Age were duly Ordained; yet if we be not
as sure that all who Ordained them had Orders rightly given them, and so
upward, till the days of the Apostles, the doubt will still remain. Therefore
it is an unjust and unreasonable thing to raise difficulties in this matter.
And indeed if we go to such nice scruples with it; there is one thing in the
Church of Rome that gives a much juster ground these, than any thing that can
be pretended in ours does; which is, the Doctrine of the Intention of the
Minister being necessary to make a Sacrament. Secret Intentions are only known
to God, and not possible to be known by any man: Therefore since they make
Orders a Sacrament, there remains still ground to entertain a scruple whether
Orders be truly given. And this cannever becleared, since none can know other
men's thought or intentions.

Therefore the pursuing nice scruples about this, cannot be a thing
indispensably necessary otherwise all people must be per plext with endless
disquiet and doubtings. But the true touchstone of a Church must be the Purity
of her Doctrine and the Conformity of her Faith with that which Christ and his
Apostles taught. In this the Scriptures are clear and plain to every one that
will read and consider them sincerely and without prejudice, which that you may
do, and by these may be led and guided into all Truth, shall be my constant
prayer to God for you.

AN APPENDIX. About the forms of Ordaining Priests and Bishops in the Latin
Church.
BEcause the decision of all the questions that can be made, by those of the
Church of Rome, about the validity of our Orders must be taken from the Ancient
Forms of Ordination, as has been fully made out in the foregoing Papers,
therefore I hope it will not be unpleasant to the Reader, to see what the Forms
of Ordinations were in the Latin Church, for many Ages, which he will more
clearly understand, when he sees them at their full Length; then he can do by
any Quotations out of them. Morinus has published sixteen of the most Ancient
Latin Rituals he could find, composed from the end of the Fifth Century; at
which time he judges the most Ancient of them was written, till within those
last Four hundred years, so that he gives us a clear view of the Ordinations of
seven succeeding Ages of the Western Church. His Book is scarce to be had, and
therefore I shall draw out of it, what relates to the Ordination of Priests and
Bishops, Only as he has Printed these Forms Strictly as the Manuscripts were
written, without altering some things that are manifestly the Faults of the
Transcribers; so I shall set them down exactly, as He has published them, with
the Emendations on the Margin from other Manuscripts, and add a Translation of
them in English.

But I shall begin with the three first Canons of the Fourth Council of
Carthage, in which we have the fullest and earliest Account of the
Ordidinations of Bishops and Priests, in the Latin Church: and from the
Simplicity of these and the many pompous Rites that are added in the latter
Rituals, the Reader will both perceive how the Spirit of Superstition grew from
Age to Age; and will be able to judge, whether the Church of England; or the
Church of Rome, comes nearest the most Primitive Forms. These I set down
according to the MSS. published by Morinus, and Collationed on the Margin, with
a MSS. belonging to the Church of Salisbury, that is judged to be six hundred
year old, and also with that Published by Labbee in the Tomes of the Councils.

Sacrarum Ordinationum Ritus. Ex Concilio Carthaginensi quarto depromptus.
CANON I.
QUI Episcopus Ordinandus est, antea examinetur, si natura sit prudens, si
docibilis, si moribus temperatus, si vita cast^s, si sobrius, si semper suis
negotiis Vacans.
cavens, Si omnibus affabilis.
si humilis, si affabilis, si misericors, si literatus, si in lege domini
instructus, si in scripturam sensibus ca^tus, si in dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis
exercitatus; and ante omnia, si fidei documenta verbis simplicibus asserat
Deest.
id est, Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum unum Deum esse confirmans,
totamque In Trinitate.
Trinitatis Deitatem coessentialem, and consubstantialem, and coaeternalem, and
coomnipotentem praedicans: si Singulam.
singularem quamque in Trinitate personam plenum deum, Desunt haec in Labbee.
and totas tres personas Unum deum. Si incarnationem divinam non in Patre,
neque in Spiritu Sancto factam, sed in Filio tantum credat, ut qui erat in
Divinitate Dei Patris, ipse fieret in homine hominis Matris filius: Deus verus
ex Patre, homo verus ex Matre, carnem ex matris visceribus habens, and animam
humanam rationalem; sim^l in eo Utraque natura.
ambae naturae, id est, Deus and Homo, una persona, unus filius, unus Christus,
unus Dominus, Creator omnium quae sunt and author, and Deest.
Dominus, and Rector cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto, Deest.
omnium creaturaram Qui passus sit vera carnis Passione; mortuus vera corporis
sui morte, resurrexit vera carnis suae Receptione.
resurrectinoe, and vera animae resumptione, in qua veniet judicar^ vivos and
mortuos. Quaerendum etiam ab eo, si Novi and Veteris Testamenti, id est, leges
and Prophetarum, and Apostolorum unum eundemque credat autorem and ev^m. Si
Diabolus non per conditionem, sed per Arbitrium, Hab. Lab. Factus. and Cod.
Saris.
sit malus. Quaerendum etiam ab eo si credat hujus quam gestamus, and non
alterius, carnis resurrectionem. Si credat judicium futurum, and recepturo^
singulos pro his, quae in Hac vita.
carne gesserunt, vel poenas vel Proemia*
gloriam. Si nuptias non improbat; si secunda Matrimonia non damnet; si carnium
per^eptionem non culpet; si poenitentibus reconciliatis communicet; si in
Baptismo omnia peccata, id est, tam illud originale contractum, quam illa quae
voluntate admissa sunt, dimittantur; si extra Ecclesiam Catholicam nullus
salvetur.

Cum in his omnibus examinatus, inventus fuerit plene instructus, tunc cum
consensu Clericorum, and Laicorum, and conventu totius provinciae Episcoporum,
maximeque Metropolitani vel Authoritate vel praesentia, ordinetur Episcopus.
Suscepto in Nomini Christi Episcopatu non suae delectationi, nec suis motibus,
sed his Patrum definitionibus acquiescat. [In cujus Ordinatione etiam aetas
requiritur, * Desunt haec in [] in MSS. Cod. Saris.
quam Sancti Patres in praeeligendis Episcopis constituerunt.] Dehinc
disponitur, qualiter Ecclesiastica Officia Ordinantur.

CAN. II.
EPiscopus cum Ordinatur, duo Episcopi ponant, and teneant Evangeliorum Codicem
supra Caput, and cervicem ejus; and uno super eum sundente benedictionem,
reliqui omnes Episcopi qui adsunt, manibus suis caput ejus tangant.

CAN. III.
PResbyter cum Ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput ejus
tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta manum
Episcopi super caput illius teneat.

In English thus.
CAN. I.
LET Him that is to be Ordained a Bishop; be first Examined if he be naturally
prudent, and teachable, if in his Manners he be temperate, if chaste in his
life, if sober, if he looks to his own Affairs, be humble, affable, merciful
and learned, if he be instructed in the Law of the Lord; and skilful in the
sense of the Scriptures; and acquainted with Ecclesiastical Doctrines: and
above all things, if he assert the Articles of Faith in simple Words: that is
to say, affirms that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God: and teaches
that the whole Deity of the Trinity, is Coessential, Consubstantial,
Coaeternal, and Coomnipotent: and that every Person of the Trinity, is fully
God: and all the Three Persons are one God. If He believes that the Holy
Incarnation, was neither of the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; but of the Son
only: that He who was the Son of God the Father by the Godhead, becoming a Man,
was the Son of his Mother, very God of His Father, and very Man of His Mother
who had Flesh of the Bowels of His Mother, and a human reasonable Soul. And
both Natures God and Man, were in Him one Person, one Son, one Christ, one Lord
the Creator of all things that are, and the Author, Lord and Governor of all
Creatures with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. Who suffered a true Passion in
His Flesh, and was dead by a true death of His Body, and rose again with a true
Resurrection of His Flesh, and a true Re-assumption of His Soul, in which He
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. It must likewise be asked if He
believes, that one and the same God, was the Author of the Old and New
Testament; of the Books of the Law, the Prophets and the Apostles. If the Devil
be not wicked by his will and not by his Nature. And if he believes the
Resurrection of this Flesh, which we now carry and not of any other, and the
Judgment to come, and that every one shall receive either punishment or glory,
for what they have done in the Flesh. If he does disapprove Marriage, or
condemn second Marriage, or blames the Eating of Flesh. If He Communicates with
Penitents, being reconciled. If he believes that in Baptism all Sins, both that
which is Originally contracted and those which are willingly committed are
pardoned, and that none is saved out of the Catholic Church.

When being examined in all these things, he is found fully Instructed, then
let him be Ordained Bishop, with the Consent of the Clergy, and Laity, and the
meeting of the Bishops of the whole Province; and chiefly in the presence or by
the Authority of the Metropolitan. And he having undertaken the Bishopric in
the name of Christ, must acquiesce in the Definitions of the Fathers, and not
in his own pleasure or inclinations. And in Ordaining him, that Age is
necessary which the Holy Fathers appointed in the choosing of Bishops. After
this it is appointed how all Ecclesiastical Offices are Ordained.

CAN. II.
WHEN a Bishop is Ordained, two Bishops shall lay and hold the Book of the
Gospel, upon his Head, and Neck; and one saying the Blessing over Him, all the
other Bishops that are Present, shall touch his Head with their Hands.

CAN. III.
WHEN a Presbyter is Ordained, the Bishop blessing Him, and holding his hand
upon his Head, all the Presbyters that are present, shall hold their hands
beside the Bishops hand upon his Head.

The most Ancient of the Rituals Morinus proves was written some time between
the year 511. and 560. in which the Ordination of the Priests is in this
Fashion: It begins with an Exhortation to the People, to tell what they know of
the Person to be Ordained, and to make a public Election of Him. Then follows
the Collect with this Rubric.

Oration ad Presbyteros Ordinandos.
ORemus, Dilectissimi, Deum Patrem omnipotentem, ut super hunc famulum suum
quem ad Presbyterii munus eligit, coelestia dona multiplicet, and quae ejus
dignatione suscipiunt, ejus exequantur auxilio; per Dominum.

Item alia. Exaudi nos, Deus salutaris noster, In aliis Cod. Et.
ut super hunc famulum tuum benedictionem Spiritus Sancti and gratiae
Sacerdotalis effunde virtutem, ut quem tuae pietatis suspectibus offerimus
Consecrandum, perpetua muneristui largitate persequaris; per Dominum.

In English thus, A Prayer for the Priests that are to be Ordained.
LEt us pray Beloved to God, the Father Almighty, that he may multiply heavenly
Gifts on this his Servant, whom he has chosen to the Office of Priesthood, that
what they receive by his favor, they may execute through his help; Through our
Lord.

And another. HEar us, O God our Savior, and pour upon this thy Servant the
blessing of the Holy Ghost and the virtue of Priestly Grace, that thou may
follow* him with a perpetual largeness of thy gift, whom we offer up to thy
holy eyes to be Consecrated; Through our Lord.

CONSECRATIO.
DOmine Sancte Pater Omnipotens aeterne Deus, honorum omnium dignitatum quae
tibi militant, distributor, per quem cuncta firmantur, amplificatis semper in
melius naturae rationalis incrementis per ordinem In aliis MSS. Congrua ratione.
congruam rationem dispositum, unde Sacerdotalis gradus and Officia Levitarum
Sacramentis Mysticis.
Mystici instituta* creverunt, ut cum Pontifices.
Pontifice summos regendis populis praefecisses ad eorum Societatis and operis
adjumentum Sequentis ordinis.
sequentes ordines viros, and secundae dignitatis elegeris, sic in eremo per
Septuaginta virorum prudentium, Mentem.
mentis Moysi Spiritum propagasti, quibus ille adjutoribus usus in populo,
innumeras multitudines facile gubernavit. Sic and Eleazaro and Ithamar filiis
Aaron paternae plenitudinis abundantiam transfudisti, Ut ad hostias salutares
and frequentioris Officii Sacramenta Ministerium sufficeret sacerdotum.
and ad hostias salutaris, and frequentiores officii Sacramenta sufficeret
meretum Sacerdotum. Hac providentia Domine, Apostolis filii tui Doctores fidei
Comites addedisti quibus illi orbem totum secundis praedicatoribus impleverunt.
Quapropter infirmitati quoque nostrae, Domine, quaesumus haec adjumenta
largire, qui quanto magis fragiliores sumus, tanto his Pluribus.
plurius indigemus. Da quaesumus, Omnipotens Pater, in hoc Hunc famulum tuum.
famulo tuo ill Presbyterii dignitatem: Innova in visceribus ejus Spiritum
Sanctitatis: acceptum a te, Deus, secundi meriti munus obtineat, censuramque
morum exemplo suae conversationis insinuet. Sit Probus.
providus cooperator Ordinis nostri, eluceat in Eo.
eum totius forma justitiae, ut bonam rationem dispensationis sibi creditae
redditurus, aeternae beatitudinis praemia consequatur.

The Consecration.
O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and Eternal God, the distributer of all Honors
and Dignities that fight for thee, by whom all things are strengthened, the
improvements of the rational nature being always enlarged by Thee to the
better, through a settled Order and congruous Reason, from whence the Priestly
Degrees and the Offices of the Levites, which were instituted by Mystical
Sacraments did grow up; so that when thou set the Highpriests to govern the
people, thou did choose for the help of their Society and work, men of an
inferior Order and a second Dignity: So also in the Wilderness thou did
propagate the Spirit that was in Moses into seventy prudent men, whom he using
as helpers with him over the people, did easily govern innumerable multitudes.
So thou did transfuse into Eleazar and Ithamar the Sons of Aaron, abundance
of the fullness that was in their Father, that the Ministry of the Priests might
be sufficient for the expiatory Sacrifices, and the Sacraments that were more
frequent. By the same providence thou, O Lord, did add companions to the
Apostles of thy Son, who were Teachers of the Faith, with which Preachers of a
second rank they filled the whole World. Wherefore, O Lord, we beseech thee
grant likewise those helps to our Infirmity, who by so much the weaker as we
are, do need these the more. Grant we beseech thee, Almighty Father, to this
thy Servant, the dignity of Priesthood. Renew in his inward parts the Spirit of
Holiness, and let him obtain the Office of the Second Merit received from thee,
O God, and make him Insinuate by the example of his Conversation a censure of
Manners. Let him be a provident Fellow Laborer with our Order, and let the
form of all Righteousness shine forth in him, that when he shall render a good
account of the Dispensation trusted to, he may obtain the rewards of Eternal
Blessedness.

Consummatio Presbyteri.
SIt nobis, Fratres, Communis Cratio, ut Hic.
his qui in adjutorium and utilitatem vestrae Salutis eligetur, Presbyteratus
Benedictionem divini indulgentia muneris consequatur, and S. Spiritus
Sacerdotalia dona privilegio virtutum, ne impar loco deprehendatur, obtineat
per suum. Per.

The Consummation of a Priest.
BRethren, Let us join in one Prayer, that he who is chosen for the help and
profit of your Salvation, may obtain the Blessing of the Office of Priesthood
by the Divine Indulgence, and the Priestly gifts of the Holy Ghost, by the
privilege of his Virtue, lest he be found unfit for his Place.

Item Benedictio.
SAnctificationum omnium Author, cujus vera Consecratio, plena Benedictio est,
Tu Domine, super hunc samulum ill. quem Ad Presbyterii honorem.
Prebyterii honor dedicamus, Gratiam tuae Benedictionis infunde.
manum tuae Benedictionis eum insunde ut gravitate actuum, and censura vivendi
probet se esse Omnium.
seniorem, his institutus disciplinis quas Tito and Timotheo Paulus exposuit,
ut in lege tua die ac nocte, omnipotens, meditans, quod Legerit.
elegerit, credat* quod crediderit, doceat; quod docuerit Imitetur.
meditetur: justitiam, constantiam, miscricordiam, fortitudinem in se ostendat,
Deest.
exemplum probet, Admonitione.
admonitionem confirmet, ut purum atque immaculatum Mysterii.
ministerii tui domum custodiat, and per obsequium plebis tuae Corpore and
sanguine filii tui immaculata benedictione transformetur ad inviolabilem
caritatem.
corpus and sanguinem filii tui imma culata Benedictione transformet, and
inviolabili caritate in virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis
Christi, in die justitiae aeterni judicii, conscientia pura, side plena,
Spiritu Sancto plenus persolvat. Per Dominum.

The Benediction.
THou the Author of all Sanctifications, whose true Consecration is a full
Benediction; Thou, O Lord, lay the hand of thy Blessing upon this thy Servant,
whom we have dedicated to the honor of Priesthood, that by the gravity of his
actions and the rule of living, he may prove himself to be an Elder instructed
in those Disciplines which Saint Paul delivered to Titus and Timothy: that
meditating in thy Law, O Almighty God, day and night, he may believe what he
reads, and teach what he believes, and follow what he teaches: and may show
forth Righteousness, Constancy, Mercy, and Courage in himself, and approve
himself a Pattern, and confirm his Admonitions, and may preserve the gift of
thy Ministry undefiled; and through the obedience of thy people, may transform
the Body and Blood of thy Son with an undefiled Blessing, and may finish all by
an inviolable Charity in a perfect man; in the measure of the Statute of the
fullness of Christ in the day of the justice of Eternal Judgment, with a pure
Conscience and a full Faith, being full of the Holy Ghost.

The follows the Consecration of their Hands in these words.

Consecratio Manus.
COnsecrentur Manus istae, and sanctificentur per istam Unctionem and nostram
Benedictionem, ut quaecunque benedixerint, benedicta sint, and quaecunque
sanctificaverint, sanctificentur. Per Dominum.

Item Alia.

UNgantur Manus istae de Oleo Sanctifica; and Chrismate Sanctificationis, sicut
unxit Samuel David in Regem and Prophetam, ita unguentur and consummentur in
nomine Dei Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti, sacientes Imaginem Sanctae
Crucis Salvatoris Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui nos a morte redemit and ad
regna coelorum perducit. Exaudi nos, Pie Pater Omnipotens Aeterne Deus and
praesta quod t^ Rogamus and Orames. Per Dominum.

In English thus.
LEt these hands be Consecrated and Sanctified by this Unction and our
Blessing, that whatsoever they Bless, be Blessed, and whatsoever they Sanctify
be Sanctified through our Lord.

And Another.

LET these hands be anointed with the Sanctified Oil; and the Chrism of
Sanctification, as Samuel anointed David to be both King and Prophet; So let
them be anointed and perfected in the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, making the Image of the Holy Cross of our Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, who redeemed us from Death, and brings us to the Kingdom of Heaven.
Hear us O Holy Father, Almighty and Eternal God, and grant what we desire and
Pray for, Through our Lord.

There is neither more nor less in that Ritual about the Ordination of a
Priest. For this last of the Anointing the Priests with Oil, it cannot be
called essential to the Priesthood, for the Greek Church never used it, and tho
Nazianzen Orat. 20. 4. and 5.
tells us that his Father had anointed St. Basil, and that himself was also
Anointed, yet neither the Apostolic Constitutions, nor Dionystus the
Areopagite, nor Simeon of Thessalonica, nor Cabasilas, tho they have delivered
to us the Rites of Ordination in the Greek Church, ever mention it. And it is
in no Greek Ritual; So that what ever places are found in any Greek Author of
Anointing in Ordination must be understood Allegorically and Mystically, of
the effusion of the Holy Ghost. So both Elias Cretensis and Nicetas the
Scholiasts on Nazianzen expound his words, and there are some Passages near the
end of his Fourth Oration, that show these other places of his are to be
understood Metaphorically. This Rite is not mentioned by the Council of
Carthage, and it seems was not received in Spain a great while after the Age of
this Ritual, for Isidor tho very particular in other Lib. 2. de Eccles. Offic.
cap. 5.
things (as the Staff and Ring) does not mention it, neither when He speaks of
the Ordination of Priests, nor Bishops. Nor do the Councils in Spain mention
it; and Alcuine speaks nothing of it, but it was only as seems used in the
Gallicane Church, and the first that Lib. 2. c. 3.
I find clearly mention it, is Amalarius, but Gildas intimates it, for he speak
of In Eccles. Ord.
the benediction, qua initiantur Sacerdotum manus, by which the Priests hands
are initiated.

Pope Nicolas the first expressly says, that at Rome neither Priests nor Deacons
were anointed. His words are;

Praeterea Epist. 19. ad Radol. Bitur. c. 3. Which is also in the Canon Law.
Did. 23. c. 12.
sciscitaris utrum solis Presbyteris, an and Diaconibus debeant cum Ordinantur,
manus Chrismatis liquore perungi, quod in Sancta hac Romana cui, Deo auctore,
deservimus Ecclesia, neutris agitur. Sed and quia sit a novis legis ministris
actum, nusquam nisi nos fallat oblivio, legimus.

You ask me further if only the Priests or the Deacons likewise, when they are
Ordained should have their hands anointed with the Chrism, this is done to
neither of them, in this Holy Roman Church; where by Gods appointment we serve,
and if our memory fails us not, we no where read that this was done by the
Ministers of the new Law.

The Second Ritual published by the same Author, is as he believes, Nine
hundred year Old, and has been compiled for the Church of Rome; being that
which is commonly called Sacramentarium Gelasianum, in which the Rubricks and
Prayers are the same with the Former, only the Anointing is not mentioned in
that part of it that relates to the Ordination of Priests, but the Transcriber
after the Office of the Ordination of the Subdeacon adds the Rite and Collects
for the Anointing the Priests, which Morinus believes he did to accommodate it
to the French Rites.

The third Ritual is as Morinus believes, antienter than Eight hundred years,
in which the Rites and Collects are the same with the Former, only the
Consummation and Blessing is wanting, and a new Rite is added of giving the
Vestiments, with these words which are in stead of the Blessing.

Hic vestis and Casulam.

BEnedictio Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti descendat super te, ut sis
benedictus in Ordine Sacerdotali, and offeras placabiles hostias pro peccatis
atque offensionibus populi Omnipotenti Deo. Cui sit honor and gloria in saecula
saeculorum.

In English thus.

THE Blessing of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, descend upon Thee,
that thou may be blessed in the Priestly Order, and may offer acceptable (or
expiatory*) Sacrifices, for the Sins and offenses of the people, to Almighty
God. To whom be honor and Glory for ever and ever.

The Fourth Ritual, is the same with that which Angelus Rocca Published among
Tom. 5.
Gregory the Great's Works, where are the two first Collects and Prayer of
Consecration; as in the first: with the Anointing of the hands, as is there:
and the giving the Vestments, with the words in the Third Ritual.

The Fifth Ritual, which he sets down has nothing relating to the Ordination of
Priests; but the two first Collects and the Prayer of Consecration before set
down, which upon that account he Judges defective.

The Sixth Ritual, about Eight hundred year Old, composed for the Church of
England, has all that is in the First Ritual, with these additions. It begins
with the Canon of the Council of Carthage, about the Ordination of a Priest.
Then follow the Collects and Prayer before set down. Then there is added this
Blessing, before the Anointing of the hands.

Benedictio vel Consecratio manuum Sacerdotis ante Unctionem Chrismatis.

BEnedic, Domine, and sanctifica has manus sacerdotis tui ill. ad Consecrandas
hostias quae pro delictis atque negligentiis populi offeruntur, and ad caetera
Benedicenda quae ad usus populi necessaria sunt, and praesta, quaesumus, ut
quaecunque benedixerint, benedicantur, and quaecunque sacraverint sacrentur,
Salvator mundi qui vivis and regnas.

BLess, O God, and sanctify these hands of thy Priest, for consecrating the
Sacrifices which are offered for the sins and negligences of the people, and
for blessing of all other things, that are necessary for the use of the people,
and Grant we beseech Thee, O Savior of the world, who live and reignest,
that whatsoever they Bless may be blessed, and whatever they Consecrate may be
Consecrated.

Then follows the Anointing of the hands as before. Then is added the
Anointing of the head, with this Prayer:

Consecratio Capitis cum oleo.

UNgatur and Consecretur Caput tuum coelesti Benedictione in Ordine
Sacerdotali, in nomine Patris, and Filii, and spiritus sancti.

LET thy head be Anointed, and Consecrated with a Heavenly Benediction in the
Priestly Order, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Then the Vestments are given as in the Third Ritual, with a little variation
in the Collect, and then follows the Consummation and Blessing; as was in the
first Ritual before set down.

The Seventh Ritual, which Morinus reckons likewise Eight hundred years Old,
has the same Collects, Consecration, and Benediction with the First, with the
delivery of the Vestment and Prayer, as is in the Third Ritual, and the
Anointing of the hands, as in the First, without any further Rite.

The Eight Ritual, is near the same Age with the Former, the two first Collects
and Prayer of Consecration, are in it as in the First, and the Giving the
Vestment, as in the Third, and the Consecrating of the hands as in the First,
and there is no more in that Ritual.

The Ninth Ritual, which He believes is Seven hundred years Old, has the First
Collects and the Prayer of Consecration as in the First. There is a little
inconsiderable variation in the Giving of the Vestments, from what is in the
Third. The hands are anointed as in the First. The head is Anointed as in the
Sixth, and the Hands are blessed as in the Sixth, the Consummation and
Benediction are according to the First. Then some Collects and Blessings are
added, relating to their Fasting and Abstinence.

The Tenth Ritual, about the same age has the two First Collects, and the
Prayer of Consecration according to the First, then follows the giving the
Vestments according to the Third. Then is the Anointing of the hands according
to the First, and the Blessing of them according to the Sixth. There is no more
in that Ritual.

The Eleventh Ritual, about the same Age, has the Exhortation to the people,
and the two First Collects, with the Prayer of Consecration as in the First.
Then these Additions follow. He puts one of the Vestments called Orarium on him
and says,

Accipe jugum Dei, jugum enim ejus suave est and onus ejus leve. Take the Yoke
of God, for his Yoke is sweet, and his burden is Light. Then the Casula is put
on him with these words.

Stola Innocentiae induat te Dominus. Let the Lord cloth thee with the Robe of
Innocence. Then follows the Blessing as in the First, and the Anointing the
Hands, with a small Variation in the Collect from the words of the First.

This being done, the Paten with the Hosties, and the Chalice, with the Wine,
is given with these words.

Accipe Potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo Missamque Celebrare tam pro vivis
quam pro defunctis, in Nomine Domini. Receive thou Power to offer Sacrifice and
to Celebrate the Mass; as well for the Living as for the Dead, in the Name of
the Lord. Then follows the Blessing as is in the Third Ritual.

The Twelfth and Thirteenth Rituals, the one being about Six hundred and Fifty
year Old, the other a Hundred years later have the First Collects, and Prayer
of Consecration as the First had. And the Blessing that is in the Third, with
the Consecration of the Hands that is in the First.

The Fourteenth Ritual, about five hundred year Old has the two Collects and
Prayer of Consecration as in the first. Then the Orarium is given as in the
Eleventh, with an Addition in Giving the Casula.

Accipe vestem Sacerdotalem per quam Charitas intelligitur; Potens est enim
Deus ut augeat tibi Charitatem, qui vivit. Receive the Priestly Vestment by
which Charity is understood, for God is able to increase thy Charity, who
lives. Then follows the Consummation, and Benediction as in the first, Then the
Bishop makes a Cross in their hands with the Oil and Chrism; and uses the words
as in the Eleventh Ritual, then he gives the Sacred Vessels as in that same
Ritual. Then follows the Blessing in the Third Ritual, and then the Bishop is
to kiss them.

The fifteenth Ritual, is about four hundred and fifty years Old, and has very
near the same Rubricks that are in the former, only upon the Margin, where the
words are to be pronounced in the delivering the Sacred Vessels, is written,

Accipe Spiritum Sanctum; quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Receive the Holy
Ghost; whose sins ye remit, etc. The Sixteenth Ritual, about Three hundred
years Old, agrees with the former, in the forementioned Rites and Collects; but
has this Addition that the Bishop lays on his hands on the Priests and says,
Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, they are remitted to them, and
whose sins you retain they are retained. But in two other Pontificals which
Morinus believes are of the same Age* these words and that Rite are wanting. In
the Ordo Romanus, which some believe is a work of the Ninth Century, others
that it is of the Eleventh Century, there are set down first some Questions and
Answers to the Priests to be Ordained, then the two Collects with the Prayer of
Consecration follow, as in the Rituals before set down, only it is marked in
the Rubric that the Bishop and Priests lay on their hands at the first
Collect, then follow all the other Rites of Giving the Vestments, anointing
and delivering the sacred Vessels; but the last Imposition of hands with the
words, Receive the Holy Ghost, are not in it.

From all which it clearly appears what must be Essential to Ordination, and
what not; none of those Rites that are only found in Later Rituals are
essential: for the Ordinations were good and valid before these were added. But
that in which all these Rituals agree must be acknowledged of greatest weight
and chief Importance, and that is the Prayer of Consecration with the two
Collects that go before it. For in those they all agree, but vary in every
thing else; and therefore Morinus thinks the former of these Collects, is now
the form of Priestly Orders, for which He has another strong Argument, which
is, that as he proves both by the ancient Canons, and even by the Doctrine of
the Council of Trent; the Imposition of the Priests hands with the Bishop is
necessary in these Ordinations, and they only lay on hands with the Bishop when
that Collect is pronounced, from which he infers that then the Priests Orders
are conferred. But it is clear from all those Rituals that these Collects were
Preparatory to the Prayer of Consecration which only is the form of these
Orders according to those Rituals.

And thus far of the office of Ordaining Priests, I shall next set down from
those Rituals the Office, Rubricks, Rites, and Prayers used in the Consecration
of a Bishop.

The Office begins with an Exhortation to the people, declaring the Necessity
of substituting one Pastor to another, and that therefore upon the former
Bishops Death, there is another chosen by the Priests and the whole Clergy,
with the advice of the Citizens and people, who is well qualified for it;
therefore they are desired to approve of the Choice by their Voices and to
declare him worthy of it. Then follows,

Oration and Preces.
Precis de Ordinandis Episcopis.
ORemus, Dilectissimi nobis, ut his viris ad utilitatem Ecclesiae Providendam
vel providens*
providendis, benignitas omnipotentis Dei, gratiae suae tribuat largitatem; per
dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Alia: Benedictio Episcoporum. In other Rituals thus. Adesto supplicationibus
nostris, omnipotens Deus, and quod humilitatis nostrae gerendum est Ministerio,
virtutis impleatur effectu. Per.

EXaudi, Domine, supplicum Preces, ut quod nostrum gerendum est ministerium tua
potius virtute firmetur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Alia.
PRopitiare, Domine, supplicationibus nostris: and Inclinato.
inclinatus super hos famulos tuos cornu gratiae Sacerdotalis, Benedictionis
tuae in eos effunde virtutem. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Coll. sequitur.
DEum totius Sanctificationis ac Pietatis actorem, qui placationem suam and
sacrificia and sacra constituit, Fratres Dilectissimi, deprecemur, ut hunc
famulum suum quem ex altari in Ecclesia, and seniorum Cathedra concordibus sua
inspiratione judiciis, and effusis super plebem suam votis fidelibus, ac vocum
testimoniis voluit imponi, collocans eum, cum principibus populi sui, ad eorum
nunc precim universam eundem summum sacerdotium debita honoris plenitudine
Charismatum gratia, sanctificationum ubertate hac, praecipue humilitatis
virtute locupletet, ut Rector potius non extollatur, sed in omnibus se quantum
est major humilians, sit in ipsis quasi unus ex illis, omnia judicii Domini
nostri non pro se tantum, sed and pro omni populo qui solicitudinis suae
creditur contremiscens, ut qui meminerit de speculatorum manibus omnium animas
requirendas pro omnium salute pervigilet, pastorali erga creditas sibi oves
Domini diligentiae ejus semper se flagrantissimum adprobans. Te dilectorum
adigitur praefuturus ex omnibus electus, ex quibus universis sacris,
sacrandisque idoneus fiat sub hac quae est homini per hominem postrima
benedictio confirmata atque perfecta suae consecrationis nostrae supplecationis
adtentissime concordissimisque omnium precibus adjovemur, omnium pro ipso
oration incumbat, cui exorandi pro omnibus pondus imponitur. Impetret ei
affectus totius ecclesiae virtutem, pietate sanctificationem, and caeteras
summi Sacerdotii sacras dotes universae ecclesiae profuturas, Domino Deo nostro
qui Sacrorum numerum profluus fons est, qui dat omnibus affluenter quod
Sacerdoti pro affectu poscitur, ad exundandam in omnibus sanctificationem
suorum omnium promptissime ac plenissime conferentem. Per Dominum nostrum.

A Collect and Prayers for the Bishops to be Ordained.
BEloved, let us pray that the bounty of Almighty God may give of the fullness
of his Grace to those men who are to be provided for the use of the Church,
Through our Lord.

HEar, O Lord, the Prayers of thy Supplicants, that the Ministry which we are
to bear may be confirmed by thy power, Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

BE favorable to our Supplications, O Lord, and put upon these thy Servants
the horn of thy Priestly Grace, and pour upon them the virtue of thy blessing,
Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

BEloved Brethren, let us pray to God who is the Author of all Holiness and
Piety, who appointed Sacrifices and holy Offices, by which he is pleased, that
he would, upon the Prayer of all his people, enrich this his Servant whom he
has appointed by the agreeing voices according to his Inspiration and the
faithful desires which he has infused in the people, and the testimony of their
voices, to be raised from the Altar in the Church, and the seat of the Elders
placing him with the Princes of his people: with the fullness of the honor of
the High Priesthood, and the Grace of sanctifying Gifts in great measure, and
chiefly with the virtue of Humility, that being a Governor, he be not lifted
up, but that in all things he humble himself the greater he grows, and be among
others, as one of them: trembling at all the judgments of God, not only for
himself, but for all the people trusted to his care, remembering that all their
souls shall be required at the hands of the Watchmen: and therefore may watch
for all their safety, approving himself always most inflamed with Pastoral
diligence about the Lord's Sheep trusted to him.

I cannot make sense of the rest, for this Collect is in no other Ritual, and
the Copy out of which it is printed, as it is very Ancient, so it has been most
uncorrectly written.

CONSECRATIO.
DEus honorum omnium, Deus omnium dignitatum, quae gloriae tuae Sacratis.
sacris samulantur honoribus: Deus qui Moysen samulum tuum secreti samiliaris
Affatu.
affectu inter caetera coelestis documenta culturae, de habitu quoque indumenti
Sacerdotalis instituens, Electum Aaron Mystico amictu vestire inter Sacra
jussisti, ut intelligentiae sensum de exemplis priorum caperet secutura
Posteritas, ne eruditio Doctrinae tuae ulli deesset aetati, cum and apud
veteres reverentiam ipsam significationum species obtineret, and apud nos
certiora essent experimenta rerum quam aenigmata figurarum. Illius namque
Sacerdotii anterioris habitus nostrae mentis ornatus est, and Pontificalis
Gloriae non jam nobis Honor.
honorem commendat vestrum sed Splendour.
splendorem animarum. Quia and illa quae tunc carnalibus blandiebantur
obtutibus, ea potius quae ipsis erant intelligenda poscebant. Et idcirco
famulis tuis, quaesumus, quos ad summi Sacerdotii Ministerium.
sacerdotium elegisti, hanc quaesumus, Domine gratiam largiaris, ut quidquid
illa velamina in fulgore auri, in nitore gemmarum, and multimodi operis
varitate signabant, hoc in horum moribus claresoat. *** Comple, Domine, in
Sacerdotibus ***
tuis mysterii tui summam, and ornamentis totius glorificationis Instructos eos.
instructum coelestis unguenti flore Sanctifica. *** Hoc, Domine, copiose in
eorum caput ***
influat, hoc in oris subjecta decurrat, hoc in totius corporis extrema,
descendat, ut tui Spiritus virtus and Interiora eorum.
interiorum ora repleat, and exteriora circumtegat. Abundet in his constantia
fidei, puritas Dilectionis, sinceritas pacis. [Sint speciosi [
munere tuo pedes horum ad Evangelizandum pacem, ad Evangelizandum bona tua. Da
eis, Domine, mysterium reconciliationis in verbo, and in virtute and Signis and
prodigiis.
signorum, and prodigiorum. Sit sermo eorum and praedicatio non in
persuasibilibus humanae sapientiae verbis, sed in ostensione Spiritus and
Virtute.
virtutis. Da eis, Domine, claves Regni coelorum: Utantur ne^ glorientur
Potestate quam tribuis in aedificationem, non in destructionem. Quodcunque
Ligaverint.
legaverint super terram sit Ligatum.
legatum and in coelis, Et quodqunque solverint super terram sit solutum and in
coelis. Quorum detinuerint peccata, detenta sint, and quorum Dimiserint.
demiserint, tu Dimittas*
demittas. Quibenedixerit eis sit benedictus, and qui maledixerit eis,
maledictionibus repleatur. Sint servi fideles and prudentes quos constituas tu,
Domine, super samiliam tuam, ut dent illis cibum in tempore necessario, ut
exhibeant omnem hominem perfectum. Sint solicitudine impigri, sint spiritu
serventes, oderint superbiam, diligant veritatem, nec eam unquam deserant aut
lassitudine aut timore superati. Non ponant lucem ad tenebras, nec tenebris
lucem; non dicant malum bonum, nec bonum malum. Sint sapientibus and
insipientibus debitores, and sructum de prosectu omnium consequantur.] Tribuas ]
eis, Domine, Cathedram Episcopalem ad Desunt haec in [] in plurimis MSS.
regendam Ecclesiam tuam, and plebem universam. Sis eis autoritas, sis eis
Potestas, sis eis firmitas. Multiplices super eos benedictionem, and gratiam
tuam, ut ad exorandam semper misericordiam tuam munere idonei, tua gratia
possint esse devoti; per Dominum nostrum, etc.

The CONSECRATION.
O God of all the Honors, O God of all the Dignities, that serve in the Holy
offices to thy glory, O God who when thou instructedst Moses thy servant with a
secret and familiar affection, among other Instructions of the heavenly
Ornaments, did teach him the Priestly Garments and commandedst him to cloth
Aaron thy Chosen, when he did officiate, that the following ages might be
instructed by those who went before them, that the knowledge of thy Doctrine
might be wanting in no age, the appearance of the things signified being
Reverenced among the Ancients, but among us the real Experiments are more
certain than the riddles of figures. For the habit of the former Priesthood in
us is the Ornament of our minds, and it is not the shining of our Clothes, but
of our Souls that commends in us the honor of the Priestly Glory; because they
did more desire those things that pleased their carnal eyes than the things
they should have understood by them. And therefore we beseech thee, O Lord,
grant this grace to those thy Servants whom thou have chosen to the Ministry of
the High Priesthood, that whatever those garments signified in the shining of
the Gold, in the brightness of the Gems, and in the curiousness of the
Workmanship, all that may appear in their Manners. **Accomplish, **
O Lord, in thy Priests the fullness of thy Mystery, and having adorned him
with all the Ornaments of Glory: Sanctify him with the flower **
of the heavenly Ointment. **Let that, O Lord, fall plentifully on their head,
and run down the rest of their face and descend to the extremities of their
body, that the virtue of thy Spirit may fill them inwardly, and compass them
about outwardly. Let the Constancy of Faith, the Purity of Love, and the
sincerity of peace abound in them. [Let their feet through [ All this betwe^ []
is w^ting in many Rituals.
thy favor be beautiful to preach peace and to preach thy good things. Give
them, O Lord, the ministry of Reconciliation, in word and in power, in signs
and wonders. Let their Discours^ and Preaching be not in the persuading words
of human Wisdom, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Give
them, O Lord, the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Let them use, but not glory in
their Power which thou give them, to Edification and not to Destruction:
Whatsoever they shall bind on earth, let it be bound in heaven, and what they
shall loose on earth, let it be loosed in heaven; whose sins they retain, let
them be retained, and whose they remit, do thou remit. Who blesses them, let
him be blessed, and who curses them, let him be filled with Curses; and let
them be faithful and wise Servants, whom thou shall appoint over thy household
to give them meat in due season, that they may present every man perfect. Make
them diligent in business and fervent in Spirit. Make them hate pride and love
truth, and let them never forsake it either through weariness or fear. Let them
not put light for darkness, nor darkness for light, nor call evil good nor good
evil. Let them be debtors both to the wise and unwise, that they may gather
fruit from the profiting of all men.] Give them, O Lord, an Episcopal [
Chair for the Governing of thy Church and whole people. Be thou to them
Authority, Power, and Strength. Multiply upon them thy Blessing and grace, that
being fitted by thy gift always to implore thy mercy they may be devout by thy
Grace: Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

There follow some Collects that are called in the Rubric Super Oblata, which
belong to the Office of the Communion, and are Prayers for the Bishop; and this
is all in that Ritual, that relates to the Ordination of a Bishop.

The Second Ritual, in all things agrees with the former.

The Third Ritual, begins that Office with the second Canon of the Fourth
Council of Carthage, about the Consecration of Bishops then follow the
Collects, Oremus, Adesto, and Propitiare, as in the first; then the Prayer of
Consecration, Deus Honorum omnium. And at the word Comple the Bishop takes the
Chrism, and at the words Hoc Domine he pours it on the head of the person to be
Consecrated, but all from Sinceritas Pacis, to Tribuas ei Domine, is left out,
then follow the Collects Super oblata, there is no more in that Ritual. For the
Anointing of Bishops, tho it was neither used in the Eastern nor African
Churches, yet both Pope S^rm. 8. de pass. Dom.
Leo and Gregory the Great mention it as a Rite then received in the Roman
Church. in 1 Reg. cap. 10.
Amalarius gives an accout of it, but cites no ancienter Author for it than
Lib. c. 14. Lib. 3. de Tab. cap. 9. See Morin. Ex. 6. c. 2.
Beda, for some other Authorities that are brought to prove the greater
Antiquity of this Rite, are either Allegorical or relate to the Chrism, with
which all were anointed at their Confirmation.

The Fourth Ritual, has first the Questions that are put to the Bishop that is
to be Ordained, which has begun, it seems, from the time of the fourth Council
of Carthage, where by the first Canon the Bishop was to be examined, both about
his Faith and Manners. I shall only set down two of these, the one is. Vis ea
quae ex Divinis scripturis intelligis, plebem cui Ordinandus es and verbis
docere and exemplis? Will thou both by the words and example instruct the
people, for whom thou art to be Ordained, in those things which thou do
understand out of the Holy Scriptures? To which he answers, I will. And this
alone were there no more, may serve to justify those Bishops, who got Orders in
the Church of Rome, and afterward received the Reformation; since by the very
Sponsions given in their Ordination, they had engaged themselves to instruct
their Flocks according to the Scriptures. Another Question is, Vis esse
subditus huic nostrae Sedi atque Obediens? Will thou be subject and obedient to
this our See. Which was no other than what every Metropolitan demanded of all
the Bishops under him, and yet this is all the obedience then promised to the
Pope; far different from the Oaths which were afterward exacted. But I go on
to give an account of the rest of the Office according to this Ritual. in the
Rubric, the Second Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage is set down, to
which is added. Hoc facto accipiat patinam cum Oblatis and Calicem cum vino,
and det ei, dicens, Accipe Potestatem offerre Sacrificium, etc. Which being
done he shall take the Paten, with the Hosties and the Chalice with the Wine,
and shall give him, saying, Receive Power to offer Sacrifice, etc. So that this
was used in the Consecration of Bishops, long before it was in the making of
Priests, then follow Oremus, Adesto, and Propitiare as they are before set
down, then two new Rites are set down, the Rubric is.

Ad Annulum dandum.
MEmor sponsionis and desponsationis Ecclesiasticae, and Dilectionis domini Dei
tui in die, qua assecutus es hunc honorem, cave ne obliviscaris illius. Accipe
ergo annulum discretionis, and honoris fidei signum, ut quae sign^nda sunt,
signs: Et quae aperienda sunt prodas: Quae liganda sunt, liges: quae solvenda
sunt, solvas: utque credentibus per fidem baptismatis, lapsis autem sed
poenitentibus, per mysterium reconciliationis januas regni coelestis aperias:
Cunctis vero de thesauro dominico nova and vetera proferas, ut ad aeternam
salutem omnibus consulas, gratia Domini nostri Jesus Christi, cui cum Patre and
Spiritu Sancto est honor and gloria in saecula saeculorum, Amen.

For giving the Ring.
BEing mindful of the sponsion and Ecclesiastical wedding, and of the Love of
the Lord God, in the day in which thou have attained this honor, beware least
thou forget it: Receive therefore the Ring the Seal of discretion, and of the
honor of Faith, that thon may seal the things that are to be sealed, and
may open the things that are to be opened, and may bind the things that are
to be bound, and may loose the things that are to be loosed, and may open
the Gates of the heavenly Kingdom to the believers, by the Faith of Baptism:
and to those that have fallen, but are Penitent, by the mystery of
Reconciliation, and that thou may bring forth to all Men out of the treasure
of the Lord, things new and old, and that thou may take care of all their
Eternal Salvation, Through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

Ad Baculum dandum.
ACcipe Baculum sacri Regiminis signum, ut imbecilles consolides, titubantes
confirms, praves corrigas in viam salutis aeternae, habeasque potestatem
a^trahendi dignos, and corrigendi indignos, cooperante Domino nostro Jesus
Christo, cui cum patre in unitate Spiritus Sancti est virtus and imperium, per
omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

For giving the Staff.
REceive the Staff, the sign of the sacred Government; that thou may
strengthen the weak, confirm them that stagger, correct the wicked in the way
of Eternal salvation, and may have power to attract the worthy and correct the
unworthy, through the assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

Then follows the Prayer of Consecration, and at the words Hoc Domine, the
Rubric appoints the Chrism to be put on his head, and what is left out in the
former Ritual, is also left out in this, after that Prayer follows the Collect
Super Oblata. and there is no more in that Ritual.

For these rites of the Ring and Staff, the first I find that mentions them is
De (...)* offi^. li^. 2. ca^. 5.
^dore, who both speaks of them and (...) sets down some of the words used in
the former Ritual. Yet Lib. d^ ^i. offic. ^ap. Q^aliter E^opus or^etur in
Eccles. Romana.
Alcuinus speaks not a word of it, tho he entitles his Chap^er; The manner in
which a Bishop is Ordained in the Roman Church. But i^ seems he has only looked
on some more Ancient Rituals, in which there was no such Rite; for it is most
certain that it was used in his time. Lib. 2. de Eccles. offic. cap. 14.
Amalarius tho he does at a great length insist on the anointing of the
Bishop; yet speaks not a word of the Staff or Ring. But Lib. de Instit. Cler.
cap. 4.
Rabanus Maurus who lived in that time does mention it, or rather sets down
Isidores words without citing him, but whether these were foisted in or not, I
cannot judge. Now these Rites were afterward a ball of Contention; for the
Emperors and Kings did give the Investiture by them which had they been given
with our such words, they might have more easily kept up See Pet. de Marca,
Concor. Sac. and Imp. l. 8. c. 19. n. 9.
their pretension; but the words joined with them, relating wholly to Spiritual
things, were no doubt made a great Argument for taking them out of their hands:
Since it seemed very incongruous for a Secular and Lay person, to pronounce
them or perform a Rite to which such words were added.

The Fifth Ritual has only the Collects, Adesto, and Propitiare, and the Prayer
of Consecration, (without the Rubric for giving the Chrism,) and the Collects
Super Oblata; leaving out in the Prayer of Consecration what is left out in the
two former Rituals.

The Sixth Ritual has the Collects Adesto and Propitiare with the Prayer of
Consecration, as in the first (in which the Rubric about putting the Chrism on
the head is also) then follows a new Prayer, that is in no other Ritual, for
the Bishop thus Ordained, after which there is a Blessing called De septiformi
Spiritu, For the sevenfold Grace of the Holy Ghost, then are the hands of the
Bishop Consecrated with holy Oil, and the Chrism, with these words.

Consecratio manuum Episcopi ab Archiepiscopo, Oleo sancto and Chrismate.
UNgantur manus istae and sanctificentur and in te Deo Deorum ordinentur. Ungo
has manus oleo sanctificato and Chrismate unctionis purificato, sicut unxit
Moses verbo oris sui Manus S. Aaron Germani sui, and sicut unxit Spiritus
Sanctus per suos flatus, manus suorum Apostolorum, ita ungantur manus istae and
sanctificentur, and consecrentur, ut in omnibus sint perfectae, in nomine tuo,
Pater, Filiique tui atque aeterni Spiritus S. qui es unus ac summus Dominus
omnium vivorum and mortuorum, manens in Saecula Saeculorum.

LET these hands be anointed and Sanctified and Ordained for the God of Gods.
I anoint these hands with Sanctified Oil, and the purified Chrism of
anointing; as Moses by the word of his mouth anointed holy Aaron his brother,
and as the Holy Ghost by his breathings did anoint the hands of his Apostles,
so let these hands be Anointed, Sanctified and Consecrated, that they may be
perfect in all things in thy name, O Father, and in thy Sons, and thy Holy
Spirit's, who art the only and great God of the quick and of the dead for ever
and ever. Amen.

Then his head is anointed with the following words.

Hic mittatur oleum super ejus.

UNgatur and Consecretur caput tuum coelesti benedictione in Ordinem
Pontificalem, in nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti.

LET thy head be anointed and Consecrated with a heavenly Blessing for the
Pontifical Order, in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.

Then the Staff is Blessed in these words in Verse:

Tu Baculus nostrae, and Rector per saecula vitae.
Istum sanctifica pietatis jure Bacillum,
Quo mala sternantur, quo semper recta regantur.
Thou who art the Staff of our Life, and our guide, for ever sanctify this
Staff, by which ill things may be beaten down and right things always guided.
Then the Staff is given and after that the Ring, almost with the same words
that are in the Fourth Ritual, then follows a Prayer that he may ascend the
Episcopal Chair, then he is put in the Chair and a Prayer is made for him that
he may resemble the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Saints, and in the end
he is Blessed in these words.

Benedictio ejusdem Sacerdotis.
POpulus te Honoret, adjuvet te Dominus, quidquid petieris praestet tibi Deus,
cum honor, cum castitate, cum scientia, cum largitate, cum Charitate, cum
Nobilitate. Dignus sis, Iustus sis, Humilis sis, Sincerus sis, Apostolus
Christi sis. Accipe Benedictionem and Apostolatum qui permaneat in die ista and
in die sutura. Angeli sint ad dexteram tuam, Apostoli Coronati ad sinistram:
Ecclesia sit matter tua and altar, sit Deus Pater tuus, sint Angeli amici tui,
sint Apostoli sratres tui and Apostolatus tui gradum custodiant. Confirmet te
Deus in Iustitia, in Sanctitate, in Ecclesia Sancta. Angeli recipiant te, and
pax tecum indiscrepabilis, per Redemptorem Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, qui
cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto vivit and regnat in saecula saeculorum.

Amen.
MAY the people Honor thee, may God assist thee and grant thee whatsoever thou
shall ask of Him, with Honor, Chastity, Knowledge, Bounty, Charity, and
Nobility. Be thou Worthy, Just, Humble, Sincere, and an Apostle of Christ.
Receive a Blessing and an Apostleship which shall continue for this time and
that which is to come. Let Angels be at thy right hand and crowned Apostles at
thy left. Let the Church and the Altar be thy Mother, and God thy Father. Let
the Angels be thy Friends, and the Apostles thy Brethren, and guard the degree
of thy Apostleship. May God strengthen thee in Justice* in Holiness, and in the
Holy Church, and may Angels receive thee, and inseparable Peace be with thee,
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit reigns
and lives for ever and ever. Amen.

The Seventh Ritual has first the second Canon of the Fourth Council of
Carthage, then the Exhortation to the people, then the Collects, Oremus, Adesto
and Propitiare, then the Prayer of Consecration, and then the anointing of the
hands, then follows the Communion Service.

The Eighth Ritual, begins the Office of Consecrating a Bishop with the Collect
Adesto. Then follows a new Rite of giving the Gospel with these words:

ACcipe hoc Evangelium, and ito, doce omnes Gentes. REceive this Gospel, and
go, and teach all Nations. Then follows the Propitiare, and the Prayer of
Consecration, and the Giving the Staff, and Ring without any more.

This Rite of delivering the Gospels, it seems was never generally received,
for it is in none of the other Rituals published by Morinus, but is now in the
Roman Pontifical.

The Ninth Ritual begins this Office with the Form in which the Kings of France
did then choose their Bishops, then follows an Oath of Obedience to the
Patriarchal See (no mention being made of the Pope or See of Rome,) then the
Ring is Blessed with a particular Benediction, and it is given with the words
in the Fourth Ritual. The Staff is next Blessed as in the Sixth Ritual, and
given as in the Fourth Ritual. Then follow the Collects Oremus, Adesto, and
Propitiare, then the Prayer of Consecration as in the First Ritual, then
follows another long Prayer, after which follows the Anointing of the hands
and head, and the Blessing for the sevenfold Grace of the Holy Ghost. Then
follows the Communion Service.

The Tenth Ritual, has only the Collects Adesto, and Propitiare, and the prayer
of Consecration with the Collects Super Oblata. And on the Margin, the giving
of the Ring and Staff is set down, but with a very different and much later
hand.

The Eleventh Ritual, begins with some rites that are not in the Roman
Pontifical, tho by it all is to be done in the Popes name, by a Bishop
Commissioned, by him called Dominus Apostolicus, or perhaps the Pope himself,
that being the common way of designing the Pope in those Ages; the Dean or
Arch-presbyter and the Clergy of the Sea, ask the Pope or his Delegate their
Blessing three times, then they are asked some questions about the Elect
Bishop, among which those are considerable. It is asked, if he be of that
Church? to which it is answered, Yes. Then, what Function he is of? Answ. Of
the Priestly. Quest. How many years has he been a Priest? Ans. Ten. Quest. Was
he ever Married? Answer, Not. After these Questions are put, then the Decree of
Electing him, which is addressed to the Pope, is read, by which they desire he
may be Ordained their Bishop. This must be signed by them all. Then it is
asked, if any Simoniacal promises be made? they answer, No. Then the Bishop
Elect is brought to the Popes Delegate, who first puts the same Questions to
him that were before put to the Dean, and he answers them in the same manner.
Then the Introitus is sung, after which follows the Collect Adesto, then the
Questions that are in the Pontifical are put to him, and whereas in the former
Rituals there was only a general promise of Obedience to the Metropolitan, put
to the Elect Bishop, instead of that the two following Questions are put to
him. Will thou reverently Receive, Teach, and Keep the Traditions of the
Orthodox Fathers, and the Decretal Constitutions of the Holy and Apostolic
See? Answer, I will. Will thou bear Faith and Subjection to St. Peter, (to whom
the Lord gave the Power of binding and loosing,) and to his Vicars and
Successors? Answer, I will. But these words not being thought full enough, they
have since added (to Faith and Subjection,) and Obedience in all things,
according to the Authority of the Canons, then the Elect Bishop is examined
about his Faith, the Questions being taken out of the three Creeds. After which
he is blessed and clothed with the Episcopal Vestments, and the Epistle is
read, 1 Timothy 3. Cap. Then his Sandals and Gloves are put on with Prayers at
each of these Rites, then the Bishops laying the Gospels on his head and
shoulders, and their hands on his head* the Ordainer says the Collects Adesto,
Oremus and Propitiare, then follows the Prayer that in former Rituals is called
the Consecration, but has no such Rubric here, it has all that is in the first
Ritual, only after the words Coelestis Unguenti Flore Sanctifica, the Rite of
Anointing the head with the words joined to it in the Sixth Ritual, is
inserted, after which follows the rest of that Prayer: Next the hands are
anointed, and words somewhat different from those in the Sixth Ritual are
pronounced. Then follows a new Rite of putting the Chrism on his Thumb, with a
Blessing joined to it, then the Ring is blessed and given, and so is also the
Staff; then the Kiss of Peace is given, and he is set down among the Bishops,
and the Ordainer, sits down and washes his hands and puts Incense in the
Censer, and gives the Blessing, then follows the Service of the Communion.

To this Ritual Morinus had added an ancient piece of a Ritual which he found
in a MSS. at Tholose about the Election, Examination, and Ordination of Bishops
in the Roman Church, which in all things agrees with the former except in an
Addition which is also mentioned by Alcuinus. I shall set it down Li. De Div.
Offi^. See inter opera Bernar. Con. ad Clerum. ^rope ^inem.
in Latin without a Translation, which in modesty I ought not to give: By it
the Reader will see what the Roman Church gained by pressing the Celibate of
the Clergy so much since they were suspected of such horrid Crimes, and were to
be tried about them. The words are:

Inquirat illum de quatuor Capitulis secundum Canones, id est, de Arsenoquita,
quod est Coitus cum Masculo: pro Ancilla Deo sacrata quae a Francis Nonna
dicitur, pro quadrupedibus and muliere alio viro conjuncta, aut si conjugem
habuit ex alio viro, quae a Graecis dicitur Deuterogamia: and dum nihil eorum
ipse vir conscius suerit, Evangeliis ad medium deductis jurat ipse Electus
Archidiacono and posthaec traditur Subdiacono and pergit cum praesato Electo ad
Aulam Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae, ibique supra ejus sacratissimum Corpus
confirmet, quod non cognovisset superius nominata capitula. And thus, if they
were free of these Crimes which are not to be named, no other act of
uncleanness was to be inquired after or stood upon: only the Pharisaical Spirit
of that Age is to be observed, in that they reckon a Churchmans having been
married to another man's wife, which is forbidden by no Law of God or Nature, in
the same Predicament with those Abominations which God punished with Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven.

The Twelfth and Thirteenth Rituals have not the office of Consecrating Bishops
in them.

The Fourteenth Ritual begins with the Decree of Election, directed to the
Metropolitan without that previous examination that is in the Eleventh; then
follows the examination of the Faith and manners of the Bishop Elect, then the
people pray he may be Ordained, after which two Bishops begin the Litany (this
is in no ancienter Ritual,) then the Hymn Veni Creator is begun (which is also
new being in no other Ritual,) after which they lay the Gospels on his head and
lay on their hands, and the Metropolitan says the Collect Oremus; then follows
the Propitiare, which is called the Benediction, then follows the Prayer Deus
honorum, after which there is another long Prayer that is in no other Ritual,
for a blessing in the Function to which he is Ordained, then follows the
blessing of the Sevenfold Grace, then the Consecration of the Bishops hands
with the Oil and the Chrism, then the Chrism is put on his head, (as the Oil
was by other Rituals put on his head in the midst of the Prayer Deus honorum
omnium) then follows a new Rite of putting the Miter on his head, but no words
are pronounced with it, then the Ring is blessed and given; so also is the
Staff blessed and given; then there is a Prayer about the putting him in his
Chair; after which he is put in his Chair and a new Prayer is used, and all
ends with the Blessing that is at the end of the Sixth Ritual.

The Fifteenth Ritual has no considerable variation from the former, only in
the beginning the Bishop that presents the Bishop Elect says, Reverende Pater,
postulat sancta Matter Ecclesia ut hunc praesentem Presbyterum ad onus
Episcopatus sublevetis. Reverend Father, the Holy Church our Mother desires
that you may raise this Priest to the burden of a Bishopric. Then the
Consecration is made with the Collects Adesto, Oremus and Propitiare said with
a middle voice. Then follows the other Prayer in which his head is anointed,
which in this Ritual is called a Preface, tho in most of the former it be
called the Consecration, then follows the blessing of the Staff; in the end the
Blessing is given to the Bishop.

The Last Ritual agrees in all things with the Pontifical as it now is, only
the words Receive the Holy Ghost are in none of these Ancient Rituals which
Morinus saw, tho the latest of those be not above three hundred years old.

To these I shall add an account of the Consecration of a Bishop, as it is in
the Ordo Romanus.

The Office begins with the Decree bearing the Election of the Bishop, with a
desire that he be Ordained as soon as may be, directed to the Bishops of the
Province, then follows the First Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, after
which is the Metropolitans letter approving the Election, and desiring the
Bishop Elect to be brought to him; when he is brought he is blessed in Order to
his Consecration, then the Antiphona and the Introitus are said, after this
follows the examination of his Faith and Manners: as in the Eleventh Ritual.
Then the Epistle is read, after which his Gloves and Sandals, and his Dalmatica
(a Vestment in the fashion of a Cross, first used in Dalmatia,) are put on, and
Collects are used in every one of these; then follows the Exhortation that is
in the antientest of Morinus his Rituals: after which two Bishops lay the
Gospels on his neck and Shoulders, and all the Bishops lay on their hands on
his head, and the Ordainer says the Prayer Adesto, then the Oremus which in the
Rubric is called Praesatio, then the Propitiare which the Rubric calls
Oration, then follows the Prayer called in other Rituals the Consecration, but
in this it is called Praesatio, which is the same that was set down in the
antientest Ritual; after Sanctifica the Chrism is poured on the Bishops head,
in the Form of a Cross with the words in the sixth Ritual. Then follows the
anointing of his hands, after that the putting the Chrism on his Thumb, then
the Blessing and giving the Ring and Staff, then follows the Blessing and
Communion, then follow the Letters that testify the Bishops Consecration,
called Literae Formatae, then the Popes Edict to the Bishop Ordained,
containing very wholesome admonitions; then there is a Sermon and an
Exhortation, which contain many excellent Instructions and Directions which
deserve to be often read and well considered.

From all the Premises it clearly appears, that the Church of Rome did never
tie these Offices to any constant unalterable Forms, but that in all Ages there
very great alterations were made. And what was more anciently the Prayer of
Consecration, was of later times called [ Praesatio] a Preface, and what was in
the ancient Rituals only a Prayer for the Bishops that were to be Ordained, is
now the Prayer of Consecration; for now in the Roman Pontifical, all that is
said in the Consecration of a Bishop when they lay hands on his head, is
Receive the Holy Ghost, and then follows the Collect Propitiare. So that it is
very unreasonable and an impudent thing, in the Emissaries of that Church, to
raise scruples about our Ordinations, because we have changed the Forms, since
they have made many more and greater Alterations of the more Primitive and
ancient Forms.

With this I should end this Appendix, which already grows too big, but I will
only add one Particular more about the Oath that is in the Pontifical, to be
sworn by all Bishops. It is in none of all these ancient Rituals, nor ever
mentioned by Morinus, so that it seems though it was at first made by Pope
Gregory the seventh, yet it was long before it was generally received or put
into the Rituals. For the Readers further satisfaction, I shall here set down
all I can find about Oaths made to Popes. At first there was nothing exacted
but a Promise of obedience, such as all Inferiors gave to Superiors. Then
there was a particular vow made by such as the Popes sent in Missions. The
first instance of this is an Oath which Boniface Bishop of Mentz, (who is
called the Apostle He died ^ Anno 755.
of the Germans,) swore to Pope Gregory the second, about the beginning of the
Eighth Century, which follows as it is among his Epistles.

In nomine Domini Dei and Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, Imperante Domino
Leone a Deo coronato magno Imperatore, Anno sexto, post Consulatum ejus Anno
sexto, sed and Constantino Magno Imperatore ejus Filio, Anno quarto, Indictione
sexta.
PRomitto Ego Bonifacius, Gratia Dei Post Epist. 11^.
Episcopus, vobis Beato Petro Apostolorum Principi, vicarioque tuo beato Papae
Gregorio, successoribusque ejus, per L. 1. vit. e. 19. Mogunt. p. 343.
Patrem and Filium and Spiritum Sanctum. Trinitateminseparabilem, and hoc
sacratissimum Corpus tuum, Me omnem fidem and puritatem sanctae fidei
Catholicae exhibere: and in Unitate ejusdem fidei, Deo cooperante, persistere:
in qua omnis Christianorum salus, sine dubio esse comprobatur: nullo modo me
contra Unitatem Communis and Universalis Ecclesiae, suadente quopiam,
consentire: sed ut dixi, fidem and puritatem meam atque concursum tibi and
utilitatibus tuae Ecclesiae, cui a Mat. 16. Joh. 21. ^
Domino Deo Potestas ligandi solvendique data est, and praedicto vicario tuo,
atque successoribus ejus, per omnia exhibere. Sed and si cognovero Antistites
contra Instituta antiqua sanctorum Patrum conversari, cum eis nullam habere
communionem aut conjunctionem: Sed magis, si valuero prohibere, prohibeam: si
minus vero fideliter statim Domino meo Apostolico renunciabo. Quod si, quod
absit, contra hujus promissionis meae seriem aliquid facere quolibet modo, seu
ingenio, vel occasion tentavero, reus inveniar in aeterno judicio; Ultionem
Ananiae Act. 1. 5.
and Saphirae incurram, qui vobis, etiam de rebus propriis, fraudem sacere, vel
salsum dicere praesumpserunt.

Ho^ autem Indiculum Sacramenti Ego Bonisacius exiguus Episcopus, manu propria
scripsi, atque positum supra sacratissimum corpus tuum, ut superius leguntur,
Deo test and judice, praestiti Sacramentum, quod and conservare promitto.
In the name of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, in the sixth year of Leo the
Great, crowned by God Emperor, the sixth year after his Consulat, and the
Fourth year of Constantine the Great, Emperor, his Son, the Sixth Indiction.
I Boniface, by the Grace of God Bishop, promise to you St. Peter, Princ^ of
the Apostles, and to thy blessed Vicar Pope Gregory, and his Successors, by the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the Inseparable Trinity, and by this thy
most Sacred Body, That I shall show forth all the Faith and purity of the Holy
Catholic Faith, and that God assisting me, I shall persist in the Unity of the
same Faith, in which the Salvation of all Christians does without all doubt
consist: and that I shall in no sort, and upon no persuasion, concur against
the Unity of the common and Universal Church: but that as I have said, I shall
show forth my Faith and Purity and give my concurrence in all things to thee,
and the advantages of thy Church, (to whom the power of binding and loosing is
given by the Lord God) and to thy Vicar and his Successors. And if I shall know
the Bishops carry themselves contrary to the ancient appointments of the Holy
Fathers, I shall have no communion nor conjunction with them; but rather if I
can, I shall hinder it, and if I cannot, I shall presently give notice of it
faithfully to My Apostolical Lord. And if (which God forbid) I shall endeavor
to do any thing against the Contents of this my Promise, any manner of way,
either on design or by accident, let me be found guilty in the Eternal
judgment, and let me incur the punishment of Ananias, and Sapphira who presumed
to lie and deal fraudulently, (even about their own goods) to thee.

This Breviate of an Oath, I Boniface, a small Bishop, have written with my own
hand, and having laid it on thy most blessed Body, as is before mentioned, I
have made my Oath, God being witness and Judge, which I promise to keep.
But it appears from another letter written in the 26. year of the Reign of
Constantine the Emperor, two and twenty years after the taking the former
Oath, which was in the Fourth year of Constantine, that he had taken another
Oath Eight years before that, for he begins that Epistle written to Pope
Zacharias with these words.

POstquam me ante Annos prope triginta Epist. 135.
sub familiaritate and servitio Apostolicae sedis, annuente and jubente
venerandae memoriae antistite Apostolico Gregorio anteriore voto constrinxi,
etc. ALmost Thirty years ago I bound my self by a former vow under the
Observance and service of the Apostolical See, by the Consent and Command of
Pope Gregory of venerable Memory, etc. This is all I can find before Pope
Gregory the seventh, But he pretending to a higher Title, not only over
Bishops, but secular Princes made some Princes swear Allegiance to him, (it
ought to be called by no other name,) for the first part of the Oath in the
Pontifical, of Being faithful and obedient to the Pope, being in no. Council
against him, and assisting him to defend the Papacy, and the Royalties of St.
Peter, etc. Was sworn Lib. 1. Ep. Greg. post. Ep. 21. lib. 8. post. Ep. 1.
both by Richard Prince of Capua, and Robert Prince of Calabria and Sicily,
when they received Investiture from that Pope in those Dominions. But the Oath
which the Bishops swore, is almost the same with that which is in the
Pontifical, as we find it taken by the Bishop of Aquileia, after the sixth
Roman Council, in which Berengarius was condemned under that same Pope.

Afterward the Council of Lateran, Ann. 1079.
under Pope Paschal the second, appointed a more modest Oath in the form of an
Anathematism, in these words.

ANathematizo omnem haeresin and praecipue Ann. 1002.
eam quae statum praesentis Ecclesiae perturbat, quae docet and astruit
Anathema contemnendum and Ecclesiae ligamenta spernenda esse: Promitto autem
Obedientiam Apostolicae sedis Pontifici Domino Paschali, ejusque successoribus,
sub testimonio Christi and Ecclesiae: Affirmans quod affirmat, damnans quod
damnat sancta Universalis Ecclesia. I Anathematize every Heresy, and in
particular that which disturbs the State of the present Church, which teaches
and asserts that an Anathema is to be contemned, and the Censures of the Church
to be despised, And I promise obedience to the Apostolic See, and to our Lord
Pope Paschal and his successors, under the Testimony (or in the sight) of
Christ and the Church, affirming all that the Holy Universal Church affirms,
and condemning all that she condemns. This Oath (if the References which Labbe
and Cossartius make to the fifth and sixth Epistles of Pope Paschal, be well
grounded,) was all that was imposed by that Pope, and that not on all Bishops,
but only on Archbishops, to whom he sent the Pall, and yet from the first words
of these Epistles, it appears that the Princes and the States of Christendom
looked on it with amazement, as a new and unheard of thing, the one is to the
Archbishop of Palermo in Sicily, and the other is directed to the Archbishop
of Poland, (I suppose it was of Gnesna) and they both are almost the same, only
the later has a great deal more than the former. They begin with these words.

SIgnificasti Regem, and Regni Majores Ep. 5. and 6. Pasch. 2.
admiratione permotos, quod pallium tibi ab Apocrisariis nostris tali
condition oblatum fuerit, si Sacramentum quod a nobis scriptum detulerant
jurares. THou have signified to me, that the King and the chief of the Kingdom
are amazed that the Pall was offered to thee by our Legates on this condition,
that thou should swear the Oath which they brought to thee written by us. And
if any Body desire to be satisfied about the excellent Reasonings with which
the infallible Chair directed his Pen, he may read the rest of those Epistles.

The next Step made in this Oath, was Lib. 2. Decret. Greg. Tit. 24. c. 4. set
out by him, Anno 1236.
by Pope Gregory the Ninth, which is in the Canon Law, where the Oath is set
down to be taken by all Bishops, which differs from that in the Pontifical in
these heads. The Royalties of St. Peter are not mentioned in it, nor those
clauses of every Bishops sending one in his name to Rome, in case he could not
go in person, nor is that of not alienating the Bishops lands without the Popes
consent in it. But when these additions were made, I do not find. The
Importance of that Oath is little Considered, since few among us read the Roman
Pontifical carefully, therefore I shall set it down with a translation of it,
from which it may be easily inferred, what all Princes may, or ought to expect
from persons so tied to the Pope, since a fuller and more formal allegiance,
can be sworn by no Subjects to their Prince than is sworn in it to the Pope.

Forma Juramenti.
EGo N. Elect us ecclesiae N. ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens ero
Beato Petro Apostolo, sanctaeque Romanae Ecclesiae, and Domino nostro, Domino
Papae N. suisque successoribus canonice intrantibus. Non ero in consilio, aut
consensu vel facto, ut vitam perdant, aut membrum; seu capiantur mala captione,
aut in eos violenter manus quomodolibet ingerantur; vel injuriae aliquae
inferantur quovis quaesito color. Consilium vero, quod mihi credituri sunt,
per se, aut nuntios suos, seu literas, ad eorum damnum, me sciente, nemini
pandam. Papatum Romanum, and Regalia Sancti Petri, adjutor eis ero ad
retinendum and defendendum, salvo meo ordine, contra omnem hominem. Legatum
Apostolicae sedis in eundo and redeundo honorifice tractabo, and in suis
necessitatibus adjuvabo. Iura, honores, privilegia, and auctoritatem Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae, and Successorum praedictorum,
conservare, defendere, augere, promovere curabo, neque ero in consilio, vel
sacto, seu tractatu in quibus contra ipsum Dominum nostrum, vel eamdem Romanam
ecclesiam, aliqua sinistra, vel praejudicialia personarum, juris, honoris,
status, and potestatis eorum machinentur. Et, si talia a quibuscunque tractari,
vel procurari novero, impediam hoc pro posse; and quanto citius potero,
significabo eidem Domino nostro, vel alteri, per quem possit ad ipsius notitiam
pervenire. Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, decreta, Ordinationes seu dispositiones,
reservationes, provisiones, and mandata Apostolica, totis viribus observabo,
and saciam ab aliis observari. Hae-reticos, Schismaticos, and Rebels eidem,
Domino nostro, vel successoribus praedictis, pro posse persequar, and
impugnabo* Vocatus ad Synodum, veniam, nisi praepeditus suero canonica
praepeditione. Apostolorum limina singulis trienniis personaliter per me ipsum
visitabo; and Domino nostro, ac successoribus praesatis, rationem reddam de
toto meo pastorali officio, ac de rebus omnibus ad me^ Ecclesiae statum, ad
Cleri and populi disciplinam, animarum denique quae meae fidei traditae sunt,
salutem, quovis modo pertinentibus: Et vicissim mandata Apostolica humiliter
recipiam, and quam diligentissime exequar. Quod si legitimo impedimento
detentus suero, praefata omnia adimplebo per certum nuntiam ad hoc speciale
mandatum habentem, de gremio mei Capituli, aut alium in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutum, seu alias personatum habentem, aut, his mihi desicientibus, per
diaecesanum sacerdotem; and clero deficiente omnino, per aliquem alium
Presbyterum saecularem, vel Regularem spectatae probitatis and Religionis, de
supradictis omnibus plene instructum. De hujusmodi autem impedimento docebo per
legitimas probationes, ad sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalem proponentem in
Congregatione sacri Concilii, per supradictum Nuntium transmittendas.

Possessiones vero ad mensam meam pertinentes non vendam, nec donabo, neque
impignorabo; nec de novo in^eudabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo, etiam cum
consensu Capituli Ecclesiae meae, inconsul^o Romano Pontifice; and si ad
aliquam alienationem devenero; paenas in quadam super hoc edita Constitutione
contentas, eo ipso incurrere volo.

IN. Elect of the Church N. from this hour forward, shall be faithful and
obedient to St. Peter the Apostle and the Holy Roman Church, and our Lord the
Pope N. and his Successors that shall enter canonically. I shall be in no
Council, Consent, or Fact, that they lose life or member, or be taken with any
ill taking, or that violent hands be any way laid on them: or any injuries be
done them on any pretended color. And whatever Council they shall trust me
with, either by themselves, their Nuntio's, or Letters; I shall knowingly
reveal to none to their hurt. I shall help them to retain and defend the Roman
Papacy and the Royalties of Saint Peter against all men, saving my own Order. I
shall treat the Legate of the Apostolic See honorably, both in his going and
coming, and shall help him in his necessities. I shall take care to preserve,
defend, increase and promote the Rights, Honors, Privileges, and Authority of
the Holy Roman Church of our Lord the Pope, and his Successors foresaid. I
shall neither be in Council, Fact, or Treaty, in which any thing shall be
contrived against the said our Lord or the same Roman Church, or any thing that
may be prejudicial to their Persons, Right, Honor, State, or Power. And if I
know such things to be treated or procured by any body, I shall hinder it all I
can, and as soon as is possible shall signify it to the said our Lord, or any
other by whom it may come to his knowledge. The Rules of the Holy Fathers, and
the Decrees, Orders, or Appointments, Reservations, Provisions, or Mandates
Apostolical; I shall observe with all my strength, and make them to be observed
by others, and I shall according to my power, persecute and oppose all
Heretics, Schismatics, and Rebels, against the said our Lord, and his
Successors. I shall come to a Council when called, if I be not hindered by some
Canonical Impediment; I shall personally visit the thresholds of the Apostles
every third year, and shall give an account to our Lord and his said Successors
of my whole pastoral charge, and of all things that shall any way belong to the
State of my Church, and the Discipline of my Clergy and People, and the
salvation of the Souls committed to my trust. And I shall on the other hand
humbly receive and diligently execute the Apostolical Command. And if I be
detained by any lawful Impediment, I shall perform the foresaid things by a
special Messenger that shall have my particular Mandate being either of my
Chapter or in some Ecclesiastical Dignity, or in some Parsonage or these
failing, by any Priest of my Diocese, or failing any of these, by any Priest
secular or regular, of signal Probity and Religion, who shall be fully
instructed in all things aforesaid. And I shall give lawful proofs of the
foresaid Impediment which I shall send by the foresaid Messenger to the
Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church that is Proponent in the Congregation of the
Holy Council. I shall neither sell, give, Mortage, nor invest of new, nor any
way alienate the possessions that belong to my Table, notwithstanding the
consent of the Chapter of my Church without consulting the Pope of Rome. And if
I make any such Alienation, I am willing to incur the penalties contained in a
Constitution thereupon set forth.

The Inferences that may be drawn from this Oath are so obvious, that I shall
not trouble the Reader with any, knowing that every one will easily make them.

FINIS.

