A SERMON PREACHED Before the KING, AT St. JAMES-CHAPEL, On the 10 th. of
February 1694/5, BEING The First SUNDAY in LENT.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCV.

PRINTED, By His Majesty's Special Command.

2 COR. vi. 1. We then, as Workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye
receive not the Grace of God in vain,
THESE Words as they are part of the Epistle for the day, so they do contain
the chief Subject of our Labors, and of your Duty: we as fellow Laborers nor
with him is not in the Greek) are to unite all our endeavors, to beseech you
not to neglect this great Salvation, nor to receive in vain that Grace and
Favor which is offered you in the Gospel: that is, not to hear it without the
Impressions that it ought to make, and the effects that it ought to have upon
you.

In the end of the former Chapter St. Paul seems to raise our Character very
high. 2 Cor. 5.20.
He calls us Ambassadors for Christ. An Ambassador is the second Character of
dignity in the World, because it represents the first. We come in the Name and
stead of our Great Master. We pray men in Christ's stead, and as tho God did
beseech them by us. But that we might not swell too much upon so sublime a
designation, we are taken down again in the words of my Text: we are Workmen,
(...)
and Builders, and ought to be esteemed for our Works sake, as we labor
faithfully, and diligently. We are called to labor and not to authority, to
persuade and not to command. The chief Subject that we are to be employed in,
is to persuade men to be reconciled to God, and not to receive his Grace in
vain.

One might think, that this was an easy task, in which we could not doubt of
our success. What Criminal under the arrests of Justice, who has the time of
his Execution in view would, need great persuasions to accept not only of a
pardon, but of favor. This would go so naturally, that it would seem a
superfluous labor to use strong arguments to prevail upon him. Were we but
sensible of the load of sin, and guilt that is upon us, what humble supplicants
would we be for Grace, in stead of needing motives to persuade us to accept of
it.

The best method for us both to maintain the dignity of our Character, as
Ambassadors, and to succeed in our Labors as joint Workmen, is to live
sutably to the station we are raised to, to represent as near as we can the
virtues of him who sends us, and to direct the persuasions that we offer to
others, so effectually to our selves, that the world may from thence believe,
that we know our Arguments to be strong, because we our selves are convinced by
them. If they observe not this, they will have little regard to all that we
say: They will rather think, that it is for the sake of our Character, or
rather as they will turn it, for the sake of our appointments, that we study to
set out this matter with good colors, and a seeming strength of reason to
others: but if we our selves do not yield to it, they will conclude, that we,
who have oppo^^^^iti^^ to meditate well on those matt^^^ have ^ound out the
weak sides of the Arguments, since we do not yi^ld to (...), what noise soever
we may make (...) them, for the subduing and terrifying of others. The strokes
of Art, and the charms of Rhetoric do please rather than persuade. The heart
has a language peculiar to it self, which is well perceived by the hearts of
others: how plain and neglect^d soever it may be, as to the airs or graces of
discourse. It will soften and melt more than labored or artificial Composures.
Mankind will judge of our hearts by our actions rather then by our words. That
we may effectually beseech others, we must carefully watch over our selves,
that, according to the words which follow, Ver. 3 d.
we may give no offense in any thing, that we may neither give just grounds,
nor even colorable pretenses to others, to stumble by any thing that we may
lay in their way: that so our ministry may not be blamed. The enemies of
Religion will not think it enough to triumph over us, when we furnish them with
such advantages; they will carry it further, and lay the blame, not where it
ought to be laid, upon our persons: they will charge our Function with it, for
they hate that more than our persons: we ought therefore to approve our selves
in all things in the conduct of our lives, v. 4.
and in the discharge of our function: in much patience, even tho we should
fall under great afflictions. v. 8.
By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: neither much cast
down for the one, nor at all listed up for the other: and upon the whole matter
we ought to behave our selves so, that tho impious and wicked men may study to
make us pass for Impostors and deceivers; yet we may be found to be true: to be
men of Integrity and probity.

St. Paul says, we beseech you also: that is, not only the Heathens, but the
Saints or Christians of Corinth, not to receive this Grace in vain. They not
only believed the Gospel, but were, when this Epistle was written to them,
under deep Impressions of Sorrow, for those Disorders and Scandals, for which
he had treated them so severely in his first Epistle to them: yet no good
temper of theirs, could supersede the necessity of this exhortation: therefore
he says, we beseech you also. This is the end of our Ministry and the chief
subject of our labors: therefore it is ever to be repeated, and to be always
insisted on, even to the greatest proficients, and in their best minutes. By
the Grace of God: in the general signification of the word, is to be understood
the love and favor of God; but more particularly that goodness and mercy of
God, which is revealed to us in the Gospel, which in opposition to the Law of
Moses is called Grace: we are not under the Law but under Grace: and the Grace
of God which brings salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching us, 6 Romans
4.
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, 2 Ti^. 11.
and godlily in this present world. To receive this Grace in vain, is not to
have that sense of it, nor to make those acknowledgments for it, or returns to
it, that become us, and which it deserves.

So then the Subject of this Discourse shall be, 1 st. To show you what it is
to receive the Gospel in vain, and who they are that are guilty of this. 2 dly.
What are those arguments that we have to offer to the world to persuade them to
receive it not in vain, but sutably to the truth and importance of it.


I come therefore now to consider, what it is to receive this Grace in vain;
and what sorts of men are guilty of it? I shall name three sorts.

The 1 st. those do certainly receive it in vain: in the highest degree, who
treat it with scorn, who make it the subject of their profane mirth, and
diver^ themselves with such Impieties, as an abused liveliness can furnish them
with from any of the parts of it. This is the peculiar unhappiness of the
present Age, that men are not contented to receive this Grace in vain, Jude 4.
but they turn it into lasciviousness: they are not satisfied with Indulgences
to their Appetites and Passions, unless they gratify them so far, as to
sacrifice Religion and that Veneration, which by the consent of all Ages and
Nations, has been paid to sacred things, to them. But if the men of that sort
will bear so serious a thing, as the arguing closely; this may be asked them,
would they have all Mankind set free from all restraints? If this is a right of
Humane Nature, all men have an equal claim to it: Now what a thing would the
World be, if men were let loose; or rather if their Appetites and Passions were
let loose, first on themselves, and then on all the World about them. God knows
the restraints of Religion are but feeble things: yet as to some Matters, and
in some Instances they have such influence, that without them the World would
soon be turned into a Desert. Men would be as Beasts of prey, destroying and
devouring one another: on the other hand what order and harmony, what
confidence and mutual affection, what happiness in Families, and what peace in
Neighbourhoods, would arise out of the sincere receiving of the Christian
Religion and the submitting to its discipline? Every man would have all those
Duties paid him, which arise out of the relation of others to himself; as he
would become to all others every thing that in reason they could expect from
him. The Doctrines of this Religion concerning God and his Attributes,
concerning the Government of this World, and the prospect of another: the
Theories concerning the Soul and a future State, and the Notions of good and
evil, have in them such a majestic gravity, such a sutableness, with the
highest Ideas and the purest Thoughts that we are capable of, that in this
respect there is nothing in Christianity, that does not well agree with the
most elevated Apprehensions that our Natures are capable of. The worship of
this Religion is so free from all pageantry and vanity, so simple in the few
Rites it proposes, so natural in the Acts that are commanded by it, and so
easy in their performance, that take all the parts of this Religion together,
the Morals, the Doctrines, and the Rituals of it, it is evident, that as every
considering man will acknowledge, that the World could not be kept in order
without any Religion; so there is no other that can be in any sort compared
with this: and therefore every man must soon see cause to wish it were true:
and to be inclined to believe a Doctrine that has nothing in it unworthy of the
Divine Nature, and that does conduce so eminently to the perfecting of the
Humane Nature. This is enough to dispose men to believe, that it may be true,
even though they could not bring evident proofs to persuade them that it is so.

But when that stands so clearly attested, when the Miracles of Moses and the
Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, were wrought in the sight of so many
witnesses, and in such eminent and uncontested Instances, which overcame the
World so fast, that without any humane supports, nay in opposition to all the
Powers on Earth, this Doctrine being received in so many remote Provinces, so
early, by such numbers, who suffered much for it, and were ready to have
suffered more; when I say, all this is well considered, here was a just reason
once to receive this Gospel, upon the Authority that proved those, who
delivered it, to have been sent of God. There is no reason to demand the
continuance of such wonderful Works: such a rule of Life, and such a method of
Worship, do so effectually recommend this Religion, that we ought to acquiesce
in those Proofs that were once given: for whatsoever is once well and fully
proved, ought never to be questioned again; unless there is somewhat in the
nature of the thing, that gives a perpetual and just ground of doubting.

So much in the way of Argument against this sort of men: As to persuasion, all
that needs be offered to them, is to appeal to their own minds, if they do not
feel a secret joy, when they do a good action, and as sensible a horror when
they commit some bad ones: if in dangers and fears, they do not feel somewhat
within them, that drives them to God and Religion, if the prospect of death
does not terrify them at some times, and if the horrors of Conscience grow
not someti^es too hard even for them to bear; and that after all their
Practices upon themselves to stifle and extinguish the Rests of Education, and
the dread of invisible Objects? If they will not hearken to those secret
Intimations, that they feel within themselves, if they will neither consider
what the World would be if there were no Religion in it, nor what it must be if
men were sincere Christians; if they will neither consider the reasons that are
offered for our Religion, nor the whole frame of it in it self, but will only
fix on a few particulars, on which they think they can lay their censure and
seed their mirth, all that remains to be said to such, is, 22 Rev. 11. 2 Cor.
4. 3. 4.
Let him that is filthy be filthy still: for if our Gospel is hidden, it is to
them that are lost, and whom the God of this World has blinded.

A Second sort of those who receive this Grace in vain, are they who outwardly
profess it, nay go into Parties and Factions, and become hot and angry about
it, and yet do by no part of their whole behavior show that they inwardly
believe it* since they live as if they did not; and that with relation to many
of the most express Rules and Principles of it. From hence it is, that the men
of the former sort conclude, that these men believe it as little as they
themselves do: and they infer from thence that since Religion does not bring
its Votaries to that, which is both the clearest and the most valuable part of
it, therefore it can neither have that Truth, nor yet that strength in it, that
is pretended, otherwise it would show it self in more real effects.

It is but too true, that the much greater part of those who are called
Christians, are a reproach to their prosession: the higher their pretensions
are, the reproach is the greater: and it never has such a certain effect for
the hardening of others, as when any of our Prosession give just color to this.
The world observes us carefully as well as maliciously: and will lose none of
the advantages that we give them: they wait for our halting, and will not only
Insult upon it, with respect to our selves, but will turn it against the
doctrine that we profess with our mouths, while we deny it by our lives. These
certainly who know their Masters will and do it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: they must expect the deepest portion in the miseries of the next
State, even the portion of Hypocrites, who have been all their lives acting a
part: for how ^ll soever they have acted it, how thin soever the disguise and
mask has been, yet still they have passed for Christians, and have perhaps
acted with some zeal, in some of the concerns of that Religion, and yet have
all the while lived so, as to make all the world conclude, that they believed
nothing of it: but yet after all this is confessed,

This ought not to strengthen the libertines in their Impieties: since it is
certain, that men may be really convinced of some truths, and yet either through
want of attention to them, or through the power of some of their appetites or
Interests, they may pursue such a course of life as is most directly contrary
to that, which they are well persuaded of. Men do know, that a li^e of riot, a
carreer of Vice, and a profusion of Expense must either shorten their days, or
make them miserable: what they see in others, and what they observe in
themselves, do assure them that Luxury will both exhaust their fortunes, and
bring pains and intolerable diseases upon them: yet they go on, and pursue
their vices; and that even after they have felt the ill effects of them, both
on their persons and estates: so that they see all must end in beggary and
rottenness, or some violent pains, under the returns of which they must
languish out their days. Their ill habits are gone too deep and becom^ too
dear to them to forsake them: so that daily observation shows us, that men may
really believe some truths, tho their lives seem to be a continual
contradiction to them.

But after all, though such an outward form of Religion can be of little
advantage to those who put it on; it is a great Blessing to a Nation to be
brought under even the Profession of the Belief of it: For whatsoever is
received as a National Religion, if it is generally known, it must have such an
influence on the Laws and Constitutions, the outward forms and decencies of
such a Nation, that the Nation must come under another face, even by that
outward appearance. In Athens and Rome, the two most refined pieces of
Heathenism, though Wit and Eloquence, Reason and Philosophy seemed to rise
among them as high as any Age can pretend to: and a good Constitution; public
Liberty, a generous Education, Courage, the love of Virtue, and the love of
their Country, seemed to raise them as high as Human Nature unassisted can go;
Yet the Corruption of their Religion, the Fables concerning their Gods, the
Brutalities of their Worship, together with all the ill consequences of it,
were too hard for their Philosophy and good Government: the Corruption of their
Religion went too deep, and was too early received, to be overcome by
Speculation or Management. This their Philosophers saw well; and so they
despaired of Reforming the World, unless those things could have been first
Corrected.

The reverse of this appears, even in the most degenerated State of
Christendom; which with all its faults, has another face than either Paganism
or Mahometanism: and that appears yet more eminently, according as the
Knowledge of this Religion has been spread. The outward appearance of
Christendom is very far different now, from what it was before the
Reformation; in which it was kept up from the world, and no more of it was let
out than what was thought necessary to feed Superstition, and to maintain the
Authority of those who had the Secret in their hands. Now things have another
face; and though the greater part of those who are called Christians can expect
nothing from it themselves, but an aggravated Condemnation, since they
dishonor it more by their ill Practices, than they can pretend to support it
by their Zeal; yet the public Profession, and the general knowledge of it, are
great Blessings to Mankind.

A third sort of those who receive this Grace in vain, are persons who with the
Profession of Religion, do think themselves bound to join some Practice^
agreeing with it; but by reason of some false Principles, and through a vicious
indulgence to their Sloth and other ill Inclinations, they form so low an Idea
of a Religious life, and make such abatements to themselves from that, to which
at first view this Doctrine seems to oblige them, that they bring it down to a
very small matter; to an external compliance with Forms and Institutions; to
some outward Regularity; and some other easy Practices, by which they pacify
their own Minds; they lay such Terrors as may be apt to arise upon them; and
they form such Theories of the Attributes of God, and the Mercies of the
Gospel, that they grow to be easy under those low degrees.

It is certain, That the main design and chief effect of Religion, is to Purify
our Hearts, to Reform our Natures, to Restrain our Inclinations, our Appetites
and Passions, and to spread such an influence through our whole Lives, through
all our Powers, and in all our Actions, that the world may from thence, as from
the evidentest as well as the powerfullest Argument, be convinced both of the
beauty and force of this Religion. The Christian Religion in its true Purity,
and as it is received among us, is so stripped of all those outward appearances
of Pompous and Costly, of severe or cruel Performances, that unless it reforms
our Natures and our Lives, it has not enough in it to feed and support that
false quiet that Superstition may give.

A Heathen that Sacrificed his Child, or Ruined his Fortunes to do honor to
his Idol; a Mohammedan that Fasts severely, that goes on chargeable Pilgrimages,
that exposes himself to all Dangers, believing the certainty of Fate; a Jew
that paid Tithes of all his increase, besides many costly Sacrifices and
Oblations; that Traveled often up to Jerusalem, and that was not to lend upon
Interest; and one of the Roman Communion, that goes through severe Penances,
and makes great Endowments for the Honor of a Saint, or the Redemption of a
Soul; all these, I say, suffer so much in their Religion, it puts them both to
so much Cost and Pain, that they may come to persuade themselves that it may be
put to their Account, that God may be pleased, and Sins or Defects may be
Forgiven upon their doing such Services, that put them to so great a Charge,
and condemn them to such Severities. But as to us and our Religion, What can we
expect from it, if it has not a real influence upon our Hearts and Lives? Can
we think that for our going sometimes (seldom God knows) to Prayers; our
Assisting, that is being present, rather than joining with any Devotion at
them; that our giving the Hearing, often a very wandering one, to a few
Discourses; and our coming to Sacrament upon some great occasions, in
compliance with Law or Custom, rather than out of true Devotion; Can, I say,
any man have such high thoughts of such Nothings, such mean and dead
Performances, or can he have such low thoughts of God and Religion, as to
imagine that any value can be set on them? It is certain, that so simple and
plain a Religion as ours is, which lays so little cost or trouble on us, can be
of no value in the sight of God; it has not so much as an outward appearance
considerable enough to give a false quiet: so that man who know that his
Religion has not its real effects on him, has no reason to flatter himself upon
that account. Indeed such a half Religion, as it lets in upon a man the belief
of the Principles of it, so it lays him open to all the Checks and Terrors
which arise out of these. It is strong enough to teach him his Duty, to make
him know his Sins, and to apprehend the terrible Consequences of them; but it
does not complete its Work; it gives him only the Terrors, but lets him not in
to the Joys of true Religion. He does not live in that purity, as to feel the
Sense of a good Conscience; nor has he that right to the Promises of the
Gospel, which may settle in him a firm confidence in God, with a full assurance
of his Love, and an entire dependence on his Providence. The Terrors of Guilt
must make him start often, and the Corruptions that he feels still within him,
are to him like those secret Pains and Diseases, that though they break not out
into violent Symptoms, yet are sensibly felt, and do imbitter our Lives, in
spite of the highest affluence of wealth and pleasure that may compass us about
on every side.

After all, such a low state of Religion, though it is not to be rested on, yet
is not to be neglected it may be a good beginning, and carry us on (...) better
things: A fire may arise from a spark, an^ a little Leaven may come to leaven
the whol^ lump: Men of low seize ought to know that they are but low; and
to press forward, for getting the things that are behind, reaching (...) those
that are before them.

To conclude this Head; As we have seen different Classes of men who do receive
this grace in vain so in opposition to them, those who do not receive^ in vain,
are they who are firmly persuaded of t^^ truth of it; and that not from the
impliciteness o^ Education, or Custom, but upon Principles, ^^ter a due
consideration of the matter. They being thus assured of the truth of it, apply
themselves in earnest to frame the inward disposition of the mind, their
Designs and settled Resolutions, n^^ even their Wishes and suddener Thoughts,
into conformity to the Spirit of the Christian Religion. They become inwardly
humble and modest, charitable and good natured, patient and gentle, serious and
devout; they have moderate designs as to this world, and are contented with
that state of life, and those Circumstances that God shall think sit to choose
for them: They consider this World as a Pilgrimage, and themselves as Strangers
in it; and have their Eyes and Aims raised to a blessed Immortality beyond it;
and so they lay down a steadfast Resolution to allow themselves in no sin, nor
to compound for any one by affecting higher degrees of zeal in any of the other
parts of Religion. Thus their mind is framed within. To this Temper they join
an exactness in their whole deportment, free from affectation or superstition.
They begin at the most indispensable Rules of Virtue; they are sincere and
true, honest in all their dealings, and faithful to all their Promises; they
are harmless and innocent, show neither envy nor spite to others, nor allow
themselves the liberty of Calumny or Detraction: They are chaste, sober and
temperate; ready not only to do good to all, but particularly to render good
for evil: And in all these things they do not content themselves with low
degrees, but study to shine; not to gratify Vanity, or to be observed; but to
set a pattern to others, and to do all the honor that they can to their holy
Religion.

But alas! if this is the extent of not receiving this grace in vain, how ^ew
are they who come within this Character? Oh where are they to be found? Some
there are, God be thanked for it, in whom Religion shows both how amiable, and
how effectual it is. It is indeed an amazing and melancholy Consideration, that
the number of them should be so small; nor does any thing prove more evidently
the monstrous depravation of Human Nature, than that a Religion composed of
such Principles, and supported by such an Author, should prevail so little, and
have so feeble an influence, even over those who seem to deliver themselves up
to its discipline.

This carries me to the second Point to which I proposed to speak, to wit, What
are those Arguments that we have to offer the World, to persuade them not to
receive this grace in vain.

The 1 st is imported in the very word it self; that it is Grace, and Favor.
Generous minds value themselves on this; That how firm soever they may be
against Terrors or Threatenings, they are easily conquered by the methods of
love, and of kindness. They are rather too feeble here, and too apt to be
overcome by them. If we do either consider our own guilt, or the Majesty of
that God who offers this Grace to us, we will have tenderer impressions of this
matter. I know the profane Tribe look upon all the sad reflections that men may
be induced to make on their past lives, as the fumes of Melancholy, and as
vapors that arise from cross Accidents, or uneasy Circumstances. If indeed we
thought that a few sad Acts could compound matters with God; be as sort of
reparation to discount all other Reckonings; this were a very mean thing, and a
great foundation for Superstition. But when reflections on past Disorders are
only meant in order to the humbling of our selves, to the making us claim to,
and value the Mercies of God the more, and to the obliging us to be more
watchful over our selves for the future, and more tender toward the failings
of others; sad Reflections so managed, and so directed, must give us another
view of things, and make us see our selves in other colors. These, while they
sink us under the apprehensions of what we have deserved, so they must raise in
us a high sense of the Grace and Pardon offered us in the Gospel; 7. Luke 47.
such persons must love much in proportion to the sense that they have of the
much that is forgiven them.

If to this we add the consideration of the method by which access was given us
to this Grace in which we stand, it must carry us to very high thoughts of it:
when we see that Holy and Divine Person, who delivered this Religion to the
World, in whom the Fullness of the Godhea^ dwelt; who was not only full of Grace
and Trut^ as Man, but was the only begotten Son of God. Words that carry such
an august sound and sense in them, that they must beget in us the highest
Idea's possible of the dignity of his Person; tha^ this Person, I say, was made
a Sacrifice for us, and went through such a black and ignominious Scen^ of
Sufferings; that at all this distance from tha^ time, the History of them
cannot yet be read without giving great tenderness to every seriou^ Reader; and
that all this was done only to reconcile us to God, to obtain to us the pardon
o^ our Sins, and the favor of God. When all thi^ is duly considered, it must
raise in us a very dee^ and sensible Gratitude; it must create in us a ju^^
horror of those Sins which God would not pardon without giving so signal a
Demonstration of h^^ abhorrence of them, when he laid so great a loa^ of
suffering on him, who was thereby to becom^ the Mediator and Intercessor for
them. So that ^^ we have tractable Natures, that can be conquere^ by that,
which the noblest minds have thought i^ an honor to be overcome by; the
goodness of God in offering so free a Pardon on such easy terms on our side,
and by so hard a purchase to him who procured it for us, will make such
impressions on us that will receive and value this Grace as we ought, and will
study to make those Returns for it which become us.

Another Consideration that may justly prevail on us to give this Grace a
suitable reception, is the easy Conditions on which it is offered to us. Here
an Objection does presently arise: Can such a course of strict Obedience and
severe Holiness be thought an easy matter, while all our Faculties are under
such feebleness and disorder, that they do ^evolt against every part of it, and
seem indeed ^ncapable to bear it?

Here a distinction is carefully to be made be^ween the Law that is laid upon
us, and the condition upon which we can hope for a share in this Grace. We are
under a Law of Universal Holi^ess; but the condition of the Covenant of Grace
^s a sincere Obedience. The meaning of which ^s not, that we are only obliged
to a sincere Obedience, and not to an entire one. The whole Law of God obliges
us to the utmost extent that the Gospel has carried every branch of it; so that
^ve sin against God, and provoke his wrath, when we fail in any part of our
Duty. But on the other hand, the Gospel is not of the nature of such an Act of
Grace, as pardons all former Faults, but gives no hope in case of a new
Disobedience; it does not only pardon all that is past, but it encourages us to
continue in the service of God, tho^ we should relapse, as well as it accepts
of our si^cerity; and it makes abatements for those Frailties that hang about
our Natures, and that do often prevail over us: yet this does not alter the
nature of things; it does not dissolve our obligations, nor make such actions
no sins; it only offe^^ a continued Pardon, not subject to forfeiture upon our
offenses. Nothing but a deliberate course in sin excludes us from this Grace;
and even i^ that case we are not condemned to Despair, bu^ there is room for
Repentance. Therefore we ar^ not to imagine, that sincere Obed^ence is all tha^
we are bound to; for if it were so, we should no^ be guilty of Sin, by such
offenses as may consi^^ with it. From hence it appears, that we are sti^^ under
an obligation to an entire Obedience; (...) that when we say, that a sincere
Obedience is the condition of this Covenant, we do not disa^^^ the Law, nor its
binding force; we only hold for^^ the continued offer of the Pardon in the
Gospel notwithstanding our Sins, upon our repenting of them and forsaking them
in the main course of our life.

Every man that deals honestly with himself, must soon be made to confess, That
a sincere Obedience is not so far out of the reach of human Nature, but that he
may hope to attain to it, especially with the help of those Aids that are
offered to him. And as every man knows what it is seriously to mind his Health
and his Affairs, even when he is guilty of some Errors and Omissions in it; he
knows what it is to pursue a Science, or be employed in a Trade, even when he
does not bend his utmost Application to it, nor use all possible Diligence in
it; yet when it is that which he labors in, and does constantly follow, that
becomes the Business of his life: He is sensible of many Errors that he makes,
he corrects them, and studies to perfect himself by all the improvements that
come in his way. From hence it will be easy to judge of our sincerity, whether
we mind Religion with that honest care, and hearty application with which we
pursue all our other concerns.

The easiness of this condition, appears yet more fully in those supplies by
which we are enabled to perform it. Secret Assistances are promised to us; but
how they are conveyed, and how they have their effect upon us, is not easy for
us to apprehend: Who can tell how it comes that our Food does animate and
exhilarate our Minds? Or that the Dew of Heaven should make the Earth Fruitful?
So how much soever Profane Minds may lay out their Wits, to make all this pass
for the delusion of the Imagination, or for a false pretension; yet all Good
men may be appealed to, whether they do not feel that upon their pursuing those
methods that are offered in the Gospel; they do perceive such a change to grow
upon them, that how insensible soever the steps of it may be, yet the whole,
after some time becomes very apparent: They feel such a new turn in their
Minds, such an alteration in their Inclinations and Aversions, that they
become, as it were, molded a^new* their Thoughts have another ply, and their
Mind another form. The unaccountableness of the way in which this is brought
about, is no just prejudice against the truth of it: For as Air, though the
weakest and most yiedling of all the bodies we know, yet is sometimes driven
with such mighty force, that nothing can resist it; so our Savior has compared
the unseen motions of the Divine Spirit, to the invisible direction of the Air:
Joh. 3.8.
Such operation have those secret Influences, that men are transformed by them;
and since what exalts the power of our Faculties, does at the same time weaken
the opposition that can be made to them, by the difficulty of any performance;
this removes the prejudice that may be raised from the feebleness of our
Natures, and the hardness of the conditions that are laid upon us. It is our
sloth and unwillingness to undergo those Labors that we know our selves
capable of, that makes the difficulties appear to be Insuperable.

We must confess that we have seen such instances of the Power of Religion, in
some Persons raised to the highest Circumstances of Life, and who lived under
the most constant observation; that by those we may be convinced how far Human
Nature can go, or rather how far Religion can carry it. We have seen them shine
with such a luster, as well as influence, that by those apparent proofs we are
forced to acknowledge, That those who attend to the methods that this Religion
prescribes, and do closely pursue them, rise up to a pitch that would scarce be
credible, if it had not been evident beyond contradiction. To those instances
we appeal the more confidently, that from them the world may judge how amiable
a thing true Religion is; how excellent in it self, and how beneficial to
Mankind. Such Impressions it is to be hoped will stick long, and will let us
see what we may grow to be, if we are not wanting to our selves, and to those
Assistances that are offered to us so freely, that we may have them if we but
ask them earnestly, and use them carefully.

A third Argument by which we are to besecch you to receive this grace, and to
pursue the designs of it with due care, is, that our labor shall not be in
vain. There is a vast reward laid up for them that walk worthy of this Gospel.
And since it is of such infinite value, it is but suitable that our acceptance
of the Gospel, and the effect it has upon us, should bear some proportion to
our expectations from it, and to those hopes that are held forth to us by it.
There is nothing more certain, than that in every wise Constitution there ought
to be a proportion kept between the Rewards that are offered, and those
Services for which they are proposed; as the due encouragements to them, and as
returns for them. Even the highest Generosity and Magnificence of bounty, must
be conducted by this rule; for the proposing vast Rewards for slight matters,
will always betray great want of judgment, in not setting a true value on
things, either on the Rewards, or the Services, or perhaps on both: The Rewards
may rise vastly above the true value of the Service; and it is fit they should
do so, that men may be duly animated and heated by them; but then the Services
must with relation to him that does them, be in proportion as great for him to
do, as the Rewards are for him who gives them.

The Rewards that our Religion proposes, are certainly far above all the
Services that we can do: And yet it does not derogate from the Infinite Wisdom
of God to offer them to us; because the Services that he Commands in order to
our obtaining them, are the highest that we are capable of. But to offer such
Rewards to such slight Services, as the taking up of a Name, and a Profession,
the ^spousing of some Opinions, the being regular in some Forms, and the
exterior parts of our deportment; all this, as it is a mean thing in it self,
so it is the insincere acting of a part; and therefore it cannot be supposed,
that a God who is Infinitely Wise and Holy, would propose such a Reward to such
Services that are so far below the Capacities and the Faculties that he has
planted in us. But when we apply our selves sincerely to his Service, when we
do set all our Powers to it, and give up our thoughts and studies, our time and
our care to know and to do his Will; when we perceive that we make Religion the
business of our Lives, and pur^ue a constant Obedience to the Laws and Will of
God Seriously and Constantly; then since this ^s all that our Natures are well
capable of, it may ^e highly suitable to the Infinite goodness of God, and to
the vast Regard that he has to the Death and ^ntercession of Christ, to offer
us Unspeakable Rewards for such Services, which tho they are mean ^n
themselves, and add nothing to him, yet are the ^ighest that we are capable of.
This is therefore very clear, that the greatness of the Reward ought t^ be a
most powerful Argumen^ to persuade us to ca^^ our Religion as far as we can,
and not to rest conten^ed with Low Measures, and Lifeless Performance^.

Now that we may have some Idea of the val^^ of this recompense of reward that
is offered us, (...) us a little consider our own Natures, and see wh^
Imaginable Perfections we are capable of. Bodies (...) great Purity and
fineness of Composition, so fixe^ as to be subject to no Wast, and liable to no
Neces^ties; and so well Tempered as to suggest to us (...) bad Thoughts; that
are capable of a great quickne^^ of Motion, and of enduring a perpetual bent of
(...) Mind: In a Word, such Bodies as we can imagi^^ our Animal Spirits would
be, if they were no mo^^ volatile but fixed, seem to be one Ingredient in the
(...) most Happiness that we are capable of. Another m^ be, that our Minds
should be filled with the cleare^ Ideas of Truth, of the nature of all things;
and abo^^ all, of that Supreme Mind that both gave Being a^^ still continues it
to all other things. Those Ide^^ must be ever present with us; and all the
Inferenc^ from them must be as easily Made, and as constant^^ Remembered, as we
do see with our Eyes, or do ^^member such things as have made the greatest
I^pressions upon us. Our Actions must be as certain^^ Determined by them, as
the easiest things are no^ carried on by the Idea's that are the Clearest, and
t^^ least Painful to us: A Sovereign love to the perfectest Being, and to every
other being in proportion to its Approach or Resemblance of the Supreme, must
so entirely possess and overcome us, that we shall be always living and acting
under the Power of that Noble and Active Principle, when there is a constant
sense of loving the best Object, and of being beloved by it: when with all
this, there is a constant Joy in the Reflections on all that men do, and a
perpetual delight in it; when this is Enjoyed in Company with many other pure
and perfect Minds who do all love one another, and rejoice together: And when
there is joined to all this a clear sense of those Insupportable Miseries to
which they had made themselves obnoxious, and from which they are for ever
delivered: And to crown all, when they do certainly know that all must be
Eternal, without End, or so much as an Interruption. Let all these be supposed
to be joined together; and they make up all the Happiness that our Natures are
capable of; besides what other Seeds of a further possible Happiness may lie in
us, of which we can at present frame no true Idea.

This Composition of all the Ingredients of an imaginable happiness, as it
carries nothing in any part of it that does not appear very possible, and that
is not suitable to all our apprehensions and observations, so it does very
perfectly agree with the descriptions that this Religion, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 53. 1 John 3. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
which ha^ brought life and immortality to light, has given us concerning it.
Our bodies are to be raised in a state of honor* and power, incorruptible and
immortal: We shall see God as he is, and know him as we our selve^ are known.
And when that which is perfect shall come that which is in part shall be done
away; and we shall be ever with the Lord, in the fellowship of Angels and of
Saints. Are not these hopes and promise^ sufficient to inflame our affections,
and to quicken us to all the application and zeal possible? It were a vain
attempt, and unbecoming the dignity of the Subject, and of this Place, to
pretend to add to or enlarge on these Arguments. They are so full and so clear;
there is that energy and conviction in them, that we must give over those, upon
whom they have no effect, as persons too hard to be softened, and too desperate
to be reclaimed. Our Gospel may appear to them weak and foolish; but to those
who consider and judge more maturely, it is the power and the wisdom of God.
Such it is, and such it will appear to be to all those who receive not hi^
grace in vain. God grant it may not be our condemnation, that light is come
unto the world, but tha^ we have loved darkness better than light, because ou^
deeds are evil: But that as we have received thi^ Gospel, so we may walk worthy
of it, to the praise of h^^ Holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

THE END.

