AN ANSWER TO THE LATE EXCEPTIONS MADE BY Mr Erasmus Warren AGAINST THE THEORY
OF THE EARTH.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1690.

AN ANSWER To the late EXCEPTIONS MADE BY Mr ERASMUS WARREN AGAINST The THEORY
of the EARTH.
IF it be a Civility to return a speedy Answer to a demand or a message, I will
not fail to pay that respect to the late Author of Exceptions against the
Theory of the Earth. I know, short follies, and short quarrels, are the best:
and to offer satisfaction at the first opportunity, is the fairest way to put
an end to controversies. Besides, such personal altercations as these, are but
res periturae, which do not deserve much time or study; but, like Repartees,
are best made off hand, and never thought on more. I only desire that
friendliness, that some allowance may be made as to unaccuracy of style: which
is always allowed in hasty dispatches.

I shall make no excursions from the Subject, nor use any other method than to
follow the learned Exceptor from Chapter to Chapter, and observe his steps and
motions, so far as they are contrary to the Theory. But if he divert out of his
way, for his pleasure, or other reasons best known to himself, I may take
notice of it perhaps, but shall not follow him any further than my business
leads me; having no design to abridge his liberty, but to defend my own
Writings where they are attackt. Give me leave therefore, without any other
preface or ceremony, to fall to our work.

EXCEPTIONS.
CHAP. I.
THIS Chapter is only an Introduction, and treats of other things, without any
particular opposition to the Theory. And therefore I shall only give you the
Conclusion of it, in the Author's own words: Page 44.
So much for the first Chapter; which may be reckoned as an Introduction to the
following Discourse* Which if any shall look upon as a Collection of Notes
somewhat confusedly put together, rather than a formal, well digested Treatise,
they will entertain the best or truest Idea of it. A severe Censure: But every
man best understands his own works.

CHAP. II.
HERE he begins to enter upon particular Exceptions: and his first head is
against the Formation of the Earth, as explained by the Theory. To this he
gives but one exception in this chapter: Page 45.
Namely, that It would have taken up too much time. The World being made in six
days. Whereas many separations of the Chaos and of the Elements, were to be
made, according to the Theory, which could not be dispatched in so short a
time. To this Exception the general Answer may be this; either you take the
Hypothesis of an ordinary Providence, or of an extraordinary, as to the time
allowed for the Formation of the Earth; If you proceed according to an ordinary
Providence, the formation of the Earth would require much more time than Six
days. But if according to an extraordinary, you may suppose it made in six
minutes, if you please. 'Twas plain work, and a simple process, according to
the Theory; consisting only of such and such separations, and a Concretion: And
either of these might be accelerated, and dispatched in a longer or shorter
time, as Providence thought fit.

However this Objection does not come well from the hands of this Author, who
makes all the Mountains of the Earth, (the most operose part of it, as one
would think) to be raised in a small parcel of a day, by the heat and action of
the Sun. As we shall find in the 10 th. Chapter, hereafter. He seems to proceed
by natural Causes, for such are the heat and action of the Sun: and if so, he
will find himself as much straightened for time, as the Theorist can be: But if
he say, the work of Nature and of the Sun was accelerated by an extraordinary
power, he must allow us to say the same thing of the Separations of the Chaos,
and the first Concretion of the Earth. For he cannot reasonably debar us that
liberty which he takes himself, unless we have debarred and excluded our
selves. Now it is plain the Theorist never excluded an extraordinary Providence
in the formation and construction of the Earth; as appears and is openly
expressed in many parts of the Theory. Eng. Theor. p. 65.
See, if you please, the conclusion of the fifth Chapter, which treats about
the formation of the Earth. The last paragraph is this: Give me leave only,
before we proceed any further, to annex here a short Advertisement, concerning
the Causes of this wonderful Structure of the first Earth: It Is true, we have
proposed the Natural Causes of it, and I do not know wherein our Explication is
false or defective; but in things of this kind we may easily be too credulous.
And this Structure is so mavelous, that it ought rather to be considered as a
particular effect of the Divine Art, than as the work of Nature. The whole
Globe of the water vaulted over, and the exterior Earth hanging above the
Deep, sustained by nothing but its own measures and manner of Construction: A
building without foundation or Cornerstone. This seems to be a piece of Divine
Geometry or Architecture; and to this, I think, is to be referred that
magnificent Challenge which God Almighty made to Job; Where was thou when I
laid the foundations of the Earth? Declare, etc. Moses also, when he had
described the Chaos, says, The Spirit of God moved upon, or sat brooding upon
the face of the waters; without all doubt to produce some effects there. And
St. Peter, when he speaks of the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, how it stood
in reference to the waters, adds, By the word of God, or by the wisdom of God
it was made so. And this same wisdom of God, in the Proverbs, as we observed
before, takes notice of this very piece of work in the formation of the Earth:
When he set an Orb over the face of the Deep, I was there. Wherefore to the
great Architect, who made the boundless Universe out of nothing, and formed the
Earth out of a Chaos, let the praise of the whole work, and particularly of
this Masterpiece, for ever with all honor be given In like manner, Eng.
Theor. ^ 106. 107.
there is a larger account of Providence, both Ordinary and Extraordinary, as
to the Revolutions of the Natural World, in the last Paragraph of the 8 th.
Chapter; and like reflections are made in other places when occasion is offered.

We have not therefore any where excluded the influence and benefit of
superior causes, where the case requires it. Especially when it is only to
modify the effect, as to time and dispatch. And in that case none will have
more need of it than himself, as we shall find in the examination of his Tenth
Chapter, about the Origin of Mountains.

The rest of this Second Chapter is spent in three Excursions. One in
justifying the Cartesian way of forming Light and the Sun, as agreeable to
Moses. The Second about the Jewish Cabala, and Cabalistical interpretations.
And the Third about Mystical numbers. But the Theory not being concerned in
these things, I leave them to the Author and his Readers, to enjoy the pleasure
and profit of them, and proceed to the Third Chapter.

CHAP. III.
IN This Chapter a Second Exception against the formation of the Earth, as
proposed in the Theory, is alleged: And it is this, The fluctuation of the
Chaos, or of that first watery Globe, would hinder, he says, any Concretion of
Earth upon its surface. Not that there were Winds or Storms then, to agitate
those waters. Neither would the motion of the Earth, or the rotation of that
Globe, disturb them, as he allows there. ^. 74. lin. 18, 19.
But the disturbance would have rise from Tides, or the ebbings and flowings of
that great Ocean: which, he says, must have been then, as well as now. And the
reason he gives is this, Because the Flux and Reflux of the Sea depend upon the
Moon: And the Moon was then present, as he says, in our Heavens, or in our
Vortex: and therefore would have the same effect then, upon that Body of waters
which lay under it, that it has now upon the Sea.

That the Moon was in the Heavens, and in our Neighborhood, when the Earth was
formed, he proves from the Six-days Creation: and spends two or three pages in
wit and scolding upon this subject. p. 77, 78. 79.
But, with his leave, when all is done, his argument will be of no force,
unless he can prove that the Fourth Day's Creation was before the Third. I
confess, I have heard of a wager that was lost upon a like case, namely,
whether Henry the 8 th. was before Henry the 7 th? But that was done by complot
in the Company, to whom it was referred to decide the Question. We have no plot
here, but appeal fairly to that Judge the Excepter has chosen, namely to
Scripture, which tells us, that the Moon was made the 4 th. Day and the Earth
was formed the 3 d. Therefore unless the 4 th. Day was before the 3 d. the Moon
could not hinder the formation of the Earth.

But, I hope, say you, this is a misrepresentation. The Animadverter sure would
not put the matter upon this issue. Yes, he does. For when he had opposed to
our Formation of the Earth, the Fluctuation of the Waters: caused, as he
phrases it, by the bulkie presence of the Moon, He concludes with these words,
(p. 77. Paragr. 3.) But in reference to this matter, there is a Doubt made by
the Theorist, which must be considered and removed. Otherwise most of what has
been said, touching the instability and fluctuation of these Waters, will be
vain and groundless. The Doubt is, Whether the Moon were then in our
neighborhood. You see that matter is put upon this issue, Whether the Moon was
in the Neighborhood of the Earth, at the time of its formation. We say she was
not, and prove it by this plain argument: If she was not in Being at that time,
she was not in our Neighborhood: But unless the 4 th. day was before the 3 d.
she was not in Being. Ergo.

But after all, If the Moon had been present then, and there had been Tides, or
any other fluctuation toward the Poles, we have no reason to believe,
according to the experiences we have now, that that would have hindered the
formation of the Earth, upon the surface of the Chaos. For why should they have
hindered that more, than they do the formation of Ice upon the Surface of the
Sea? We know, in cold Regions, the Seas are frozen, notwithstanding their
Tides. And in the mouths of Rivers, where there is both the current and stream
of the River on one hand, and the counter-current of the Tides on the other,
these together cannot hinder the Concretion that is made on the Surface of the
Water. And our water is a substance more thin, and easily broken, than that
tenacious film was, that covered the Chaos. WHEREFORE, upon all suppositions,
we have reason to conclude, that no fluctuations of the Chaos could hinder the
formation of the First Earth.

Lastly, The Observator opposes the reasons that are given by the Theorist, why
the presence of the Moon was less needful in the first World. Namely, because
there were no long Winter-nights: nor the great Pool of the Sea to move or
govern. As to the Second reason, it is only Hypothetical: and if the Hypothesis
be true, That there was no open Sea at that time, (which must be elsewhere
examined) the consequence is certainly true. But as to the first reason, He
will not allow the Consequence, though the Hypothesis be admitted. For he says,
p. 79.
As there were no long Winter-nights then, so there were no short Summer ones
neither. So that set but the one against the other, and the presence of the
Moon may seem to have been as needful then, in regard of the length of nights,
as she is now. This looks like a witty observation, but it does not reach the
point. Is there as much need of the Moon in Spain, as in Lapland, or the
Northern Countries? There is as much Night in one place as another, within the
compass of a Year: but the great inconvenience is, when the Night falls upon
the hours of Travel, or the hours of work and business. For if it fall only
upon hours of sleep, or of rest and retirement: as it does certainly more in
Spain, and in those Climates that approach nearer to and Equinox, the Moon is
there less necessary in that respect. We can sleep without Moonshine, or
without Light; but we cannot travel, or do business abroad, without hazard and
great inconvenience, if there be no light. So that the reason of the Theorist
holds good viz. That there would be more necessity of Moon shine in long
Winter-Nights, than in a perpetual Equinox.

We proceed now to the rest of this Chapter, which is made up of some secondary
Charges against this part of the Theory, concerning the Chaos and the Formation
of the first Earth. As first, that it is precarious: p. 80, 81* p. 83.
Secondly, Vnphilosophical: and Thirdly, Antiscriptural, which we shall answer
in order. He seems to offer at three or four instances of precariousness, as to
the ingredients of the Chaos, their proportions, and separations. But his
quarrel is chiefly with the oily particles. These he will scarce allow at all:
nor that they could separate themselves, in due time, to receive the
Terrestrial: at least in due proportions.

First, He would have no oily particles in the Chaos. But why so, I pray? what
proof or just exception is there against them? Why may there not be original
Oily particles, as well as original Salt particles? Such as your great master
D. Carts supposes. Prin. ph. l. 4.. 84. Meteor. c. 1.. 8.
He who considers that vast quantity of Oleagineous matter that is dispersed
every where: in Vegetables, in Animals, and in many sorts of Earths: And that
this must have been from the beginning, or as soon as the Earth had any
furniture: will see reason to believe that such particles must be thought
Original and Primeval. Not forged below the Abyss, and extracted from the
inferior regions of the Earth. For that would require a process of many ages;
whereas these being the principles of Fertility, it is reasonable to suppose
that a New World abounds with them more than an Old one. Lastly, if we suppose
Oily particles to be tenuious and branchy, as your Philosopher does, too gross
to be Air, and too light for Water: Why should we imagine that in that vast
mass and variety of particles, whereof the Chaos consisted, there should not be
any of this figure, as well as of others? Or, what reason is there to suppose,
that there are none of that figure, but what are brought from the inferior
Regions of the Earth? For, of all others, these seem to be the most unlikely,
if not incapable, of being extracted from thence. And if there be only a
gradual difference, in magnitude and mobility, betwixt the particles of Air and
of Oil, Prin. phil. l. 4.. 76.
as that Philosopher seems to suppose, why must we exclude these degrees, and
yet admit the higher and lower?

The second thing which he charges with precariousness, is the separation of
this Oily matter, in due time, so as to make a mixture and concretion with the
terrestrial particles that fell from above. This objection was both made and
answered by the Theorist: Eng. Theor. p. 58, 59.
which the Observator might have vouchsafed to have taken notice of: and either
confuted the answer, or spared himself the pains of repeating the objection.

The third precariousness is concerning the quantity and proportion of these
particles: and the fourth, concerning the quantity and proportion of the Water.
The Excepter, it seems, would have had the Theorist to have gagged these
liquors, and told him the just measure and proportion of each. But in what
Theory or Hypothesis is that done? Has his great Philosopher, in his Hypothesis
of Three Elements, (which the Excepter makes use of, p. 52.) Or in his several
Regions of the unformed Earth, in the 4 th Book of his Principles, defined the
quantity and dimensions of each? Or in the Mineral particles and juices, which
he draws from the lower Regions, does he determine the quantity of them? And
yet these, by their excess or defect, might be of great inconvenience to the
World. Neither do I censure him for these things, as precarious. For when the
nature of a thing admits a latitude, the original quantity of it is left to be
determined by the effects: and the Hypothesis stands good, if neither any thing
antecedent, nor any present phoenomena can be alleged against it.

But if these examples from his great Philosopher, be not sufficient, I will
give him one from an Author beyond all exception: and that is from himself.
Does the Animadverter in his new Hypothesis concerning the Deluge, chapter 15. give
us the just proportions of his Rock-water, and the just proportions of his
Rainwater, that concurred to make the Deluge? I find no calculations there, but
general expressions, that the one was far greater than the other: and that may
be easily presumed concerning the oily substance and the watery in the Chaos.
p. 80, 81.
What scruples therefore he raises in reference to the Chaos, against the
Theorist, for not having demonstrated the proportions of the liquors of the
Abyss, fall upon his own Hypothsis, for the same or greater reasons. And you
know what the old verse says, Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

But however, p. 81.
He will have such exceptions to stand good against the Theorist, though they are
not good against other persons. Because the Theorist stands upon Ego quidem in
ea sum sententia. si in harum rerum de quibus agitur, cognitionem, aut aliarum
quarumcunque, quae momenti sunt, visum fuerit Deo aut Naturae ut pateret
hominibus ratio perveniendi, ratio illa certa est, and in aliqua clara and
invicta evidentia fundata: non conjecturalis, vaga, and dubia. Qualem nempe ii,
qui optime utuntur liberate sua, and qui maxim sibi cavent ab erroribus,
nunquam amplecterentur.
terms of certainty, and in one place of his Book, has this sentence, Ego
quidem, etc. These words, I think, are very little exceptionable, if they be
taken with the Context. For this Evidence and certainty which the Theorist
speaks of, is brought in there in opposition to such uncertain arguments as are
taken from the interpretation of Fables and Symbols: or from Etymologies and
Grammatical Criticisms, which are expressly mentioned in the preceding
discourse. And yet this sentence, because it might be taken in too great an
extent, is left out in the 2 d Edition of the Theory, and therefore none had
reason to insist upon it. But I see the Excepter puts himself into a state of
War, and thinks there is no foul play against an Enemy.

So much for his charge of precariousness. We now come to the 2 d, which is
called unphilosophicalness. And why is the Theorist, in this case,
unphilosophical? Because, says the Excepter, He supposes Terrestrial particles
to be dispersed through the whole Sphere of the Chaos, as high as the Moon. And
why not, pray, if it be a mere Chaos? where, antecedently to separations, all
things are mixed and blended without distinction of gravity or levity. Otherwise
it is not a mere Chaos. And when separations begin to be made, and distinction
of parts and regions, so far it is ceasing to be a mere Chaos. But then, says
the Observator, why did not the Moon come down, as well as these Terrestrial
particles? I answer by another question, Why does not the Moon come down now?
Seeing she is still in our Vortex, and at the same distance; and so the same
reason which keeps her up now, kept her up then. Which reason he will not be at
a loss to understand, if he understand the principles of his great Philosopher.

We come now to the last charge, That the Theory, in this part of it, is
Antiscriptural. And why so? because it supposes the Chaos dark, whereas the
Scripture says there was Light the first day. Well, but does the Scripture say
that the Chaos was thoroughly illuminated the first day? Page 52.
the Excepter, as I remember, makes the primigenial Light to have been the
Rudiment of a Sun: lin. 17.
and calls it there a faint light, and a feeble light; lin. 27.
and in this place, a faint glimmering. If then the Sun, in all its strength
and glory, cannot sometimes dispel a mist out of the Air, what could this
faint, feeble glimmering do, toward the dissipation of such a gross caliginous
opacity, as that was? This Light might be sufficient to make some distinction
of Day and Night in the Skies; and we do not find any other mark of its
strength in Scripture, nor any other use made of it.

So we have done with this Chapter. Give me leave only, without offense, to
observe the style of the Excepter in reference to Scripture and the Theory. He
is apt to call every thing antiscriptural, that suits not his Sense. Neither is
that enough, but he must also call it a bold affront to Scripture. p. 78.
He confesses, he has made a little bold with Scripture himself, p. 299. pen.
in his new Hypothesis. How much that little will prove, we shall see
hereaster. But however as to that hard word, affront, a discreet man, as he is
not apt to give as affront, so neither is he forward to call every cross word
an affront. Both those humors are extremes, and breed quarrels. Suppose a Man
should say boldly, God Almighty has no right hand. Oh, might the Animadverter
cry, That Is a bold affront to Scripture: For, I can show you many and plain
Texts of Scripture, both in the Old Testament, and in the New Testament; where
express mention is made of God's Right Hand. And will you offer to oppose
Reason and Philosophy to express words of Scripture, often repeated, and in
both Testaments? O Tempora, O Mores. So far as my observation reaches, weak
reasons commonly produce strong passions. When a Man has clear reasons, they
satisfy and quiet the mind, and he is not much concerned whether others
receive his notions, or no. But when we have a strong aversion to an opinion,
from other Motives and Considerations: and find our reasons doubtful or
insufficient, then, according to the course of humane nature, the passions rise
for a further assistance: and what is wanting in point of argument, is made up
by invectives and aggravations.

CHAP. IV.
THIS Chapter is chiefly concerning the Central Fire, p. 86.
and the Origin of the Chaos. Of both which the Theorist had declared he would
not treat. And it is an unreasonable violence to force an Author to treat of
what things we please, and not allow him to prescribe bounds to his own
discourse. As to the first of these, see what the Theorist has said, Engl.
Theor. p. 48. 64. and 324. By which passages it is evident, that he did not
meddle with the Central parts of the Earth: nor thought it necessary for his
Hypothesis. As is also more fully expressed in the Latin Si admittamus insuper
Ignem Centralem, sive Massam ignis in centro Terrae: quod quidem non est hujus
argumenti. Neque partem intimam Chaos, nisi obiter and pro forma, consideravi,
cum ad rem nostram non spectet. Vid. etiam p. 186. edit. 2.
Theory, p. 45. For, do but allow him a Chaos from the bottom of the Abyss,
upwards to the Moon, and he desires no more for the formation of an habitable
Earth. Neither is it the part of wisdom, to load a new subject with unnecessary
curiosities.

Then as to the Origin of the Chaos, see how the Theorist bounds his discourse
as to that. Eng. Theor. p. 324.
I did not think it necessary to carry the story and original of the Earth,
higher than the Chaos, as Zoroaster and Orpheus seem to have done; but taking
that for our foundation, which Antiquity sacred and profane does suppose, and
natural reason approve and confirm, we have formed the Earth from it. To form
an habitable Earth from a Chaos given, and to show all the great Periods and
general Changes of that Earth, throughout the whole course of its duration, or
while it remained an Earth, was the adequate design of the Theorist. And was
this design so short or shallow, that it could not satisfy the great Soul of
the Excepter? but it must be a flaw in the Hypothesis, p* 88.
that it did go higher than the Chaos. We content our selves with these bounds
at present. And when a man declares that he will write only the Roman History,
Will you say his work's imperfect, because it does not take in the Persian and
Assyrian?

These things considered, to speak freely of this Chapter, it seems to me, in a
great measure, impertinent. Unless it was designed to show the learning of the
Observator: who loves, I perceive, to dabble in Philosophy, though little to the
purpose. For, as far as I see, his disquisitions generally end in Skepticism;
He disputes first one way, and then another, and, at last, determines nothing.
He rambles betwext D. Carts and Moses, the Rabbis, the Septuagint, the
Platonists, Magnetisme, striate Particles, and praeexistence of Souls: and ends
in nothing as to the formation of the Earth, which was to be the subject of the
Chapter. We proceed therefore to the next, in hopes to meet with closer
reasoning.

CHAP. V.
FRom the manner of the Earth's formation, p. 106.
the Excepter now proceeds to the Form of it, if completed. And his first
Exception is, That it would want Waters or Rivers to water it. He says there
would either be no Rivers at all: or none, at least, in due time.

The Theorist has replenisht that Earth with Rivers, flowing from the extreme
parts of it toward the middle, in continual streams: and watering, as a
Garden, all the intermediate climates. And this constant supply of water was
made from the Heavens, by an uninterrupted stream of Vapors: which had their
course through the Air, from the middle parts of the Earth toward the extreme;
and falling in Rains, returned again upon the surface of the Earth, from the
extreme parts to the middle. For that Earth being of an Oval, or something
oblong figure, there would be a declivity all a-long, or descent, from the
Polar parts toward the Equinoctial, which gave course and motion to these
waters. And the vapors above never failing in their course, the Rivers would
never fail below; but a perpetual Circulation would be established, betwixt the
waters of the Heavens and of the Earth.

This is a short account of the state of the Waters in the Primeval Earth.
Which you may see represented and explained more at large, in the 2 d. Book of
the Theory, Chap. 5. And this, I believe, is an Idea more easily conceived,
than any we could form concerning the Waters and Rivers of the present Earth,
if we had not experience of them. Suppose a Stranger that had never seen this
Terraqueous Globe, where we live at present, but was told the general Form of
it: How the Sea lies, how the Land, and what was the constitution of the
Heavens: If this Stranger was asked his opinion, whether such an Earth was
habitable: and particularly, whether they could have waters commodiously in
such an Earth, and how the Inland Countries would be supplied? I am apt to
think, he would find it more difficult (upon an Idea only, without experience)
to provide Waters for such an Earth, as ours is at present, than for such an
one as the Primeval Earth was. It Is true, He would easily find Rains, possible
and natural: but with no constancy or regularity; and these he might imagine
would only make transient torrents, not any fixed and permanent Rivers. But as
for Fountains derived from the Sea, and breaking out in higher grounds, I am
apt to believe, all his Philosophy would not be able to make a clear discovery
of them. But things that are familiar to us by experience, we think easy in
speculation, or never enquire into the causes of them. Whereas, other things
that never fall under our experience, though more simple and intelligible in
themselves, we reject often as Paradoxes or Romances. Let this be applied to
the present case, and we proceed to answer the Exceptions.

Let us take that Exception first, as most material, that pretends there would
have been no Rivers at all in the Primeval Earth, p. 114.
if it was of such a Form as the Theorist has described. And for this He gives
one grand Reason, Because the Regions toward the Poles, where the Rains are
supposed to fall, and the Rivers to rise, would have been all frozen and
congealed: and consequently no fit Sources of water for the rest of the Earth.
Why we should think those Regions would be frozen, and the Rains that fell in
them, he gives two Reasons, the Distance, and the Obliquity of the Sun. As also
the experience we have now, of the coldness and frozenness of those parts of
the Earth. But as to the Distance of the Sun, He confesses that is not the
thing that does only or chiefly make a Climate cold. p. 118.
He might have added, particularly in that Earth, where the Sun was never at a
greater distance than the Equator. Then as to the Obliquity of the Sun, neither
was that so great, nor so considerable, in the first Earth, as in the present.
Because the Body of that lay in a direct position to the Sun, whereas the
present Earth lies in an Oblique. And though the Polar circles or circumpolar
parts of that Earth, did not lie so perpendicular to the Sun as the
Equinoctial, and consequently were cooler, yet there was no danger of their
being frozen or congealed. It was more the moisture and excessive Rains of
those parts that made them uninhabitable, than the extreme coldness of the
Climate, of it self. And if the Excepter had well considered the differences
betwixt the present and primitive Earth: as to obliquity of position, and, that
which follows from it, the length of Nights: He would have found no reason to
have charged that Earth with nipping and freezing cold; where there was not, I
believe, one morsel of Ice from one pole to another. But that will better
appear, if we consider the causes of Cold.

There are three general causes of Cold: the distance of the Sun, his
Obliquity, and his total Absence; I mean in the Nights. As to distance, that
alone must be of little effect, seeing there are many Planets, (which must not
be looked upon as mere lumps of Ice) at a far greater distance from the Sun than
ours. And as to Obliquity, you see it was much less considerable in the
respective parts of the Primitive Earth, than of the present. Wherefore these
are to be considered but as secondary causes of Cold, in respect of the third,
the total absence of the Sun in the night time. And where this happens to be
long and tedious, there you must expect excess of Cold. Now in the primitive
Earth there was no such thing, as long winter nights, but every where, a
perpetual Equinox, or a perpetual Day. And consequently, there was no room or
cause of excessive cold in any part of it. But on the contrary, the case is
very different in the present Earth. For in our Climate, we have not the
presence of the Sun, in the depth of Winter, half as long as he is absent. And
toward the Poles they have nights that last several weeks or months together.
And then it is, that the Cold rages, binds up the ground, freezes the Ocean, and
makes those parts, more or less, uninhabitable. But where no such causes are,
you need not fear any such effects.

Thus much to show that there might be Rains, Waters, and Rivers, in the
primigenial Earth, and toward the extreme parts of it, without any danger of
freezing. But however, says the other part of the exception, These Rivers would
not be made in due time. That Is wholly according to the process you take; It
you take a mere natural process, the Rivers could not flow throughout the
Earth, all on a sudden: but you may accelerate that process, as much as you
please, by a Divine Hand. As to this particular indeed of the Rivers, one would
think there should be no occasion for their sudden flowing through the Earth*
because mankind could not be suddenly propagated throughout the Earth. And if
they did but lead the way, and prepare the ground, in every country, before
mankind arrived there, that seems to be all that would be necessary upon their
account. Neither can it be imagined, but that the Rivers would flow faster than
mankind could follow; for it is probable, in the first hundred years, men did
not reach an hundred miles from home, or from their first habitations: and we
cannot suppose the defluxion of Water, upon any declivity, to be half so slow.
As to the channels of these Rivers, the manner of their progress, and other
circumstances, Those things are set down fully enough in the 5 th Chapter of
the 2 d Book of the English Theory, and it would be needless to repeat them
here.

But the Anti-theorist says, this slow production and propagation of Rivers is
contrary to Scripture: Both because of the Rivers of Paradise, and also because
Fishes were made the Sixth day. As to that of the Fishes, He must first prove
that those were Riverfishes; Genesis 1. 22. and 22.
for the Scripture makes them Seafish, and instances in great Whales. But he
says, ( p. 113, 114.) it will appear in the sequel of his Discourse, that the
Abyss could be no receptacle of fishes. To that sequel of his Discourse
therefore we must refer the examination of this particular. Then as to
Paradise, that was but one single spot of ground, chapter 13.
according to the ordinary Hypothesis: which he seems to adhere to; and Rivers
might be there as soon as he pleases, seeing its seat is not yet determined.
But as for the Lands which they are said to traverse or encompass, that might
be the work of time, when their channels and courses were extended and settled.
As they would be doubtless long before the time that Moses writ that
description. But as to the Rivers of Paradise, it would be a long story to
handle that dispute here. And it is fit the Authors should first agree amongst
themselves, before we determine the original of its River, or Rivers.

CHAP. VI.
WE come now to the Deluge: p. 121.
where the great Exception is this, That according to the Theory, the Deluge
would have come to pass, whether mankind had been degenerate or no.

We know mankind did degenerate, and it is a dangerous thing to argue upon false
suppositions: and to tell what would have come to pass, in case such a thing
had not come to pass. Suppose Adam had not sinned, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20.
Apoc. 13. 8.
what would have become of the Messiah and the Dispensation of the Gospel?
which yet is said to have been determined more early than the Deluge. Let the
Anti-theorist answer himself this question, and he may answer his own.

But to take a gentler instance, Suppose Adam had not eaten the forbidden
fruit: How could He and all his Posterity have lived in Paradise? A few
generations would have filled that place, and should the rest have been turned
out into the wide World, without any sin or fault of theirs? You suppose the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth to have been the same with the present, and
consequently subject to the same accidents and inconveniences. The action of
the Sun would have been the same then, as now, according to your Hypothesis:
The same excesses of heat and cold, in the several regions and climates: The
same Vapors and Exhalations extracted out of the Earth: The same impurities
and corruptions in the air: and, in consequence of these, the same external
dispositions to Epidemical distempers. Besides, there would be the same storms
and tempests at Sea, the same Earthquakes and other desolations at Land. So
that had all the Sons and Daughters of men, p. 122.
to use the Excepter's elegant style, been as pure and bright, as they could
possibly have dropped out of the mint of Creation, They should still have been
subject to all these inconveniences and calamities. If mankind had continued
spotless and undegenerate till the Deluge, or for sixteen hundred years, they
might as well have continued so for sixteen hundred more. And in a far less
time, according to their fruitfulness and multiplication, the whole face of the
Earth would have been thick covered with inhabitants: every Continent and every
Island, every Mountain and every Desert, and all the climates from Pole to
Pole. But could naked innocence have lived happy in the frozen Zones! where
Bears and Foxes can scarce subsist. In the midst of Snows and Ice, thick foggs,
and more than Egyptian darkness, for some months together. Would all this have
been a Paradise, or a Paradisiacal state, to these Virtuous Creatures? I think
it would be more advisable for the Excepter, not to enter into such disputes,
grounded only upon suppositions. God's prescience is infallible, as his
counsels are immutable.

But the Excepter further suggests, p. 121.
that the Theory does not allow a judicial and extraordinary Providence in
bringing on the Deluge, as a punishment upon mankind. Which, I must needs say,
is an untrue and uncharitable suggestion. As any one may see, both in the Latin
Theory Notandum vero, quamvis mundi veteris dissolutionem and rations Diluvii
secundum ordinem causarum naturalium explicemius, quod eo modo magis clare and
distinct intelligantur; non ideo in poenam humani generis ordinatum fuisse
diluvium, singulisque ipsius motibus praefuisse providentiam, inficiamur: imo
in eo elucet maxim Sapientia divina, quod mundum naturalem morali ita coaptet
and attemperet, ut hujus ingenio, illius ordo and dispositio semper respondeat:
and amborum libratis momentis, simul concurrant and una compleantur utriusque
tempora and vicissitudines, ipse etiam Apostolus Petrus diluvii and excidii
mundani causas naturales assignat, cum ait, (...), etc.
Chap. 6th. and in the English, in several places. So at the entrance upon the
explication of the Deluge (Theor. p. 68.) are these words, Let us then suppose,
that at a time appointed by Divine Providence, and from causes made ready to do
that great execution upon a sinful world, that this Abyss was opened, and the
frame of the Earth broke, etc. And accordingly in the conclusion of that
discourse about the Deluge, are these words, (Theor. p. 105.) In the mean time
I do not know any more to be added in this part, unless it be to conclude with
an advertisement to prevent any mistake or misconstruction, as if this Theory,
by explaining the Deluge in a natural way, or by natural causes, did detract
from the power of God, by which that GREAT IVDGMENT WAS BROVGHT UPON THE WORLD,
IN A PROVIDENTIAL AND MIRACVLOVS MANNER. And in the three following Paragraphs,
Theor. p. 106, 107, 108.
which conclude that Chapter, there is a full account given both of an ordinary
and extraordinary Providence, in reference to the Deluge, and other great
revolutions of the Natural World.

But it is a weakness however to think, that, when a train is laid in Nature,
and Methods concerted, for the execution of a Divine Judgment, therefore it is
not Providential. God is the Author and Governor of the Natural World, as well
as of the Moral: and He sees through the futuritions of both, and has so
disposed the one, as to serve him in his just Judgments upon the other. Which
Method, as it is more to the honor of his Wisdom, so it is no way to the
prejudice of his Power of Justice. And what the Excepter suggests concerning
Atheists, and their presumed cavils at such an explication of the Deluge, is a
thing only said at random and without grounds. On the contrary, so to represent
the sense of Scripture, in natural things, as to make it unintelligible, and
inconsistent with Science and Philosophic truth, is one great cause, in my
opinion, that breeds and nourishes Atheism.

CHAP. VII.
THIS Chapter is about the places of Scripture, alleged in confirmation of the
Theory. And chiefly concerning that remarkable Discourse in St. Peter, 2 Epist.
3. which treats of the difference of the Antediluvian World and the present
World. That Discourse is so fully explained in the Review of the Theory, that I
think it is placed beyond all exception. And the Animadverter here makes his
exception only against the first words, Ver. 5
(...) which we thus render, For this they willingly are ignorant of. But he
generally renders it, wilfully ignorant of: and lays a great stress upon that
word wilfully. But if he quarrel with the English Translation, in this
particular, he must also fault the Vulgate, and Beza, and all others that I
have yet met withal. And it had been very proper for him, in this case, to have
given us some Instances or proofs, out of Scripture or Greek Authors, where
this Phrase signifies a wilful and obstinate ignorance. He says it must have
been a wilful ignorance, otherwise it was not blameable: whereas St. Peter
gives it a sharp reproof. I answer, There are many kinds and degrees of
blameable ignorance, a contented ignorance, an ignorance from prejudices, from
non-attendance, and want of due examination. These are all blameable in some
degree, and all deserve some reproof; but it was not their ignorance that St.
Peter chiefly reproves, but their deriding and scoffing at the Doctrine of the
coming of our Savior, and the Conflagration of the World. And therefore He
calls them Scoffers, walking after their own lusts.

But the Excepter seems at length inclinable to render the forementioned words,
p. 137.
thus, They are willingly mindless or forgetful. And I believe the translation
would be proper enough. And what gentler reproof can one give, than to say, you
are willing to forget such an Argument or such a Consideration. Which implies
little more than non-attention, or an inclination of the will toward the
contrary opinion. We cannot tell what evidence or what Traditions they might
have then concerning the Deluge, but we know they had the History of it by
Moses, and all the marks in Nature, that we have now, of such a Dissolution.
And They, that pretended to Philosophize upon the works of Nature and the
immutability of them, might very well deserve that modest rebuke, That they
were willing to forget the first Heavens and first Earth, and the destruction
of them at the Deluge, when they talked of an immutable state of Nature.

Neither is there any thing in all this, contrary to what the Theorist had
said, Theor. c. 1.
concerning the Ancient Philosophers, That none of them ever invented or
demonstrated from the causes, the true state of the first Earth. This must be
granted; But it is one thing to demonstrate from the Causes, or by way of
Theory, and another thing to know at large: whether by Scripture, Tradition, or
collection from effects. The mutability and changes of the World, which these
Pseudo Christians would not allow of, was a knowable thing, taking all the
means which they might and ought to have attended to: At least, before they
should have proceeded so far as to reject the Christian doctrine concerning the
future changes of the World, with scorn and derision. Which is the very thing
the Apostle so much censured them for.

So much for what is said by the Excepter concerning this place of St. Peter.
To all the rest he gives an easy answer, (in the Contents of this Chapter)
viz. That they are Figurative, and so not argumentative. The places of
Scripture upon which the Theory depends are stated distinctly and in order, in
the REVIEW: and, to avoid repetitions, we must sometimes refer to that: Review,
p. 29, etc.
particularly, as to two remarkable places, Psalm. 24. 2. and Psalm. 136. 6.
concerning the Foundation and Extension of the Earth upon the Seas. Which the
Excepter quickly dispatches by the help of a Particle and a Figure.

The next He proceeds to, is, Psalm. 33. 7. He gathers the waters of the Sea,
as in a Bagg: He lays up the Abysses in storehouses. But, he says, it should
be rendered, as on a heap: which is the English Translation. Whether the
Authorities produced, in this case, by the Theorist Eng. Theor* p. 86.
, or by the Excepter, are more considerable, I leave the Reader to judge. But
however, he cites another place, Psalm. 78. 13. where the same word is used and
applied to the Red Sea, which could not be enclosed as in a bag. Take whether
Translation you please for this second place; it is no prejudice to the Theory,
if you render it on an heap: for it was a thing done by Miracle. But the other
place speaks of the ordinary posture and constitution of the waters, which is
not on a heap, but in a level or spherical convexity with the rest of the
Earth. This reason the Animadverter was not pleased to take notice of, p. 86.
though it be intimated in that same place of the Theory which he quotes. But
that which I might complain of most, is his unfair citation of the next
Paragraph of the Theory, Excep. p. 140.
which he applies peculiarly to this Text of Psalm. 33. 7. whereas it belongs to
all the Texts alleged out of the Psalms, and is a modest reflection upon the
explication of them. As the Reader may plainly see, if he please to look the
Theory, and compare it with his citation.

The next place he attacks, is, Job 26. 7. He stretches the North over the
Tohu, or, as we render it, over the empty places: and hangs the Earth upon
nothing. Here he says, p. 141.
Job did either accommodate himself to the vulgar, or else was a perfect
Platonist. Methinks Plato should rather be a Iobist, if you will have them to
imitate one another. Then he makes an Objection, and answers it himself:
Concluding however, that Job could not but mean this of the present Earth,
because in the next Verse he mentions Clouds. But how does it appear, that
every thing that Job mentions in that Chapter, refers to the same time.

The next place, is, Job 38. 4, 5, 6. Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the Earth, etc. These eloquent expostulations of the Almighty,
he applies all to the present Form of the Earth: where he says, there are the
Embossings of Mountains, the Enamelling of lesser Seas, the open-work of the
vast Ocean, and the Fret-work of Rocks, etc. These make a great noise, but they
might all be applied to the ruins of an old Bridge, fallen into the water.
Then he makes a large harangue in commendation of Mountains and of the present
Form of the Earth: Which, if you please, you may compare with the 10 th. Chap.
of the Latin Theory, and then make your judgment upon both.

But it is not enough for the Excepter to admire the beauty of Mountains, p.
146.
but he will make the Theorist to do so too, because he has expressed himself
much pleased with the sight of them. Can we be pleased with nothing in an
object, but the beauty of it? does not the Theorist say there, in the very
words cited by the Excepter, Saepe loci ipsius insolentia and spectaculorum
novitas delectat magis quam venustas in rebus notis and communibus. We are
pleased in looking upon the Ruins of a Roman Amphitheater, or a Triumphal
Arch, though time have defaced its beauty. A man may be pleased in looking upon a
Monster, will you conclude therefore that he takes it for a beauty? There are
many things in objects besides beauty, that may please: but he that has not
sense and judgment enough to see the difference of those cases, and whence the
pleasure arises, it would be very tedious to beat it into him by multitude of
words.

After his commendation of Mountains, he falls upon the commendation of Rain:
making those Countries, that enjoy it, to be better watered than by Rivers; and
consequently the present Earth better than that Paradisiacal Earth described by
the Theorist. And in this he says, he follows the rule of Scripture, for these
are his words. p. 148.
And that these rule whereby we measure the usefulness of this Earth, and show
it to be more excellent than that of the Theory; are the most true and proper
rules: is manifest from God's making use of the same, in a case not unlike: For
he comparing Egypt and Palestine, prefers the later before the former; because
in Egypt the Seed sown was watered with the foot, as a Garden of herbs; but
Palestine was a Land of Hills and Valleys, and drank water of the rain of
Heaven, Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11.

Let this rest a while. In the mean time let us take notice how unluckily it
falls out for the Observator, that a Country, that had no rain, should be
compared in Scripture, or joined in privilege, with Paradise it self, and the
Garden of God. For so is this very Egypt, Genesis 13. 10. though it had no rain,
but was watered by Rivers. The words of Scripture are these. And Lot lifted up
his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every
where, (before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha) even as the Garden of the
Lord, like the land of Egypt. The Plain of Jordan you see is commended for its
fruitfulness and being well watered: and as the height of its commendation, it
is compared with Egypt, and with the Paradise of God. Now in Egypt we know
there was little or no rain: and we read of none in Paradise: but they were
both watered by Rivers. Therefore the greatest commendation of a Land, for
pleasure and fertility, according to Scripture, is its being well watered with
Rivers: which makes it like a paradise. Surely then you cannot blame the
Theorist, having this authority besides all other reasons, for making the
Paradisiacal Earth to have been thus watered.

Now let the Excepter consider how he will interpret and apply his place in
Deuteronomy, and make it consistent with this in Genesis. Till I see a better
Interpretation, I like this very well, though quite contrary to his: Namely, That
they were not to expect such a Land as Egypt, that was a Plain naturally
fruitful, as being well watered; But the Land they were to possess, depended
upon the benediction of Heaven: And therefore they might expect more or less
fertility, according as they kept God's Commandments. And so much for those two
texts of Scripture.

Lastly, p. 149.
The Excepter in the conclusion of his discourse about that place in Job, makes
a reflection upon the impropriety of those expressions in Job, about
Foundations and Corner-stones, if they be applied to the first Earth described
by the Theorist. But this seems to me an Elegancy in that discourse, which he
makes a fault: whether it be understood as an Allusion only to our manner of
building, by deep Foundations, and strong Corner-stones: Or an Ironical
interrogation, as it seems to me; implying, that there was no Foundation,
(strictly so called) nor Cornerstone, in that great Work, though we cannot build
a cottage or little bridge without such preparations.

He proceeds then to the following verses in that 38 th chap. Who shut up the
Sea with doors, when it broke forth as if it had issued out of a Womb? This the
Theorist understands of the Disruption of the Abyss at the Deluge, when the Sea
broke forth out of the womb of the Earth: or out of that subterraneous cavity,
where it was enclosed as in a womb. It Is plainly implied in the words of the
Text, That the Sea was shut up in some Womb, before it broke forth. I desire
therefore to know in what Womb that was. You will find Interpreters much at a
loss to give a fair answer to that question: What was that enclosed state of
the Sea? and what place, or part of Nature, was that Receptacle where it lay?
But the Excepter has found out a new answer. He says it was that Womb of
nonentity. These are his words, It just then (as its creation) gushed out of
the womb of nothing, into existence. This is a subtle and far-fetcht notion.
Methinks the Womb of nothing, is much what the same as no Womb. And so this is
no answer. But however let us consider how far it would suit this case, if it
was admitted. If you understand the Womb of Nonentity, Genesis 1. 2.
the Sea broke out of that womb the first day, and had no bars or doors set to
it, but flowed over all the Earth without check or control. Therefore that
could not be the time or state here spoken of. And to refer that restraint, or
those bars and doors, to another time, which are spoken of here in the same
verse, would be very inexcusable in the Excepter: Seeing he will not allow the
Theorist to suppose those things that are spoken of in different verses, p. 150.
to be understood of different times. To conclude, this Metaphysical notion of
the Womb of nothing, is altogether impertinent, at least in this case: For the
Text is plainly speaking of things Local and Corporeal, and this prison of the
Sea must be understood as such.

He proceeds now to the last place alleged, Prove. 8. 27, 28. When he prepared
the Heavens, I was there: when he set a Compass upon the face of the deep. The
word (...) which we render compass, he says, signifies no more than the
rotundity or spherical figure of the Abyss. And so the fence will run thus,
When God set a rotundity, or spherical figure, upon the face of the Abyss. But
whereas the word may as well signify a Sphere or Orb, the Theorist thinks it
more reasonable that it should be so translated: and so the sentence would run
thus, When God set an Orb upon the face of the Deep. And this discourse of
Solomon's, referring to the beginning of the World, he thinks it rational to
understand it of the first habitable Earth: which was really an Orb set over
the face of the Deep.

One cannot swear for the signification of a word in every particular place,
where it occurs: but when there are two fences whereof it is capable, and the
one is much more important than the other, it is a fair presumption to take it
in the more important sense; especially in such a place, and upon such an
occasion, where the great works of the Divine Wisdom and Power are celebrated:
as they are here by Solomon. And it cannot be denied, that our fence of the
words is more important than the other* For of what consequence is it to say,
God made the Body of the Abyss round. Every one knows that Fluids of their own
accord run into that figure. So as that would be a small remark upon a great
occasion.

The construction of this Orb we speak of, minds me of an injustice which the
Excepter has done the Theory, in the precedent part of this Chapter, by a
false accusation. For he says, The Theory makes the construction of the first
Earth to have been merely Mechanical. At least his words seem to signify as
much, p. 143.
which are these. And so its Formation, speaking of the first Earth, had been
merely Mechanical, as the Theory makes it. That the construction was not merely
Mechanical, in the opinion of the Theorist, you may see, Eng. Theor. p. 65.
which, because we have cited it before, we will not here repeat. The Theorist
might also complain that the Excepter cites the first Edition of the Theory for
such things as are left out in the second: which yet was printed a twelvemonth
before his Animadversions. And therefore in fairness he ought always to have
consulted the last Edition and last sense of the Author, before he had censured
him or his work. But this unfair method, it seems, pleased his humor better:
as you may see in this Chapter, p. 81. p. 100. last part. p. 154. p. 227, 228.
p. 244. p. 279, 280. p. 288.
( p. 154.) and in several other places; where passages are cited and insisted
upon, that are no where to be found in the second Edition. Not to mention his
defective citations; omitting that part that qualifies the sentence, as p. 99.
last citation, and elsewhere. I make this note that the Reader may judge, how
well this answers that sincerity, with which he professed he would examine this
work. Only as a friend and servant to Truth. And therefore with such Candor,
Meekness and Modesty, as becomes one who assumes and glories in so fair a
Character, p. 43.

The rest of this Chapter is a general Censure of citations out of Scripture,
that are only Tropical or Figurative Scheams of Speech. These must be made so
indeed, if our sense of them be not allowed. But what necessity is there of a
figurative interpretation of all these Texts? The rule we go by, and I think
all good Interpreters, is this, That we are not to leave the literal sense,
unless there be a necessity from the subject matter. And there is no such
necessity in this case, upon our Hypothesis: for it suits with the literal
sense. And it is to beg the Question, to say the literal sense is not to be
admitted, because it complies too much with the Theory. But as for that Text of
his own, which he instances in, the Pillars of the Earth tremble, that cannot
be understood (by the same Rule) of Pillars literally; because there are no
such Pillars of the Earth, upon any Hypothesis.

CHAP. VIII.
THIS Chapter is concerning that grand property of the Antediluvian Earth, a
perpetual Equinox, or a Right position to the Sun. This perpetual Equinox the
Excepter will by no means admit. But I Am afraid he mistakes the notion: for as
he explains it in the two first Sections of this Chapter, he seems to have a
false Idea of the whole matter. He thinks, I perceive, that when the Earth
changed its situation, it was translated from the Equator into the Ecliptic:
and that before that change, in the Antediluvian state, it moved directly under
the Equator. For these are his words, So that in her Annual motion about the
Sun, p. 158.
namely, the Earth before that change, she was carried directly under the
Equinoctial: without any manner of obliquity in her site, or declination
toward either of the Tropicks, in her course; And therefore could never cut
the Equinoctial, by passing (as now she is presumed to do) from one Tropic to
the other. By which words, you see, he imagines that the Earth moved
perpetually under the Equator, when it had a perpetual Equinox. And when it
came out of that state, into this wherein it is now, it did not only change its
position, and the posture of its Axis, but was also really translated from one
part of the Heavens into Another: namely, from under the Equator to the
Ecliptic, and so took another road in its annual course about the Sun. This is
a great mistake: And I cannot blame him, if he was so averse to admit this
change, seeing it lay so cross in his imagination. For what Pullies or Leavers
should we employ to remove the Earth out of the Equator into the Ecliptic?
Archimedes pretended, if he had ground to plant his Engines upon, that he would
move the Earth out of its place; but that it was done before, I never knew,
Lat. Theor. li. 2. c. 4.
nor heard of: And if the Excepter had considered what is said in the Theory
upon that occasion, he might easily have prevented his mistake. But we shall
meet with the same Error again in another place; Let us consider now what
Arguments he uses against this change.

He says, p. 159.
If there had been such a change, either Providence or Mankind would have
preserved the memory of it. How far the memory of it has been preserved, we
shall see hereafter. In the mean time, we will give him instances of other
things to reflect upon, that are lost out of memory, unless he be the happy Man
that shall retrieve them. The Age of the World has not been preserved, either
by the memory of Man, or by the care of Providence. And was not that both a
thing of importance, and of easy preservation? Noah could not but know the Age
of the World, for he was contemporary with five or six Generations, that were
contemporary with Adam. And knowing the Age of the World himself, he could not
easily forbear, one would think, to tell it to his Sons and Posterity. But to
this day, we do not know what the true Age of the World is. There are three
Bibles, if I may so say, or three Pentateuchs, the Hebrew, Samaritan, and
Greek: which do all differ very considerably in their accounts, concerning the
Age of the World: and the most Learned men are not yet able to determine with
certainty, which of the three accounts is most authentic. Then, what think you
of the place of Paradise? How well is the memory or knowledge of that
preserved? Could Noah be ignorant of it: and was it not a fit subject to
discourse of, and entertain his Sons and Nephews, and by them to communicate it
to Posterity? Yet we seek it still in vain. The Jews were as much at a loss as
we are: and the Christian Fathers, p. 263, 264, 265.
you think, were out in their opinions, both about the place and conditions of
it: neither do you venture to determine them your self: so that Paradise is
lost in a manner out of the world. What wonder then if this single property of
it be lost? If the Excepter had well considered what the Theorist has said
concerning the Providential conduct of knowledge in the World, Eng. Theor. p.
286, 287.
this doubt or objection might have been spared.

After a long excursion, little to the purpose, but to show his reading: p. 166.
He tells us next, that Scripture does not favor this notion of a perpetual
Equinox before the Flood: And cites Genesis 8. 22. which the Theorist had cited as
a place that did suggest to us that vicissitude of Seasons that was established
after the Flood. The words indeed are not so determinate in themselves, but
that they may be understood, either of the restoration of a former order in
the Seasons of the Year, or of the establishment of a new one. And in whether
sense they are to be taken, is to be determined by collateral Reasons and
Considerations. Such the Theorist had set down, to make it probable, that they
ought to be understood as a Declaration of such an Order for the Seasons of the
Year, as was brought in at that time, and was to continue to the end of the
World. The Excepter has not thought fit to take notice of, or refute, those
Reasons, and therefore they stand good, as formerly. Besides, the Excepter must
remember that this Text stands betwixt two remarkable Phenomenon, the Longevity
of the Antediluvians in the old World, and the appearance of the Rainbow in the
New. Both which were marks of a different state of nature in the two Worlds.

He further excepts against that perpetual Equinox before the Flood, p. 168.
for another Scripture-reason: Viz. Because the Earth was cursed before that
time, and consequently, he says, had not a perpetual Equinox. But if that curse
was supernatural, it might have its effect in any position of the Earth. For
God can make a Land barren, if he think fit, in spite of the course of Nature.
And so he also must suppose it to have been in this case. For, upon all
suppositions, whether of a perpetual Equinox, or no, the Earth is granted to
have been very fruitful at first: and so would have continued, if that curse
had not intervened.

Lastly, p. 169.
He makes that an argument, that the Air was cold and intemperate in Paradise,
and consequently no constant Equinox, because Adam and Eve made themselves
Aprons to cover their nakedness. So, he confesses, Interpreters generally
understand that it was to cover their nakedness. But he will not allow that to
be the true sense, but says those Fig Leaves were to keep them warm. And the
other Interpretation of covering their nakedness, he will not admit, for three
reasons. First because the Scripture, as he pretends, does not declare it so.
See, pray, Genesis 3. 7. Secondly, What shame, says he, need there have been
betwixt Husband and Wife? Thirdly, If it was modesty; when they were innocent,
they should have been more modest. Some arguments answer themselves, and I do
not think these deserve a confutation. p. 170.
But, he says, however God made them Coats of Skins afterward, and that was to
be a defense against cold. He must tell us in what Climate he supposes Paradise
to have stood: and which way, and how far, Adam and Eve were banished from it.
When those things are determined, we shall know what to judge of his argument,
and of Coats of Skins.

After Lastly, I expected no more: but he has two or three reasons after the
Last. As first, he says, upon our Hypothesis, p. 1^1.
one Hemisphere of the Globe must have been unpeopled: because the Torrid Zone
was unpassable. And was not the Ocean as unpassable, upon your Hypothesis? How
got they into America? and not only into America, but into all the Islands of
the Earth, that are remote from Continents. Will you not allow us one Miracle,
for your many? I Am sure the Theorist never excluded the Ministry of Angels?
and They could as easily carry them thorough the Torrid Zone, as over the
Ocean. But Secondly, he says, There could be no Rains, to make the Flood, if
there was a perpetual Equinox. Were not those rains that made the Flood,
extraordinary, and out of the course of Nature? you would give one angry words
that should deny it. Besides, the Floodgates of Heaven were opened when the
Great Deep was broken up, Eng. Theor. p. 99.
( Genesis 7. 11.) and no wonder the Disruption of the Earth should cause some
extraordinary Commotions in the air: and either compress the vapors, or stop
their usual course toward the Poles, and draw them down in streams upon
several parts of the Earth. But the Excepter says, this could not be, because
the Theorist makes the rains fall before the disruption of the Abyss. But he
does not suppose the Cataracts of Heaven to have been opened before, which made
the grand rains. And how unfairly that passage of the Theory is represented, we
shall see hereafter in the 14 th. Chapter.

Lastly, p. 176.
He concludes all with this remark: That all sorts of Authors have disputed, in
what season of the Year the Deluge came, and in what season of the Year the
World began: therefore they thought there were then different seasons of the
Year. These disputes, he confesses, did manifestly proceed from inadvertency,
or something worse: Because there could not be any one season throughout all
the Earth at once. He might have added, unless upon the supposition of the
Theory, which makes an universal Equinox at that time. And why may not that
have given occasion to the general belief, that the world begun in the Spring?
and when the true reason of the Tradition was lost, they fell into those
impertinent questions, In what season of the Year the World began. But however
we do not depend upon the belief, either of the Ancients or the Moderns, as to
the generality: for we know they had other notions of these things than what
the Theory proposes; otherwise it would have been a needless work. But
notwithstanding the general error, that Providence did preserve some Traditions
and Testimonies concerning that ancient Truth, we shall see in the next
following discourse.

So much for Scripture and Reasons. He now comes to examine Authorities: Namely
such Testimonies as are alleged by the Theorist, to show that there was a
Tradition amongst the Ancients, of a change that had been, as to the position
of the Earth: and consequently, as to the form and seasons of the Year. The
first Testimony that he excepts against is that of Diogenes and Anaxagoras; who
witness plainly, p. 177.
That there had been an Inclination of the Earth, or a change of posture, since
it was formed and inhabited. But the Excepter says they have not assigned a
true final cause, nor such as agrees with the Theory. The second Testimony is
that of Empedocles, p. 178.
which he excepts against, because he has not given a good Efficient Cause of
that change. p. 179.
The third witness is Leucippus: against whom he makes the same exception, that
he does not assign the Causes a-right. p. 180.
The fourth witness is Democritus: whom he quarrels upon the same account. But
is this a fair hearing of Witnesses? Or are these just and legal grounds of
rejecting their testimony, as to matter of Fact, because they are unskilful in
giving the causes and reasons of that matter of Fact? That is not required in
witneses: and they are often impertinent when they attempt to do it. The
Theorist does not cite these Authors to learn of them the causes either
Efficient or Final, of that Inclination, or change of posture in the Earth, but
only matter of Fact. To let you see, that, according to their testimony, there
was a Tradition in that time, which they took for true, concerning a change
made in the posture of the Earth. And this is all we require from them. If you
pretend to invalidate their testimony, because they do not Philosophize well
about that change: That Is as if you should deny that there was such a War as
the Peloponnesian war, because the Historian has not assigned the true causes
and reasons of it. Or as if a man should give you the history of a Comet, that
appeared in such a year, was of such a form, and took such a course in the
Heavens; and you should deny there was any such Comet, because the same Author
had not given a good account of the generation of that Comet, nor of the Causes
of its form and motion. The exceptions made against the testimonies of these
Philosophers, seem to me to be no less injudicious.

After these Testimonies, p. 181.
He makes three or four remarks or reflections upon them. But they all concern,
either the time of this Change, or the Causes of it. Neither of which the
Theorist either engaged or intended to prove from these Witnesses.

There is still one Testimony behind, p. 182.
which the Excepter has separated from the rest, that he might encounter it
singly. It Is another passage from Anaxagoras, which both notes this Inclination,
and the posture of the Heavens and Earth before that Inclination. But here the
Excepter quarrels, first, with the word (...): because Ambrosius the Monk,
would have it to be (...) but without the Authority of any Manuscript: and, as
Casaubon says, male. Then, he says, Aldobrandinus translates it turbulente, but
gives no reason for that translation, in his notes. Therefore he cannot rest in
this, but in the third place, he gives another sense to (...). And if that will
not please you, he has still a fourth answer in reserve. I do not like when a
man shifts answers so often, it is a sign he has no great confidence in any one.
But let us have his fourth answer, It Is this, That Anaxagoras was a kind of
heterodox Philosopher, and what he says is not much to be heeded. These are the
words of the Excepter. p. 184.
If this will not satisfy, I have one thing more to offer. Grant that
Anaxagoras should mean that very Declination, which the Theory would have him,
yet this truly would contribute little toward the proof of the thing. For he
was a man as like to be Heterodox, as like to broach and maintain false and
groundless opinions, as any of the learned Ancients. Had he made this exception
against this witness at first, it might have saved both himself and us a great
deal of pains. For we do allow, if you can prove a witness to be persona
infamis, or non compos mentis, it is sufficient to invalidate his Testimony.

But this is a rude and groundless censure; Shall that famous Anaxagoras, that
was called MEN'S, (...), not be thought so much as mentis compos? nor have
credit enough for an honest witness? I am apt to think, from those sentences,
and those remains we have left of him, that there was not a more considerable
man amongst the Ancients, for nobleness of mind and natural knowledge. I could
bring the testimonies of many ancient Authors, and of many Christian fathers,
to clear his reputation, and place it above envy. It Is generally acknowledged,
that he first introduced an intellectual principle, in the formation of the
Universe: to dispose and order confused matter. And accordingly Eusebius gives
him this fair character, Praep. Evan. l. 10. c. ult. p. 504. Col.
(...) (...), etc. He first rectified the doctrine of Principles: For he did
not only discourse about the matter or substance of the Universe, as other
Philosophers: but also of the cause and principle of its motion. And the same
Author, chapter 14. p. 750.
in his 14 th Book, repeats and enlarges this character.

I wonder, the Excepter, of all men, should lessen the name of Anaxagoras. For,
besides his Orthodoxy as to the intellectual World: He was one that established
the notion of Vortices, in the Corporeal. As you may see in Clem. Alexandrinus,
and in Plato's Phaedo. Strom. 2. p. 364. Phaed. p. 99.
And though the Father, and Socrates, (who never was a friend to natural
Philosophy) both blame him for it; yet the excepter, who is deservedly pleased
with that Systeme of Vortices, ought to have showed him some favor and esteem
for the sake of this doctrine. Lastly, as to his moral temper; his contempt of
the World, and his love of contemplation; you have many instances of it in the
short story of his life in Laertius. And I shall always remember that excellent
saying of his in Clem. Serem. 2. p. 416.
Alexandrinus, (...), (...), That the end of life is Contemplation; and that
liberty, that accompanies it, or flows from it.

But we are not to imagine, that all the opinions of the ancient Philosophers,
are truly conveyed or represented to us. Neither can we in reason or justice
believe, that they could be guilty of such absurd notions, as are sometimes
fathered upon them. The Excepter instances in an extravagant assertion, (as the
story is told to us) ascribed to Anaxagoras: of a stone that fell from the Sun.
This cannot be literally true, nor literally the opinion of Anaxagoras, if he
believed Vortices; therefore methinks so witty a man as the Excepter, and so
well versed in the modern Philosophy, should rather interpret this of the
Incrustation of a fixed Star, and its descent into the lower World: That a Star
fell from the Ethereal regions, and became an Opake and Terrestrial Body.
Especially seeing Diogenes, as he says, supposes it a Star. Some things were
aenigmatically spoken at first: and some things afterward so much corrupted,
in passing thorough unskilful hands, that we should be very injurious to the
memory of those great Men, if we should suppose every thing to have come so
crudely from them, as it is now delivered to us. And as to this Philosopher in
particular; As the Ionick Physiology, in my opinion, was the most considerable
amongst the Ancients; so there was none, of that order, more considerable than
Anaxagoras. Whom, though you should suppose extravagant, quoad hoc, that would
not invalidate his testimony in other things.

Upon the whole matter, let us now sum up the Evidence, and see what it will
amount to. Here are five or six Testimonies of considerable Philosophers:
Anaxagoras, Diogenes, Empedocles, Leucippus and Democritus. To which he might
have added Plato, both in his Politicus and Phaedo, Li. 2. c. 10. p. 274.
if he had pleased to have looked into the 2 d. Edition of the Latin Theory.
These Philosophers do all make mention of a change that has been in the
posture of the Earth and the Heavens. And though they differ in assigning causes,
or other circumstances, yet they all agree as to matter of Fact: that there was
such a thing, or, at least, a Tradition of such a thing. And this is all that
the Defendant desired or intended to prove from them, as Witnesses in this
cause.

To these Philosophers, he might have added the Testimonies of the Poets, who
may be admitted as witnesses of a Tradition, though it be further questioned,
whether that Tradition be true or false. These Poets when they speak of a
Golden Age, or the Reign of Saturn, tell us of a perpetual Spring, or a Year
without change of Seasons. This is expressly said by Ovid, Ver erat Aeternum,
etc. And upon the expiration of the Golden Age, he says, Jupiter Antiqui
contraxit tempora Veris,
Perque Hyemes, Aestusque, and inaequales Autumnos,
Et breve Ver, spatiis exegit quattuor annum.
Ovid lived in the time of our Savior. And the Tradition, it seems, was then a
foot, and very express too. Plato, who was much more ancient, has said the
same thing, in his Politicus, concerning the Reign of Saturn. And if we may
have any regard to Mythology, Vid. Theor. Lat. li. 2. c. 10. in fine.
and make Ianus the same with Noah, which is now an Opinion generally received:
That power that is given him by the Ancients, of changing Times and Seasons,
cannot be better expounded, than by that great change of time, and of the
Seasons of the Year, that happened in the Days of Noah. Neither must we count
it a mere Fable, what is said by the Ancients, concerning the Inhabitability of
the Torrid Zone: and yet that never was, if the Earth was never in any other
posture, than what it is in now.

Lastly, As the Philosophers and Poets are witnesses of this Tradition, so many
of the Christian Fathers have given such a Character of Paradise, as cannot be
understood upon any other supposition, than of a Perpetual Equinox. This Card.
Bellarmine De Great. Prim. hom. c. 12. Accedit ad haec* quod Paradisus it a
describitur a Sancto Basilio, in Libro de Paradiso; a Joan. Damasceno Libro
secundo, de fide, capite undecimo; a Sancto Augustino libro decimo quarto de
civitate Dei, capit. 10. Ab Alchimo, Avito, and Claud. Mario victore, and aliis
supra citatis, Isidoro libro decimo quarto Etymolog. capite tertio, and aliis
communiter; ut fuerit in eo ver perpetuum, nulla figora, nulli aestus, nullae
pluviae, nives, grandines, nullae etiam nubes; quod ipsum significat scriptura,
cum dicit primos homines in Paradiso fuisse nudos.
has noted to our hands; and also observed, that there could not be a
perpetual Equinox in the Countries of Asia, nor indeed in any Topical Paradise,
(unless it stood in the middle of the Torrid Zone) nisi alius tunc fuerit
cursus solis, quam nunc est; unless the course of the Sun, or, which is all
one, the posture of the Earth, was otherwise at that time, than what it is now:
which is a true observation. The Jewish Doctors also, as well as the Christian,
seem to go upon the same supposition, See Eng. Theor. p. 253.
when they place Paradise under the Equinoctial; Because they supposed it
certain, as Aben Ezra tells us, that the Days and Nights were always equal in
Paradise.

We have now done with the examination of Witnesses: Philosophers, Poets, Jews,
and Christians. From all these we collect, That there was an opinion, or
Tradition, amongst the Ancients, of a change made in the state of the Natural
World, as to the diversity of Seasons in the Year: And that this did arise from
the change of the posture of the Earth. Whether this Opinion, or this
Tradition, was de jure, as well as de facto, is a question of another nature,
that did not lie before us at present. But the thing that was only in debate in
this Chapter, was matter of Fact, which I think we have sufficiently proved.

In the close of this Chapter, The Excepter makes two Queries: still by way of
objection to the Antediluvian Equinox. p. 185.
The First is this, Supposing an Equinox in the beginning of the World, would
it (in likelihood) have continued to the Flood. If you grant the first part, I
believe few will scruple the second. For why should we suppose a change before
there appear any cause for it. He says, the Waters might possibly have weighed
more toward one Pole, than toward another. But why the Waters more than the
Air? The Waters were not more rarefied toward one Pole, that toward another,
no more than the Air was: for which the Excepter had justly blamed Leucippus
before. p. 180.
But however, says He, that Earth would be very unstable, because, in process
of time, there would be an empty space betwixt the Exterior Region of the
Earth, and the Abyss below. But that empty space would be filled with such
gross vapors, that it would be little purer than water: and would stick to the
Earth much closer than its Atmosphere that is carried about with it. We have no
reason to change the posture of the Earth, till we see some antecedent change
that may be a cause of it. And we see not any, till the Earth broke. But then
indeed, whether its posture depended barely upon its Aequilibrium, or upon its
magnetisme, either, or both of them, when its parts were thrown into another
situation, might be changed. For the parts of a ruin seldom lie in the same
libration the Fabric stood in. And as to the magnetisme of the Earth, that
would change, according as the Parts, and Regions of the Earth changed their
situation.

The second Query is this. Granting there was such an Equinox in the first
World, p. 187.
Would not the natural day, toward the later end of that World, have been
longer, than in the former periods of the same. Suppose this was true, which
yet we have no reason to believe, That the Days were longer toward the flood,
than toward the beginning of the World: why is this contrary to Scripture? p.
188.
He tells you how, in these words. That the days just before the flood were of
no unusual length, is evident in the very story of the Flood; the duration of
which we find computed by Months, consisting of thirty days a-piece. Whereas
had days been grown longer, fewer of them would have made a Month. This is a
mere Paralogisme, or a mere blunder. For if thirty days were to go to a Month,
whether the days were longer or shorter, there must be thirty of them; and the
Scripture does not determine the length of the days. If thirty circumgyrations
of the Earth make a Month, whether these circumgyrations are slow or swift,
thirty are still thirty. But I suppose that which he would have said, and which
he had confusedly in his mind, was this, That the Month would have been longer
at the Flood than it was before. Longer, I say, as to extent of time, or
duration in general, but not as to number of days. And you could not cut off a
slip of one day, and tack it to the next, through the intermediate Night, to
make an abridgment of the whole. Therefore this Objection is grounded upon a
mistake, and ill reasoning, which is now sufficiently detected.

CHAP. IX.
THIS Chapter is against the Oval Figure of the first Earth: p. 189.
which the Theorist had asserted, and grounded upon a general motion of the
Waters, forced from the Equinoctial Parts toward the Polar. But before we
proceed to his Objections against this Explication, we must rectify one
Principle. The Excepter seems to suppose, that Terrestrial Bodies have a
nitency inwards or downwards, p. 190.
toward their Central point. Whereas the Theorist supposes, that all Bodies
moving round, have, more or less, a nitency from the Center of their motion:
and that it is by an external force that they are pressed down, against their
first inclination or nitency.

This being premised, we proceed to his exceptions: where his first and grand
quarrel is about the use of a word: whether the motion of the Water from the
middle of the Earth toward the Poles, can be called defluxus. Seeing those
Polar Parts, in this supposed case, were as high, or higher than the
Equinoctial. I think we do not scruple to say, undae defluunt ad litora: though
the shores be as high, or higher than the Surface of the Sea. For we often
respect, as the Theorist did, the middle and the sides, in the use of that
word: And so, defluere e medio ad latera, is no more than prolabi ad latera.
But it is not worth the while to contest about a word. Especially seeing it is
explained in the 2 d. Edition of the Theory, p. 186.
by adding detrusione: but it would have spoiled all this pedantry, and all his
little triumphs, if he had taken notice of that Explication.

Wherefore setting aside the word, Let us consider his reasons against this
motion of the Waters toward the Poles: which, he says, could not be, because
it would have been an ascent, not a descent. We allow and suppose that. But may
not Waters ascend by force and detrusion: when it is the easiest way they can
take to free themselves from that force, and persevere in their motion? And
this is the case we are speaking to. They were impelled to ascend, or recide
from the Center, and it was easier for them to ascend laterally, than to ascend
directly: upon an inclined Plain, than upon a perpendicular one. Why then
should we not suppose that they took that course? Methinks the Observator, who
seems to be much conversant in the Cartesian Philosophy, might have conceived
this detrusion of the Waters toward the Poles by the resistance of the
superambient Air, as well as their flowing toward and upon the shores, by the
pressure of the Air under the Moon. And if the Moon continued always in the
same place, or over the middle of the Sea, that posture of the waters would be
always the same: though it be an ascent, both upon the Land and into the
Rivers. And this, methinks, is neither contradiction, nor absurdity. But an
Enemy, that is little used to Victory, makes a great noise upon a small
advantage.

He proceeds now to show, p. 195.
that it was improbable that the Figure of the first Earth should be Oval, upon
other considerations. As first, Because of its position: which would be cross
to the stream of the Air, that turns it round, or carries it about the Sun. As
a Ship, he says, that stands side-ways against a stream, cannot sail. But if
that Ship was to turn round upon her Axis, as a Mill-wheel, and as the Earth
does, what posture more likely to have such an effect, than to stand cross to
the stream that turns it? And the stream would take more hold of an
Oblong-Body, than of a round. Then, as to its annual course, which he mentions,
that is nothing, but so many Circumvolutions: for in turning round it is also
progressive, as a Cylinder in rolling a Garden. And three-hundred sixty-five
circumgyrations complete its annual course. So that this argument turns wholly
against him, and does rather confirm the Oval Figure of the Earth.

His Second Argument against the Oval Figure of the First Earth, is the
Spherical Figure of the present Earth. And how does he prove that? First from
Authorities: Anaximander, Pythagoras, and Parmenides thought so. But how does
he prove that their asserting the Earth to be round, was not meant in
opposition to its being Plain: as the Epicureans, and the Vulgar would have it?
That was the Question Socrates promised himself to be resolved in by
Anaxagoras, Plat. in Phaed.
(...). Whether the Earth was flat, or round. And it is likely the dispute was
generally understood in that sense. However the Theorist has alleged many
more Authorities than these, in favor of the Oval Figure of the Earth. For
besides Empedocles in particular, and those whom Plutarch mentions in general,
the Philosophy of Orpheus, the Phoenician, Egyptian, and Persian Philosophers
did all compare the Earth to an Egg: with respect to its Oval external form, as
well as internal composition. These you may see fully set down in the Theory:
Lat. Theor li. 2. c. 10.
And it had been fair in the Excepter to have taken some notice of them, if he
would contend in that way of Authorities. But he has thought fit rather to pass
them over wholly in silence.

His reasons to prove the figure of the present Earth to be Spherical and not
Oval, p. 197.
are taken, first, from the Conical figure, of the shadow of the Earth, cast
upon the Moon. But that cannot make a difference, sensible to us at this
distance, whether the Body that cast the shadow was exactly Spherical or Oval.
His Second reason is from the place of the waters: which, he says, would all
retire from the Poles to the Equator, if the Polar parts were higher. But this
has been answered before. The same cause that drive the Waters thither, would
make them keep there. As we should have a perpetual Flood, if the Moon was
always in our Meridian. And whereas he suggests, that by this means the Sea
should be shallowest under the Poles: which, he says, is against experience. We
tell him just the contrary, That, according to our Hypothesis, the Sea should
be deepest toward the Poles; which agrees with experience. That the Sea should
be deepest under the Poles, p. 186.
if it was of an Oval form, he may see plainly by his own Scheme, or by the
Theory Scheme: Theor. Lat. li. 2. c. 5.
So that if his observation be true, of an extraordinary depth of the Ocean in
those parts, it confirms our suspicion, that the Sea continues still Oval.
Lastly, p. 198.
he urges* If this Earth was Oval, Navigation toward the Poles would be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, because upon an ascent. But if there be
a continual draught of Waters from the Equator toward the Poles, this will
balance the difficulty, and be Equivalent to a gentle Tide, that carries Ships
into the mouth of a River, though upon a gradual ascent.

Thus much we have said in complacency to the Excepter. For the Theorist was
not obliged to say any thing, in defense of the Oval form of the present Earth,
seeing he had no where asserted it. It not being possible, as to what evidence
we have yet, to determine in what order the Earth fell, and in what posture the
ruins lay after their fall. But however, to speak my mind freely upon this
occasion, I am inclinable to believe, that the Earth is still Oval or Oblong.
What things the Antitheorist has suggested, will not decide the controversy:
nor, it may be, any natural history, nor any of those observations, that we
have already. The surface of the Sea lies more regular than that of the Land,
and therefore I should think, that observations made there, would have the best
effect. I should particularly recommend these two: First, that they would
observe toward the Poles, whether the Sun rise and set, according to the rules
of a true Globe, or of a Body exactly Spherical. Secondly, that they would
observe whether the degrees of latitude are of equal extent in all the parts of
a Meridian; that is, if the quantity of sea or land that answers to a degree in
the heavens, be of equal extent toward the Equator as toward the Poles. These
two observations would go the nearest of any, I know, to determine whether the
figure of the Earth be truly spherical or oblong.

CHAP. X.
THIS Chapter is concerning the Original of Mountains, and that they were befoe
the Flood, or from the beginning. Which the Excepter endeavors to prove from
Scripture: not directly, but because mention is made of them in the same places
where the beginning of the Earth is mentioned, p. 201.
as Psalm. 90. 1, 2. and Prove. 8. 25. therefore they must be co-eval and
contemporary. We have, I think, noted before, that things are not always
Synchronal that are mentioned together in Scripture. The Style of Scripture is
not so accurate, as not to speak of things in the same place, that are to be
referred to different times. Otherwise we must suppose the destruction of
Jerusalem, and of the World, to have been intended for the same time: seeing
our Savior joins them in the same discourse, ( Matt. 24.) without any
distinction of time. Or with such a distinction, as rather signifies an
immediate succession ( ver. 29.) than so great a distance as we now find to be
betwixt the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the World. Greater than
that, betwixt the Beginning and the Flood. So in the Prophets sometimes, in the
same discourse, one part is to be referred to the first coming of our Savior,
and another part to the second: Isa. 9. 6, 7. Isa. 9. 1, etc. Luke 1. 31, 32,
33.
without making any distinction of time, but what is to be gathered from the
sense. Neither is there any incongruity in the sense, or in the tenor of the
words, if those expressions in the Psalmist be referred to different times. God
existed before the Mountains were brought forth, and the Earth and the World
were made. This is certainly true, whether you take it of the same or different
times. And if you take it of different times, it is a way of speaking we often
use. As suppose a man should say concerning the Antiquity of Troy, that it
existed before Rome and Carthage, that does not necessarily imply, that Rome
and Carthage were built at the same time; but only that Troy was before them
both. And so this of the Psalmist may be very well thus expressed, by a gradation
from a lower Epoch to an higher. Then as for that place in Prove. chapter 8. It
would be very hard to reduce all those things that are mentioned there, (from
ver. 22. to the 30.) to the same time of existence; and there is no necessity
from the words that they should be so understood. The design and intention of
the Holy Ghost is plain in both these places: In the one to set out the
Eternity of God, and in the other, of the Logos in particular. And this is done
by showing their pre-existence to this Earth, and to all its greatest and most
remarkable parts.

He mentions also, Deuteronomy. p. 202.
33. 15. where the Hills are called Lasting, and the Mountains Ancient. And
therefore they were before the Flood. This is a hard consequence. The River
Kishon is called the ancient River. Judge. 5. 21. but I do not therefore think
it necessary, that that brook should have been before the Flood. Things may
very well deserve that character of Lasting or Ancient, though they be of less
antiquity than the Deluge. If one should say the lasting Pyramids, and ancient
Babylon, none could blame the expression, nor yet think that they were
therefore from the beginning of the World.

After these allegations from Scripture, p. 205.
He descends to a natural argument, taken from the mountains in the Moon.
Which, he says, are much higher than the mountains upon the Earth: and
therefore, seeing her Body is less, they could not be made by a Dissolution of
that Planet, as these of the Earth are said to have been. Though we are not
bound to answer for the Mountains in the Moon, yet however it is easy to see
that this is no good argument. For, besides that the Orb there might be more
thick, all ruins do not fall alike. They may fall double, or in ridges and
arches, or in steep piles, some more than others, and so stand at a greater
height. And we have reason to believe that those in the Moon fell otherwise
than those of the Earth: because we do not see her turn round: nor can we ever
get a sight of her backside, that we might better judge of the shapes of her
whole Body.

From this Natural Argument, p. 206.
he proceeds to an Historical Argument, taken from the Talmudists and Josephus.
The Talmudists say, that many Giants saved themselves from the Flood upon Mount
Sion. But this, the Excepter confesses, is wholly fabulous. What need it then
be mentioned as an argument? Then he says, Josephus reports that many saved
themselves from the flood upon the mountain Baris in Armenia. p. 207.
But this also, he says, is false in the gross, and a formal fiction. Why then,
say I, is it brought in as an argument? Lastly, he quotes a passage out of
Plato, who says, when the gods shall drown the Earth, the Herdsmen and
Shepherds shall save themselves upon mountains. ibid.
And this the Excepter calls a piece of confused forgery. Why then, say I
still, is it alleged as an argument against the Theory? But however, says the
Excepter, these things argue that many thought there were mountains before the
Flood. But did the Theorist ever deny that it was the vulgar and common
opinion? Therefore such allegations as these, may be of some use to show
reading, but of no effect at all to confute the Theory.

Yet the Excepter is not content with these stories, but he must needs add a
fourth. Which, p. 208.
he says, is a plain intimation that there were mountains in the beginning of
the World. Take his own words for the story and the application of it. I will
only add that Traditional story which is told of Adam; namely, how that after
his fall, and when he repented of his Sin, he bewailed it for several hundreds
of years upon the mountains of India. Another plain intimation that THERE WERE
MOVNTAINS in the beginning of the World. This is a plain intimation indeed,
that those that made this Fable, thought there were mountains then: but is it a
proof that there really was so? as you seem to infer. Does the Excepter really
believe that Adam wandered an hundred years upon the mountains of India? If the
matter of fact be false, the supposition it proceeds upon may as well be false.
And he does not so much as cite an Author here, for the one or the other.

We are now come to the main point, p. 208, 209, etc.
a new Hypothesis concerning the original of Mountains, which the Excepter has
vouchsafed to make for us. And in short, it is this. When the Waters were
drained off the Land, on the 3d day, while it was moist and full of Vapors,
the Sun by his heat, made the Earth heave and rise up in many places, which
thereupon became Mountains. But lest we mistake or misrepresent the Author's
sense, we will give it in his own words. p. 209.
Now the Earth by this collection of the waters into one place, being freed
from the load and pressure of them, and laid open to the Sun; the moisture
within, by the heat of his beams, might quickly be tur^'d into Vapors. And
these Vapors being still increased by the continued rarifying warmth from
above, at length they wanted space wherein to expand or dilate themselves. And
at last not enduring the confinement they felt, by degrees heaved up the Earth
above; somewhat after the manner that leaven does Dough, when it is laid by a
sire; but much more forcibly and unevenly. And lifting it up thus in numberless
places, and in several quantities, and in various figures; Mountains were made
of all shapes and sizes. Whose origin and properties, he says, upon this
Hypothesis, will be obvious, or at least intelligible, to thinking and
Philosophic Minds.

I must confess I am none of those Thinking and Philosophic Minds, to whom
this is either obvious or intelligible. For there seem to me, to be a great
many palpable defects or oversights in this new Hypothesis. Whereof this is one
of the grossest, that he supposes the Sun, by his heat, the 3 d Day to have
raised these Mountains upon the Earth; whereas the Sun was not created till the
4 th. p. 51. the 4th. day was the first day of the Sun's existence.
Day. So that it had this powerful effect, it seems, one day before it came
into Being.

But suppose the Sun had then existed: This is a prodigious effect for the Sun
to perform, in so short a time, and with so little force. The greatest part of
that Day was spent in draining the Waters from off the Land. Which had a long
way to go, from some Inland Countries, to reach the Sea, or their common
receptacle. p. 209.
And, he says, without an extraordinary power, perhaps they could not have been
drained off the Earth in one Day. Let us then allow, at least, half a Day, for
clearing the Ground; so the Sun might begin his work about Noon: And before
Night, he had raised all the Mountains of one Hemisphere. It will require a
strong Philosophic Faith, to believe this could be all done by the action of
the Sun, and in so short a time. Besides we must consider, that the Sun, by
Noon, had past all the Eastern Countries, yet covered with Water, or not well
drained: So that after they were dried, he could only look back upon them, with
faint and declining rays. Yet the Mountains of the East are as great and
considerable as elsewhere. But there is still another great difficulty in the
case, as to the Northern and Southern Mountains of the Earth: for they lie
quite out of the road of the Sun: being far removed toward either Pole; where,
by reason of his distance and obliquity, his beams have little force. How would
he heave up the Riphaean Mountains, those vast heaps of Stone and Earth, that
lie so far to the North? You see what observations the Excepter has made ( p.
119, 120.) concerning the cold of those Countries: And it falls out very
untowardly for this new Hypothesis, that the Northern parts of the Earth, as
Norway, Sweedland, Island, Scythia, Sarmathia, etc. should be such Mountainous
and Rocky Countries; where he had before declared the Sun had so little force.
And indeed, according to his Scheme, all the great Mountains of the Earth
should have been under the Equator, or, at least, betwixt the Tropicks.

But to examine a little the manner and method of this great Action: and what
kind of Bodies these new Mountains would be. Either the Sun drew up only the
surface and outward skin of the Earth, as Cupping-glasses raise Blisters. Or
his beams penetrated deep into the Earth, and heaved up the substance of it, as
Moles cast up mole-hills. If you take the first method, these superficial
Mountains would be nothing but so many baggs of Wind: and not at all answerable
to those huge masses of Earth and stone, whereof our mountains consist. And if
you take the second method, and suppose them pusht out of the solid Earth, and
thrown up into the air, imagine then how deep these rays of the Sun must have
penetrated in a few hours time, and what strength they must have had, to
agitate the vapors to that degree, that they should be able to do such
prodigies as these. Several Mountains, upon a moderate computation, are a mile
high from the level of the Earth. So that it was necessary that the beams of
the Sun should penetrate, at least, a mile deep, in so short a time: and there
loosen and rarefie the vapors, and then tear up by the roots vast loads and
extents of ground, and heave them a mile high into the open air; and all this
in less than half a day. Such things surely are beyond all imagination: and so
extravagant, that one cannot, in conscience, offer them to the belief of a man.
Can we think that the Sun, who is two or three hours in licking up the Dew from
the grass, in a May- morning: should be able, in as many more hours, to suck
the Alps and Pyreneans out of the bowels of the Earth? And not to spend all his
force upon them neither. For he would have as much work in other Countries. To
raise up Taurus, for instance, and Imaus, and frozen Caucasus in Asia. And the
mighty Atlas and the Mountains of the Moon in Africa. Besides the Andes in
America, which, they say, far exceed all the Mountains of our Continent. One
would be apt to think, that this Gentleman never see the face of a Mountainous
Country. For he writes of them, as if he had taken his Idea of Mountains, and
the great ridges of Mountains, upon the Earth, from the Devil's Ditch, and
Hogmagog Hills. And he raises them faster than Mushromes, out of the ground. If
the Newborn Sun, at his first appearance, could make such great havoc, and so
great changes, upon the face of the Earth, what has he been doing ever since?
we never heard, nor read, of a Mountain, since the memory of Man, raised by the
heat of the Sun. We may therefore enquire in the last place,

Why have we no Mountains made now by the same causes? We have no reason to
believe, that the heat or strength of the Sun is lessened since that time, why
then does it not produce like effects? But I imagine he has an answer for
this. Namely, that the moisture of the first Earth, when it was new-drain'd and
marshy, contributed much to this effect: which now its dryness hinders. But
besides, that the dryness of the Earth should rather give an advantage, by the
collection of Vapors within its Cavities: However we might expect, according
to this reason, that all our drained Fenns and marshy grounds should presently
be raised into Mountains. Whereas we see them all to continue arrand Plains, as
they were before. But if you think these are too little spots of ground to
receive a strong influence from the Sun, take Egypt for an instance. That Is
capacious enough, and it is overflowed every Year, and by that means made soft
and moist to your mind, as the new Earth when it rise from under the Abyss. Why
then is not Egypt converted into Mountains, after the inundation and
retirement of Nile? I do not see any qualification awanting according to the
Excepter's Hypothesis: Egypt has a moist Soil and a strong Sun; much stronger
than the Alps or Pyreneans have: and yet it continues one of the plainest
Countries upon the Earth. But there is still a greater instance behind against
this Hypothesis, than any of the former: And that is, of the whole Earth after
the Deluge: when it had been overflowed a second time by the Abyss; upon the
retirement of those Waters it would be much what in the same condition as to
moisture, that it was in the 3 d. Day, when it first became dry Land. Why then
should not the same effect follow again, by the heat of the Sun: And as many
new Mountains be raised upon this second draining of the Earth, as upon the
first? These are plain and obvious Instances, and as plainly unanswerable. And
the whole Hypothesis, which this Vertuoso has proposed concerning the Origin
of Mountains, is such an heap of Incredibilities, and things inconsistent one
with another, that I Am afraid I shall be thought to have spent too much time
in confutation of it.

In the conclusion of this Chapter, p. 215.
he has an attempt to prove that there were Mountains before the Flood,
because there were Metals: which are commonly found about the Roots of
Mountains. But the Theorist, he says, to shun this great inconvenience, fairly
consents to the abolishing of metals out of the first state of nature. Yet he is
hard put to it, to prove that the Theorist has any where asserted, whatsoever
he thought, that there were no Metals then. The first Citation he produces,
only recites the opinion of others, and says, p. 216.
he thinks they do not want their reasons. Of the two other Citations out of
the Preface, the First does not reach home, making no mention of Metals. And
the Second is wholly misconstrued, and perverted to a sense quite contrary to
what the Author intended, or the Context will bear. But however the Theorist
appears doubtful whether there were Metals, or no, in the First World: and upon
this doubt the Excepter lays this heavy charge. Thus the Fidelity of Moses is
assaulted, p. 215. li. 24.
and another intolerable affront put upon the HOLY GHOST. For, do not both
inform us, that the City Enoch was built, and the Ark prepared before the
Flood? But how could either be done without Iron-tools? But does either Moses,
or the Holy Ghost tell us, that there were Iron-tools, in building that City,
or the Ark? If they do not, we only affront the consequence, which the
Excepter draws from the words, and not the Authors of them. By what divine
authority does the Animadverter assert, that there was Iron, or Iron-tools, in
building this City, or that Ark? I Am sure Scripture does not mention either,
upon those occasions. Genesis 6. 1^
And seeing it mentions only Gopher Wood and Pitch for the building of the
Ark, it is a presumption rather, that there were no other Materials used. And as
to the City, it is true, if he fancy the City which Enoch built, to have been
like Paris, or London, he has reason to imagine, that they had Iron-tools to
make it. But suppose it was a number of Cottages, made of Branches of Trees, of
Osiers and Bulrushes, (and what needed they any other House, when the Air was
so temperate) or, if you will, Per ludibrium rogant nasuti homines, unde
Architectos and Opifices conduxerit Cain ad urbem extruendam; Nos vicissim ab
illis quaerimus, quo authore credant Vrbem ex quadratis lapidibus fuisse
extructam: and magno artificio, multisque sumptibus, and longi temporis opera,
aedificium hoc constitisse. Nihil enim aliud colligere licet exverbis Mosis,
quam muros ex rudi materia, Cain sibi and posteris circumdedisse. Call. in loc.
of Mud-walls, and a Roof of Straw: with a Fence about it to keep out Beasts:
there would be no such necessity of Iron-tools. Consider, pray, how long the
World was without knowing the use of Iron, in several parts of it, as in the
North, and in America: and yet they had Houses and Cities after their fashion.
For the Northern Countries you may see Olaus Magnus, li. 12. c. 13. For
America, Pet. Martyr, Dec. 1. But the Excepter will save you your pains, as to
the Indians, for he says himself in another place, that they had no Instruments
of Iron, p. 250.
when the Spaniards came amongst them. And if in those late Ages of the World,
they were still without the use of Iron, or Iron-tools, we have less reason to
believe that the Children of Cain had them four or five thousand years before.

It is also worthy our Consideration, how many things must have been done,
before they could come at these Iron-tools. How came the Children of Cain to
dig into the Earth, I know not to what depth, to seek for a thing they had
never heard of before? when it was so difficult to dig into the Earth without
such Tools: more difficult, methinks, than to build an House without them. But
suppose they did this, we know not how; and, amongst many other Stones, or
Earths, found that which we call Iron-ore: How did they know the nature and use
of it? Or, if they guessed at that, how did they know the way and manner of
preparing it? By Fornaces, Wind-forges, and SmeltingMills. These would be as
hard to make or build, without Iron-tools, as dwelling Houses. And when they
had got a Lump of Iron, till they knew how to temper it, they could not make
Tools of it still. Unless Cain's Children had an Inspiration from Heaven, I do
not see how they could discover all these things, in so short a time. And this
is only to make good what the Theorist said, that such an Hypothesis does not
want its reasons. And as to Tubal-cain, let those that positively assert that
there was no Iron in the First World, tell us in what sense that place is to be
understood. For, I believe, Iron or Brass is not once mentioned in all the
Theory.

CHAP. XI.
THIS Chapter is to prove that the Sea was open before the Deluge. It Is
something barren of Philosophical arguments, but we will begin with such as it
has, which are taken from this Topic, That the Fishes could not live in our
Abyss: p. 224.
and that for three reasons. First, because it was too dark. 2 dly. too close,
and 3 dly. too cold. As for coldness, methinks he might have left that out,
unless he suppose that there are no fish in the frozen Seas, toward the North
and South: which is against all sense and experience: for cold countries abound
most in fish. And according to reason, there would be more danger of too much
warmth, in those subterraneous waters, than of too much cold, in respect of the
Fishes.

Then as to darkness and closeness, this minds me of the saying of Maimonides:
That no man ever would believe, that a child could live so many months, shut up
in its Mothers Belly, if he never had seen the experience of it. There Is
closeness and darkness in the highest degree: and in Animals, that, as soon as
born, cannot live without respiration. Whereas Fishes, of all creatures, have
the least need of Respiration, if they have any. And as for darkness, how many
subterraneous Lakes have we still, wherein Fishes live? And we can scarce
suppose the Main and fathomless Ocean to have light to the bottom: at least
when it is troubled or tempestuous. How the Eyes of fish are, or might be
formed or conformed, we cannot tell, but we see they feed and prey on the night
time, and take baits as greedily as on the day. But it is likely they were less
active and agile in that Abyss, than they are now; Their life was more sluggish
then, and their motions more slow. Job 38. 8.
As being still in that womb of nature that was broke up at the Deluge. And as
to Air, they would have enough for their imperfect way of breathing in that
state. But if they have a more perfect now, which is still a question: They
might have some passages, in their body, opened, (at the disruption of the
Abyss) when they were born into the light and free air, which were not opened
before. As we see in Infants, upon their birth, a new passage is made into
their lungs, and a new circulation of the blood, which before took another
course.

So much for pretended reasons and Philosophy. The rest of this long Chapter is
spent either in consequences made from Scripture, or in a prolix discourse
about Rain. As to Scripture, He makes this the first objection, p. 219, 220.
that, whereas Adam had a dominion given him over the fish of the Sea, it could
have no effect, if they were enclosed in the Abyss. Adam had no more dominion
given him over the fish of the Sea, than over the fowls of the Air: which he
could not come at, or seize at his pleasure, unless he could fly into the air
after them. Adam was made Lord of all Animals upon this Earth, and had a right
to use them for his convenience, when they came into his power. But I do not
believe that Adam was made stronger than a Lion, nor could master the
Leviathan, or command him to the shore. He had a right however, and his
posterity, to dispose of all creatures for their use and service, whenever,
upon occasion offered, they fell into their power.

Next he says, p. 225, 226.
The Waters were gathered into one place, and a Firmament was made to divide
the Waters from the Waters. Well, allow this, tell us then what was that
Firmament. Genesis 1. 17.
For it is said there, that God set the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in the Fiamament.
Therefore you can argue nothing from this, unless you suppose Supercelestial
Waters: which, when you have proved, we will give you an account of the
Subcelestial, and of the Subterraneous. And here the Excepter cites some things
from the Theory, that are not in the second Edition, and therefore the Theorist
is not concerned to answer them.

Lastly, The Excepter comes to his long Harangue in commendation of the Clouds
and of Rain: which takes up a great part of this Chapter. In his Exordium he
makes this Complement to the Clouds. p. 234.
Sometimes they mount up and fly aloft, as if they forgot, or disdained the
meanness of their Origin. Sometimes again they sink and stoop so low, as if
they repented of their former proud aspirings, and did remorseful humble
penance for their high presumption. And though I may not say they weep to
expiate their arrogance, or kiss the earth with bedewed cheeks in token of
their penitence; yet they often prostrate in the dust, and sweep the lowest
grounds of all, with their misty foggy trains. One while they, etc. This
Harangue about the Clouds and Rain, is pursued for fourteen or fifteen pages,
and, with submission to better judgments, I take it to be a Countrey-Sermon,
about the usefulness of Rain. And, I believe, whosoever reads it, will, both
from its matter and form, be of the same opinion. I do not speak this in
derogation to his Sermon, but he would have done better, methinks, to have
printed it in a pamphlet by it self; there being no occasion for it in this
Theory.

Toward the conclusion of the Chapter, p. 246.
He answers an objection made by the Theorist against the supposed Islands and
Continents in the First Earth. Namely, That it would render the propagation of
mankind difficult, into those broken parts of the World. And the many imperfect
shifting answers which the Excepter gives, or conjectures without authority, do
but confirm the objection of the Theorist, or make his words true, quod Res
esset difficilis explicatu. Which is all that the Theorist said upon that
Subject.

CHAP. XII.
THIS is a short Chapter, and will be soon dispatched. It Is to prove that the
Rainbow was before the Flood. And notwithstanding that, a good sign that there
should never be a Flood again. This is to me a Paradox, but he confirms it by a
greater Paradox: for he says, God might as well (as to significancy, or
authenticalness) have appointed the Sun, as the Rainbow, for a sign that there
never should have been another Flood. So that if God had said to Noah, I do
assure thee there shall never be a second Deluge, and for a sign of this,
Behold I set the Sun in the Firmament: This would have done as well, he says,
as the Rainbow. That is, in my judgment, it would have done nothing at all,
more than the bare promise. And if it had done no more than the bare promise,
it was superfluous. Therefore if the Rainbow was no more than the Sun would
have been, it was a superfluous sign. They to whom these two signs are of equal
significancy and effect, lie without the reach of all conviction, and I am very
willing to indulge them their own opinions. p. 257.


But he says, God sometimes has made things to be signs* that are common and
usual. Thus the fruit of a Tree growing in Paradise, was made a sign of man's
Immortality. But how does it appear that this was a common Tree: or that it was
given to Adam as a sign that he should be Immortal? 2 Kings 13. 17.
neither of these appear from Scripture. Secondly, he says, Shooting with bow
and arrows upon the ground, was made a sign to Joash of his prevailing against
the Syrians. This was only a command to make war against Syria, and a Prophecy
of success; both delivered in a Symbolical or Hieroglyphical way. The command
was signified by bidding the King shoot an arrow, which was the sign of War.
And the sign of Victory or of divine assistance, was the Prophets strengthening
the King's hands to draw the Bow. This is nothing as to a sign given in Nature,
or from the Natural World, in confirmation of a Divine Promise: which is the
thing we are only to consider.

All the rest of this Chapter is lax discourse without proof. And as to the
significancy of the Rainbow, upon supposition that it was a New Appearance: And
its insignificancy upon supposition that it was an Old Appearance, Eng. Theor.
book 2. chapter 5.
we have spoken so fully in the Theory it self, that it would be needless here
to make any longer stay upon this argument.

CHAP. XIII.
THIS Chapter is concerning Paradise; But our Author fairly baulks all the
difficulties in that Doctrine, and contents himself with a few generals, which
every body knows. The Doctrine of Paradise consists chiefly of two parts; the
site or place of it: and the state or properties of it. As to the first, If the
Excepter would have confuted the Theory, he should have set down the
Conclusions that are advanced by the Theory, Eng. Theor. book 2. chapter 7.
concerning the place of Paradise, which are these; First, The place of
Paradise cannot be determined by Scripture only. Neither the word Mekeddem,
(Genesis 2. 8.) nor the four Rivers mentioned there, make the place of it
defineable. Secondly, The place of Paradise cannot be determined by the Theory.
Seeing then neither Scripture, nor Reason determine the place of Paradise, if
we will determine it, it must be by Antiquity. And if we appeal to Antiquity in
this case, we shall find, first, that it was not in Mesopotamia. Secondly, that
according to the plurality of Votes, both amongst the Heathen and Christian
Authors, it was placed in the other Hemisphere. And this is all the Theory says
upon that Point. As you may see Eng. Theor. Book 2. chapter 7. and Lat. Theor. 2 d.
Edit. p. 194. and p. 214, 215. Wherefore if the Animadverter would undertake to
confute the Theory in this Point, he should have confuted those four
Particulars. But he slips over these, and gives us only a Paraphrase upon some
Verses in the 2 d. and 3 d. Chap. of Genesis which says little to this purpose, p.
265.
and yet more than it proves.

In the Second place, As to the state and properties of Paradise, or the
Antediluvian world; The longevity of the Antediluvians is the thing he insists
upon. But this he handles so loosely, p. 273.
that in the conclusion of his discourse, one cannot tell whether he affirms
it, or denies it. This Skeptical humor of the Excepter has been taken notice
of before, and it is continued in this Chapter, where there is little or nothing
positively determined. The Theorist, on the contrary, expressly affirms the
Longevity of the Antediluvians, and gives these reasons for his assertion.
First, because all the Lives, and all the Generations recorded in Scripture,
before the Flood, from Father to Son, in a Line of sixteen hundred years, are
longeval. Of six, seven, eight, nine hundred years a-piece. Secondly,
Antiquity, both Greek and Barbarian, have attested the same thing, See the
Table of both. Eng. Theor. p. 220.
and recorded the Tradition. Thirdly, the Generations recorded in Scripture
after the Flood, as they exceed the term of succeeding Ages, so they decline by
degrees from the Antediluvian Longevity. Lastly, Jacob complains of the
shortness of his life, and fewness of his days, in comparison of his
Forefathers, when he had lived one hundred and thirty years; Genesis 47. 9.
which had been a groundless complaint, if his Ancestors had not lived much
longer.

These two last reasons the Excepter has not thought fit to take notice of.
And, in answer to the two former, he has only the usual subterfuges. As, that
the long lives of the Antediluvian Patriarchs was a thing extraordinary and
providential: confined to their Persons; not of a general extent, nor according
to the course of Nature. But how does this appear? It must be made out, either
by Scripture or Reason. Scripture makes no distinction, nor exception of
Persons in this case; All, whereof it has left any account, as to term of
life, are declared to have lived several hundreds of years. And why should we
not conclude the same thing concerning the rest? Then as to Reason, you cannot
suppose Longevity, in that World, against reason or nature, unless you first
suppose the form and constitution of that World to have been the same with the
present: Which is to beg the Question. Admitting that form and constitution of
the first Heavens and Earth, which the Theory has given, Longevity will be a
natural consequnce of it. Theor. bo. 2. chapter 3. and 4th.
And having such a course of nature laid before us, as agrees with the reports
of Scripture, and with general Tradition, why should we quit that, to comply
with an imaginary presumption: that these were miraculously preserved, and all
the rest were short-lived. I know he pretends, p. 2^7.
we may as well conclude all Men were Giants in those days, because Moses says,
There were Giants upon the Earth in those days, Genesis 6. 4. as conclude that all
Men were long-lived in those days, because Moses mentions some that were so.
There had been some pretense for this, if Moses had made a distinction of two
races of Men in the first World: Long-livers and short-livers; as he has
distinguished the Giants from the common Race of Mankind. Or, as he has said in
one case, There were Giants on the Earth in those days. So if he had said in
the other, there were Long-livers upon the Earth in those days: and upon that,
had given us a List of the Long-lived Patriarchs: this indeed would have made
the cases pretty parallel. But, on the contrary, Moses makes no such
distinction of long-living and short-living races, before the Flood; nor yet
notes it as a mark of divine favor, or extraordinary benediction upon those
persons that lived so long. Therefore, not to suppose it general to Mankind at
that time, is a groundless restriction, which is neither founded upon Scripture
nor Reason.

As to the second Argument for Antediluvian longevity, taken from Tradition and
the Testimony of the Ancients; p. 276, 277.
He objects, that Josephus does not seem to be firm in that opinion himself.
But what then? The Theorist lays no stress upon Iosephus's single opinion, but
refers to the Testimonies of those Authors, whether Greeks, or such as have
given an account of the Egyptian, Chaldean, and Phoenician Antiquities: which
are called in by Josephus, as witnesses of this Truth or Tradition, concerning
the long lives of the first Men. And at last, p. 278.
the Excepter seems content, this Tradition should be admitted: seeing the
Authors are too many, and too considerable, to have their Testimonies
questioned or rejected. But then he will make a further Question, Why there
should not also be a Tradition concerning the Perpetual Equinox, or Perpetual
Spring, upon which this Longevity depended. But this Question is fully
answered, and the Tradition fully made out before, in the 8 th. Chapter, which
I need not here repeat. In like manner, all the secondary Questions which he
there mentions, depending upon, and being included in this first, receive their
resolution from it. For when a perpetual Equinox is once truly stated, there is
no difficulty concerning the rest.

After these contests about Traditions, he has one or two Reasons against this
Antediluvian Longevity. 79, 280.
First, Because the Earth, by this means, would have been over-stockt with
People before the time of the Deluge. Secondly, They should all have been of
the same Longevity before the Flood. Neither of these, methinks, have any
strength in them. As to the first, That Earth was much more capacious than this
is, where the Sea takes away half of its Surface, and renders it uninhabitable.
And whereas he suggests, as a recompense, ibid.
That Mountains have more surface and capacity than Plains; That Is true, but
they are also less habitable, by reason of their barrenness and ruggedness. Who
can believe that there are as many People in Wales, as in other parts of
England, upon the same compass of level ground? Or no more in Holland, than
upon a like number of Acres upon the Alps or Pyreneans? There would be room
enough for twice as many People as there are in the World, and twice as many
Animals, if there was food enough to nourish them. But here I have two things
to complain of, as foul play: First, the Excepter cites the Theory partially.
Secondly, he does not mark the place whence he takes that citation: as if it
was on purpose to hide his partiality. The words he cites are these, If we
allow the first Couple, at the end of one hundred years, or of the first
Century, Eng. Theor. p. 23.
to have left ten pair of Breeders, which is an easy supposition, there would
arise from these in fifteen hundred years, a greater number than the Earth was
capable of: allowing every pair to multiply in the same decuple proportion the
first pair did. Here the Excepter stops, and makes this inference, that upon an
easy supposition, which the Theorist makes and allows, the Earth would have
been over-stockt in fifteen hundred years. This is an easy supposition for the
first Century, as the Theorist put it: But it would be a very uneasy one for
the following Centuries; when they came to be at any considerable distance from
the beginning. And therefore the Theorist tells you, in that very Page, The
same measure cannot run equally through all the Ages. And in his Calculation
you see, after the first Century, he has taken only a quadruple proportion for
the increase of mankind. As judging that a moderate and reasonable measure
betwixt the Highest and the Lowest. ibid.
This the Excepter might easily have observed, and as easily avoided this
misapplication of the words of the Theorist.

His second reason against the antediluvian longevity is slighter that the
first. p. 280.
For he pretends that all the Antediluvians, upon that supposition, should have
been equally long-lived. You may as well say, that all the children of the same
parents, and that live in the same place, should now be equally long-lived; the
external world being the same to them all. But, besides accidents, their
stamina and constitutions might then be of a different strength, as well as
now: though they were born of the same Parents, and lived in the same Air.
Lastly, p. 281.
he moves a difficulty about the multiplication of Animals in the first World,
that they would have been too numerous before the Flood. I can say nothing to
that, nor He neither, upon good grounds: unless we knew what Species's of
Animals were then made, and in what degrees they multiplied. The Theorist
always supposes a Divine Providence to superintend, proportion, and determine,
both the number and food of Animals upon the Earth: suitably to the
constitution and circumstances of every World. And seeing that Earth was no
less under the care and direction of Providence, than the present, we may
conclude that due measures were taken for adjusting the numbers and food of
Animals in such manner, as neither to be a burden to one another, nor to man.

CHAP. XIV.
THIS Chapter is against the Explication of the Deluge by the Dissolution of
the Earth. That dissolution, as is pretended, being unfit or insufficient to
produce such an effect. And to prove this, the Antitheorist gives us five
Arguments, whereof the first is this: Moses having left us an accurate
description of Paradise, according to the proper rules of Topography, p. 285.
such a description would have been improper and insufficient to determine the
place of Paradise, and consequently useless, if the Earth had been dissolved:
and by that means the bounds of those Countries, and the Channels of those
Rivers, broken and changed. This objection, I Am afraid, will fall heavier upon
Moses, or upon the Excepter himself, than upon the Theorist. However one would
have expected that the Excepter should have determined here the place of
Paradise, in virtue of that description. So learned and sagacious a person,
having before him an exact draught of Paradise, according to the proper rules
of Topography, could not fail to lay his finger upon the very spot of ground
where it stood. Yet I do not find that he has ventured to determine the place
of Paradise, either in this Chapter, or in the precedent. Which gives me a
great suspicion, that he was not satisfied where it stood, notwithstanding the
Mosaical Topography. Now if it cannot be understood or determined by that
Topography, one of these two things must be allowed, either that the
description was insufficient and ineffectual: or that there has been some great
change in the Earth, whereby the marks of it are destroyed; namely, the bounds
of Countries, and the courses of the Rivers. If he take the second of these
answers, he joins with the Theorist. If the first, he reflects, according to
his way of arguing, upon the honor of Moses, or confutes himself.

But here is still a further charge: p. 286.
Moses's description of Paradise would have been False (which he notes for
horrid blasphemy) if the Earth ws broken at the Deluge. For then those Rivers,
by which Moses describes Paradise, could not have been before the Flood. But
why so, I pray? The Theorist supposes Rivers before the Flood, in great plenty:
and why not like to these? And if their channels were very much changed by the
Flood, that is no more than what good Interpreters suppose. Being unable, upon
any other supposition, to give an account, why it is so hard (notwithstanding
Moses's description) to determine the place of Paradise. Now where is the
Blasphemy of this: Horrid Blasphemy against the holy Ghost? ibid.
A rude and injudicious defense of Scripture, by railing and ill language, is
the true way to lessen and disparage it. Especially when we make our own
consequences to be of the same authority with the Word of God: and whatsoever
is against them, must be charged with blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Is it
not a strange thing that the Dissolution of the Earth should be made Blasphemy?
when the Prophets and inspired Authors speak so often of the Disruptions, See
Review, p. 35, etc.
Fractions, Concussions, and Subversions of the Earth. And that very
expression, that the Earth is dissolved, is a Scripture-expression. ( Psalm. 75.
3. Isa. 24. 19. Amos. 9. 5.) which, methinks, might have been enough to have
protected it from the imputation of blasphemy. But there is nothing safe
against blind zeal, and opinionative ignorance; which, by how much they find
themselves weaker in reasons, by so much they become more violent in passions.

But to return to the objection; upon the whole matter, he casts the burden of
the charge upon Moses himself, as we noted before. For take whether Hypothesis
you will, that the Earth was, or was not, broken: the question still returns,
if the Mosaical Topography was exact and sufficient, why can we not yet find
out the situation of Paradise? It Is now above three thousand years since Moses
dyed, and men have been curious and very inquisitive, in all ages, to find out
the place of Paradise: but it is not found out to this day to any satisfaction.
So that, methinks, upon the whole, the Theory, which supposes the Earth very
much changed, makes the fairest Apology both for Moses and mankind, in this
particular. But to proceed to his second Argument.

Secondly, p. 288.
says the Excepter, The dissolution of the Earth could not be the cause of the
general Flood, because it would have utterly destroyed Noah's Ark, and all that
were in it. I thought the Theorist had effectually prevented this objection, by
putting the Ark under the conduct of its Guardian Angels, and of a miraculous
Providence. Eng. Theor. p. 108.
These are his words, I think it had been impossible for the Ark to have lived
upon the raging Abyss, or for Noah and his family to have been preserved, if
there had not been a miraculous hand of Providence to take care of them. Now,
either the Excepter did not take notice of this passage in the Theory, or he
does not allow that a miraculous hand was sufficient to preserve the Ark: or
thirdly, he made an objection, which he knew himself, to be impertinent. And, I
confess, I am inclinable to think the last is true. For as to the first, he
confesses (p. 354.) that the Theory represents the Ark, with its Guardian
Angels about it, in the extremity of the Flood. And as to the second, He
himself makes use of a miraculous power to preserve the Ark, upon his
Hypothesis: in answer to the eighth objection, p. 351, 352, etc. Why then may
not we make use of the same power and with the same effect? It remains
therefore, that he was conscious to himself that he made this objection to no
purpose.

But that is not all: He has also used foul play in his citation. For whereas
the great danger of the Ark would be at the first fall of the Earth, or the
disruption of the Abyss; The Theorist, he says, to prevent this, makes the Ark
to be a-float by the Rains, before the Abyss was broken. But is that all the
Theorist says in that place? does he not assign another way how the Ark might
be a-float? namely, in a River, or in a Dock. These are the words of the
Theory, p. 98.
So as the Ark, if it could not float upon these Rain-waters, at least taking
the advantage of a River, or of a dock or cistern made to receive them, it
might be a-float before the Abyss was broken open. And these words being in the
same place whence he makes his citation, it must be a wilful dissimulation not
to take notice of them. But he see they would have taken off the edge of his
objection, and therefore thought fit not to touch upon them. But after all,
there is no necessity that the Ark should be a-float, before the Earth broke.
Those things were premised in the Theory, only to soften the way to men that
are hard of belief in such extraordinary matters. For the Angels, (whose
ministry we openly own, upon these grand occasions) could as easily have held
the Ark, a-float, in the Air, as on the water. And the Ark, being an Emblem of
the Church, God certainly did give his Angels charge over it; that they should
bear it up in their hands, that it might not be dashed against a stone. And
this having been more than once, professed by the Theorist, we must again
conclude this objection superfluous and useless.

The third objection is this. p. 289
If the Earth had been thus dissolved, The present Earth would have been, in
likelihood, of another figure, than what now it bears. These are his words, but
I suppose he means, that it would have been of another form, as to Sea and
Land. And the reason he gives is this: Because, says he, it would have broke
first, in the Equator, and consequently that part falling down first, would
have been swallowed up by the waters, and become all Sea. Whereas we find, that
under the Equator that then was (which he supposes the present Ecliptic) the
dry ground is of most spacious extent and continuity. ibid.
We need not examine his account of Sea and Land, because it proceeds upon a
false supposition. He relapses here into his former Astronomical error, See p.
27. before.
or to his first adds a second; viz. That the Earth, when it changed its
situation, changed its Poles and Circles. This is a great mistake; the change
of position in respect of the Heavens, did not change the places of its Circles
in respect to its own Globe. As when you change a Sphere or a Globe out of a
right situation into an oblique, the Circles do not change their places, as to
that Sphere or Globe: but have only another position to the Heavens. The
Earth's Ecliptic runs through the same places it did before: and the
Equinoctial regions of that Earth were the same with the Equinoctial regions of
this; only bear another posture to the Heavens and the Sun. These Circles have
not changed places with one another, as he imagines: and which is worse, would
father this imagination upon the Theory; in these words, under the Ecliptic
(which, in the Primitive situation of the Earth, (ACCORDING TO THE THEORY) was
its Equinoctial, and divided the Globe into two Hemispheres, as the Equator
does now) the dry ground, etc. He that affirms this, with respect to the Earth,
neither understands the Theory, nor the Doctrine of the Sphere. But let us press
no further upon a mistake.

The fourth objection is this: p. 290.
That such a Dissolution of the Earth, would have caused great barrenness after
the Flood. Partly by turning up some dry and unfruitful parts of the Earth: and
partly by the soil and filth that would be left upon its surface. As to the
first, I willingly allow, that some of the interior and barren parts of the
Earth might be turned up; as we now see in Mountainous and wild Countries: but
this rather confirms the Theory, than weakens it. But as to the second, that
the filth and soil would have made the Earth more barren, I cannot allow that.
For good Husbandmen overflow their grounds, to make their crop more rich. And
it is generally supposed, that the Inundation of Nile, and the mud it leaves
behind it, makes Egypt more fruitful. Besides, this part of the objection lies
against the common explication of the Deluge, as well as against that which is
given by the Theory. For if you suppose an universal Deluge, let it come from
what causes you please, it must overflow all the Earth, and leave mud and slime
and filth upon the surface of it. And consequently cause barrenness, according
to this argumentation.

He adds another consideration under this head, p. 292.
namely, that if the Earth had been dissolved in this manner, All the buildings
erected before the Flood, would have been shaken down, or else overwhelmed. Yet
we read of some that outstood the Flood, and were not demolished. Such were the
pillars of Seth, and the Cities Henochia and Joppa. As to Seth's pillars, they
are generally accounted fabulous. And I perceive the excepter will not vouch
for them. For he concludes, ( p. 295.) I know the very being is questioned of
Seth's pillars, etc. If he will not defend them, why should I take the pains to
confute them? I do not love to play with a Man, that will put nothing to the
stake. That will have his chance to win, but can lose nothing, because he
stakes nothing. Then as to the City Henochia, it has no authority, but that of
Annius Viterbiensis, and his Berosus. A Book generally exploded, as fictitious.
Lastly, as to Ioppa, the authority indeed is better, though still uncertain.
But however, suppose the ruins of one Town remained after the Flood, does this
prove that the Earth was not dissolved? I do not doubt, but there were several
tracts of the Earth, much greater than that Town, that were not broken all to
pieces by their fall. But you and your English Historian are mistaken, if you
suppose the Altars and Inscriptions mentioned by Mela, to have been
Antediluvian Altars and Inscriptions. Unless you will make the Fable of Perseus
and Andromeda, and the Sea Monster, to have been an Antediluvian Fable. Neither
has your Historian been lucky in translating those words of Mela, cum
religione plurima, with the grounds and principles of their religion, which
signify only, with a religious care or superstition. But to leave Fables, and
proceed.

His last Argument against the Dissolution is this. p. 296.
Had the Dissolution of the Earth been the cause of the Deluge, It would have
made God's Covenant with Noah a very vain and trifling thing. So much is true,
That the Deluge, in the course of Nature, will not return again in the same
way. But unless God prevent it, it both may and will return in another way.
That is, if the World continue long enough, the Mountains will wear and sink,
and the Waters in proportion rise: and overflow the whole Earth. As is plainly
shown, by a parallel case, in the first Book of the Theory, chapter 4. Besides, God
might, when he pleased, by an extraordinary power, and for the sins of Men,
bring another Deluge upon the World. And that is the thing which Noah seems to
have feared, and which God, by his Covenant, secured him against. For, as the
Excepter has said himself, in answering an harder objection, (p. 152.) When
God assigned to the Waters the place of their abode, he did not intend to
fortify them in it against his own omnipotence, or to divest himself of his
Sovereign Prerogative of calling them forth when he pleased. This being
allowed, with what we said before, that Covenant was not vain or trifling,
either in respect of an ordinary or extraordinary Providence.

Thus we have done with all the Exceptions against the Theory. For the two next
Chapters are concerning a new Hypothesis of his own. And the last of all,
excepts not against the truth of the Theory, but the certainty of it. In
reflection upon this whole matter, give me leave to declare Two things; First,
That I have not knowingly omitted any one Objection that I thought of moment.
Secondly, That I have not from these Exceptions found reason to change any part
of the Theory, nor to alter my opinion, as to any particular in it. No doubt
there are several Texts of Scripture, which, understood according to the Letter
in a Vulgar way, stand cross, both to this, and other natural Theories. And a
Child that had read the first Chapters of Genesis, might have observed this, as
well as the Excepter: but could not have loaded his charge with so much
bitterness. Some Men, they say, though of no great Valor, yet will fight
excellently well behind a Wall. The Excepter, behind a Text of Scripture, is
very fierce and rugged. But in the open Field of Reason and Philosophy, he is
gentle and tractable. Eng. Theor. book 2. chapter 9. at the end.
The Theorist had declared his intentions, and obliged himself, to give a full
account of Moses his Cosmopoeia, or six-days Creation: but did not think it
proper to be done in the Vulgar Language, nor before the whole Theory was
completed. This might have spared much of the Excepter's pains; But till that
account be given, if the Excepter thinks fit to continue his Animadversions,
and go thorough the Two last Books, as he has done the two first, it will not
be unacceptable to the Theorist. Provided it be done with sincerity, in
reciting the words, and representing the sense of the Author.

CHAP. XV.
IN This Chapter the Anti-theorist lays down a new Hypothesis for the
Explication of the Deluge. p. 299.
And the War is changed, on his side, from Offensive, to Defensive. It Is but
fair that he should lie down in his turn: and if some blows smart a little, he
must not complain, because he begun the Sport. But let us try his Hypothesis, p.
297, 300.
without any further ceremony. The first Proposition laid down for the
establishing of it, is this: That the Flood was but fifteen Cubits high, above
the ordinary level of the Earth. This is an unmerciful Paradox, and a very
unlucky beginning; For under what notion must this Proposition be received? As
a Postulatum, or as a Conclusion? If it be a Postulatum, it must be clear from
its own light, or acknowledged by general consent. It cannot pretend to be
clear from its own light, because it is matter of Fact, which is not known, but
by Testimony. Neither is it generally acknowledged: For the general opinion is,
that the Waters covered the tops of the Mountains; Nay, that they were fifteen
Cubits higher than the tops of the Mountains. And this he confesses himself, in
these words: We shall find there is a great mistake in the common Hypothesis,
p. 300.
touching their depth: namely, of the Waters. For Whereas they have been
supposed to be fifteen Cubits higher than the highest Mountains: They were
indeed but fifteen Cubits high in all, above the Surface of the Earth. And this
Opinion, or Doctrine, he calls, p. 329. lin. 19. c. 31. p. 339. lin. 18.
The general standing Hypothesis: The usual Hypothesis: The usual sense they
have put upon the Sacred Story. It must not therefore be made a Postulatum,
that such an Hypothesis is false, but the falsity of it must be demonstrated by
good Proofs. Now I do not find that this new Hypothesis, of a
fifteen-cubit-Deluge, offers at any more than one single proof, namely, from
Genesis 7. 20. But before we proceed to the examination of that, give me leave to
note one or two things, wherein the new-Theorist seems to be inconsistent with
himself, or with good sense.

At his entrance upon this new Hypothesis, he has these words, (P. 300.) Not
that I will be bound to defend what I say, as true and real, etc. But why then
does he trouble himself, or the World, with an Hypothesis, which he does not
believe to be true and real? or if he does believe it to be so, Why will he not
defend it? for we ought to defend truth. But he says moreover, (p. 302. lin.
19.) Our supposition stands supported by Divine authority: as being founded
upon Scripture. Which tells us, as plainly as it can speak, that the Waters
prevailed but fifteen Cubits upon the Earth. If his Hypothesis be founded upon
Scripture: and upon Scripture as plainly as it can speak. Why will not he
defend it as true and real? For to be supported by Scripture, and by plain
Scripture, is as much as we can allege for the Articles of our Faith: which
every one surely is bound to defend.

But this is not all the difficulty we meet with. The whole period which we
quoted runs thus. Not that I will be bound to defend what I say, as true or
real; any more than to believe (what I cannot well endure to speak) that the
Church of God has ever gone on in an irrational way of explaining the Deluge.
Which yet she must needs have done, if there be no other rational method of
explaining it, and no other intelligible Causes of it, than what the Theory has
proposed; Now for the word Theory, put the word Excepter, or Excepter's
Hypothesis, and see if this charge, That the Church of God has ever gone on in
an irrational way of explaining the Deluge, does not fall as much upon the
Excepter's new Hypothesis, as upon the Theory. If the Church-Hypothesis was
rational, what need he have invented a new one? why does he not propose that
Hypothesis, and defend it? I Am afraid it will be found that he does not only
contradict the Church-Hypothesis, but reject it as mistaken and irrational. For
what is the Church-Hypothesis, but the Common Hypothesis? (p. 300. lin. 24.)
The general standing Hypothesis: The usual Hypothesis: The usual sense they put
upon the Sacred story. All these he rejects and disputes against; as you may
see in the places forecited. And also he calls them such Inventions, p. 312.
ult.
as have been, and justly may be disgustful, not only to nice and squeamish,
but to the best and soundest Philosophic judgments. And, p. 319. He says by
his Hypothesis, we are excused from running to those Causes or Methods, which
seem unreasonable to some, and unintelligible to others, and unsatisfactory to
most. And, to name no more, he says, p. 330. The ordinary supposition, that the
Mountains were covered with water in the Deluge, brings on a necessity of
setting up a new Hypothesis for explaining the Flood. Now, whose Methods,
Inventions and Supoositions are these, which he reflects upon? Are they not the
commonly received Methods and Suppositions? It Is plain, most of those which he
mentions, (p. 310, 311, 313, 314, 318.) are not the Theorist's. Eng. Theor. chapter
2. and 3.
For the Theorist had rejected before, those very Methods and Inventions, which
the Excepter rejects now: and so far the justifies the Theory The Excepter
rejects, first the Waters of the Sea. Then the Waters in the bowels of the
Earth. Then the Supercelestial Waters. Then a New Creation of Waters. Then the
mass of Air changed into water. And lastly, a partial Deluge. And therefore he
puts men fatally, either upon the Theory, or upon his new Hypothesis.
These reflections therefore must fall upon some other Hypothesis: And what
Hypothesis is that, if it be not the Church-Hypothesis? To conclude, I argue
thus in short, to show the Excepter inconsistent with himself in this
particular. The Church Way of explaining the Deluge, is either rational or
irrational. If he say it is rational, why does he desert it, and invent a new
one? And if he say it is irrational, then that dreadful thing, which, he cannot
well endure to speak, That the Church of God has ever gone on in an irrational
way of explaining the Deluge, falls flat upon himself.

Thus much in general, for his Introduction. We proceed now to examine
particularly his new Hypothesis. Which, as we told you before, consists chiefly
in this, That the Waters of the Deluge were but fifteen Cubits higher than the
common unmountainous Surface of the Earth. This, which seems so odd and
extravagant, he says, p. 301.
is the Foundation of his Hypothesis. And, which is still more surprising, he
says this depth, or rather shallowness, or the Waters of the Deluge, is told us
by Scripture, p. 302. lin. 21.
as plainly as it can speak. This must needs raise our curiosity, to see that
place of Scripture, which has been over-lookt by all the Learned hitherto.
Well, it is Genesis 7. 20. in these words, Fifteen Cubits upwards did the Waters
prevail. This, me thinks, is somewhat general: for the Basis of these fifteen
Cubits is not expressed, in these words. But why does our Author stop in the
middle of a Verse: Why does he not transcribe the whole Verse: for the last
part of it, is as good Scripture as the first. And that says plainly, that the
Mountains were covered with the Waters. The whole Verse runs thus: Fifteen
Cubits upwards did the Waters prevail; AND THE MOVNTAINS WERE COVERED. Now, if
the Basis of these fifteen Cubits was the commons Surface, or plain level of
the Earth, as the new Hypothesis will have it: How could fifteen Cubits, from
that Basis, reach to the tops of the Mountains? Are the highest Mountains but
fifteen Cubits higher than the common surface of the Earth? 1 Samuel 17. 4.
Goliath was six cubits and a span high. So Pic Tenariff would not be thrice as
high as Goliath. Yet David slung a stone up to his forehead. Take what cubit you
please, Sacred or common, it does not amount to two foot. So the height of the
greatest Mountains, from bottom to top, must not be thirty foot, or ten paces:
according to this New Hypothesis. Who ever measured Mountains at this rate? The
modern Mathematicians allow for their height a mile perpendicular, upon a
moderate computation; and that makes 3000 foot. How then could waters that were
not 30 foot high, cover Mountains that were 3000 foot high? That the highest
Mountains of the Earth were covered with the waters, you may see expressed more
fully in the precedent verse. And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the
Earth. Genesis 7. 19.
And all the high Hills that were under the whole Heaven were covered. There
can scarce be words more plain and comprehensive. The Excepter says, the
Scripture tells us, as plainly as it can speak, that the waters were but
fifteen cubits high from the common surface of the Earth. And I say, The
Scripture tells us as plainly as it can speak, That, all the high Hills under
the whole Heaven, were covered with water. And it must be a strange sort of
Geometry, that makes fifteen cubits of water reach to the top of the highest
Hills. Lastly, the same History of Moses says, the tops of the Mountains were
discovered, when the waters begun to decrease, Genesis 8. 5. Is not that a plain
demonstration that they were covered before, and covered with those waters.

We may therefore safely conclude two things. First, that this new Hypothesis,
besides all other faults, is contrary to the general exposition of the text of
Moses This he acknowledges, p. 325. (We expound a Text or two of Scripture so
as none ever did; and deserting the common received sense, put an unusual Gloss
upon them, not to say, (...), a private interpretation,) and p. 359.
Secondly, that it is contrary to the general recei'd Doctrine of the Deluge.
And if he has delivered a doctrine, contrary to these two methinks, it should
be hard for him to maintain his ground, and not pronounce at the same time,
what he dreads so much to speak, That the Church of God has ever gone on in an
irrational way of explaining the Deluge.

But let us reflect a little upon this Fifteen-cubit Deluge; to see what figure
it would make, or what execution it would do upon mankind and upon other
Creatures. If you will not believe Moses as to the overflowing of the
Mountains, at least, I hope, you will believe him as to the universal
destruction made by the Deluge. Hear his words, Genesis 7. 21, 22, 23. we will take
only the last verse, which is this, And every living substance was destroyed,
which was upon the face of the ground. Both man and cattle, and creeping
things, and the fowl of the heavens; and they were destroyed from the Earth:
and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the Ark. Now I
would gladly know how this could be verifyed in a fifteen-cubit Deluge. The
birds would naturally fly to the tops of Trees, when the ground was wet. And
the Beasts would retire by degrees to the Mountains and higher parts of the
Earth, as the lower begun to be overflowed; and if no waters could reach them
there, how were they all destroyed, while they had so many Sanctuaries and
places of refuge?

Or if you suppose some of these Creatures had not wit enough to save
themselves, (though their wit and instincts lie chiefly in that) at least
mankind would not be so stupid: when men see the waters begin to rise, they
could not fail to retire into Mountains. And though the upper stories of their
houses might be sufficient to save them from fifteen cubits of water; yet if
fear made them think themselves not secure there, whither could it drive them,
but still into higher places. And an House seated upon an Eminency, or a Castle
upon a Rock, would be always a safe retreat from this diminutive Deluge. I
speak all this upon the suppositions of the Excepter, who allows not only
Mountains and Rocks, p. 215, 216, 292, etc.
but also Castles and Cities before the Deluge: built of good Timber, and
Stone, and Iron, and such substantial materials. But how in such a case, and in
such a state of things, all mankind (except Noah and his Family) should be
destroyed by fifteen cubits of water, is a lump of Incredibilities, too hard
and big for me to swallow.

But there is still another difficulty, that we have not mentioned. As those
that were upon the Land might easily save themselves from ruin, so those that
were upon the Sea, in ships, would never come in danger. For what would it
signify to them, if the Sea was made a few fathoms deeper, by these new
waters? It would bear their vessels as well as it did before, and would be no
more to them than a Springtide. And lastly how shall we justify the Divine
Wisdom, which gave such punctual orders, for the building of an Ark, to save
Noah, and a set of Creatures, for a new World: when there were so many more
easy and obvious ways to preserve them, without that trouble?

These objections, in my opinion, are so plain and full, that it is not needful
to add any more. Nor to answer such evasions as the new Theorist attempts to
make to some of them. As for instance, to that plain objection from Moses's
words, p. 330.
that the Mountains were covered with the waters, he says, first, that it is a
Synecdoche, where the whole is put for a part. Or Secondly, it is an Hyperbole:
where more is said than understood. Or Thirdly, it is a Poetical History. Or
Lastly, if none of these will do, p. 332, 333.
by the Tops of the Mountains is to be understood the bottoms of the Mountains:
and that cures all. The truth is, he has taken a great deal of pains in the
next Chapter to cure and incurable Hypothesis. We will give you but one
instance more. It Is about the appearance of the tops of the Mountains at the
decrease of the Deluge. Which argues strongly that they were covered in the
Deluge. But take it in his own words, p. 337.
with the answer, It is recorded, Genesis 8. 5. that the waters decreased
continually until the tenth month, and on the first day of the month, WERE THE
TOPS OF THE MOVNTAINS SEEN. Now if the mountains had not been quite under
water, and so invisible for the time they were overwhelmed; how could they be
said to become visible again, or to be seen upon the Floods going off? This is
a plain and bold objection. And after two answers to it, which he seems to
distrust, his 3 d and last is this: p. 339.
If these two considerations will not satisfy, we must carry on the enquiry a
little further, and seek for a Third. And truly some one or other must needs be
found out. -- Thirdly, therefore we consider: that the tops of the mountains
may be said to be seen, at the time mentioned, upon account of their EMERGENCY
OVT OF DARKNESS, NOT OVT OF WATERS. This is his final Answer. The tops of the
Mountains, at the decrease of the Deluge, were seen: not that they were covered
before with water, says he, but with darkness. Where finds he this account?
it is neither in the Text nor in reason. If it was always so dark, and the tops
of the Mountains and Rocks naked and prominent every where, how could the Ark
avoid them in the darkness? Moreover, If the Deluge was made in that gentle way
that he supposes, I see no reason to imagine, that there would be darkness,
after the forty-days-rain. For these rains being fallen, and all the Vapors and
clouds of the Air, discharged, methinks there should have ensued an
extraordinary clearness of the Air: as we often see after rainy seasons. Well,
it is true: But the rains, he supposes, were no sooner fallen, but the Sun
retracted them again in Vapors: with that force and swiftness that it kept the
Air in perpetual darkness. Thus he says afterward. p. 341.
He Is mightily beholden to the Sun, upon many accounts: and the Sun is no less
beholden to him: for he gives him a miraculous power to raise Mountains, and
draw up Waters. It Is well the Sun did not presently fall to his old work again,
of raising Mountains out of this moist Earth: as the Excepter says he did, when
the Earth was first drained. That he contented himself now to suck up the
Waters only, See chapter 10.
and let the Earth alone: We are not a little beholden to him for this. For he
seems to have had the same power and opportunity, at the decrease of the
Deluge, of making new ravages upon the Earth, that he had before when it was
first drained. But let us see, how or when, these waters were sucked up, or
resolved into vapors.

Upon the expiration of the 40 days rain, whether was the Air purged of Vapors
and clear, or no? Yes, it was purged. He says ( p. 343.) The Atmosphere was
never so exhausted of Vapors, and never so thin: as when the waters were newly
come down. Then in that clear Air, the tops of the Mountains might have been
seen, if they lay above water. But Moses says, it was in the Tenth Month that
they begun to be seen, Genesis 8. 5.
when the Waters were decreased; 'twas therefore the Waters, not the gross Air,
that hindered the sight of them before. And according to this Method of the
Excepter, after the first Forty days, the Deluge begun to decrease. For the Sun
forthwith set his Engines a work, and resolved the Waters into vapor and
exhalations, at such a rate, p. 341.
that he presently made all the Atmosphere dark with thick Mists and Clouds:
and, in proportion, lessened the Waters of the deluge. But we do not read in
Moses of any abatement in the Deluge, till the end of one hundred and fifty
days; ( Genesis 8. 3.) which is four Months after this term. The truth is, The
whole notion of spending the Waters of the Deluge by Evaporation, is no better
than what the Excepter suspected it would be thought: p. 343.
A mere fancy, a whimsical groundless figment. For what could the Sun do, in
the Northern and Southern parts of the World, toward the exhaling of these
Waters? And in the temperate Climates, why should they not fall again in Rains,
(if he had a power to exhale them) as they do now? Was not the Earth in the
same position, and the Sun of the same force? Besides, where does he find this
notion in Scripture, that the Waters of the Deluge were consumed by
Evaporation? Moses says, the Waters returned from off the Earth, in going and
returning: Genesis 8. 3, 5. that is, after frequent reciprocations, they settled at
length in their Channels. Where bounds were set them, that they might not pass
over: that they return not again to cover the Earth. Seeing therefore this
notion has no foundation, either in Scripture or reason, it is righty enough
styled, in the Excepter's words, a mere fancy, and groundless figment.

But I think we have had enough of these shifts and evasions. p. 303.
Let us now proceed to the 2 d. part of his new Hypothesis, which is this: That
the Abyss or Tehom-Rabbah, which was broken open at the Deluge, and (together
with the Rains) made the Flood, was nothing but the Holes and Caverns of Rocks
and Mountains: which opened their mouths at that time, and poured out a great
quantity of Water. To support this new notion of Tehom-Rabbah, he alleges but
one single Text of Scripture: Psalm. 78. 15. He clave the Rocks in the
Wilderness, and gave them drink, as out of the Great Depths. That is, copiously
and abundantly, as if it were out of the great Deep. So the next Verse implies,
and so it is generally understood. As you may see both by Interpreters, and
also by the Septuagint and Vulgate Translations, and those of the Chaldee
Paraphrase and the Syriack. But the Excepter, by all means, will have these
holes in the Rocks to be the same with the Mosaical Abyss, or Great Deep, that
was broken open at the Deluge. So the Great Deep was not one thing, or one
continued Cavity, as Moses represents it, but ten thousand holes, separate and
distant one from another. Neither must the Great Deep, according to him,
signify a low place, but an high place. For he confesses these Caverns were
higher than the common level of the Earth. p. 303. But though these Caverns be
called Deeps, we must not take them for profound places, that went down into
the Earth, below the common Surface of it: on the contrary, they were situate
above it.
But I do not see, how, with any tolerable propriety or good sense, that, which
is higher than the Surface of the Earth, can be called the Great Deep. An
Abyss, in the Earth, or in the Water, is certainly downwards, in respect of
their common Surface. As much as a Pit is downwards. And what is downwards from
us, we cannot suppose to be above us, without confounding all dimensions, and
all names, of things. Calling that low, which is high: a Mountain a Valley, or
a Garret a Cellar.

Neither is there any thing in this Text, Psalm. 78. 15. that can justly induce
us to believe the Great Abyss to be the same thing with Caverns in Rocks. For
whether you suppose it to be noted here as a miraculous thing, that God should
give them Water out of a Rock, or out of a FLINT Psalm. 114. 7, 8. Tremble thou
Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, Which
turned the Rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of Waters.
Number. 20. 10, 11. And Moses and Aaron gathered the Congregation together before
the Rock, and he said unto them, Hear now you rebels: must we fetch you water
out of this Rock? And Moses lift up his hand, and with his rod he smote the
Rock twice: and the Water came out abundantly.
, as plentifully, as if it had been out of the Great Abyss. Or whether you
understand the original of Fountains to be noted here: which are said in
Scripture to come from the Sea, or the great Abyss; neither of these senses
make any thing to the purpose of the new Hypothesis, and yet they are the
fairest and easiest sense that can be put upon the words: and that which agrees
best with other places of Scripture, where the same matter of fact, or the same
History is related. And therefore there can be no necessity, from the Text, of
changing the general notion and signification of Deep or Abyss. Both from that
which it has in common use, and that which it has in Scripture-use.

I say, as in the common use of words, Deep or Abyss signifies some low or
inferior place: So the general use of it in Scripture, is in the same sense.
Either to signify the Sea, or some subterraneous place. Who shall descend into
the Abyss or Deep: says the Apostle, Romans 10. 7. Is that as much, as if he had
said, Who shall ascend into the holes of the Rocks? And when Jacob speaks of
the blessings of the Abyss, or of the Deep, he calls them the blessings of the
Deep that lies under: Genesis 49. 25. In like manner, Moses himself calls it the
Deep that coucheth beneath: Deuteronomy. 33. 13. And I know no reason why we should
not understand the same Deep there, that he mentioned before in the History of
the Deluge. Which therefore was subterraneous, as this is. Then as for the
other use of the word, namely, for the Sea, or any part of the Sea, (whose
bottom is always lower than the level of the Earth) that is the most common use
of it in Scripture. And I need not give you Instances, which are every where
obvious.

One must needs think it strange therefore, that any Man of judgment should
break thorough, both the common use of a word, and so many plain Texts of
Scripture that show the signification of it, for the sake of one Text; which,
at most, is but dubious. And then lay such stress upon that new signification,
as to found a new doctrine upon it. And a doctrine that is neither supported by
reason, nor agrees with the History of the Deluge. For, as we noted before, at
the decrease of the Deluge, the Waters are said to return from off the Earth:
Genesis 8. 3. Did they not return to the places from whence they came? but if
those places were the Caverns in the Rocks, whose mouths lay higher than the
Surface of the Deluge, as he says they did: p. 303, 305.
I see no possibility of the Waters returning into them. But the Excepter has
found out a mavelous invention to evade this argument. He will have the
returning of the Waters, to be understood of their returning into their
Principles, (that is, into vapors) not to their Places. In good time: So the
Dove's returning, was her returning into her Principles: that is, into an Egg,
not into the Ark. Subtleties ill-founded, argue two things, wit and want of
judgment. Moses speaks as plainly of the local return of the Waters, in going
and returning; as of the local going and returning of the Raven and Dove. See
Genesis 8. 3, and 5. compared with Verse 7 th. and 9 th.

Lastly, That we may end this Discourse; the whole notion of these Water-pots
in the tops of Mountains, and of the broaching of them at the Deluge, is a
groundless imagination. What reason have we to believe, that there were such
Vessels then, more than now: if there was no Fraction of the Earth, at the
Deluge, to destroy them. And he ought to have gagged these Casks, (according to
his own rule chapter 3.
) and told us the number and capacity of them, that we might have made some
judgment of the effect. Besides, if the opening the Abyss at the Deluge, had
been the opening of Rocks, why did not Moses express it so: and tell us, that
the Rocks were cloven, and the waters gushed out, and so made the Deluge? This
would have been as intelligible, if it had been true, as to tell us that the
Tehom-Rabbah was broken open. But there is not one word of Rocks, or the
cleaving of Rocks, in the History of the Flood. Upon all accounts therefore, we
must conclude, that this Virtuoso might have as well suspected, that his whole
Theory of the Deluge, as one part of it, would be accounted a mere fancy, p.
343.
and groundless figment.

CHAP. XVI.
THIS Chapter is made up of Eight Objections, against his own Hypothesis. And
those that have a mind to see them, may read them in the Author. I have taken
as much notice of them, as I thought necessary, in the precedent Chapter: and
therefore leave the Excepter now to deal with them all together. I omitted one
objection ( p. 311.) concerning the shutting up of the Abyss, and the Fountains
of the Abyss, because it was answered before in the English Theory, p. 104.
namely, There were fountains in the Abyss, as much as Windows in Heaven: and
those were shut up, as well as these; that is, ceased to act, and were put into
a condition to continue the Deluge no longer.

CHAP. XVII.
THERE is nothing in this Chapter against the Truth of the Theory, but the
Author is blamed for believing it to be true. I think he had been more
blameworthy, if he had troubled the World with a Theory which he did not
believe to be true: and taken so much pains to compose, what he thought himself
no better than a Romance. As to what the Theorist has said in reference to his
assurance or belief of the Theory, which the Excepter calls positiveness: upon
examination, I cannot find any thing amiss in his conduct, as to that
particular. For, first, he imposes his sentiments upon no man: He leaves every
one their full liberty of dissenting. Preface to the Reader, at the end.
Lastly, in things purely speculative, as these are, and no ingredients of our
Faith, it is free to differ from one another, in our opinions and sentiments;
And so I remember S. Austin has observed, upon this very subject of Paradise.
Wherefore as we desire to give no offense our selves, so neither shall we take
any at the difference of judgment in others. Provided, this liberty be mutual,
and that we all agree to study PEACE, TRUTH, and a GOOD LIFE. And as the
Theorist imposes his Sentiments upon no man, so, as to matter of certainty, he
distinguishes always betwixt the substance of the Theory, and particularities.
So, at the latter end of the First Book, Eng. Theor. p. 150.
this profession is made; I mean this only, speaking about certainty, as to the
general parts of the Theory. For as to particularities, I look upon them only
as problematical: and accordingly I affirm nothing therein, but with a power of
revocation, and a liberty to change my opinion when I shall be better informed.
And accordingly, he says in another place: I know how subject we are to
mistakes, Eng. Theor. p. 96.
in these great and remote things, when we descend to particularities. But I am
willing to expose the Theory to a full trial, and to show the way for any to
examine it, provided they do it with equity and sincerity. I have no other
design than to contribute my endeavors to find out truth, etc. Lastly, To cite
no more places, he says, Eng. Theor p. 288.
There are many particular explications that are to be considered with more
liberty and latitude: and may, perhaps, upon better thoughts and better
observations, be corrected, etc. The Theorist having thus stated and bounded
his belief or assurance, and given liberty of dissenting to all others,
according to their particular judgments or inclinations, I see nothing unfair
or undecent in this conduct. How could the Observator have made it more
unexceptionable? Would he have had the Theorist to have professed Skepticism: and
declared that he believed his own Theory no more than a Romance or fantastical
Idea? That had been, both to belly his own conscience, and to mock the World. I
remember I have heard a good Author once wish, That there were an Act of
Parliament, that whoever Printed a Book, should, when he took a License, Swear,
that he thought the Contents of his Book to be true, as to substance. And I
think such a method would keep off a great many impertinencies. We ought not to
trouble the World with our roving thoughts, merely out of an itch of
Scripturiency, when we do not believe our selves what we Write. I must always
profess my assent to the substance of that Theory: and am the more confirmed in
it, by the weakness and inefficacy of these Exceptions.

We need not take notice of the particular citations he makes use of, to prove
this positiveness of the Theorist. For they only affirm, what we still own,
That the Theory is more than an Idea: or that it is not an Imaginary Idea: or
that it is a reality. And, together with its proofs from Scripture: especially
from S. Peter: has more than the certainty of a bare Hypothesis, or a moral
certainty. These are the expressions he cites, and we own all, that, in fair
construction, they amount to. And find no reason, either from the nature of the
thing, or from his objections, to change our opinion, or make any Apology for
too much positiveness.

I wish the Excepter had not more to answer for, as to his Partiality: than the
Theorist has, for his positiveness. And now that we draw to a conclusion, it
will not be amiss to observe, how well the Excepter has answered that
character, which he gave himself at the beginning of his work. These are his
words. p. 43.
This I will endeavor to do, namely, to examine the Theory, with all
sincerity; and that only as a Friend and Servant to Truth. And therefore with
such Candor, Meekness, and Modesty, as becomes one who assumes and glories in
so fair a Character: And also with such respect to the Virtuoso who wrote the
Theory, as may testify to the world, that I esteem his Learning, while I
question his Opinion. It Is of little consequence what opinion he has of the
Virtuoso, as he calls him. But let us see with what sincerity and meekness, he
has examined his Work. As to his sincerity, we have given you some proofs of it
before ( p. 26.) both in his defective and partial citations: and also, in his
never taking notice of the last Edition of the Theory: where several citations
he has made use of, are not extant. Now, by his own Rule, he ought to have had
regard to this; for he says, ( p. 356.) He will there take notice only of the
English Edition, as coming out after the other: and so with more deliberation
and mature thoughts of things. By the same reason, say I, he ought to have
taken notice of the last Edition of the Theory, as being the last product, and
the most deliberate and mature thoughts of the Author. But this, it seems, was
not for his purpose.

So much for his Sincerity: Now for his Meekness. So impatient he is to fall
upon his Adversary, that he begins his charge in the Preface: and a very fierce
one it is. ( p. iii.) The Theorist has assaulted Religion, and that in the
very foundation of it. Here I expected to have found two or three Articles of
the Creed assaulted or knocked down by the Theory. But that is not the case, it
seems: he understands something more general: namely, our contradicting
Scripture. For so he explains himself in the next Page. In several things (as
will appear by our discourse) it contradicts Scripture; and by too positive
asserting the truth of its Theorems, makes that to be false, upon which our
religion is founded. Let us remember, that this contradicting Scripture, here
pretended, is only in natural things: and also observe, how far the Excepter
himself, in such things, has contradicted Scripture. As for other reproofs
which he gives us, those that are more gentle, I easily pass over: but
some-where he makes our assertions too bold an affront to Scripture. p. 78.
And in another place represents them, as (either directly, p. 286.
or consequentially) Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: which is the
unpardonable Sin: Matt. 12. 31.

There is no pleasure in repeating such expressions, and dreadful sentences.
Let us rather observe, if the Excepter has not made himself obnoxious to them.
But first, we must state the case truly, that so the blame may not fall upon
the Innocent. The case therefore is this, Whether, to go contrary to the Letter
of Scripture, in things that relate to the natural World, be destroying the
foundations of Religion: affronting Scripture: and blaspheming the Holy Ghost.
In the Case proposed, We take the Negative, and stand upon that Plea. But the
Excepter has taken the Affirmative: and therefore all those heavy charges must
fall upon himself, if he go contrary to the Literal sense of Scripture, in his
Philosophical opinions or assertions. And that he has done so, we will give
you some Instances, out of this Treatise of his: Page 314. He says, It is most
absurd to think, that the Earth is the center of the World. Then the Sun stands
still, and the Earth moves, according to his doctrine. But this is expressly
contrary to Scripture, in many places. The Sun rejoices, Ps. 19. 5, 6. Ios. 10.
12, 13.
as a strong Man, to run his race, says David: His going forth is from the end
of the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it. 2 Kin. 20. 10, 11. Isa. 38.
8.
No such thing, says the Excepter: The Sun has no race to run: he is fixed in
his seat, without any progressive motion. He has no course from one end of the
Heavens to the other. In like manner, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, says
the Sacred Author: and the Sun stood still. No, says the Excepter, 'twas the
Earth stood still, upon that miracle: for the Sun always stood still. And it is
absurd, yea most absurd, p. 157.
to think otherwise. And he blames Tycho Brahe for following Scripture in this
particular. Now is not this, in the language of the Excepter, to destroy the
foundations of Religion: To affront Scripture: and blaspheme against the Holy
Ghost? But this is not all. The Excepter says, ( Chap. 10.) the Sun raised up
the Mountains on the 3 d. Day. And the Sun was not in being till the 4 th. Day:
according to Scripture: Genesis 1. 14. The Moon also, which according to
Scripture, was not created till the 4 th. Day: he says, would hinder the
formation of the Earth, which was done the 3 d. Day. p. 74.
Lastly, In his new Hypothesis, he makes the Waters of the Deluge, to be but
fifteen Cubits higher than the Plain, or common Surface of the Earth. Genesis 7.
19, 20.
Which Scripture affirms expressly to have covered the tops of the highest
Hills, Genesis 8. 5.
or Mountains, under Heaven. These two things are manifestly inconsistent. The
Scripture says, they covered the tops of the highest Mountains: And the
Excepter says, they reach but fifteen Cubits, about, or upon the skirts of
them. This, I think, is truly to contradict Scripture: or, according to his
talent of loading things with great words, p. 216.
This is not only flatly, but loudly contradictory to the most express word of
the Infallible God.

These observations, I know, are of small use, unless perhaps to the Excepter
himself. But if you please, upon this occasion, let us reflect a little upon
the Literal style of Scripture: and the different authority of that style,
according to the matter that it treats of. The subject matter of Scripture is
either such, as lies without the cognizance and comprehension of humane reason,
or such as lies within it. If it be the former of these, it is what we call
properly and purely Revelation. And there we must adhere to the literal style,
because we have nothing to guide us but that. Such is the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation: wherein we can have nothing to authorize our
deviation from the Letter and words of Scripture. And therefore the
School-Divines, who have spun those Doctrines into a multitude of Niceties and
Subtleties, had no warrant for what they did, and their conclusions are of no
authority.

The second matter or subject of Scripture, is such, as falls under the view
and comprehension of Reason, more or less: and, in the same proportion, gives
us a liberty to examine the Literal sense: how far it is consistent with
reason, and the faculties of our mind. Of this nature there are several things
in the Holy Writings, both Moral, Theological, and Natural, wherein we recede
from the Letter, when it is manifestly contrary to the dictates of reason. I
will give some Instances in every kind. First, as to Moral things. Our Savior
says, Mat. 5. 29* 30.
If thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it out. If thy right hand offend thee, cut
it off. There is no Man that thinks himself obliged to the Literal practice of
this doctrine: And yet it is plainly delivered, you see, in these terms, in the
Gospel. Nay, which is more, our Savior backs and enforces the letter of this
doctrine with a Reason: For it is profitable for thee that one of thy members
should perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell. As if he
had intended that his Precept should have been really executed according to the
Letter. In like manner, our Savior says, If any man will sue thee at Law, and
take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also. And yet there is no Christian
so good-natured, as to practice this: nor any Casuist so rigid, as to enjoin
it, according to the Letter. Other Instances you may see in our Savior's
Sermon upon the Mount, where we do not scruple to lay aside the Letter, when it
is judged contrary to the Light of Nature, or impracticable in humane Society.

In all other things also, that lie within the sphere of humane reason, we are
allowed to examine their practicability, or their credibility. To instance in
something Theological: The words of Consecration in the Sacrament. Our Savior,
when he instituted the last Supper, used these words; This is my Body: taking
the Bread into his hand. Which words joined with that action, are very formal
and expressive. Yet we do not scruple to forsake the Literal sense, and take
the words in another way. But upon what warrant do we this? Because the literal
sense contains an absurdity: Because it contradicts the light of Nature?
Because it is inconsistent with the Idea of a Body, and so destroys it self. In
like manner, upon the Idea of the Divine Nature, we dispute Absolute
Reprobation, and an Eternity of Torments, against the letter of Scripture. And,
Lastly, Whether the Resurrection-Body consists of the same individual parcels
and particles, whereof the mortal Body consisted, before it was putrified or
dispersed. Phil. 4. 3. Apoc. 3. 5. and 20. 12.
And whether the Book of Life are to be understood in a literal sense.

The last Head is of such things as belong to the Natural World. And to this
may be reduced innumerable Instances, where we leave the literal sense, if
inconsistent with Science, or experience. And the truth is, if we should follow
the Vulgar Style and literal sense of Scripture, we should all be
Anthropomorphites, as to the Nature of God: And as to the Nature of his works
in the external Creation, we must renounce Philosophy and Natural Experience,
if the descriptions and accounts given in Scripture, concerning the Heavens,
the Earth, the Sea, and other parts of the World, be received as accurate and
just representations of the state and properties of those Bodies. Neither is
there any danger lest this should affect or impeach the Divine Veracity; for
Scripture never undertook, nor was ever designed to teach us Philosophy, or the
Arts and Sciences. And whatsoever the Light of Nature can reach and comprehend,
is improperly the Subject of Revelation. But some men, out of love to their own
ease, and in defense of their ignorance, are not only for a Scripture-Divinity,
but also for a Scripture-Philosophy. It Is a cheap and compendious way, and
saves them the trouble of farther study or examination.

Upon the whole, you see, it is no fault to recede from the literal sense of
Scripture, but the fault is when we leave it without a just cause. As it is no
fault for a man to separate from a Church: or for a Prince to make war against
his Neighbor: but to do the one or the other, without a just cause, is a real
fault. We all leave the literal sense in certain cases, and therefore that
alone is no sufficient charge against any man. But he that makes a separation,
if I may so call it, without good reasons, he is truly obnoxious to censure.
The great result of all therefore, is this, to have some common Rule to direct
us, when every one ought to follow, and when to leave, the Literal Sense. And
that Rule which is generally agreed upon by good Interpreters, is this, Not to
leave the literal Sense, when the subject matter will bear it, without
absurdity or incongruity. This Rule I have always proposed to my self, and
always endeavored to keep close to it. But some inconsiderate minds make every
departure from the Letter, let the Matter or Cause be what it will, to be an
affront to Scripture. And there, where we have the greatest liberty, I mean in
things that relate to the Natural world, They have no more indulgence or
moderation, than if it was an intrenchment upon the Articles of Faith, In this
particular I cannot excuse the present Animadverter; yet I must needs say, he
is a very Saint in comparison of another Animadverter, who has writ upon the
same subject, but neither like a Gentleman: nor like a Christian: nor like a
Scholar. And such Writings answer themselves.

FINIS.

