A RATIONAL METHOD For proving the Truth of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, As it is
Professed in the Church of England.

In Answer to A Rational Compendious Way to Convince without Dispute all
persons whatsoever Dissenting from the true Religion, By I. K.

By Gilbert Burnet.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most Excellent Majesty,
M DC LXXV.

To I. K.
SIR,
ABout two or three months ago a Noble Lady gave me your Book with a Letter
that addressed it to me, wherein after some civilities I was desired to peruse
the Book, and made hope I should reap great advantages from it; and indeed if I
had not learned from the Inspired Preacher that there is nothing new under the
Sun, or had been easily catched to believe Novelties, a Title and Preface that
promised so much should have made me apprehend I had got sent me the
Philosophers stone in Divinity; and truly so short, so sure, so easy and so
general a Method as you think you offer for curing and preventing all
distempers about Religion, deserved to be entertained with equal degrees of Joy
and Astonishment. What a happiness were it to Mankind after all the expense of
Blood, all the toil and sweat of Care, all the Speculations and Labors of the
Learned, and the Industry and endeavors of Statesmen for resolving the doubts
and difficulties about Religion, to find a shorter and a safer way to get out
of that trouble? But as the high pretenses and promises of the Spagiricks make
sober people afraid to meddle with them, and do often bring disesteem and neglect
on the Medicines, because they are overvalued: so I am afraid your Book shall
have the same fate with clearer and unpossessed minds.

And I must confess my self strongly prejudiced against these hudling Methods,
so that I always apprehend some Legerdemain from them. And the Title of your
Book did very naturally lead me to this thought, it being a form of Speech we
in England call a Bull, A Rational way to convince without any Dispute, for a
Rational way of Conviction is when upon a full hearing and considering all can
be said on both sides of any debate, the evidence of Reason determines our
persuasion. And to form an opinion after we have only considered the grounds of
one side, is as unequal and unjust, as for a Judge to pass sentence when he has
heard but one party. Now Disputing is only the considering with an even
balance what all parties say, and the suspending our Verdict till they have
finished their Evidence. It is therefore no Rational way but a blind and
unreasonable one that bars Disputing; nor can it be a Conviction, but only a
prepossession when we are led into any Opinion, before all that can in reason
be said has been examined by us. But I suppose by Dispute you meant the eager
and hot contests of wrangling Disputants, who espousing a party do with all the
tricks and disingenuities of Sophistry and the petulant Incivilities of rude
treatment, manage debates as persons more concerned for glory and victory than
for truth; and rather than confess an escape and disclaim an error, will with
all the trifling arts of their embased Logic, defend every thing which either
they themselves have once said, or that party they adhere to has maintained.

But as I passed from your Title through your Preface to your Book, I must
freely confess I did not find in it such fair and clear Reasoning as you
promised; and I saw you had a great deal of reason to avoid Disputing: for
nothing but a blind easy yielding to what you delivered could save your Book
from being rejected. And this seemed to me so obvious, that I judged it
needless to engage in any Answer to it, and so laid it aside. But a few days
ago a worthy and learned friend of mine told me many wished some would be at
the pains to Answer it, and desired me to do it; and when I told him how it was
brought to my hands, he thought I was under some obligation to send you the
reasons that lay in my way and kept me from yielding to this new Method of
Conviction. I was the more easily persuaded to it, that my present
circumstances did leave me at a greater freedom of disposing of my time than I
have enjoyed for some years.

The starched formality of Dedications is as much out of esteem with me, as out
of date in this freer age; but it was natural to address this to your self
though utterly unknown to me, by any other Character than what your Book gives
of you, and so I am in no hazard of making personal reflections. I shall first
give you my sense of your Method in all the Six points you go through, before I
take any notice of what is in your Preface, which I shall consider last of all,
and with the same breath shall offer a Rational way of managing all Disputes
about Religion so, that after a full hearing of what may be said we may arrive
at a clear and well grounded Conviction in matters of Religion. I hope you will
consider what I go to lay before you with a mind calm and undisturbed, and
believe that in this I am acting the part of one who is sincerely

Your Friend and Servant, Gilbert Burnet.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guliel. Wigan.
Feb. 27. 1674/5.
THE CONTENTS.
CHap. I. It is considered if J. K. does prove convincingly that there is a
God. Page 1. Chap. II. It is considered if J. K. proves convincingly that there
must be some true Religion. p. 11. Chap. III. It is considered if J. K. proves
convincingly that there must be some true Revealed Religion. p. 17. Chap. IV.
It is considered if J. K. has proved convincingly the truth of the Christian
Religion. p. 23. Chap. V. It is considered if J. K. proves convincingly that
the Roman Catholic Religion is true. p. 33. Chap. VI. It is considered if J.
K. proves convincingly that every thing the Roman Church teaches as an Article
of Faith, must be true. p. 57. Chap. VII. Of the supposed inconveniences J. K.
imagines in the want of a true Church to judge Infallibly, and of the right
methods of finding truth p. 65.
THE INTRODUCTION.
NOthing does give both occasion and nourishment to Error and Mistake more than
the being prevailed on by the heats of fancy without bringing them under the
severer trial of Reason; nor do our Imaginative powers in any case more
certainly impose upon us, than when they present Notions to us which do at once
surprise with their novelty, and delight with their apparent usefulness: and
none are sooner caught with such a bait than men of Speculative heads,
accustomed to Disputes and to the little tricks of Logic; for they being
habituated to so many Axioms which pass among them for sacred Truths, think, if
they can found a discourse on some received Maxim, all is sure work, and have
not distinguished aright betwixt the Colors of Truth which Wit, Eloquence and
Sophistry can by a deceiving Perspective cast on the falsest Propositions, and
the close Contextures of Reason derived from the common Notices of Truth which
dwell on the minds of all men.

The subtleties of the Schoolmen did well enou^h in an Age that questioned
nothing; but n^w that men are thoroughly awake, and having thrown off the
prejudices of Custom and Education call for a fuller Evidence, they are not
the proper men to deal with this Age: their ignorance of mankind makes them
offer many things as demonstrations, which some even of the most trifling
pretenders to Wit can undo and bl^w away; and their being accustomed to their
own Topics, not knowing how much they are rejected by men of severer and more
searching Understandings, makes them often beg the one half of the question to
prove the other. Therefore whoever would deal with our Hectors in matters of
Religion, must know men as well as Noti^n^ and Books.

And as of (...) Plato thought the Study of Geometry a necessary preparation to
the understanding the higher Mysteries of his Philosophy: So I have often
judged an acquaintance with Mathematical Arts and Sciences a fit and almost
necessary preparation for a right understanding and managing Theological
debates; since these teach us to distinguish Critically betwixt truth and
falsehood, and practice a man into an exact considering of every thing that is
proposed to him.

The want of this, or at least a great overliness in it appears in J. K's late
Book, wherein he thinks he leads his Reader in a Mathematical method through a
great many Propositions, every one of which he imagines he has proved,
beginning from a very plain unquestioned one, That something is True, and
ending it in a very fruitful one, That every thing the Roman Church teaches as
an Article of Faith must certainly be True. Undoubtedly if his method be good,
that Church is infinitely beholding to him for its support, having offered an
easier and clearer method for bringing the world under her Authority than any
yet thought on. This he concludes as firm and sure of all sides; and by a clear
way of Analyticks offers a Resolution of any Theorem or Problem in Divinity
even to the giving the Quadrature of that Circle their Church is forced to run
round in, proving her own Authority from the Scriptures, and the Authority of
the Scriptures from her own Testimony.

I shall without any further Introduction enter into a survey of the Six Points
proposed by J. K. to be proved, without examining the unwariness of his
expressions in any of them; in which though he lies often open, yet it is of so
little importance to quarrel about Words or forms of Speech, that I shall not
stand upon them: being also careful to avoid the engaging in any debate that
may be personal betwixt him and me, and therefore shall confine my discourse to
the Six Points he has gone through.

CHAP. I. It is considered, if J. K. does prove convincingly that there is a
God.
J. K. thinks he has proved the being of a God, by this progression of Reason,
If something be true, then this is true, That there is something better than
another; which if any man deny he denies himself better than an Ass or a Block,
and so is either a mad man or a fool. Now if something be better than other,
then there is a best of all things; and every thing is better as it comes
nearer that which is best, and this best of all things is God.

Des Carts is blamed by many for having left out all other Arguments for the
proof of a Deity, setting up only One, which how strong soever it may be, it is
a great injury to the Cause he maintains to seem to slight all other proofs may
be brought for so sacred and fundamental a truth: Yet his establishing that
upon a good and solid Foundation does very much qualify any guilt, which is
rather to be imputed to the over-valuing his own Notions than a designed
betraying the Cause he undertook. But upon this occasion the Reader may be
tempted to sever^r C^^sure, when the Foundations of so great a Su^^^structure
are so ill laid, and both the Antecedent and Consequent of this Argument prove
equally weak.

And in the first place, how is it proved, that some things are better than
other things? or does any imagine the Atheists will admit that? On the contrary
they deny there is any thing morally good or evil, and ascribe all the Notions
of good and evil to Education, Custom, the several tempers and interests of
men. And indeed did they acknowledge the Morality of Actions, they should yield
the full half of the Debate, that men ought to be good; which would clearly
make way for proving all the rest. And these men, will without any hesitation
acknowledge themselves no better than Beasts or Blocks, as to any moral
goodness. They will not deny but Matter is more refined in a man, the
Contexture better and the Usefulness greater than in other Animals: but as to
any moral goodness they plainly disclaim it. As though Wood be never so neatly
wrought in a fi^e and useful Cabinet, yet is no better so than when it was an
undressed Plank as to any moral goodness.

Thus it appears that I. K's ignorance of men makes him stumble in his first
attempt, nor is his next more successful; for though some things be better, it
will not follow there is a best: for of every sort of Beings there are some
Individuals better than other; but from that it does not follow there must be a
best of that rank or order of Creatures: because one Horse is swifter, one Dog
better scented, one Lion stronger, therefore must there be a Horse swifter than
all others, a Dog the best scented of any, and a Lion stronger than any other
Lion? This may be applied to all the Species of Creatures: for all the goodness
these people admit, being only a better temper of more nimbly agitated Matter,
though one thing excel another, it is not because it comes nearer the best of
all Beings, nor because it recedes further from the worst of all Beings, but
because it is more wieldy, more apt to serve the several uses and interests of
men; without rising higher to consider any Or^ginal and Standart goodness. Nor
w^ll this any more prove the being of one that is (...) all, than because some
men are sharper sighted, others stronger limb^d, others of a better digestion,
and others of a better tempered health; that therefore there must be one that
h^^ the sharpest sight of all men, the strongest limbs, the best d^gestion and
the most constant health.

Besides, though an Atheist did admit there were some beings Morally better and
worse, this does not prove there must be a best of all Beings; for he may say
that as naturally as Colors fit the eye and Sounds the ear, so some Notions of
good are suitable to the minds of men, and their being better and worse is
nothing but their keeping more close to these Notions, discerning them more
truly and following them more constantly: so that as a man sees well when his
eye does present objects to him in their due Colors and distances, yet this
proves no Deity; in like manner a man is better or worse as he discerns and
follows these common Notices more or less exactly.

Thus far I have considered this Argument, and have found it so weak on all
sides, that no weight is to be laid on it at all. But all this while I have
been put to act a very unpleasant part, when I did but seem to defend Atheism
from any objection is brought against it; but I know nothing that does more
prejudice a good cause, than when it is maintained by arguments palpably weak
and unconcluding; for it makes many overly considerers, and more particularly
those that are already biased and partial, imagine it has no more strength in
it than what it receives from the Arguments by which it was proved* since no
conclusion (as such) can have more truth in it than was in the premises from
which it was deduced. If therefore the proving of a Deity be made good, by an
Argument so fallacious that it must needs appear such at first view, one that
is wickedly partial may from that be sortified in his accursed hopes, that
there is none, because he finds that so much feared truth is so weakly
asserted. But that I do not leave the Atheists in a vain triumph, or seem to
weaken so good a Cause, by blowing away any reasons brought for it without
substituting other and better ones in their room, I shall here say a little for
the conviction of an Atheist.

First then, all men are desired to consider there is no Argument that can so
much as pretend to prove there is no God, or that a supreme being infinitely
perfect is impossible; for all the Atheists offer at, is only to weaken those
Reasons from which the belief of a Deity is inferred: so that still it is
possible there may be a God. And from this every man will see cause to retire
his thoughts inwards to consider what danger he is in, if there be a God and he
continue to deny and despise him; and if it be possible there be a God, for
ought he knows there may be one, since he has no reason to be assured of the
contrary.

If upon this he yield so far as seriously and with even balances to weigh
what shall be offered to him, he is next desired to consider if he find not
within himself the secret apprehensions of a Supreme invisible being, if the
fears of offending him, the desire of his assistance, the joy in the opinion of
being acceptable to him, do not often spring up in his mind, and this even
after all attempts to stifle and repress them. Nor can this be only the effect
of Education, for every man finds by experience that all other things which he
sucked from his breeding can by a little care and attention be so quite
forsaken, that no visage of the first impression shall remain. Since therefore
these thoughts stick closer, there must be somewhat more than Education in the
case.

But this will appear stronger if a man compare the thoughts and common
sentiments of all Nations and Ages as far as either History or writings can
lead us up, with these stirring within his own breast; where finding that all
mankind have agreed in the belief of a Deity, he must needs be convinced there
is some proportion betwixt his Soul and these thoughts from which he is not to
be shaken, though he meet with some few in this or former Ages who have denied
or doubted this truth, for these can never be set up against such vast numbers
as have agreed in this belief, who have been always the most sober, most
serious and considering persons, who have cultivated all Arts and Sciences, and
advanced the good of Mankind more than the whole Tribe of Libertines and
Ruffians, who having abandoned themselves to their sensual appetites and
pleasures, and neglected the improving their minds in any thing that is either
Great or Good, are not to be put in the balance with the Religious. What have
they ever done to better Mankind? On the contrary their Maxims dissolve all the
Nerves of Government, and all the duties we owe one another; and they being
buried in their brutal lusts, have lost that clearness of discerning which men
of more sober tempers have: nor do they ever converse with their own minds, but
study to guard against serious Thoughts, as effects of the Spleen and
Melancholy; and the dissoluteness of their Lives as it depraves their
Understandings, so it makes them partial to those Notions, that may give them
ease and sleep in their licentious practices. And thus he that consults his own
thoughts and the common verdict of all Mankind, will be made acknowledge a
Deity.

And if he open his eyes to look on the visible world, this will furnish him
with many Reasons to believe an invisible power that made it. If we consider
the Revolutions of the heavens, the interchanges of day and night, summer and
winter, the figure of the earth, its division into Sea and Land, by which all
Nations communicate what they abound in to others, the inequalities of Hills
and Valleys, the Lakes and Rivers that moisten the earth, and give drink to
Anim^^^, the many product^o^s of the Earth, the great variety of Plants and
Vegetables with their several uses, besides the more inward riches of the
Earth, Mines and Minerals: what man of common sense can ascribe all this to
Fate or Chance? But the Structure of Animals, the Organs of Sense, the Vessels
of Concoctions, the various Ferments, and the skilfully disposed Channels for
conveying nourishment to all the parts of the Body, raises our wonder higher
which, is at its full height when we examine the parts of man's Body, which
amazed Galen, and made him sing a Hymn to his Maker, upon so astonishing a
Meditation. If the Brain and seat of Memory and Imagination be considered, what
a surprising thing is it to find such a substance the Receptacle of so many
various Impressions as make up all the words of every Language we speak, the
figures of all persons, places and things we have seen or considered, and that
all these be so well disposed that we can draw them out when we please in so
ready and natural an order, and also that all words flow so easily through our
Mouths?

Now this must either be the effect of Fate, or Chance, or of an intelligent
wise Being. Not of Fate, for beside that they cannot explain what that Fate
should be, every thing that flows from a Natural Cause must always operate the
(...) way; but the great diversities of men's Tem^ers, Apprehensions and
Judgments, the difference of their Faces, Eyes, way of Speaking, Writing and
Walking show that they are not the effects of Fate. Nor can so much Regularity
and parts so useful and well*disposed, have run so together by Chance, which
must needs be unequal and unconstant. So that man's Formation must owe its
Original to a wise Being; and that this is not the wisdom of the Father and
Mother, every one knows: therefore there must be some unseen wise Being that
created the Universe, and did not only at first set the several parts of it in
those Channels wherein they still run, but does continue to mould this Matter
according to the designs of his Eternal mind.

All this receives a further Confirmation from the many sudden changes of the
Course of Nature at the command of some extraordinary persons who have forced
her out of her common Methods and Operations, which is an evident demonstration
there is somewhat Superior to Matter and Motion, which can overruled and govern
it. This having appeared often in the sight of many thousands of discerning and
impartial witnesses, who have both confessed and attested the truth of what
they saw and heard, we have no reason to doubt the matter of Fact, and as
little to question the being of a Deity who is Master of the world, and can do
in it and with it what he will.

Thus far have I considered upon what true and solid grounds the belief of a
Deity must rest, which are indeed such that we need not the help of any little
piece of Sophistry to maintain them; they require only a serious and thinking
temper to examine and weigh things in a fair and Rational way, without either
the prejudices of Education or the partialities of lust and interest.

CHAP. II. It is considered, if J. K. proves convincingly that there must be
some true Religion.
THE next step I. K. makes, is to prove that there must be a true Religion,
which he defines, A Doctrine that teaches men in what manner God will be
worshipped by them, and in what matters he will be obeyed by them. Now he
proves this, for if there be a true God, we ought to worship him in what manner
he will be worshipped by, and obey him in what matters he will be obeyed by us,
as subjects and servants reverence and ^bey their Sovereigns and Masters.
Therefore if God be the best and greatest of all things, we are his subjects
and servants, for certainly he is the supreme Governor of the Universe; and
this he thinks none who grant a true God can deny, and this way of Worship must
be assigned by God and men must know it.

This is the substance of what I. K. says on this head, which is so extremely
weak and ill proved that I am amazed he did not see it. For he must remember he
only pretended there was a Being best of all others. Now though that were true,
it will not follow from that, that I must Worship or Obey God, much less that I
am his subject and servant: all that will follow being only, that I ought to
esteem him the best of all Beings; but why Adore or Obey him, and why am I his
servant or subject?

Adoration and Obedience can only be exacted as acts either of Justice,
Gratitude or Interest. If any have a right to my Worship or Obedience, they are
due to him in Justice; or if he have put such Obligations on me that these are
but a proportioned return and acknowledgment of them, then they are due in
Gratitude; or if he be able to confer extraordinary favors, or inflict most
severe punishments, then the avoiding his displeasure and the procuring his
favor are necessary on the account of my own Interest, and so I must study to
please him by Worship and Obedience: but nothing of all this will follow if it
be only proved that there is a best of Beings, which is all I. K. attempted.

And hence it was that though the Epicureans acknowledged such a Deity as he
thinks he has proved, yet they denying both Creation, Providence and another
State, did throw off the care and thoughts of Religion as the effects of fear
and superstition. And I. K. defining Religion to be a Doctrine teaching us to
worship and obey God so as he will have us do, goes to prove there must be a
Religion, because if there be a God, he must be Worshipped and Obeyed so as
pleases him. Now this being his definition of Religion, and by consequence all
one with it, he proves that if there be a God, there must be a Religion, thus:
if there be a true God, there must be a true Religion. And how Sophistical a
way of procedure this is, common sense, not to say Logic, does make appear.
And thus he is again unhappy in this his second step.

But as in the former Section I judged it nenecessary to substitute some better
proofs of a Deity than he gave; so I shall now offer ^ome stronger Arguments to
prove there must be a Religion. And first, if God be the Creator of all things
and the Author of our beings, as was already proved; then we are his subjects
by that right of Creation and owe our Nature, Reason and Life wholly to him.
Therefore as in justice we ought to acknowledge this by our thankful Praises
and Adorations; so we ought by the same justice to give our selves up to him,
and do and suffer what he will have us do and suffer. And this is confirmed by
those impressions of Awe and Reverence which, as was before proved, the
greatest and best, nay and often the worst part of Mankind feel on their
hearts. Which with the checks and pangs of Conscience for sins, shows how
Religion is natural to the Soul, and proportioned to our faculties. Again, if
God created the world and all things in it, he must uphold, preserve and govern
his own workmanship, which the regular course of Nature, with the daily
productions of it, do demonstrate. And it is no less clear from the
extraordinary and miraculous interruptions and changes, which by his great
power are given to the common course of Second causes. Now if there be a
supreme Providence that watches over all humane things, and from whose care
all the blessings o^ this life flow upon us; then we ought to make returns
suitable to such favors, and likewise implore the continuance of them.

Finally, if there be a God that made and governs all things, ^e must be both
so good and so just as to protect and reward all who trust in him and serve
him, this being the natural result of justice and goodness; and there must be
some discrimination between those that worship and obey him, and those that do
not so. Now this is not done in this life; for often those who Fear and Love
him are in great Miseries* Pains and Troubles, and live and die most
uncomfortably, whereas those who dishonor and disobey him* are often in great
honor and esteem, and abound in all outward advantages; nor is there any
visible discrimination in this Life: yet that being inseparable from the notion
of justice and goodness, it must certainly be done at some time or other. Since
therefore it is not in this Life, it must be in another, therefore we must
believe our Souls shall outlive this state. When likewise we consider, that
Matter in all its subtilest refinings and nimblest motions gives no discoveries
of Sense or Cogitation, and yet we feel a Thinking being within us, which we
plainly perceive to be a Being different from Matter both in its actings and
nature, we conclude there is a principle in us that must not necessarily die at
the dissolution of this life. Which is confirmed from innumerable stories of
the Apparitions of some Rational beings separated from Bodies which in all Ages
and places of the world have abounded, and are as certainly attested as ever
any matter of Fact has been. Which shows, that there are Beings distinct from
Matter; and that our Souls are such, their subtle reasonings both Metaphysical
and Mathematical do demonstrate.

Their surviving this Body is also gathered from their frequent ascent above
material Figures and Phantasms in their Conceptions and Inferences; which
shows, they do not so much depend on matter as not to outlive their union with
it. In fine; The common apprehensions which all Thinking men, in all Ages, have
owned, and which appears in the greatest part of all both good and bad at their
death, shows the belief of this is among those common Notices of truth which
are born with the Soul.

From all which I may fairly assume, That there is another state in which our
Souls surviving their union with our Bodies shall be rewarded or punished as
they have deserved well or ill at the hands of the great Creator and Judge of
all men. And therefore if our own interests touch us or prevail upon us, and
the apprehensions of future rewards or punishments work on our fears or hopes,
we must carefully avoid all dishonouring, disobeying or offending this God; and
with the same care we must study to acknowledge our beings are of him and for
him, and that all the blessings of this Life are the effects of his Bounty, for
which we must thank him; and adoring his blessed Attributes and Perfections we
must dedicate our whole Lives to his service: that so we may still enjoy his
favor here, and in the next life receive the rewards of good and faithful
servants.

And thus upon good and solid foundations I have built up this proposition,
That there must be some true Religion.

CHAP III. It is considered if J. K. proves convincingly that there must be
some true Revealed Religion.
J. K. goes on to prove this Religion must be Revealed, which he performs thus:
How can we know Gods will unless he Reveal it to us either immediately or
mediately? For natural Religion teaches only in general that we ought to
Worship and Obey God, but does not teach the particular manner or matters of
this Worship and Obedience: therefore there is a necessity of this Revelation.
Yea, if God had left this to the Choice of every one, yet at least that must be
revealed.

In this Reasoning I. K. has forgot a very necessary distinction of
Revelation, into that which is communicated naturally to the Soul, and that
which is superadded by some extraordinary manifestation or inspiration. In the
former sense it cannot be denied, but it is necessary there be a Revelation of
Religion: but that is not what I. K. drives at. Now he must be very ignorant if
he does not know that the greatest part of the Philosophers believed there were
on the Souls of all men such inscriptions of Truth, that if all should purify
their minds from the defilements Lust superinduced upon them, they should then
clearly discern every thing that the Deity enjoined them; and therefore they
looked upon Inspiration as a degree of madness, which was only incident to
weaker minds, whose imaginative powers were too hard for their reasons. And
indeed they knew so much of the juglings of their Oracles, that no wonder they
studied to detract from their Authority all they could. Now I desire I. K. will
review his discourse, and see what strong or good reasons it offers for the
conviction of those of this persuasion. So that his Argument proving only that
God must reveal how he will be Worshipped and Obeyed, if it be replied that it
is done to all men by those common Notices of Truth that are born with their
Souls, he has furnished us with nothing to prove a further Revelation
necessary.

To make good this therefore against the Philosophers, it is not to be denied
but if mankind had continued in the purity wherein God did create our Natures,
their Reasons were strong, but they themselves complained of a great
depravation of their Natures, which they found were much prevailed on by Senses
and sensible objects, by Education, Custom, Corporeal pleasure, and the power
of Fancy. And for clearing of this they apprehended another Prior state wherein
our Souls for some trespass had lost their wings and plumes, and so were
degraded into Bodies. This shows they found some corruption on their Nature
from which they studied to emerge; and did indeed attempt most gloriously the
recovering themselves to their first original. This being then confessed that
our minds are much darkened, and that our bodies, appetites and fancies are too
strong for them, it will thence very naturally follow, that as our reasons
cannot discover all things to us, so that our way of apprehending of divine
things may carry along with it much of a body and gross phantasms.

This was evidently demonstrated in that numberless variety of Opinions into
which all Nations were divided about Religion; a great mixture of bodily
phantasms, and gross pleasures appearing both in their opinions and practices
about Religion. Nor was this only the fate of the Rabble, but both Tully and
Varro have given us an account of the great diversity was among Philosophers
about the very Notion and Nature of a Deity. And if they differed so much in
their thoughts of that primitive and first Truth, into how many divisions may
we imagine they must have run about the other Truths to be deduced from that?

Since therefore men did so grope after all the disputes and speculations of
Philosophers in which there was no certainty, nor had any of them such plenary
Authority as to oblige others to submit to their decision; thence I infer the
necessity of some clear and certain way for satisfying all mankind in things of
so great and universal concern. The Speculations of Philosophers were neither
certain nor (such as they were) evident to men of weaker understandings; the
only way therefore to avoid this, was either to make such plain and glorious
Manifestations of God's presence and pleasure as the Jews had on mount Sinai
and in their most holy place, or to authorize some men by divine Inspirations
to reveal God's will to mankind Now there is no impossibility in the notion of
an Inspiration. For if we make known our thoughts to one another, either by
forming such a ^ound, or writing such Characters as shall convey into the ears
or eyes of others Corporeal Impressions from which they may judge of our
thoughts, which is a great way about and much more unintelligible (though we
are very sure it is true) then that a spirit shall communicate its thoughts to
our understandings, which it may either do by such outward impressions on our
senses as bring the thoughts of other men to our knowledge, or without these
outward objects may make the same Impressions on our Brain. And like to this,
are the impressions made on us in sleep, in which we imagine we converse with
the objects of sense. Or finally, without the means of any Corporeal phantasms,
a spirit, especiaally the supreme and sovereign spirit, may immediately convey
to our understanding its pleasure, as well as our understandings do receive
hints from gross phantasms, which is a great deal harder to conceive than this.

Thus the Atheist can propose nothing that will prove there can be no
Inspiration: but there is great necessity of guarding this both from the
juglings of Impostors and the more innocent though no less hurtful deceits of
our heated fancies, which may obtrude their Notions on us as Divine; especially
in some in whom the Spleen or hysterical distempers may produce strange
effects: therefore this must be well proved, and warranted before others are
bound to acknowledge or submit to it, nor must the great heats and divine
Raptures of the inspired person engage our belief. We know how the Sibylls were
said to be inspired, and with what Bacchick fury many heathen Priests delivered
some of their Impostures; and it is daily seen what strange appearances of
inspiration are in hysterical persons. Therefore it must be accompanied with
such other extraordinary Characters as can neither be the forgeries of Juglers
nor the vapors of the Spleen or Mother; and these are Miracles or Prophecies
which are certain indications of some extraordinary and supernatural presence
with the inspired persons.

And thus far I have helped I. K. to prove the necessity of Revelation for the
ascertaining mankind of the Worship and Obedience that God requires, and have
met with the great objections which Deists and other enemies to Revelation
bring against it. But I now follow him to his fourth proposition about the
truth of the Christian Religion.

CHAP. IV. It is considered if J. K. has proved convincingly the truth of the
Christian Religion.
J. K. goes on in his Series of truths, and his next attempt is to prove the
truth of Christian Religion. And indeed the Atheism that has of late broke out
in the world and in upon us, has engaged so many excellent pens of all the
parties and divisions of Christendom to stand up in vindication of our most
holy Faith with so much closeness of Reason, that it may be justly a problem,
whether that pestiferous contagion has not occasioned as much good to
Christian Religion, by the many admirable Treatises have been writ for it upon
that account, as it has done hurt by its own venom. But to see I. K. manage
so glorious a Cause so poorly and so faintly, after all that light which these
Books offer, does justly raise Indignation; and it is plain he was afraid to
bring out the strongest proofs for it, lest it should appear there was much
more to be said for the Verity of the Christian Religion, than can be for the
Roman: but I. K. being resolved to prove there was no more to be said for the
one than for the other, and therefore would manage this Cause faintly, that he
might maintain the other more strongly, and so it seems cares not with how
slender Evidence ^e assert the truth of Christianity, so that the truth of the
Roman Religion be but as undisputed.

His great Argument for its truth is, That it has been miraculously
propagated, which could not have been without true and real Miracles, and these
are manifest proofs of that truth which they confirm. Now since Christian
Religion, though it contains Mysteries far above the reach of humane reason,
and severities contrary to humane Inclinations, yet has been propagated without
the help of Arms or humane enticements, by men of themselves unfit for so great
a work, and has overcome other Religions which were both well established and
preached liberty and pleasures.

Then this was either done with Miracles or without them; if with them, it is
confessed there were Miracles; if without them, such a propagation must be
confessed to be a Miracle. This is the substance of what I. K. brings for the
proof of the Christian Religion.

But this alone cannot satisfy a considering mind. For it is acknowledged by
all who believe any Religion, that the power of evil spirits is very great, and
far above ours; so that Miracles cannot determine my belief, since there must
go somewhat previous to that. Therefore Moses told the people of Israel, that
though a Prophet Deuteronomy. 13 1.
by a Sign or wonder did amuse them, and upon that persuaded them to go after
other gods, they should not hearken to that Prophet, but put him to Death. And
S. Paul tells us, that if an Angel from Gal. 1. 8, 9.
heaven should preach another Gospel, he must be anathematized. So that
Miracles or other extraordinary apparitions do not prove a Prophet.

Therefore the first and great Argument for the proof of the Christian Religion
is, the purity of the Doctrine, and the holiness of its precepts, which are all
so congruous to the common Impressions of nature and reason; and this must
prove, (as our Savior himself taught us) that his Miracles were true ones, and
not wrought by the Prince of Devils, since his Doctrine S. Mat. 12. 24, to 31.
is opposite and destructive of his Interest and Kingdom. And our Savior also
asserts the truth of what he said, most commonly from this Topic, that he came
not to do his own will but the will of him that sent him, that he sought not
himself nor his own honor, but his Father's.

Again our Savior asserts his authority from the Prophecies of Moses and the
other inspired persons of that Dispensation, whose predictions of the Messiah
did all agree to him and receive completion in him. And from these our Savior
often silenced the Jews; and this is to us still a strong Argument, that these
Books which the enemies and blasphemers of our Religion have still kept as
sacred, and had among them for some thousands of years, do give such clear and
evident Characters of our Savior as their Messiah, as must needs convince
every serious and sober enquirer.

These are the chief and great proofs of the authority of our Savior, by which
we are assured that all the mighty works he did, were by the presence and
wonderful assistance of a Divine spirit. And for the Miracles themselves I. K.
would resolve all our certainty concerning them into a miraculous propagation
of Christianity. So that if there be no other certain way to prove them, then
if Christian Religion had not been so propagated as it was, it could not have
been made out that it was true; and if so, what must have been the strong
Arguments used for it before it was so propagated? Either these were convincing
or not; if they were not convincing, then it being propagated by weak and
unconcluding Arguments, we cannot be bound to submit to it or believe it; if
these Arguments were convincing, we either know them, or we know them not; if
we know them not, how can we judge they were convincing? if we know them, then
we may be as well convinced by them as those were to whom they were at first
proposed.

The great Argument the Apostles offered was, that our Blessed Savior wrought
many Miracles in the sight of the Jews, and that he being dead and laid in the
grave was raised from the dead, and after a long stay with them on earth they
saw him ascend with great glory to Heaven; of all which they were witnesses.
Now these being matters of Fact so positively attested by so many eyewitnesses
who were men of great probity, (that could not be cast on the pretense of their
being hired or bribed, there being no interest could lead them to give that
testimony but only truth, all other considerations deterring them from it)
there was good reason then, and remains so still to believe this true, whether
the world had embraced it or not. And I will ask I. K. what if the Gentiles had
rejected their testimony as well as the Jews did? yet if these sacred writings
had been with a most Religious care conveyed down to us, had we not been bound
to believe the Gospel? certainly we had, for the Apostles were men, who upon
the strictest trial of Law must be admitted as competent witnesses; they were
well informed of what they heard, and saw for a tract of three or four years;
they were plain simple men who could not in reason be suspect of deep designs
or contrivances; they in the testimonies they gave do not only vouch private
stories that were transacted in corners, but public matters seen and known of
many hundreds; they all agreed in their testimony, so that the fumes of
melancholy could not lead so many into such an agreement of mistakes. Their
testimonies if false might have been easily disproved, the chief power being in
the hands of their enemies, who neither wanted power, cunning nor malice. And
in fine, the truth of their testimony appears in their constant adhering to it,
from which neither imprisonments, whippings, tortures, no not death it self
could divert them.

From all which it is as evident as is possible any matter of Fact can be, that
their testimony was true, and this discourse must hold good whether the world
had received and believed their report or not. Which was the more fully
confirmed by the miraculous operations of the Apostles in the name of Christ,
by which they did cast out Devils and cure all manner of diseases; and to this
they appeal in their Epistles and Acts which were published at that time
wherein had the matter of Fact not been true, they had been branded as bold and
impudent Impostors.

We have also a Series of Books in all Ages citing the Writings wherein these
Testimonies are contained; by which we know they were written at that very
time. And the Apologists for the Christian Faith in their Apologies appeal to
the wonders that were still wrought for confirmation of the Faith; nor can we
imagine, that men of common sense, not to say Modesty and Ingenuity, would have
appealed to proofs that were slender and false in matter of Fact.

Thus we see that great confirmation of our Savior from his Miracles is made
good by another way of proof than by the propagation of it, which I do not deny
does very strongly make out the truth of all, yet is rather a consequent
confirmation of what has been said, than an antecedent argument for proving
it. So though it be far from my thoughts to weaken this way of confirming
Christian Religion, yet it is plain that an extraordinary propagation will not
infer the truth of the Doctrine, though it be allowed it was done by Miracles;
since we cannot be assured these Miracles are wrought by a good Spirit till we
first consider the Doctrines they confirm, whether they be good or not. It does
also appear that the truth of these Miracles is made out abundantly to us,
abstracting from the way of propagating them.

But in end we must a little examine what this way of propagating them was, and
we shall find that notwithstanding all the calumnies and lesser persecutions of
the Jews, of the derision of the Philosophers, of the prejudice carnal lusts
and appetites laid in the way; and above all, of the violent oppositions given
it by the Roman Emperors who spared no cruelty for a Succession of three Ages
and ten Persecutions that hell or hellish men could devise for destroying it:
yet it prevailed, and in a few years did spread to the astonishment of the
world; and all other Religions were not only overthrown by the many Converts
were daily flocking in to the Christian Church, but by the ruin of these very
Religions. Judaism fell to the ground by the subversion of their Temple, and
the total ruin and dispersion of their State begun by Vespasian and Titus, and
completed by Trajan and Hadrian; nor could their attempts though cherished by
an apostate Emperor succeed for the rebuilding their Temple, Heaven and Earth
combining to break off the work. Heathenism did also receive a mortal blow, by
the silencing the Oracles upon the beginnings of Christianity, which were the
great supports of that Religion with the vulgar. And the exemplary lives, the
heavenly Doctrines, the mutual Charity, and the noble Constancy of the first
Witnesses and Martyrs of the Christian Faith, wrought not a little on all that
beheld them, even on such as were very partial and biased against them. And
the Christian Religion being thus universally received, as it is a very full
demonstration that these Miracles were no forgeries, but known and approved
truths: So also it confirms in us a belief, that there was an extraordinary
presence of God in these beginnings of Christianity, assisting and animating
those Converts of all Ages, Sexes and Qualities to adhere to it under all the
discouragements and sufferings they were to pass through, whether occasioned by
the irregular appetites of their own carnal lusts, or by the outward
oppositions they met with.

And thus far I have considered how the truth of Christian Religion can be made
out against the opposition of Atheists, Infidels or Deists. Hitherto I have
waited on I. K. in the survey of these Truths about which we are agreed, and I
hope, upon a review of what we have both performed, he will not deny but I have
strengthened his Positions with the accession of many more, and better
Arguments than any he brought. So that if he be in earnest zealous for these
four great Truths, he will rejoice to see such a supplement, to what he had so
scantly proposed. But I am afraid (and perhaps not without reason) that he
knowing how weak his Arguments must needs be for the two positions that follow,
and yet designing to impose on the Reader all the Six as equally certain, he
would needs disguise the first Four, and propose them so weakly guarded, that
the proofs of all the Six might be of a piece. But I have hitherto helped I. K.
henceforth I quit that part, and go to enter in a downright opposition to him
in what remains.

CHAP* V. It is considered, if J. K. proves convincingly that the Roman
Catholic Religion is true.
J. K. now comes to that which he drove at all along and proves it thus: If
Christian Religion be true, then that Religion which has the same proofs that
it has, at least any of them that are solid, must needs be true. Since then
the miraculous propagation of Christianity is a common, solid and evident proof
of its truth, therefore the Roman Catholic Religion must be true since it is
solidly proved by the like propagation; for though it contains very hard
Mysteries in it above the reach of humane reason, as Transubstantiation, and
some very hard Precepts and Counsels, as Vows, Fasts, Confession, prohibition
for Priests to marry, etc. yet it has been propagated over a great part of the
world without the help of Arms or humane Enticements, by strangers who have
converted Nations from Paganism to embrace the Christian Faith, as S. Austin
the Monk did in England, and Xaverius in the Indies, and many others in other
places, which can be manifestly proved from History, nor can any exception be
made against it, which the enemies of Christianity may not make against the
same pro^f brought for the Christian Religion. And to use S. Austin's dilemma,
This propagation of Roman Catholic Religion was either with or without
Miracles: if with Miracles, it must be true, since confirmed by Miracles; if
without them, then no Miracle is greater than this propagation. By which it
appears, we have as good ground to be Roman Catholics, as we have to be
Christians.

By this time I suppose it is clear enough why I. K. would bring no better
proofs for the Truth of the Christian Religion; and now he thinks he has gained
his design: but what I said in the former Section has undermined this Fabric,
since it is made out that the miraculous propagation is neither the only nor
the chief proof of Christianity, but that before we believe even the Miracles
of our Savior to be of God, two things were to be made out; the one that his
Doctrine was all holy and such as tended to the glory of God; the other was,
that all he said and delivered agreed with the Prophecies had gone before. So
by the same rule of proceeding we must first see that all the parts of the
Roman Religion are holy and such as tend to the glory of God, and then, that
they (...) as fully with both the Testaments, as our Saviors Doctrine did with
(...) and the Prophets.

If this Method be taken I am afraid I. K. will find it a hard task to prove
the holin^^s of all the Roman Doctrines. What a Sanctuary for all manner of
Vice and Impiety is the (...)* power of Dispensing, Pardoning and giving
Indulgences for all sins upon such trifling accounts? Witness the present year
with all the favors and Indulgences to such as go to the thresholds of the
Apostles? What a patrociny to impenitence is their Opinion, of a simple
Attrition being sufficient for the Sacrament? And the whole trade of their
penances and absolutions looks like a design to quiet all men's Consciences, let
them lead as bad lives as they will. Besides, who can believe that to be a true
Religion, that has tolerated a great many Casuists who have found out
distinctions to excuse men from all the duties they owe God and their
Neighbor? and have studied to satisfy men in the most impious and immoral
practices? A woman that entertains common and avowed Prostitutes will never be
thought an honest woman, though none could prove her self guilty of any base
act. So that Church that not only entertains but cherishes those who have
studied to discharge mankind of all sense of Religion and Virtue, can never
pass for a pure Church. Nor does the Doctrine of that Church tend wholly to the
glory of God as our Saviors did; for what greater dishonor can be done him
than to Worship him in a way which himself has so often condemned, and never
since allowed, by the representations of Pictures and Images? And that instead
of addressing their Adorations and Prayers to him by his Son, have found out a
great many other Mediators both Angels and Saints and the Blessed Virgin?
Surely this is highly to the dishonor of God, when the Souls of people are
turned off from their Faith, and dependence on him and his blessed Son into a
trusting to and calling on Creatures; and when instead of that plain simple and
rational Worship that is suitable to the Divine nature and pleasing to him, the
mimical pageantry of a Thousand little apish practices and an unknown Worship
are brought into his Church.

If we likewise consider and measure the Roman Religion by the second great
Topic by which our Savior cleared himself, which was his appealing to the
Scriptures, we will quickly find good reason to suspect them guilty there,
since they study nothing more than the suppressing and concealing the
Scripture, and by all means labor to prove it an incompetent rule to decide
Controversies by: And yet I am sure, I. K. will give me no reason to prove the
Scriptures an unproper rule for deciding Controversies, and that we must submit
to the verdict and decree of the Church, that might not with more strength been
made use of by the Jews against our Savior. And if I carry this consideration
as far as it will go, it must necessarily lead me to compare all the Doctrines
of the Roman Religion with the Scriptures; And as if our Saviors Doctrine had
been contrary to the Law of Moses, there had been no reason to have believed
him for all his mighty deeds, which in that case might justly have been imputed
to evil spirits; so now should an Angel from heaven teach any thing contrary to
this Doctrine and Gospel, he must be anathematized, even though he wrought
mighty wonders. Therefore we are with the Bereans to examine all new Doctrines,
by their conformity to the Scriptures, and till that appear, we are not to look
on any thing they do as miraculous. And thus far, I hope, I have said enough to
convince I. K. that though what he says of the miraculous propagation of the
Roman Religion were true, it does not from that follow that the Religion it
self must be true. But I go next to convince him how much he mistook himself in
his account, when he asserted that the Christian and the Roman Religion were
propagated in the same manner, and shall first examine his grounds.

His first Branch of the Comparison is, that as the Christian Religion contains
some high Mysteries in it above the reach of humane Reason, so does the Roman
Religion in holding Transubstantiation. He did well to distinguish this from
the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, for it is indeed none of them; nor is
it above humane Reason as he calls it, but contrary to it and not at all to be
compared to the Mysteries of Christian Religion, as the Trinity, the
Incarnation and the Resurrection. The last of these contains nothing in it that
may not be Rationally enough conceived as very possible and easy to Divine
Omnipotence; for the other Mysteries that concern God, it is no wonder those be
above our understandings, since the divine Nature is so vastly exalted above
all our depressed Notions of things, and therefore is not a proper object for
our Faculties. So no wonder we cannot frame such clear conceptions of his
Nature, as to give a distinct account of it to our Reasons. But a material
object proposed to our senses, is proportioned to our Faculties. And therefore
we must either believe the clear evidence our Faculties give us of the Bread
and of the Wine, after the Consecration, or turn Scepticks for ever, since full
evidence to our Faculties is all can possibly be offered for our conviction;
and if that in any case fail, it is in no case certain. So that if our Senses
fail in this, we have no reason to receive any thing upon their Testimony; for
a noted Liar in one thing is to be believed in nothing, even though his lie had
been discovered by a divine Revelation. Now if we weaken the evidence of Sense,
all the authority of the Christian Religion which it received from the Miracles
will be weakened, for these were only known by the Senses of the spectators. And
so far of the first branch of the parallel.

The Second branch of the parallel is, that as the Christian Religion enjoins
diverse severities, to embrace Crosses, to Love our enemies, and to Mortify
our passions; so also the Roman teaches very hard precepts and Counsels, as
Vows, Fasts, Confession, prohibition for Priests to Marry, to which I. K. adds
an etc. The Christian Religion does indeed command diverse duties contrary to
our natural appetites, but those are things of themselves Morally good and such
as do highly perfect our Natures: But the Roman Religion has made a shift to
find means for voiding all these Sacred obligations, and to set a great many
little trifling performances instead of them which have no tendency to the
purifying of our Natures or the bettering of Mankind. How much they have
detracted from the obligation to all the severer, and unalterably Moral Duties
of Christianity has been already (and shall be more fully) laid open, if it be
called for, though that be needless, it being so clearly done by many better
Pens; but for those they have substituted in their room, let us a little
consider these I. K. mentions, and to begin with Vows.

We do not deny that the first design of Monasteries in the primitive Church
was excellent, but it quickly began to degenerate into idleness and
superstition, which S. Jerome though inclined enough to the severities of that
course of Life, has fully told us. But how they did afterward sink into all
the Corruptions imaginable, all Histories inform us. And whatever may be said
for such Houses, as either Seminaries for the Church, or Sanctuaries for those
that are no more able to labor in it; yet certainly the entanglements of Vows
is a yoke which none can be assured he shall be able to bear. We ought to Vow
and pay our Vows unto God, and therefore should be sure to Vow nothing but that
whereof the execution is in our power. Now when we Vow to serve God, which we
do in the Sacraments, we are assured of the aid of the Divine Grace to assist
us in the performance. But to Vow things which we are not sure to perform, our
tempers being so liable to Change, that what agrees with them at one time,
becomes an intolerable burden and snare at another, is certainly to cast our
selves headlong into many temptations. And what unnatural and brutal lusts have
abounded in these Houses, we read a great deal more than I am willing to
repeat. What a cheat is the pretense to poverty in those Orders which have got
such vast Riches that they are become the envy of the world, as the
Benedictine, the Ca^^husians, and the Jesuits? And for the beg^ing Orders, it
is both against the rules of Chris^i^n Religion and all good Government to
allow, much more to encourage such swarms of idle fellows, who shall always go
rambling and begging about, and do not work 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
that they may eat. And for 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
their obedience what a rack it may be under a Tyrannical Superior, and what
an engine it may prove for Sedition and disturbance, I leave to all to judge.

In a word, all such severities as tend to the subduing our lusts and passions
are good and suitable to the spirit of Christianity; but for overcharging men
with new burdens (which signify nothing but to create a perpetual trouble and
constant scrupulosity) is to abridge them of their Christian liberty without
cause, and tends to swell them up with pride, and a lofty opinion of their
meriting by such practices and a contempt of others, who though they bear none
of these voluntary assumed burdens, yet are more meek, more humble, and more
charitable, and in all things more conformable to the life and doctrine of our
Blessed Savior. And if voluntary severities be a character of a true Religion,
the Priests of Baal, the worshippers of Diana Taurica, the Ebionites, the
Montanists, the E^cratites, and many other heresies might have put in a fair
claim since they abounded in them

From your Vows I go to your Fasts. God forbid we should disclaim Fasting which
our Savior did so much recommend, both by his example and Commands: we
acknowledge it a powerful mean, both for mortifying all bodily lusts, and for
disposing the mind to prayer, and all other spiritual exercises; and therefore
we do not allow these to the Roman Church as peculiar to them. And I do not
believe any of them will justify the corruptions they are palpably guilty of
in the observance of their Fasts, which are generally only a change of diet,
wherein no severity nor strictness is to be seen. Wine is liberally drunk, the
most delicate Fishes with the most exquisite way of dressing them are sought
for, and no other mixtures of higher Devotion appear on these weekly or annual
returns.

For Confession, I know no Christians that deny the usefulness of it; but the
setting up the necessity of Auricular Confession, as it has driven out of
their Church the primitive and public Confession with all the ancient
discipline which was indeed the great glory of those Ages, and the chief
preservative of Piety, and good manners; so, as they have it among them, it
has been one of the greatest engines of Hell for driving out of the minds of
men all sense of the duties of a holy and good life. I do not deny but some
Priests among them make good use of it; but those being very few, it does give
but a small allay to the gross corruptions which even many grave and pious
Writers of their own Communion complain of and condemn. Shall I here mention
the giving Absolution, and admitting to the Sacrament upon Confession before
any part of the Penance be performed, the trifling Penances are often enjoined,
the taking Confessions from persons unknown, the receiving it when it is
apparent they are only reciting their sins without any Compunction? And for
Contrition they confess it is not necessary. Now the generality of that Church
being persuaded that if they Confess with a little Attrition, and be Absolved
and receive the Sacrament, they stand clear and innocent in the presence of
God* whatever their former life have been, or their present temper may be; Is
not here a very sure way to defeat the whole design of Religion and Holiness,
when men are taught so ea^ie a way of getting into the favor of God without
repenting of and forsaking their sins? And thus it appears that in the Roman
Church Confession is no severity, but a thing very grateful to flesh and blood.

The last particular I. K. instances, is the prohibition of Priests to Marry.
Truly if to reckon that impure, which the holy Spirit of God has declared
honorable in all without exception, be a great sublimity, they may well glory
in it. Our Savior recommended Cellbate only to those who were able to receive
it; but the Roman Church will force all in Orders to receive it whether they
can or not. And though S. Paul makes it one of the Characters of a person fit
to be a Bishop, that he has been married and educated his children well (which
I shall not stretch so far as either the Greek or the Russian Churches do now)
and does not at all command him to abandon her, and has elsewhere condemned
that in all persons without exception, except it be for a time in order to
fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 4, 5.
and conform to this the primitive Church did not require the Clergy to abandon
their wives, but on the contrary did condemn such as did: yet the Roman Church
has most tyrannically imposed this on all the Clergy. And although we read that
God will judge Whoremongers and Adulterers, but no where that he will judge the
Married; yet they have been very gentle to these crying scandals which continue
to this day, and have allowed the Concubinate when they condemned the Marriage
of the Clergy. By which they show they prefer the Traditions of men to the
Command of God. And thus far I have examined this Branch of the parallel I. K.
makes between the Roman and the Christian Religion, wherein I have been longer
than I intended, but as short as the particulars he named did allow. When he
brings the rest of his etc. I doubt not it shall appear they are a sequel of
such things which the same or the like considerations will clear.

But I must follow his next step, that the Roman Religion has been propagated
over a great part of the world without the help of Arms or humane enticements,
by strangers who converted many from Paganism (that allowed liberty) to their
Religion, that teaches Severities and Mortification.

To all which I reply, That since the Roman Church is still Christian, I deny
not but God may bless the honest endeavors of a great many of that Communion,
so that their labors may have great success on Infidels in converting them to
Christianity; herein God blessing them as he did the Hebrew Midwives whose
charitable tender hearts God rewarded, building them Houses, passing over their
lie. But I. K. must not insist on this as a good Argument, otherways he will be
driven into great absurdities.

Did not the Arrians by Ulphilas his means who was a stranger to the Goths
(that were a barbarous cruel and yet vastly numerous people) convert them both
to Christianity and Arrianism at once? From whence we find the whole Roman
Empire very soon overrun by Arrianism upon the Incursion of the Goths, Vandals,
and Longobards. Philostorgius does also inform us that Theophilus an Arrian
converted the Indians to the Christian Faith. Did not the Greek Church when it
was broke from the Roman, convert many Nations, the Bulgars, the Muscovites and
many other northern Kingdoms?

In fine, what will I. K. answer according to his own Argument to the great
progress of the Doctrine of Luther and Zuinglius, who notwithstanding all the
opposition they met, and all the persecutions their followers suffered, yet did
so strangely propagate their Doctrine, that before half an Age went about, the
greater half of the Roman Church fell off from the Obedience of that See, to
their Doctrine which holds all the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and
there was no need of more, and instead of all the Juglings the Roman Priests
had brought in, teaching men an easy way to Heaven, did preach all the
severities of a holy Life which our Savior and his Apostles taught? And as
they taught a severer course of Life to all Christians (I do not speak of the
particular severities of some Orders in the Roman Church, but what must be the
necessary conditions upon which all may hope for Salvation) so they advanced
this without Arms* and under great Persecutions. And here I. K. must think how
he will answer his own Dilemma, That either this was done with Miracles, or
without them: if with them, the Doctrine must be true that was confirmed by
Miracles; if without them, that propagation was a great Miracle: and thus I. K.
will find it hard to avoid the dint of his own Argument.

Besides when I. K. speaks of the propagation of the Roman Religion, he must
not prove that from the propagation of Christianity by persons of that
Religion, though the same Instruments might at the same time have engaged their
new Converts to the particular conceits of that Church. For (as it was observed
before) God blessing the sincerity of their Labors so that they made Converts
to the Christian Doctrine, that has so much to be said for it that it is a
wonder all the world did not receive it, it was not strange if those so
converted seeing the foundation of the Divine Mission of Jesus Christ to be
true, did either in humble gratitude to their charitable Instructors pay them
all the returns of acknowledgment and Obedience, or being ignorant of that
Doctrine which was wholly new to them, did easily receive and imbibe any
particular Opinions they might infuse in them, and so at the same time became
Votaries to Christ and to Rome.

But if I. K. will deal fairly and satisfyingly, he must show us how their
Religion, as it is distinct from the commonly received truths of Christianity,
was so miraculously propagated, and that in the points which we chiefly
challenge, as the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, with his being the Universal
Bishop of the Church, the forbidding the use of the Scripture to the Laics,
and the Worship in an unknown tongue, the use of Images in the Worship of God,
the Invocating of Saints and Angels, the belief of Transubstantiation, the
Sacrifice of the Mass and the taking the Chalice from the people, the belief of
Purgatory, the Treasure of the Church and Indulgences, with a long etc. I. K.
knows well that many have given very particular and full Histories of the rise
and progress of these abuses with which we charge the Roman Church, and for
which she having obstinately refused to reform them, on the contrary binding
them on the Consciences of all with new and heavier Anathema's, we have
separated our selves from her Communion. That those are not in the Scripture it
is plain enough, and we will not decline a trial upon all hazards by the
verdict of the first four Ages.

It is true, in the fifth Century the Incursion of the Goths and Vandals did
very much change the face of things, and bring on a black night of ignorance on
the greater part of Christendom, which made way for gross Superstition, and the
bold pretenses of the Bishops of Rome: And I. K. is very much out in his
accounts, that says the propagation of the Roman Religion was without Arms. Was
not that dearest part of it, the authority of the Popes, the occasion of many
long and bloody wars in Germany and Italy? And for their conversion of
Heretics, the third Decree of the Council of Lateran, and the practices of the
Inquisitions were the surest means of effectuating it. And what humane
enticements were wanting to draw men into their Religion? The cherishing of
such Kings as were firm to them, and the making over to them the Rights of
their Neighboring Princes, were pretty enticing baits. Witness their getting
Pipin into the Throne of France, their inviting him and his Son to the Conquest
of the Lombards, with many other Instances. And was there ever found out such
an enticement for men of carnal tempers, who yet retained some belief of
Religion, as the power of pardoning, indulging and exchanging of penances? So
that this whole account of I. K's fails him when put to the issue of a severe
trial, though it looked pretty smooth and fair to an overly considerer. But in
end I will add a few considerations of the methods of the first propagation of
Christianity, and from these it will appear how different those were from any
thing the Roman Church can pretend to.

First, the Propagators of Christianity went witnessing the truth of what was
publicly seen and known without any other design of their own, either to
engross power or riches. Now whether this be the method of the Roman Church I
refer it even to their own Histories, if their great care has not always been
to get Ambassadors sent to Rome with the offer of their obedience and great
submissions, of which nothing appears in the first conversion of the world to
Christianity.

Secondly, the first Converters of the world studied to draw Mankind to a great
acknowledgement of the inestimable Blessings we received by Jesus Christ, and
to the making suitable returns by addressing our selves to the Father by him and
living according to his Gospel. Now the greatest care of most of the Apostles
of the Roman Church was to propagare the worship of Creatures, to give Patrons
to whole Nations, and teach them to build Churches to those, and above all to
the blessed Virgin, of which no footsteps appear in the first Conversion to
Christianity: And instead of the strictness of a holy life and an humble
charitable temper, they have set up a vast multitude of little observances,
which may be received, and yet the life of sin remain still strong and in
vigor.

Thirdly, the first Propagators of Christianity studied by all possible means
to wean people from all kind of Idolatry, and to make the^ serve the living
God, and worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Now how far the Roman Church has
declined from this is apparent, and that they have studied rather to change
than overthrow their Idolatry, giving them little Pictures, Medals and Agnus
Dei's and Relics for their worship.

Fourthly, those that labored first to convert the world to the Christian
Religion studied to make all understand what they taught them, gave them the
Scriptures in their own tongue, and forms of Worship which they understood and
could well make use of: But the Emissaries of Rome deny their Converts these
helps, and so would hood them into a blind receiving of all they shall propose
to them, and keep them still under their Authority, and so teach them Prayers
in a tongue they do not understand.

Fifthly, those that first converted the world did by many Miracles wrought in
the sight of all convince and convert them to the Faith, and these Miracles
were grave useful actions, as the curing of diseases, the casting out of
devils, the procuring them good seasons and other temporal blessings, and all
this was done in the name and to the honor of Jesus Christ. But the Roman
Agents wanting these real Miracles have betaken themselves to the shameful
forgeries of strange Visions and Apparitions, and of ridiculous Miracles, with
so vast a superfetation of them, that few even of their own Communion can read
these Legends of their grand Apostles without a just disdain at such palp^^^^
impostures.

^^xthly, the first propagation of Christianity was when there was no Secular
power to support it or those who labored in it; so that they exposed
themselves to all the dangers of hunger and cold, of scorn and reproach; being
assured of no supply not assistance from men: and yet God appeared so
^xtraordinarily with them, that their success was plainly the work of Heaven.
But the Bishops of Rome becoming great Princes, sent out Agents to make new
Conquests well furnished and powerfully supported, so that they went like
Ambassadors from one Prince to another to treat an Alliance, wherein there was
little hazard and great hope of success by the advantageous terms were offered
on both sides. And therefore after Charles the great had conquered Germany, and
was become a terror to the Northern Kings, the Bishops of Rome sent their
Agents to labor in their Conversion, which was an easy matter and had no
difficulty in it.

And Seventhly, the first Conversion of the world to Christianity was signally
the finger of God; since though it met with the greatest Opposition from the
Secular powers and was persecuted every where and for many Ages, yet it
prevailed: and though the first Converts were poor mechanical and simple
persons, yet great wisdom and constancy appeared in them, to the amazement of
the Philosophers and other persons of Eminence and Authority. But this has not
been the method of the Roman Conversions which begun in a kind of Alliance with
the Prince, who being convinced of his advantage in the Change did upon that
oblige his subjects to it, not without severely punishing sometimes such as
refused it; so far were they from being persecuted for it. If any one were by a
fury or tumult killed, that does not alter the case nor make it a persecution.

And thus it is apparent that for all the noise the Roman Church makes of their
Conversions, they have managed them in a method very different from the way of
the primitive Christians. How basely and barbarously it has been carried on in
the West Indies the Bishop of Guatimala did inform the world; and the Bishop of
Angelopolis did within these few years inform the Pope how wretchedly the
Jesuits continue to manage it to this day. And though we have little reason to
believe the accounts given us from the Indies, since we see those who publish
them are guilty of such Impostures in things nearer us and easily discovered,
that we have no reason to credit them in things at so great a distance where
the forgeries of their account cannot be found out; yet even from these a great
many of the observations made upon the methods of the Emissaries of the Roman
Church may be proved.

But as for Austin the Monk I. K. cannot sure be so ignorant as to think we owe
our Conversion to him; for whatever truth may be in the story of Glastenbury,
it is undoubted we received the Faith at farthest in the second Century; and
that it did overrun our Island farther than the Roman Conquest Tertullian
witnesses. The Rites of our observing Easter do also prove we had not the
Christian Faith by any sent from Rome; so that long before the time of Austin
the Monk this Island was converted. And that famed story of the Monks of Bangor
as it proves what footing Christianity had then, so it shows how proud and
insolently cruel that pretended Apostle was. And it is apparent he was a man of
an Ambitious temper, his great design on those of Bangor being to engage them
to a subjection to the Pope and to comply with their Rites in the observation
of Easter. But if what is delivered by ancient Historians of his setting on the
King of the Northumberlands to destroy these Monks be true, he is to be looked
on as an Emissary of Hell rather than an Apostle of Christ. Besides, the King
of Kent to whom he came was so favorable to the Christian Faith, that as he
had married a Christian Queen, so he allowed the Christians a Church near
Canterbury. And so it is no wonder if a Prince so prepared was soon prevailed
on. But Austins first coming to him with all that pomp of Crosses carried
before him, has nothing primitive in it, and the fabulous Legends of the Monks
are little to be credited.

Thus far I have examined I. K's proofs for the truth of the Roman Religion;
and I doubt not upon a sober review of what has been said, he himself will
acknowledge he must see for other and better Arguments, before he can oblige
any to believe the Roman Religion to be the true Catholic and Apostolical
Religion.

CHAP VI. It is considered if J. K. proves convincingly that every thing the
Roman Church teaches as an Article of Faith, must be true.
J. K. advances to his last attempt which is the finishing of the whole
contrivance to persuade the belief of every thing the Roman Church delivers as
an Article of Faith; for if that Religion be a true Religion, then it is free
from all fundamental errors, and does err against no fundamental point of
Religion: and if that be acknowledged* then it does not err against this point
that God is not the Author of any error or corruption whatsoever, that being
unquestionably a fundament^l point. Now if the Roman Religion does not e^re
against this, it does not teach that God is the Author of any error or
corruption; and if it do not that, then it teaches nothing as an Article of
Faith which is either error or corruption: for whatever it teaches as an
Article of Faith, is teaches as that which has been delivered by God. This
then may be applied to every particular Article of Faith which the Roman Church
teaches; for if that be either error or corruption, it teaching God to be the
Author of it, makes him to be the Author of error or corruption, which is to
err against a fundamental point, and by consequence that Religion shall be no
true Religion.

If by true Religion I. K. understands a Religion that has no mixture of error
or corruption in it, then it is needless to prove that if the Roman Religion be
true it has neither error or corruption in it; for the proving it a true
Religion must carry the other along with it. But if by true Religion be only
meant a Religion that holds all the fundamentals of Christianity, so that
Salvation may be had in its Communion; then it is a most wretched Inference
that it must be true in all it^* definitions of Faith. And to confute this I
shall for once turn the Tables on I. K. and become an Advocate for the Roman
Church, to show they may be still a true Church and a true Religion, though
they have a large mixture of errors and corruptions. And this I do not so much
out of love to them, but from a general principle of charity to overthrow this
unmerciful Opinion that damns all men, as erring fundamentally, for believing
any error in a matter of Faith.

And let me first ask I. K. whether he takes the Church of Corinth to have had
a true Religion when S. Paul wrote to* it? This sure he cannot deny if he read
but S. Paul's first salutation; and yet in that Church there were various
parties, some for Cephas, some for Apollo, some for Paul and some for Christ,
and great difference of opinion there was whether Moses Law did oblige or not.
Now these questions concerning Circumcision and the Law were matters of Faith,
and in all contradictory opinions one must be true, another false; those
therefore that were of the false side must by I. K's doctrine be all
irrecoverably lost, as being in a fundamental error, for each side believed his
Opinion was of God. But S. Paul taught another doctrine, that whosoever builds on
the foundation Jesus Christ, shall be saved, though he build upon it wood, hay
and stubble. And the distinction he there makes between those who build Gold,
Silver and precious stones, and wood, hay and stubble, can only relate to sound
and unsound Doctors, the one building good and useful Superstructures upon the
foundation, the other teaching trifling Doctrines that will not bear the Trial;
and yet that both may be saved, is a plain demonstration against I. K.

The same Apostle also tells us that neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision
availed any thing, and that in the new Creature there was neither Circumcision
nor uncircumcision but Christ was all in all, and that one God did both
justify the Circumcision by Faith and the uncircumcision through Faith; from
all which it is evident that those of the Circumcision might be saved, and by
consequence that their Religion was a true Religion; and yet that their
doctrine of Circumcision was an error, can be disputed by none who read the
Epistles of S. Paul; And it is no less clear that they held it an Article of
Faith delivered to Abraham by God. So here it is plain that S. Paul in one
breath both condemns this Opinion as erroneous, and yet allows Salvation to
such as believed it. With how many errors does S. John charge some of the seven
Churches? yet they were still the Churches of Christ.

The Church in the second Century did generally believe the Millennium as a
thing revealed by God, which the Roman Church now calls an error; yet I hope I.
K. will not condemn that Church as holding a false Religion. The African
Churches held it necessary for Infants to receive the Eucharist, from these
words, Except you eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man, you have
no life in you, and this was approved by P. Innocent, and was continued many
Ages in the Roman Church, as appears from the Ordo Romanus, and yet that Church
has declared that not to be necessary, by which the Opinion the former Ages had
of its necessity is declared an error: But it were a strange thing from that to
condemn these as holding a false Religion. The Franciscans, and Dominicans had
hot contests about the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, and both
pretended Divine authority and Revelations, so that one of those must have held
an error. The Dominicans and Iansenists believe Predestination and Grace
efficacious of it self, this the Molinists deny; both vouch Scriptures and the
definitions of the Church. The Canonists Courtiers of Rome and Jesuits have
asserted the Popes Infallibility from Scripture and Councils, the Sorbon has
always rejected this. Now of all these different Opinions the one must be true
and the other false, since they stand in the terms of a contradiction; and they
have all vouched God and Scriptures for them: therefore those who hold the
false side of the contradiction according to I. K's reasoning must be of a
false Religion; which I believe when he considers more maturely, he will find
he mistook his measures in this.

And in fine, his Argument will also hold as strong to prove that every
Individual of a true Religion must be exempt from all errors in every Opinion
whereof he takes God to be the Author; For I. K's Argument will be as strong
for every thing whereof God is believed the Author, as for Articles of Faith.
So that every mistaken sense of Scripture will turn one to be of a false
Religion, since every mistaken exposition is an error; and yet that being
thought the meaning of the place, God is believed the author of that meaning,
and by I. K's consequence of the error it self. From all which I may (I hope
even by I. K's leave) infer the necessary distinction between things that are
believed to be errors, and those that are believed to be Truths. For the
former, to vouch God the Author of what we know to be an error and corruption,
is certainly so criminal that none of the true Religion can be guilty of it.
But there be many things which (though errors, yet) any one may very innocently
mistake for truths. I do not say the mistake does quite excuse the error; if
the error be fundamental the mistake must be so too: But if the error be in a
lesser matter, it is a lesser error; and it will never be made out, That, if
one apprehending an Opinion true, embrace it, as come from God, and as an
Article of Faith, if he is mistaken, in that he strikes at the divine veracity:
for among men, who thinks that any wronged his veracity if another mistook his
meaning, and understood his words in a different sense from what he intended
and expressed? Certainly he who so mistakes, after the true meaning is cleared,
cannot be understood to have fastened any reproach upon the Candor of him whose
words he mistook, all the blame being to be cast only on his want of right
understanding. This were indeed a hard case if all our mistakings of divine
Revelations did infer a charging God with error or corruption. But the thing is
so clear that I am afraid I have spent too many words about it, and this
Argument of I. K's cannot but upon first reading appear to all that are
accustomed to weigh and examine truth* to be a piece of crude ill digested and
ill palliated Sophistry.

Thus far have I followed I. K. through those six points he imagines he has
demonstrated, and have showed how true the first four were, but how little
reason there was to account them such for any thing he said for their proof,
and how false the other two are. And I suppose he will acknowledge that if what
is already set down hold true and be founded on good reason, I need not follow
him through the rest of his Book, it being only a direction to his gentle
courteous Reader how to manage this method of arguing so as to convince all
persons that dissent from the true Religion, which he thinks is a Mathematical
and sure way of proceeding, and such as no man can decline or avoid, and in end
must be either convinced by it, or be forced to confess himself no better than
an Ass or a block, which concludes him a mad man. I will not follow this with a
railery that is as obvious as severe; but I love not to mix matters of sport
with such serious purposes: therefore I follow I. K. no more through the rest
of his Book.

But come next to consider the great support of that cause which he manages
both in his Preface and through the rest of his Book, that there can be no
certainty neither about the true books of Scripture, the Decrees of Councils or
writings of Fathers, without there be a true Church and Religion agreed on,
which shall both declare to us what Books are true and what not, and shall
deliver their true meaning to us: otherwise endless confusions must follow,
which plainly appears in the many divisions of the Protestants and the
uncertainties they are in about all Controverted points. From which the
necessity of a true Church appears, as much as in a well ordered State there is
not only a necessity of clear and good Laws, but of Judges to expound them.

CHAP. VII. Of the supposed Inconveniences J. K. imagines in the want of a
true Church to Judge Infallibly, and of the right methods of finding Truth.
THere is nothing about which those of the Roman Church make more noise than
the necessity of an Infallible Judge, and of the great and visible
inconveniences that appear from the want of it in those Churches that have
departed from the Roman Communion. I have not long ago proposed a great many
Queries to one of I. K's brethren, in which I have set before him, the many
difficulties they must needs be involved in by clearing who this Infallible
Judge must be; and I shall here repeat nothing of what I said then, but shall
go on to show upon what clear and certain grounds we may rest our persuasions
about Articles of Faith and divine Truths.

All Arts and Sciences must be acquired by some rules and methods by which a
progress may be made from plainer things to those that are more involved and
difficult; and if any would desire to understand any Theorem or Problem in
Geometry without beginning at the Elements and advancing by Euclid or some
other such methods, he labors in vain: So also if any would without more ado
study to know a secret in Chemistry having neither learned to know the terms of
Art nor the course of a process, he shall not be the wiser though one deliver
him their best secrets. In like manner if a man will enter into the knowledge
of Divine truth without any of those preparations which are necessary, he is in
a wrong way; and the further he engages, he is the more out of the way; nor can
he be ever in the right way till he begin afresh.

It may justly seem strange that Christian Religion was so plain a thing when
the Apostles first delivered it; that mean simple people, poor women, and an
illiterate company should have understood it, and that it subdued a great part
of the Roman Empire, before men of great Learning were Converted to the belief
of it: and all the knowledge they then had of it was by the Sermons and
Epistles of the holy Apostles which remain to this day. And though at this
distance from that time, we may have lost the true meaning of some phrases, and
we have not so particular a History of the state of the first Churches as might
help us to understand many passages that seem very dark to us: yet for the main
of those Books they seem very easy and plain. We have also still so perfect a
knowledge of the Greek tongue as clearly to understand them. But after all
this, Christian Religion is now become such a strange kind of secret, that men
with all their Learning and Study can scarce understand it. Certainly we must
have either changed Religion from what it was at first, so that it has now put
on a new face; or we are much mistaken in our methods of enquiring into it, and
examining what things are revealed to us by God.

S. Paul tells us, the Natural man receives not the things of God, neither
indeed can be for they are spiritually discerned. From which it appears that a
Renovation of the mind from its natural mould, and its being transformed into a
spiritual temper are necessary, as well for the understanding and discerning,
as the obeying the things of God. Now all natural men may be divided into three
Classes; either they are so immersed in senses and sensible things, that all
their apprehensions are tinctured with the figures and phantasms which their
senses and imaginations present to them, or they rise a little above this, but
are so governed by the heats of nature and passion, that either their minds are
rendered quite incapable of all serious thoughts, or so distorted in them that
they do not discern them truly. But the highest elevation of the natural man is
Reason, which has a fairer appearance, and if rightly managed would certainly
advance him to a spiritual temper: but being fed only with dry Notions and
trying them by a false touchstone, does strenghthen our errors, fortify our
prejudices and swell us with pride, and fret us with the itch of an
unsatisfiable and useless curiosity.

Now it will not be ungrateful, it is hoped, to propose the great hindrances
all these several Modifications of the Natural man have given to the right
understanding Divine truths, and to begin with those of the lowest form.

One whose mind is immersed in sense, either believes nothing but what his
senses propose to him, or at least tinctures all his Notions with sensible
objects. Thus the Atheist believes no God, because he cannot see him; and those
of the heathens over whom the power of their senses was strong, yet not such as
to overcome the Impressions of a Deity left on their Souls, did believe the
Sun, Moon and Stars were Gods, being both dazzled with the brighter splendour of
the day and delighted with the fainter shinings of the night. And finding both
the pleasant Lightsomness, the warm Benignity and fruitful usefulness of their
Beams, they did adore them as gods, and seeing strange effects answering some
of their positions and aspects, they came to imagine all humane things were
governed by them, and so framed an entire Theory (if so ill grounded a thing
can deserve that name) of Astrology. Others much taken with the greatness and
glory of brave Commanders and Princes, and having some Notion of the Souls
Immortality on their minds, did think that after their death they governed this
inferior world; and to those Heroes they assigned Stars to dwell in, and those
gods they represented either by some* Symbols, the chief whereof was Fire, or
by some Statues, Pillars or other pieces of Sculpture, which at least
represented that Deity to their Senses, if it had not some strangely Magical
and Divine influence united or affixed to it. They did also prognosticate all
future things either by the flight or feeding of Birds, or by the inwards of
Animals.

Here then a Religion entirely framed from the Conceptions of the Natural man,
in its lowest depression; and their gross Notions of Religion made them both
prejudiced against the Jews who worshipped nothing but a Celestial Deity, and
more against the Christians whom they called Atheists because they had none of
those sensible representations or ways of Worship, but their Faith was plain
and simple.

But as the Natural man did thus corrupt the notices of natural Religion, it
did no less embase the Christian Religion. When many natural men were engaged
in the profession of it, either by Education, Custom or Interest, who loathing
its simple purity did study so to dress it up that it might gratify their
natural minds by bringing in the worship of deceased men, and by worshipping
them by Images, Pictures, Relics, and at length making Pictures for the Deity
it self, and by dressing up all the parts of Religious Worship so as to amuse
and delight the senses, by affecting an outward grandeur in Processions and
other Festivals, and in the greatness of their Priests, chiefly of their high
Priest: all which were visibly the effects of minds deeply engaged in sensible
things, to whom nothing appeared sacred or solemn without it had been adorned
with all the exquisite deckings of Art and Industry; and judging of piety by
some heats which were raised in the fancy by outward objects presented to it,
studied to fill all the parts of Worship with such rites as might make either a
glorious show for amusing the worshippers, or some melting tender impressions
for cozening them into an opinion of their being divinely elevated.

But after that by the blessed providence of God Religion was in many parts of
the world refined from that dross, yet the sensitive part of the natural man
did not give over its attempts for embasing Religion; many still continued to
place all their Religion in forms, and bestowed that Zeal which should have
gone to the advancing true piety, holiness of life and Brotherly Charity, to
the adorning and maintaining those. Others thought they had pretty well escaped
this whole danger, being got into an extreme very opposite to it of vilifying
all forms; but the Natural man did act in their sensitive powers though in
another method: for though they had emerged out of the Dominion or Influence of
their outward senses in matters of Religion, yet their inward senses and
imaginations, (which are the rebound of sensible impressions upon the
understanding) prevailed much on them. These therefore came to think a voluble
way of pouring out soft words with great heavings of the natural mind, was a
mighty thing, and gave themselves wholly to this, so that the conceiving and
hearing long Prayers and Sermons, especially if accompanied with tenderness in
the thoughts and great meltings in the fancy, was thought the highest feat and
elevation of Religion: though it plainly appears to a man of a severe and
discerning Reason, that all this is but an illusion of the fancy heated by some
fervours of the mind. And yet they upon these deceits of their fanciful
thoughts have separated themselves from all regular forms of Worship, because
that gratification of new words was necessary to feed their devotion.

Another great mischief of this distemper is, that such persons judge that as
long as they enjoy these heats, all is as they would have it; and this will
readily continue as long as they are put to do nothing displeasing to them: so
that whatever they do, be it never so contrary to the Laws of Religion; yet if
with that they can but keep up these heats, they judge either that what they
do, is not at all a sin, or at most such a sin as being a branch of necessary
infirmity, may consist well enough with Grace, because it can live with those
fervours; and if any thing quench them, (which it is like every thing that
displeases them may do) then they throw it off as carnal. Thus they measure all
things by these fluctuating and inconstant motions, and as that temper is
volatile and of all others the most subject to change; so the inequalities they
are in, are looked on as the flowings and ebbings of the divine Spirit; and the
heats they feel sometimes being ascribed to the divine Spirit, every thought
which drops into their minds when under these actuations is taken for a divine
Revelation, and followed and given out for such; and the coldness and dullness
which must of necessity follow these heats, is thought a withdrawing and
desertion of the divine Spirit. Whence follow sad melancholy and perplexing
scrupulosities, which do often mightily afflict some devout but weak minds, and
bring up an ill report on Religion, as if it were sullen and morose, and led
men into dejection, and perpetual anxiety. And this humor as it swells up the
mind into a mighty conceit of its own eminent and exalted piety and to a
contempt of others, so it does often carry on those who are imposed on by it,
into strange conceits, making them apprehend they are obliged to nothing but as
they are inwardly moved to it. And thus they would supersede Reason and give
themselves up to their fancies under a conceit that they are acted by a divine
Spirit; whereas it is but an impulse of some vapors of the grosser and more
terrene parts of the natural man rarefied by the heats of the Brain, and the
fumes of Melancholy into a thin and nimble agitation.

The next power of the Natural man, is in his passions and appetites, which
being suited to the contexture of his Blood, Brain and Spirits, have a mighty
influence on all his thoughts, and chiefly on those that relate to Religion.
And first these carrying him with a strong impetus to many irregular desires to
which Religion if believed must give a stop, he is from that made first to
question, then to doubt, and at last to deny there is a God, because his
appetites are too dear to forgo them for the belief of a superior power or
the hopes of another state. And it is an easy thing for any man to bribe his
Reason to believe what he has a great mind to persuade himself of, either by
diverting his thoughts from seriously considering the thing proposed, or by
looking only at the oppositions may be made to this belief without examining
what may be said for it, and by living in a perpetual disorder, which both
darkens the mind and keeps out all serious thoughts from it; upon all which
there may by the just judgment of God follow a searing of the Conscience and a
blinding of the mind

But if the power of Religion and the witness God has in our Breast, prove too
hard for all this opposition, then the next attempt of passion and lust is to
misshape these notices of truth into such a figure as may best agree with their
desires. And thus the Heathens corrupted all the evidences of natural Religion,
and set up such Deities as were guilty of the most furious passions, and the
most ungoverned lusts of all sorts; and this being once done, no wonder the
worship of those gods was of a piece with the opinions they had of them, and
that they devised such Sacrifices and services as might agree best with those
Deities. It was also a very natural result of this opinion that they should
conform their lives to their gods, and so they were secure of patrociny and
protection when they were to commit the basest villainies. And no wonder this
prejudiced them at Christianity which they saw taught all its Converts to be
severely virtuous and pious; and therefore they complained that Christians came
to disgrace their gods, and to turn them from the Religion they had received
from their Fathers.

But afterward when the world rushed into the Church, the passionate and
lustful parts of the natural man finding nothing in that Faith for their
shelter, yet studied to do the best they could for their own preservation.
Therefore insensibly men were turned from minding the great things for which
Christ died, and rose again to place all their care on other things which might
well be maintained without overcoming a passion or mortifying a lust. Some did
set up highly for opinions, others for forms, and by a curious improving those
hoped that their other faults should be more easily forgiven, both by God and
man. Afterward a great many notions were found out, if not for a direct
defense of those disorders, yet for palliating them, and allaying the grief for
them. A devotion to Saints was one great Engine; the opinion of many sins being
expiated in Purgatory, together with the belief of the Popes power of Redeeming
from it, was an universal Medicine for all diseases of Conscience. Then the
dispensing with Vows, Covenants, and most of all Duties was a great ease to
the natural man. There were also some new coined duties of Religion which did
agree well with their passions, such as fighting for Religion against Infidels,
Heretics and others that were excommunicated by the Pope, and a violent
persecuting of all, who in any point departed from the received Opinions: And
their Auricular Confessions, easy Penances, and ready Absolutions were sure
and Infallible means to reconcile them to Religion after it was so debased as
to meet them more than half way.

But when a great part of Europe was delivered from those more apparent
Impostures, the natural man did not for all that give over his practicing upon
Religion to frame it to his own taste; and a fondness on some reformed
Opinions, with a Reverence for the Persons of the Teachers, came to be set up
by many as all they drove at. But cunninger Arts were also found out and some
sacred truths did insensibly become so abused as to be made the excuses of
sins, especially as they were stretched by the corruptions of men, which were
much encouraged by many unwary expressions of some hot Divines, who in the
eagerness of dispute had said many things that were not to be justified. Hence
it was that the Doctrine of Christ's dying for sinners, and being their
Sacrifice, by which the guilt of their sins was expiated and they reconciled to
God, was used by many for a security for men to sin as pleased them, so they
but trusted to Christ; and because perfection was not attained in this life, it
was held unattainable and sin insuperable. Nor could men be much afflicted for
sin nor guard diligently against it, who believed they were inevitably led and
determined to it, especially when that was thought done by God himself; and
fighting for Religion against the supreme Authority was also by many made a
great demonstration of their zeal for God and Religion, and a surious bitter
zeal against all who departed from their Opinions whether to the one hand or to
the other, was looked on as a great evidence of Grace and Love to God. And it
is plain in many persons Religion does not so much mortify their passions and
lusts as palliate and disguise them, or at most change their object but not
their nature. Men of Choleric dispositions placing all Religion in an eager,
violent, yea and if need be, a bloody maintaining all their Opinions about
matters of Faith. The melancholy men put it all in abstraction and recluseness,
valuing themselves much upon it, and undervaluing others that were not so
retired. Others of a more sanguine Complexion finding either great excuses for
all their levities and follies, or if more serious, turning all their thoughts
to the dressing up some pretty Notion. And thus men not forming their minds by
the dictates and precepts of Religion, but framing it according to their own
tempers, so as might best suit their inclinations, did hold the truth in
unrighteousness. And thus again the natural man did adulterate the notions of
Religion which are spiritually discerned.

But the last and greatest (because both strongest and subtilest) assault that
Nature made upon Religion was by the misguidings of ill directed and ill
managed Reason. The former prejudices were more visible and could not be so
well defended; but this was managed with a deeper cunning. And first the great
value that the Masters and pretenders to Learning and Reason had of themselves,
made them scornfully reject all Instruction, stiffly maintain all they had once
asserted, and despise every one that differed from them. Hence it was that the
Philosophers broke into so many divisions, being as is apparent mightily
swelled in selfconceit, so that they scorned to yield to one another, but
employed all their wit and eloquence to justify their own Notions, how absurd
soever. Now this is the temper in the world the most incapable of instruction;
and this their pride they carried higher, laughing at all Inspiration as a kind
of madness, which therefore they despised and thought that their Reason was
able to penetrate into the deepest and secretest mysteries. And as this
occasioned a numberless variety of opinions, so it made them despise the first
preachings of Christianity, in which as there was none of their Metaphysical
canting; so poor illiterate men delivering it, they who valued themselves on
their Learning and their noble generous tempers, rejected it with scorn, which
was fed with the contempt they had for the first Converts, who were either such
as they called Barbarians, or men of mean Education and Employments.

But after an Age or two many of those were by the prevailing progress of
Christianity Converted to the Faith, and did for some Ages very good service to
it. But diverse of their Successors retaining the old temper of the
Philosophers, the debates about Religion begun to be managed with an unyielding
ambition, and Anathema's were the common sanctions with which they imposed
their Opinions. And at length one of the Bishops assumed to himself and
Successors the absolute authority of judging and deciding all Controversies,
which (though the most unreasonable opinion in the world, and that which
destroys the free and right use of Reason: yet) was brought in on the highest
pretenses of Reason, as the only mean to end all disputes.

And when a great many errors were visibly got into their Church, and some rose
who with all the evidence of Reason imaginable laid open these and pressed them
to disown and reform them, they continued in their stubborness, multiplied
their Anathema's, and wreathed all their errors in one Chain, as S. James had
done the Law of God, and imposed all without mercy. And for doing this they
brought their Janissaries, whom they had educated in Nurseries at fencing,
cudgelling, and the other discipline of Pen-slaughter and Ink-shed. These
Schoolmen who had been well trained to dispute about every thing, and
stubbornly to maintain every position how trifling or how false soever with all
confidence and earnestness, were brought to give Battle, and they as
Mercenaries who expected good preferments did fight it out most obstinately;
nothing was too disingenious for their confidence, no Author was so spurious
but they would vouch his testimony, no place of Scripture sounded favorably to
their Opinions but (though it had been never so plain that it was to be
understood in a different sense) was brought as a certain proof, no maxim of
the Schools, no old fustian distinction was left out to maintain the Fight; and
as some after the greatest defeats have impudence enough to pretend a Victory,
so that art was not omitted by them, but loud acclamations of Victory were
made, when all free discerners saw they were quite routed; and the rudeness
they had learned in their Cells was brought out with them, for they managed
their disputes with all the roughness of expression, the most petulant
insultings and the most barbarous railings.

Nor does this charge fall only on one side of Christendom, though one Church
be most notoriously guilty; but the Disputants of all sides have for the
greatest part managed their debates with that acrimony of style, those severe
invectives and the catching up some escapes of inconsiderate Pens, as if they
were more concerned for Glory than for Truth. Besides that every one swallows
down an entire system of that party to which he has offered up himself; and
all must be defended without that ingenuity which becomes inquirers into divine
truth. Nor do most men take their opinions from the sacred Oracles, but from
their Educations, and the Catechisms and Confessions they have been accustomed
to; and being thus prepossessed go to the Scriptures to seek proofs for their
opinions, being resolved beforehand to defend them and to make the Scriptures
serve their turns; which if they will not do easily, they will so stretch them
upon the rack by their forced Criticisms or consequences, as to make them
confess any thing though never so plainly contrary to the clear meaning of the
words. And it is evident that men thus blown up with pride are resolved to
justify all they have ever said, though to the cost of throwing off all candid
and fair dealing, saying things that no man of common sense would say if he
were not strangely biased. And indeed we daily see things brought for the
proof of many opinions which are so visibly weak and unconcluding, that it is
scarce possible to think those believed them that said them; but that being
resolved to stand to what they once asserted, some mist must be raised for
keeping up their reputation, and imposing on weaker and more credulous
Disciples. And thus it must continue as long as men are led by their pride to
be stubborn in all their reasonings about Religion.

Another great abuse of Reason is a needless curiosity about things that either
are of no great importance, or are wrapped in mysterious darkness; into which
if men will penetrate, their Conjectures and Discourses must turn to
impertinent Cantings and Nonsense. Thus the Philosophers disputing about the
nature of the Deity and of the Soul, do fall into unintelligible niceties and
Cabalistical conceits of Numbers, of which no account can be given, but that
they would seem to say somewhat where they could say nothing. And this curious
subtilising carried along another mischief with it, that they rejected every
thing of which they could not give a distinct account, and therefore called S.
Paul a babbler when he told them of the Resurrection.

But when some of the Philosophers became Converts to Christianity, both these
effects of this curiosity did appear; some studying to make out the high
Mysteries of the Faith from their Metaphysics, and to reconcile them to the
Platonical Notions, in which any discerning Reader will see a great deal of
needless and very ill proved and worse applied curiosity. This appearing both
too curious and ill grounded to others, was no small occasion of their
rejecting those Mysteries, or at least framing them so as to agree with their
Conceptions of things; and both seem to have had too la^g^ a share of this
oversearching humor, and of not believing any thing but what was made out to
their Reasons: the one party pretending they did understand the Mysteries, and
the other denying them because they could not understand them.

What subtleties were used in explaining those incomprehensible doctrines any
that has conversed in those writings must needs know, and how they were
opposed with the like subtleties. Whereas had all sides adored the divine
Revelations without engaging into these discantings, they had held the
simplicity of the Gospel, and acted more like true Christian Philosophers;
since it agrees with the strictest reason to acknowledge our faculties are
limited, and so not fit to comprehend the divine Nature, nor the operations or
the communications of that Supreme being; and therefore we must believe with
all humility what himself has been pleased to reveal to us concerning himself,
without either doubting the truth because we understand not what is so far
above us, or engaging into over curious searching into that which it appears
from our limited understandings, and the general terms of Revelation God
intended should be still a Mystery to us. But indeed the Schoolmen have thought
it below the height of their ^ouring minds and great Learnings to stick at the
explaining all Mysteries, and as far as hard words and unconceivable niceties
will go, they have given us a very satisfying account of all Mysteries, by
which we know neither more nor less than we do without them. Whether this may
not have led many over curio^s enquirers into the contrary extreme, I shall not
determine, but this is plainly an abuse of Reason on both hands.

The humor of enquiring into all subtleties did quickly bring into the Church
a superfetation of unconceivable Mysteries. For every bold conceit that any
(who had so much authority as to be well followed) took up was presently given
out for a Mystery, and then it was sacred and must not be touched; and if any
did offer to examine it, he was scared with the bugbear of a Mystery. So that
Transubstantiation, the treasure of the Church, the way of the Popes
Infallibility, together with a thousand devised Mysteries in all the pieces of
Divine Worship, were crammed down the throats of all Christians, and many being
justly provoked by these pretended Mysteries, and seeing the other great
Mysteries made the engines of obtruding these on the world, were thereupon by
an unjustifiable and an immoderate use of the Counterpoise led to the other
extreme of denying all

And with how great nicety of Argument have even the Reformed managed many high
mysterious points, as the derivation of Adam's sin, the Order o the Divine
decrees, with the nature of the aids and assistances of Grace, which have been
canvassed with a very searching curiosity? and as dark as these must be
confessed to be, yet they are delivered with as much dictating and imperious
authority, as if these Authors had been caught up to the third Heavens. Many
other niceties are also found out to exercise their curiosity; yet if it rested
there the hazard were not so great, but these are all made Articles of Faith,
and all who are not satisfied about them, are barred the Communion of the
Church, and so no wonder there be endless heats and debates.

The occasion of this curiosity and itch of disputing may be perhaps not
unjustly derived from the contentions and endless wranglings of the Schools in
matters of Philosophy; in which men being accustomed to that game of disputing
and subtilising about nothing, and going from those studies to Divinity, and
carrying that same temper, and fiery edge along with them, they made all that
work about it which has now so long divided the world. They being also by a
long practice habituated to many Maxims and Axioms which were laid down for
rules not to be enquired into or denied, came really to believe those were
true, and to carry them along with them to all their Theological debates. All
which will appear very evident to any that compares their Philosophical and
Theological works, from which many of their strange inferences and positions
did take their rise, and I am afraid do still receive their nourishment.

Thus far I have discoursed of the several prejudices the powers of the natural
man do lay in the way of our apprehending and judging aright of Divine truths;
and the common notions of the moral Philosophy will concur to teach all men
that before their minds can be rightly qualified for the understanding any
intellectual truth, but most chiefly Divine truth, we must abstract from all
those figures of things, which our senses present to us, and rise above all
grosser phantasms. It is no less necessary that our thoughts be serene, and
free of passion, that we may freely and at leisure consider what lies before
us, without the Bias of preconceived opinions or interests. And it is equally
rational with these that we have modest minds not vainly puffed up with an
opinion of our own knowledge, but tractable and docile, such as will not stick
after clear conviction, to confess and retract an error, and that we proceed in
our reasonings closely and on sure grounds, not on vain conjectures and maxims
taken up merely on trust, but by a clear progress advance from one truth to
another as the Series of them shall lead.

A man who is thus prepared must next consider all was said in the first four
Sections, with a great deal more to the same purpose; That he be on good
grounds persuaded there is a God; that there is a true revealed Religion, and
that the Christian Religion is the true Religion. These things being laid down
he is in the first place by earnest Prayers to beg God's direction to go along
with him in all his enquiries, which certainly will not be wanting if he bring
with him a sincere and well prepared mind, not biased nor prepossessed; and of
this we may be well assured both from the Divine goodness and veracity. For as
he has promised that whosoever seek shall find; so it is a necessary consequent of
infinite goodness to assist all that sincerely seek after life and happiness:
but if any come to this study without he be duly prepared, he has himself to
thank if he fall into errors and mistakes.

The next thing an exact searcher into Religion must labor in, is once to
observe the nature of Christianity and the great designs of it; and in this he
is not to follow the small game of some particular and obscure passages, but to
observe through the whole New Testament what was the great end of all our
Savior spoke and did, and his disciples testified and wrote. If once we
comprehend this a right, it will be a thread to carry us through particular
disquisitions. For as there be many natural truths of which we are well
assured, though Philosophy offers us some Arguments against them, in the
answering which we are not able to satisfy our Reasons; so there may be some
divine truths very certainly made out to us, and yet there may be places of
Scripture which seem so to contradict those truths that they cannot be well
answered.

Again, a serious Enquirer will see good reason to believe the Scriptures must
be plain, evident and clear, since they were at first directed to men of very
ordinary parts and of no profound understandings and learning; therefore he may
well conclude those strange Superstructures some have reared up for amusing the
world, can be none of the Articles of Faith necessary to be believed.

And as the first Converts were honest simple men, so our Savior and the
Apostles spoke in a plain easy style, therefore all these forced Criticisms
and Inferences by which some more ingenious than candid Writers would expound
them in a sense favorable to their Opinions, a^e not to be received, since
these do often represent the divine discourses rather like the little tricks of
double-dealing and Sophistry for which an honest Tutor would severely chide his
Pupil: words are to be understood in their plain meaning, and not as Logic or
a nicety of Criticism may distort and throw them.

If then a man will in this method (which no honest man can except against) go
to the search of the Scriptures with a mind prepared, as has been already
said, he cannot fail of finding out all that is necessary for his Salvation.
Nor is he to be doubtfully anxious concerning the true Books; for none denies
but the Churches care in all Ages has been the great conveyance of this; the
many various Translations of all Ages and Languages (nay and different
Religions) agreeing in all material points, and the Citations out of those
Books which we find in a Series of Authors who have lived in the several Ages
since they were written agreeing likewise with the Books themselves, together
with many ancient Manuscripts which do yet remain of a great many Languages,
may abundantly satisfy even the most severe Inquirer, that these be the very
Books which the Apostles delivered and were universally received by all
Christians.

The matter of Fact being thus cleared without any necessity of running to the
authority of the Church, all those scruples which I. K. with the rest of his
Brethren would needs raise, do vanish, since they never distinguish exactly
between a Witness and a Judge. For the former nothing is required but honesty
and good information, and we have the agreeing suffrages of many witnesses that
do all agree in their Testimony of these Books, who though they differed very
much in their Expositions of them, yet concurred in their verdict about the
Books, and were checks on one another in the faithful preserving and
transcribing them. In this sense we do receive the Churches Testimony as the
necessary means of conveying these Books to us. But an Authority Sacred and
Solemnly declared is required in a Judge, and this no Church can so much as
pretend to but from the Scriptures. Therefore the Scriptures being received as
Divine cannot depend on the sentence of the Church as a Judge, since all its
Jurisdiction is derived from Scripture, which therefore must be acknowledged
before it can be believed.

But because there be persons of a meaner Condition and not Educated so as to
make all the inquiry which is necessary in so important a Business, there is
therefore a shorter method for such, which yet is as morally certain as any
thing can be. Let then the simplest man in England provide himself of two New
Testaments, one published by the Church of England, another by the Church of
Rome as was that of Rheims: Now he knows well what animosities be betwixt the
Divines of these Churches, and that they are engaged so hotly one against
another, that they agree in nothing, but where the Evidence of truth especially
in matters of Fact does bind them. And yet he comparing these New Testaments
will find, that though the phrase, the position of words, and in some few
places perhaps the sense varies, but upon a survey of the whole he finds that
they do plainly agree in all matters of moment. So that from this he is
persuaded that both have the same true Book which the Apostles did deliver to
the Church; and the Jews agreeing with us as to the Old Testament, is the same
Evidence to him that we have those very Books which were held Sacred by the
Jews in our Savior's time. And thus by I. K's leave a man may be satisfied
what be the true Books, without being assured which is the true Church or the
true Religion.

Being then assured about the Books and studying them in the method already set
down, he shall be certainly directed by God to find out every thing necessary
to Salvation; and this is far from setting up a private Spirit to lead us
Enthusiastically, but is an appeal to the Reason and ingenuity that is common
to all men. For let me ask I. K. how the Decrees and Canons of the Council of
Trent are to be understood? He himself says, the meaning of those is plainly
and certainly to be known, yet every Reader must expound them to himself in
that easy and clear sense which best agrees with the words. Is this therefore
to set up a private spirit to enterpret these Canons? I know he will say (and
with good reason too) that it is far from it; and with the same warrant do I
assert that the considering of Scripture according to the method proposed, is
not to interpret it by a private Spirit, but by the clear conduct of our
understandings directed by the divine Grace which is freely given to all that
ask it.

If after all this it be replied, How is it then that there are such different
Expositors and Expositions of Scripture? the Answer is plain, by sending back
the Reader to what has been said of the corruption of men's minds; and as long
as men live so ill as they do, it is to no purpose to expect they shall think
or understand aright. Besides, there be a great many things in the Scriptures
which are not Articles of Faith, which every man is not bound to know and
conceive aright under the hazard of Damnation, and about which there may be
disputings and different Opinions without any hazard. If any set up particular
Opinions in matters justly controvertible and of less moment, and impose these
on all with severe Sanctions, and if he have Authority to cast all out of the
Church Society that do not agree with him, or if he have not that Authority, if
he do separate from the Communion of the Church because they will not receive
or hearken to his conceits, he is a Schismatic; for a dogmatizing and
dictating spirit, if strengthened with power, does always lead to persecution,
and if it want it, to separation.

And thus I think enough is said for proving that the way to Salvation is not
at all uncertain in our Church, since it is no other but that new and living
way which our Savior did Consecrate through his flesh. But in this we are
strongly confirmed, when we find the ancient Martyrs, Fathers and Doctors of
the Church going in the same Method, and by it Converting the Nations, enduring
Martyrdom and giving glory to their most holy Faith and to its most holy
Author, whose Decrees, when met in Councils, and Doctrines delivered in their
writings do so agree with Ours in all matters of Faith, that we decline not to
put the whole debates between us and them to this Trial. I. K. thinks we cannot
know what Fathers or what Councils to receive, but by first acknowledging a
true Church which must tell what Fathers and Councils to receive. But this
being a matter of Fact, we are to judge of it as of all matters of Fact that
were transacted some Ages ago, and by the evidence of Testimonies are to find
out the truth concerning the Fathers and Councils, and their Writings and
Decrees. We have good reason to decline the writers of the latter Ages, since
we plainly see that upon the overthrow of the Western Empire by the Goths and
Vandals and other Northern Nations, and of the Eastern Empire by the Saracens
and other Mahometans, Religion and Learning were quickly brought under sad and
lasting decays, which is confessed by writers on all sides.

And what I. K. says, That we may as well expect the whole Gospel in the first
Chapter of S. Matthew, as all Faith of the Church in the first four General
Councils, is very impertinently alleged. Did we ask for all the definitions of
the Church in the first Canon of Nice, his comparison might well take place;
but it cannot be fitly used in our case who say we are the true Catholic
Apostolic Christians, because we in all things agree with the Churches of God,
as they were during their greatest purity both in the persecutions, and after
those for two Ages. Certainly if we hold all that Faith they then held, and if
they were saved, we may be so too; and you cannot pass a severe sentence on us
which will not likewise take hold of them. I. K. cannot deny but they stated
the Christian Faith in very formal Creeds, and one of them expressly decreed
That no new addition should be made to the Creed; and so we who receive that
Creed, though at all this distance from them, are really in Communion with
them, from which those have departed, who have made such vast additions to the
Creed. And thus it appears we are in the same way which our Savior first
opened and in which that glorious cloud of witnesses followed him, and are
still in Communion with Rome as she was when her Faith was spoken of through
the whole world, and therefore we are in a safe way to Salvation.

But because Christians must live together in Unity and Charity, and in order
to that end must associate together in the Worship of God in mutual Councils
and other necessary parts of Government and some External rites for maintaining
the visible acknowledgment of the Faith, therefore we have rules given in
Scripture no less express for obeying the Civil powers in all their Commands
that are not plainly contrary either to Natural or revealed Religion, which is
a clear and constant rule by which we may be satisfied if our minds be right
prepared and qualified, as was before set down. And if by the disorder of our
understandings, through the corruptions of the natural man, we be brought under
Errors, we have our selves to blame. Next to this we are to associate our
selves with all who Worship God as long as there is not some great corruption
in it, so that we can no longer continue in it without sin. If others be formal
or guilty in it, that is none of our fault, and can never warrant our departure
from that Communion of Saints in worship. Therefore the particular Forms of
Worship are to be agreed on by the Guides and Pastors of the Church, which must
still be received by all till they put us to act or assist in somewhat that is
evil, or be defective in some necessary part of Divine worship. And the great
rule by which the Guides of the Church ought to compose these Forms, is the
constant and universal practice of the Churches of God in their best times;
Calculating these as near as may be to the present Constitutions and tempers of
men, so as to avoid all unnecessary scandal, and to edify the people by them.

Therefore we dare appeal to all just and impartial Judges, if our Church have
not observed this rule in all the parts of our Worship, to bring things as near
as could be to the Primitive Forms; and if in some particulars we have departed
from them, such as the not Commemorating expressly the dead, or receiving gifts
in their Names in the holy Communion, the not using the Chrism in Confirmation,
nor the sign of the Cross on all occasions, or if we kneel in Churches on
Sundays, and betwixt Easter and Pentecost, which are the most considerable
things that now occurr to me, in which we are not exactly conform to the
Primitive Church; these are both things of less importance, and by the
following Superstition and other abuses were very much corrupted. And it is
certain that all things not Necessary when much abused, how innocent, nay how
useful soever they may be, yet may very reasonably be left out and laid aside
as the Pastors of the Church see cause. If after all this Evidence there be
great divisions among us, we owe these, next to the corruption or manners, to
the daily practices of such as I. K. who (as is offered to be made out by many)
have under all disguises labored the renting us to pieces, and our sins are
such that these wicked designs prove daily but too successful.

But after all the mist and dust any may study to raise, I doubt not but to
serious considerers it will appear, that we of this Church are in a clear and
safe way, and that our doctrine is no other than what our Savior and his
Apostles delivered, and what the first Christians and their Successors for many
Ages believed; and that we are in the same Method of finding out the true Faith
which they followed: all which I shall conclude with these excellent and
divinely Charitable Versicles of our Litany:

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of Grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived, and that it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.
THE END.
A Brief Catalogue of Books newly Printed and Reprinted for R. Royston,
Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty.
THE Works of the Reverend and Learned Henry Hammond, D. D. containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author enlarged, by
the Reverend Dr. Fell, Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford. In large Folio.

A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, Briefly
explaining all the difficult Places thereof. The Fourth Edition corrected. By
H. Hammond, D. D. In Folio.

(...), Or, a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio, by Ier.
Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to K. Charles the First of Blessed Memory, and
late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.

Antiquitates Christianae, or, The History of the Life and Death of the Holy
Jesus, as also, The Lives, Acts, and Martyrdoms of his Apostles. In two parts,
The first part containing the Life of Christ, Written by Jeremy Tailor, late
Lord Bishop of Down and Conner. The second, containing the Lives of the
Apostles, by William Cave, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

The Second Part of the Practical Christian, consisting of Meditations and
Psalms illustrated with Notes, or Paraphrased; relating to the Hours of Prayer,
the ordinary Actions of Day and Night, and several Dispositions of Men. By R.
Sherlock, D. D. Rector of Winwick

The Royal Martyr, and the Dutiful Subject, in two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet.
New.

The Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise showing the Necessity, End and Manner of
Receiving the Holy Communion, etc.

The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: or, a Book
of Devotions, etc. Both written by the Reverend S. Patrick, D. D. in 12.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England, etc.

Considerations concerning Comprehension, Toleration, and the Renouncing the
Covenant. In Octavo New.

Animadversions upon a Book, Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically imputed to the
Catholic Church: by Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C. The Second Edition. By a Person of Honor. In Octavo.

Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church. With the Prayers, Hymns
and Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic Authors. In Three Parts.
In Octavo.


