PRINTED, By Her Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, On the 11th of March,
1693/4. BEING The Third SUNDAY in LENT.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON; Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

THE BISHOP of SARVM's LENT-SERMON Before the QUEEN, On Sunday, March the 11th,
1693.

1 COR. i. 26. For ye see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many Wise after
the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called.
IT was one of the earliest, and is like to be one of the most lasting
Prejudices against the Christian Religion, that few of those who have been
under eminent Distinctions in the World, have sincerely gone into its Precepts
and Discipline: many have indeed gone into its Interests, when they found their
own in them, who have been much above the common Level; but these have lived so
little like their Profession, that they have become a Reproach to it: and what
they seemed to build up with one Hand, was more than defaced with the other:
while the World, by comparing their Zeal with their Morals, have been led to
collect, that they themselves did not believe that Religion, about whose
Concerns they seemed to be so warm and active. But when it has been observed,
that those few upon whose Tempers and Actions this Religion seemed to have a
more real and a more powerful Influence, have been for the greater part Men of
a lower size of Mind and Fortune, many have from thence framed to themselves
the most mischievous Idea possible of our most holy Faith, that its Votaries
were either apt to deceive or be deceived; in plain English, either Knaves or
Fools. This the Jews began and charged our Savior with it, that none of the
Doctors, Joh. 7. 48, 49.
the Rulers, or the Pharisees had believed on him; and that the Rabble who
followed him, were People who knew not the Law, and were accursed. The
Philosophers when they heard St. Paul preach, reckoned him a Babbler, Acts 17.
18, 32.
and his Doctrine foolish: and whereas they thought that none were capable of
true Philosophy, that is (in the sense of those Ages) of true Notions
concerning God and Morality, but Men happily born and duly prepared; they were
amazed, when they saw Multitudes of all Ages and Conditions, and of both Sexes,
embrace this Doctrine, adhere so firmly to it, and die so resolutely for it;
that whereas a generous Contempt of Life, and a Firmness against the Terrors of
Death, had been esteemed the greatest Indication of the Courage of the Romans,
or the Philosophy of the Greeks, the Christians came to be marked with this
Character, not only by the profane Lucian, but by a much better Man, Marcus
Aurelius, as too regardless and prodigal of Life: yet still the World stuck to
that as to a just Prejudice, that those who embraced this Doctrine were mean
and illiterate Men, who having little to lose in this World, were the more
easily prevailed on to despise it, and to hearken after the hopes of another;
and to embrace a Doctrine that offered its Proselytes many Privileges beyond
the rest of Mankind. And since mean Men's Minds are often as low as their
Fortunes, and poor and weak People are more apt to be imposed on, and less
capable of making strict Enquiries into the truth of Things; all this seems to
give a fair and reasonable Presumption against a Religion, whose first Converts
were neither the Learned Rabbis, nor the Subtle Philosophers, neither Men of
Authority nor Birth.

Somewhat like the same Observation is still made, if not of the Nominal
Christians of our days, for now all are such, yet of those, of whom one has the
justest reason to conclude, that they are in earnest with their Religion, that
they are neither of the highest size for Parts, Quality* or Power; but are more
commonly Persons of a moderate Proportion, as to all these things. This seems
to afford a very proper Subject for a Discourse of this kind, to consider and
discuss the Truth and the Consequences that may arise out of this Prejudice,
and that both with relation to the Beginnings of Christianity, and to the
present State in which we find it to be among our selves.

I need not amuse you long with explaining the words of my Text. By Calling, is
meant their Vocation to the Christian Religion, not in that general sense, Mat.
20. 16.
in which it is said that many are called: which imports, only that the Gospel
was to be preached to many; but in a more restricted sense, in which it is used
promiscuously with Election, so we are required to make our Calling and
Election sure: 2 Pet* 1. 10.
that is, our being gathered together by the Call of the Gospel into a Body
distinct and separated from the World* By this then is to be understood that
Vocation, by which Christians, as they are called on by the Gospel, so they do
hearken to it, and follow it. By the wise after the Flesh, may be well meant
Men of Worldly Prudence, Skill and Dexterity in the ordering their Affairs, or
in the Conduct of the World: but the common Acceptance of this word used among
the Greeks, and in this Epistle, relates to those Men of Speculation and
Knowledge, of Subtilty and Dispute, known by the Names of Sophists and
Philosophers. By Mighty are to be understood the Men of Power and Authority,
Princes and Magistrates. By Noble, are meant Men of high Birth and great Blood:
So the Importance of my Text is this, You Christians of Corinth, see that among
you, who have embraced the Christian Religion, there are not many (some few
there might be) either Philosophers, Magistrates, or Men of Noble Extraction:
but on the contrary, you see that your Assemblies are made up of Persons that
are weak and despised, that are of no Account or Esteem in the World. And of
this the Apostle is so little ashamed, and so little disposed to deny, hide or
extenuate it, that he enlarges upon it in a variety of several very full
Expressions; he calls them not only foolish and weak, base and despised, but
things that are not; as low a Figure as Language is capable of; and draws from
it two very important Reflections, That no Flesh should glory in God's
Presence; but that he that glories, should glory in the Lord.

In speaking to these words, I shall consider, I. What reason there was for
such Reflections in the days of the Apostles, and how came it that their
Converts were not of the upper, but of the lower Ranks of Men? II. What reason
there may be for the like Reflections in the present Age? III. Whether this is
a just Prejudice against the Christian Religion or not? IV. That all this
belongs only to the greater part, the many; and that it is not universally, tho
it be generally true. And, V. What are the proper Inferences to be drawn from
all this?


To the first;

It is very true that the first Converts to Christianity, were for the most
part weak and mean Men: The Arguments which did then enforce this Religion,
were such, that the lowest Capacity could judge of them. Miracles were wrought
in the sight of great Multitudes, and that in signal Instances, of wonderful
Cures done with a Word, of raising some from the Dead, and speaking the
Language of every Country into which those Preachers came, and that without any
previous Preparation, or time lost in acquiring it. These were things that bare
Observation, bare Seeing or Hearing, could discover to any, that would look
into them: they required no Strength of Apprehension, nor Niceness of Judging.
Men of a higher Form are naturally more apt to despise all such things, and to
shut them out by forming a previous Disbelief of them; and setting that up as a
Bar against all Conviction; which Men of a more moderate size are more willing
to ask after, and enquire into: So that for the great Argument then given in
behalf of our Religion, every Man was capable of seeing it is Truth: and when
these mighty Works confirmed such a Narrative concerning the Death and the
Resurrection of Christ, together with such a holy Rule of Life and of Morals;
every honest Man was capable of judging, at least for himself, that such a
Recital with such a Scheme of Divine Morals so well attested, could come from
none but the great and good God. It was also suitable to the miraculous Vouchers
that accompanied this Doctrine, that the first Bodies of Men who were converted
to it, should consist chiefly of such Persons, that no Suspicion could be
against them, as if they by the Strength of their Parts and Skill, by the
Credit they were in, or the Authority that they had, might have procured to
this Doctrine any part of the Reception that it met with in the World. Had
either the Tricks of Dispute, the Charms of Eloquence, or the Dexterity of
Conduct appeared among the first Planters of this Faith; had they been
fortified with Power, or supported by Dependencies, then the Progress of it
might have been accounted for: but when Numbers both of Jews and Gentiles, and
those Greeks as well as Barbarians, that is, Learned and Unlearned, forsook the
Religions in which they had been bred, and to which they were tied by all the
Prejudices that could possibly lock them up fast in the way in which they had
been brought up; and when they not only embraced it upon the Credit of what
they saw and heard, and reformed their Lives according to it, but stood to it
in spite of all the ill Usage and Persecution that it brought upon them, so
that many of them died for it, and all suffered more or less by reason of it,
it must be acknowledged, that this was a very extraordinary and an
unaccountable thing. The vast Increase and Propagation of this Religion under
all those Disadvantages, and with no visible human Help at all, was so
astonishing, that as all the first Apologists for Christianity appealed often
to it, as to one of the most sensible Arguments, so it had been capable of an
Answer that had taken off much from its Strength, if it could have been said
that the Progress it made, was in some degree owing to the Abilities or
Interests of those who first embraced it. Therefore as the Arguments upon which
its Credit at first was built, were such that the meanest Capacities were
capable of passing a Judgment upon them; so their being without all human
Supports was an evident Indication of the Divine ones that attended upon them.
And thus the first Branch of this Prejudice is sufficiently accounted for.

I go now to the second Particular, to examine what Reasons there may be for
the like Reflections in the present Age. Alas, it is but too visible! that tho
now whole Nations are become Christians by the lump, yet there are few, very
few real Christians to be found among all those Assemblies that are crowded
full with those who carry that worthy Name. There are few the Tenor and Thread
of whose Lives speaks them to be Men that deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
and that live godly, righteously and soberly, like Pilgrims on Earth, having
their Hearts and Affections in Heaven; that are pure and holy, meek and lowly
in Heart in imitation of their great Master, whom the far greater part of those
who are called Christians, dishonor with their Lives while they offer up to
him the outward Shows and Pageants of Honor and Worship. Among those few (few
they are God knows) there are not many who have great Advantages in this World,
either with respect to their Talents, or to their Fortunes.

Those who have a greater compass of Knowledge, more flame of Thought, and
elevation of Mind, either turn and employ it wholly to base and mean Purposes,
to the close Contrivances of Dissimulation and Falsehood, or to a loose and
libertine Gaity; valuing themselves upon some sparkling Thoughts, which are
directed to the questioning or laughing at the most serious and sacred Matters;
which by a profane Mimickry they represent as ridiculous, both to themselves
and others. These are the too common Corruptions that hang about many of those
who yet seem to be born with somewhat that is sublime in them: Men of a greater
Depth in Study, as well as of more Gravity of Temper, feeling that their
Thoughts have a higher Flight, and a greater Extent than others about them are
perhaps capable of, do swell often upon that, and grow to value themselves as
much beyond what they deserve, as they undervalue others below what is due to
them: These, if sullen and ill-bred, show their Pride in Scorn and insolent
Behavior; or if, by a due Commerce with the World, their Deportment is more
decent, yet inwardly they are full of an Admiration of themselves, and of a
Contempt of all other Persons: they are apt to be singular in their Thoughts,
and fond of their own Notions; they love Novelties, and delight to see whole
Bodies of Men called by their Name: they form to themselves Prejudices against
the believing any thing upon the Testimony of others; especially if the Matters
proposed to them are of a pitch above their Apprehensions. Men of Knowledge and
Parts are subject to one or more of these ill Qualities, which do so much
vitiate their Understandings, and corrupt their Natures, that they cannot come
under a Discipline, whose first Elements are Humility, Modesty, a due Distrust
of one's self, and a charitable Esteem of other Men: they have not treatable
Understandings, that can diligently observe and lay things slowly and
attentively together; they neither examine the first Principles, nor the
Connections of things: So that their Hearts and Heads are not capable of that
ply of Mind, which is a necessary Preparation to the being a true Christian.

As for the Mighty Men, if they are of a lower Form, their Thoughts turn much
to Avarice and Corruption, to Partiality and Injustice, and to Violence and
Rage; if they are at the top of Human Nature, in high Power and Authority, they
are apt to extend that, either to an undue Domination over those who are
subject to them, or to an unjust Enlargement of Empire. Unlawful Wars and
Conquests look great, and sound big: if they are successful in them, and
flattered for them, they are enchanted with a false Opinion of their own Glory,
so that neither the Blood that is shed, nor the Miseries that are occasioned by
them, are able to disturb that Imaginary Happiness, with which they seem to be
at present so much delighted. Men thus turned and so vitiated are not capable
to apprehend themselves to be under the Obligations to Justice and Compassion,
to Truth and Fidelity, to Moderation of their Desires, and to the restoring
what they have injustly taken, or do as unjustly detain from other Men. If a
Zeal for some of the Interests or Passions of a Party in Religion; if Cost and
Magnificence, Solemnity and Cruelty in the Cause of a Church, will buy off
greater Obligations, or pay for the most Criminal Violations of all that is
just and sacred among Men, then they will perhaps purchase a Name at that rate,
as well as pay those who flatter them on that account. It is then very true,
that the Men of Power and Authority are under such a Biass and so many
Temptations, that it is scarce to be hoped for, that many of them shall come
within this high and holy Calling.

As for the Noble, the Men of Extraction and Descent, of high Blood and ancient
Families, they are often so much mollified and broken by a soft and careless
Education, they are so enervated by Luxury, and so dissolved into Idleness and
Voluptuousness, that they are as little capable of coming under this Yoke, as
either of the former were found to be. The Abundance to which they were born,
and in which they have always lived, seems to set them beyond the Necessity of
employing their Thoughts and Time in worthy or useful Studies and Exercises:
They are steeped in Laziness, and overrun with fierce and craving Appetites.
Pleasure sways and turns them, it consumes their Time, and exhausts both Bodies
and Minds: a Restraint of Excess and Riot, and a Limitation of Appetite, are
Doctrines they cannot submit to; but think their Liberties ought to be as
unbounded as their Desires are. The ill Example they see, and the bad Company
they keep, meet little Resistance from them, and do soon conquer Minds so
little disciplined or cultivated.

And thus it is not to be denied, but that the Opposition which the Christian
Doctrine gives to those Corruptions, that do but too easily beset the Wise, the
Mighty, and the Noble, makes that few of them can conquer themselves, and break
through those ill Habits and Dispositions of Mind, that do as it were belong to
their Condition and Circumstances; and by so doing become true Christians.
Common Observation is so full of this, that I will not go about to prove it: I
wish I were mistaken, and out in my account: The thing is but too visible and
crying; and the Corruptions are too public and scandalous: Men glory too much
in them, to be either ashamed of them, or willing to forsake them. While on the
other hand, the few Men of Virtue and Probity, of Morality and true Piety, are
for the most part Men of a lower size, whose honest Tempers and good Nature, do
more than balance those seeming Defects in Vivacity and Knowledge; they are Men
of a middle size, neither contemptible for their Folly, nor of a sublime
Exaltation; Men of moderate Fortunes as well as Desires; who are neither
depressed with Poverty, nor exalted with Wealth, are generally the most capable
of Justice and Honesty, of Industry and a cheerful Contentedness with their
Condition; and those who are neither high nor low, neither blown up nor sunk
with their Fortunes, are generally the best fitted for the Precepts of
Religion. As for those who are placed in the Extremes of Fortune; certainly tho
the lowest have their Temptations as well as the greatest, yet of the two, they
are by their Condition much more disposed to Religion, they are less dissipated
and more alone, they have more occasion both to fear bad Accidents, and to be
devout under them; and the mean Condition to which they seem to be doomed in
this Life, may very naturally dispose them to try to have it bettered in
another World. So far I have gone on the second Head.

The third is, Whether this is a just Prejudice against the Christian Religion
or not? At first view it looks as if the Truth of our Faith appeared very
doubtfully, and could not bear a strict Enquiry, that howsoever weaker Minds
might be overcome, yet it could not stand the Test before Men of more searching
Understandings. It looks also ill that it seems incompatible with Authority and
Dignity, as if it were a mean and dispiriting Doctrine, suited only to Men of
abject Minds and broken Fortunes, and a proper Theory for the Unfortunate to
take Sanctuary in. It is true, we have already considered and agreed this
matter, that there is somewhat in most of the Wise, the Mighty, and the Noble,
which bars out this Discipline, they are not fitted to it, nor it to them. But
after all, if this Indisposition arises not from any Opposition between
Religion and their Faculties, or Circumstances, but only from the Contradiction
it gives to some bad and vicious Qualities that are in the Persons here
described, then it can furnish us with no just or well-grounded Prejudices
against the Christian Faith.

That Humility and Modesty, a due distrust of our selves, and regard to others,
that Application and Industry, are necessary Dispositions to the perfecting our
Faculties, is that which few can deny. What is true Breeding, among the
civilized, but the putting on the appearances of Modesty and Humility? And if
the appearances of these things are so Beautiful, and that Youth is formed in
them with so much Care, how much more valuable must these things be? When they
are the genuine and natural growth of our Minds; When they are not only
counterfeit and mimickry, but the product of Hearts duly seasoned and well
principled. How rough and boisterous a thing is Pride and a haughtiness of
Temper and Behavior? How unkind and unneighbourly a thing is the contempt of
other Peoples Understandings? And how unseemly and brutal is it for a Man to
Dictate and to be Imperious? It is a sign of a trifling Mind to affect to
Doubt, when all the just Reasons of Doubting are sufficiently cleared. And
nothing shows a Man to be more a stranger to himself, and to the natural
Defects of his Faculties, than to imagine that all things may fall well within
the compass of his Thoughts: Nor is there any thing more contrary to the true
Methods of arriving at Knowledge, than for Men after a slight view of things,
to form Difficulties* and to heighten these with Similes that tend to render
them ridiculous, and then to season all with Laughter and Scorn: and to take no
further Care of being better informed about them. That these are Defects and
Disorders, even in a wise Man, common Observation does justify. But if a Man
will study to free himself from them, and take some Pains to adjust the
Balance, that is to bring his Understanding to a due fixedness and attention,
to consider well, and to pronounce slowly: And to have the Scales made equal,
that is to have no Biass in him, or Weight from bad Inclinations in the Scale
opposite to Religion, then let him consider the Matter as if he were in a Jury,
for his own Life or Death turns upon the Verdict, and then let him give
Sentence: Before such a Judgment, so well poised and so duly made, there is no
reason to fear the Cause of the Christian Religion.

If the mighty are prejudiced against Religion, it is by reason of those ill
qualities that commonly creep upon the Men of Power. Justice and Equity do very
often lie in the way of a present Interest. Impartial Proceedings require
Impartial Minds. The thoughts of a Judgment to come, must be very unacceptable
to him that perverts Judgment and Justice. He who is not content with what he
has, cannot be easy while he sees that his Neighbor has more than himself:
Or that he has that which would very much accommodate himself, and which he
might come at, if it were not for such an importunate Rule as is that of doing
as one would be done by. He who has been successful in his Injustice and
Violence, cannot easily receive a Doctrine which brings him under indispensable
Obligations of restoring all that he has unjustly acquired. The Horrors of
Guilt, the Tears of the Oppressed, and the cry of Blood that pursues them,
would arise too fast, and be heard too sensibly by them, if they admitted such
a secret Monitor as true Religion would prove to them. When Felix heard the
Doctrines of Temperance, Justice, and a Judgment to come, he trembled indeed,
but yet he sent away the Preacher, putting him off to a more convenient time.
And whereas no Man is in danger to be much corrupted by the Flatteries of
others, till he has accustomed himself to such kind Thoughts of his own
supposed Worth, that he easily believes that all others are as favorable to
him as he himself is, the severe Reflections that will arise out of this Holy
Doctrine will soon take off the Visar, and make him see himself in his own
Deformity, and that perhaps in the most odious appearances. In a word, unless
this Man of Power and Dominion, can free his Mind from the false Notions he has
of his own Glory and Authority, he cannot receive the Christian Religion, but
with great aversion, since his Nature and his Habits are so totally opposite to
its chief Tendency and Design. Yet this arises not from any Contradiction that
it has to the true Ends of Power and Government, as if these were incompatible,
but from those ill qualities which do so generally vitiate the Taste, and
corrupt the Tempers of the great and mighty Men.

As for the Noble, if the Humility enjoined in the Gospel obliged them to
meannesses, unbecoming their Rank, or if that Awe and Fear which arises out of
Religious Principles, did sink Men's Spirits, or depress their Courage, here
were a very colorable Pretense: But when this Humility consists chiefly in a
modesty of Temper, and a readiness to do good Offices, even to the meanest;
what harm can this do to the Men of the greatest Advantages for Birth and Rank?
In the performing these Offices, there is a natural Decency and Suitableness,
agreeable to the Order that must be maintained in the World. Persons of the
highest Form, when they hear the just Complaints of the miserable, and the
oppressed, with Patience and Pity, and take care that they be relieved, do the
Humilities of their Rank as much as those of a lower Order, that visit the
Sick, or serve Hospitals and Prisons. And since the Fear with which
Christianity inspires, does only work on the Guilty, it is their Guilt, and not
our Doctrine, which gives the disquiet. But, on the other hand, nothing gives
such an exalted Courage, and so true a contempt of Death, as the prospect of
another State, with the just assurances of the Favor of God, and of endless
Happiness. Nor does any thing make a Man so firm against Accidents and
Misfortunes, as the Belief of Providence; and nothing raises a Man to a truer
Generosity, and a greater nobleness of Mind, than the contempt of Wealth, and
that extent of Charity which our Religion enjoins. But if the Noble of this
World get into the Habits of Voluptuousness and Sensuality, if they think it
becomes their Dignity to give a loose range to Appetite, and to be as Public
and Eminent for their Irregularities, as they are by the Rank they hold, if
they cannot submit to the drudgery of Instruction, and Knowledge, nor to such
Employments as are truly Manly and Useful to the Age, if they think that
Laziness and Luxury, Sloth and Idleness belong to them as Appendages of their
Birth; if because they need be at no Pains to help to support themselves, they
think they owe nothing to Humane Nature, or to their Country, and if the little
Submissions to which they are accustomed within Doors, make them Insolent and
Insufferable to all abroad, then it is from those vicious Habits that their
dislike of our Religion does arise. It is from the undisciplined wildness of
their own Natures, and the neglected Methods of their Education that this
flows. Herod heard John gladly, but could not part with Herodias: And somewhat
like this, made that Agrippa went no further than to be almost a Christian.

So now, I hope, it is abundantly clear, That the too common opposition that is
between the Wise, the Mighty, and the Noble, and the Precepts and Rules of the
Christian Religion, arises not from any thing that is justly exceptionable in
it, but from a great many qualities and dispositions that hang about those
Orders and Ranks of Men, which make that they cannot bear a Yoke that is so
hard to them: They can neither resolve on changing those Dispositions, nor of
suffering a set of Thoughts to break in upon them, that will make them uneasy
in them, and give them much trouble for them: And if it is Visible, as I hope
it is, that all those habits are in their nature and effects, hurtful both to
those who are overrun with them, and* to the rest of Mankind, then all this is
so far from being a just prejudice against the Christian Religion, that it
tends rather to recommend it the more: Since those who are the most averse to
it, are so, only by reason of the prevalency of some very bad Habits and
Customs; which the Interest of the whole World does require, that Men should be
cured and freed from. And this appears more evident by considering the fourth
Particular, which is,

4. That all this belongs only to the greater part the many, but that it is not
constantly nor Universally true. We have seen what a Powerful Biass the Orders
of Men specified in the Text are under, as to the Christian Religion: But we
are now to consider the Abatements that are to be made in this Point. In Fact
we find a Nicodemus and a Joseph of Arimathea among the first who acknowledged
our Savior; though they were both of the Sanhedrin the chief Judicature, and
indeed the Head of the Jewish State. We see Gamaliel was not far from it,
besides several Rulers of Synagogues, who were always Men of distinction in the
Neighborhood; we find also one of the Judges of Areopagus, the most Celebrated
Court in Greece, and one of the Roman Deputies, among the first Converts to our
Faith. St. Paul himself was a Master of the Jewish Learning, and acquainted
with the Greek Philosophers and Poets. We find some of Domitian's Kindred were
not only Christians but Martyrs: Many of the Philosophers and the most admired
Orators of Greece, came afterward to receive and defend this Faith: And now in
a course of a great many Ages, Men in all respects, eminent both for Sense and
Learning, Wit and Eloquence, have not only made outward Profession of this
Doctrine, but have strenously defended it, and which is yet more, have
conformed their own Lives to it.

If we will judge a little of this Matter by the Bulk, we must confess, that
where the Light of this Gospel shines, even in colder Climates, less productive
of Men of Genius, yet there is a more general Knowledge spread among Nations
that were dull and barbarous, while under the Power of other Religions, than is
to be found in Provinces of a much vaster extent, that live in a purer Air, a
happier Soil, and under a kinder aspect of the Heavens. I need not observe,
what a Darkness is spread over all the Pagan Nations, how most of them are sunk
even below Humane Nature, and how little the Mahometans rise above them; bating
their Freedom from Idolatry. Greece and Rome, the two most refined Scenes of
Paganism, had Notions of their Gods and Religion, which the wiser Men among
themselves could hardly endure, and which they have sufficiently exposed. The
good Laws, under which all States are brought which acknowledge this Doctrine
in its purity, produce an unspeakable Change on the outward face and
appearances of things: which though it does not reform Men inwardly, yet it
proves a great Blessing to humane Society, and the cultivation of all Arts and
Sciences, that accompanies this happy Light, shows, that it awakens Men's
Faculties, excites their Thoughts, and quickens their Industry. All other
Religions feed so much Superstition, that it tends to Barbarity: and though under
some happy Reigns and great Princes we find good Sense and true Knowledge
sometimes in the Ascendant: Yet this went soon off, it is not the natural
growth of such a Religion, and cannot thrive long in that Soil.

Thus upon the whole Matter, this our Doctrine is Light, and it illuminates
Mankind in gross: And some even of the sublimest Minds, that Ages and Nations
have produced, the Men of the liveliest Thoughts, truest Judgments, and most
piercing Understandings, that have gone the deepest into Knowledge, and have
seen the furthest into Humane Nature, have not only undertaken and managed the
Cause of Religion with great Advantages, but have recommended it more by their
own unblemished and exemplary Lives, than can possibly be done by the most
labored Writings, and the most moving Persuasions. They have expressed a
genuine Humility, an unaffected contempt of the Pleasures and Interests of this
Life: They have been pure without spot, grave and sober, yet neither sullen nor
ill-natured: They have been serious without Melancholy, and devout without
Superstition: And have showed that Wit could be lively without being Impious,
and that one may be cheerful without being Profane or Scurrilous. Now I would
gladly know, whither any such whom you may have known, and I hope you may have
known many of them, have not been more Beneficial to Mankind, have not been
greater Blessings in their Families and Neighbourhoods, and if their Knowledge
set off with their Modesty and Humility, has not looked full as well about
them, as the highest Pretenders to Wit and unsanctified Vivacity. The
Presumption of the latter, takes off from the true Value that does perhaps
belong to them: Whereas the former have nothing that is troublesome and
offensive, with all that is useful in Knowledge: They can feel that they know
more than others, without either despising them or offering to impose upon
them: they can be superior to others, without Insolence, and Conquer without
Scorn. In such Persons, knowledge does both shine and triumph, and is equally
useful and amiable. None are hurt but such Men's Wit, and many are the better by
their means. The temper that Religion inspires them with does really exalt
their Capacities, it fixes their attention, and composes their Minds: and as
the Revelation of this Doctrine has brought a great deal to Light, which the
World could never have thought on without it, so the excellent disposition
under which Men are brought by it, puts them in a good way, to improve those
Seeds, and to increase them.

But as some of the disputers of this World, the Wise and the Learned, have
been great Ornaments to this Religion, as well as they have been much adorned
by it, so some Men of Power and Authority have come under the standarts of the
Cross: they have owned their Power to be derived from him who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. They have not only taken on the Profession of this Faith,
but have established and conformed it by Laws: they have employed their Power
to protect and encourage Virtue and Justice: they have studied the common good
of Societies and the true Interest Mankind. Some Princes and Magistrates, I am
sorry that I must only say some, but some they have been whose Exemplary lives
have been Patterns to one great part of mankind, and Reproaches to the rest.
They have been raised above the World, only to let others see, to what a height
of virtue, and to what an exactness of Deportment, to what a nobleness of
Temper, and purity of Morals humane Nature may be exalted; and remain untainted
under all the smiles of Fortune, and the flateries of the obsequious. Some have
reckoned it the end of their Power, to promote Justice, to repress Rapine, to
encourage Virtue, and put Vice out of countenance, and to pursue the common
Good of the whole Society, as well as the particular happiness of every
deserving Person in it; and have reckoned no part of their time better
employed, and more to their own content, than that which has been applied to
consider the miseries, and to procure the happiness of their People. They have
easily admitted and patiently heard the groans of the helpless and oppressed,
and have thought it no interruption nor disturbance of their own happy
tranquillity, to enter into and feel the sufferings of others, with a tenderness
that becomes those who are called, and ought to be the Fathers and Guardians of
their people. When such blessings happen to any Age, how sensibly do all Men
feel it? This softens the afflictions of the Unfortunate, which grow the
lighter to them, if they who are so far exalted above them seem to afford them
but one tender look or thought. It gives a reserve of hope for the Prosperous,
who apprehend the Calamities that may happen to them, with a less dreadful
prospect when they can promise themselves supplies in Reversion to their
present abundance. Now let every Man consider and pronounce, whither Men so
made, do not become their power better, and if their power is not an Instrument
of much realler blessings to mankind, more benign and beneficial than all that
glitter, all the shows of Glory and affectations of Greatness, in the Men of
Dominion, the mighty Potentates and Conquerours, those plagues of Heaven and
scourges of the Earth.

And as for the 3d and last rank, of the Noble, it cannot be denied neither,
but how general soever the corruption of that sort of Men has been spread, yet
that this admits of exceptions. Some of high Birth have delighted to
distinguish themselves, by their Generosity and Bounty, by their Sobriety and
Temperance, by their Affability and sweetness of Temper. Some have passed their
lives in Courts and Camps, how little soever these may seem Schools of Virtue,
so exactly, that neither the censures of the envious, nor the Calumnies of the
malicious, which are the more natural grouth of those places, could fix on
them, or lessen them. Some have mixed their Piety with their Courage, so
equally, That it was plain both were fed from the same root. They have exposed
themselves to every danger from the Enemies, but have born indignities rather,
than deride their private differences in that Inhumane and Unchristian way,
that the corruption of these latter Ages has introduced, with a sort of
uncontroulled Authority among the men of the Sword. Such among the Noble must
needs appear with a very particular Luster, having in them all that is valuable
among the men of their sort, without any of the abatements or diminutions that
do too commonly appear among them: Does not their Sobriety and moderation,
their temperance of Mind as well as of Diet, the firmness of their Courage,
with the modesty of their Deportment, their Intrepidity in danger, together
with their pious Meditations, both before and after it, look greater and
nobler, has it not an Air in it, that arises above humane nature, and strickes
more than all the false Vanities, and the proud boastings of pretending Hero's?

I will dwell no longer on this Head, I hope it is undeniable that instances
have happened, both among the Wise, the Mighty and Noble, of men that have been
strict and eminent Christians, and therefore this prejudice is the less just,
because not universally true: and since those few among these orders of Men,
have been so much superior in their true value, and in their usefulness to
mankind, to all the rest of their sort, there is therefore no strength nor
force in this prejudice against our Religion, that is founded on this ground,
because the greater numbers of the Wise the Mighty and the Noble are not true
and sincere Christians: since that arises only from the purity of this
Religion, and the impurity of their Tempers and Morals: so that upon the whole
matter, this becomes rather an argument to recommend our Religion, since those
who stand out against it, do it by reason of the disorders they fall under, in
which if they could continue secure in ours, as well as they may in other
corrupt Religions, they would probably like it as well as any other: So that we
may justly conclude that how true soever the position in the Text may still
continue to be, yet it furnishes the world with no just prejudice against this
Religion. It remains now in the last place that I consider.

5ly, What are the proper Inferences to be drawn from all this, and 1st. It is
plain how little value we ought to set on all those distructions that look so
big in the eyes of blinded and mistaken Men: for if on the one hand they put
men in a capacity of doing good and great services to mankind, on the other
hand they bring them under temptations that for most part prove too hard for
humane frailty. So that they have a double account to make, both of the good
that they might have done, but have not done, and the evil that they have done.

The men of Parts and Wit; might contribute to enlighten the World, to make
knowledge both easier and pleasanter, they might gain an Ascendant by the
superiority of their understandings, to subdue the rest to their Reasons: They
might by the authority of their persuasions and the exactness of their conduct,
make the World see, in the most sensible manner, the beauty and excellence of
Wisdom and Virtue: all this they might do, but if instead of this, they turn
the most Serious things into Burlesque, and profane the most Sacred, if they
set themselves to face down Virtue, and to laugh away the sense of Religion;
and furnish little dablers with some scraps to support them in their Impieties,
these persons tho pressed down with a vast load of there own Guilt, have a huge
accession from all those Crimes, that others are brought to, by their Influence
and Example: so that by a fatal fruitfulness they are entitled to all that
cursed offspring, That is the descent of their Wit and humor.

The Men of Authority that might set bright Patterns, and have a noble
Influence over others, which is perhaps all that is valuable in a great Post,
and all that can well balance that vexation, and the other ill accidents that
accompany it, will have a severe reckoning to make, if instead of endeavoring
this, they have not only been passive and indifferent, but have really
perverted Justice, and authorized Crimes: if they have looked on as unconcerned
at many evils, which they might have redressed, and not content with that, have
enouraged Vice, and promoted Wickedness: If those of whom the Scripture has
said ye are Gods, a strain that without such an authority, had passed for
unsufferable flattery, will make that, which in respect to their Character, is
not to be named, if they who might be the blessings and almost the Idols of
mankind, become plagues and curses, then certainly that great exaltation to
which God had raised them here, must end terribly: they who have received their
good things in this Life, must look to be tormented in proportion to the ill
returns they have made for such extraordinary favors.

The Men of Birth and Blood might by the regards that the world naturally paies
them, and the dependencies that are upon them, bring virtue in credit, and put
vice out of countenance: they who make fashions in all other things, might go
far in this too, if they would set about it in good earnest: but if they go
into the Stream, they make it so much the stronger, and to grow the more rapid.
They run good things down, by a set of bad words which they bestow upon them,
they call Religion, Superstition, Zeal, Bigotry, Strictness of Conscience,
Narrowness of mind: The just apprehensions of the guilt of sin, or the wrath of
God goes for a poorness of spirit, and a want of courage. Such words pass upon
them, and among them without any strict inquiry, and thus they run headlong
into false notions, so that all those great Characters of Wise, Mighty, and
Noble, that have so August a sound, are far from answering the first Ideas,
that we naturally frame in our minds concerning them.

2dly, Men of a lower form ought to be the more easily satisfied with that
narrow Portion that has fallen to them, since it delivers them from many
temptations, which otherwise would probably overset them. A Man of a moderate
sise as to parts, tho perhaps few put themselves into this Classis, except
those who are really above it, as they have little to answer for, so they have
little to encounter or to fear. They may have sense enough to know what is
their duty, how they ought to go through this Scene of life, and what part they
are to act in it. But they were not born to disturb the Age, to embroil
Kingdoms and to distract Churches: they are not Men of notions or speculations,
yet after all, if they are Men of Probity and Industry, Piety, and Conscience,
they may fully answer the ends of their coming into the World, and fulfill the
obligations of that State of life in which they are put: Men of Middlefortunes
who are contened and easy, who know to obey, without aspiring to command, and
who chose rather to use well what they have, than ravenously to cover what they
have not, are secure from many accidents, and exempted from many temptations.
They are as much above Necessity as below Envy: happy is a Middle-region Serene
and Calm: or if the Balance seem rather to lean to the extraem of want, yet
they are thereby carried to take Sanctuary in the secret comforts, which
Religion gives: in those two most eminently, the firm belief of a wise
Providence, and of a future State: the never-failing Springs of Joy to those
who are possessed of them. And if those who pass for the refuse and dreggs of
Mankind, have reason to conclude that they are the Sons of God, and the Heirs
of Glory; How easily may they bear with all the depressions of their present
condition, who have such a Blessedness in view and in Reversion.

3dly, And lastly, let us all consider what great reason we have to bless
Almighty God for this high and holy calling, to which he has called us. Let us
but compare the present State of the greatest part of the world with our own;
how much preferable are our circumstances to theirs? for all their happier
Climates, and richer Soils: and how much does the present condition of this
Island exceed that of our Ancestors, either in the ruder times of Paganism, or
under the later corruptions of Popery? how sensible, how vast is the difference
in all respects?

Since then we are called to so holy a Religion, and enjoy it in its true
purity, with advantages both spiritual and temporal, beyond any Church or
Nation now under Heaven, and far beyond what we had in former ages; we have
just reason to Glory in the Lord, to value our selves upon the favors we have
received, and the privileges that we are under: but if we are under such
peculiar distinctions, the natural inference from this, is, that we ought to
distinguish our selves from all others, and that in proportion to what we have
received: we ought to rejoice in this light, to walk in it, and to walk worthy
of it, and to become in every respect both the wiser and the better for it.

But if we have reason to glory in the Lord, God knows how little reason we
have, according to St. Paul's other inference, to glory in his sight, that is
to glory or boast of our selves, This is but too evident, and needs not be
proved; the enumeration of particulars would be too sad and too long: all is to
be summed up in these words, that Light is come among us, but that we love
darkness better than Light; because our Deeds are Evil.

May the great God so touch our hearts with a sense of all his blessings to us,
and above all of his unspeakable Love in sending his Son to die for us, that we
may bring forth fruits worthy of them, to the glory of his great name, and to
the salvation of our souls in the day of the Lord Jesus. To whom, with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now, and for ever.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for R. Chiswell.
A Discourse of the Pastoral Care; By the Lord Bishop of Sarum. 8vo.

Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum, concerning,
I. The Truth of the Christian Religion, II. The Divinity and Death of Christ,
III. The Infalibility and Authority of the Church, IV. The Obligations to
continue in the Communion of the Church. By the Lord Bishop of Sarum.

An Impartial History of the Late Wars of Ireland, from the beginning to the
end. In two Parts. Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most
Important Places of Action. Written by George Story, an Eyewitness of the most
Remarkable Passages. 4to.

A Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts. By George Tully. Sub-Dean of
York. 8vo.

Memorials of the Most Reverend Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Wherein the History of the Church, and the Reformation of it, during the
Primacy of the said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular
Matters relating thereunto now first published in Three Books. Collected
chiefly from Records, Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original
Manuscripts. By John Strype, M. A. Fol.

Origo Legum; Or, A Treatise of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power.
As also of their great Variety, and why some Laws are immutable, and some not;
but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended or abrogated. In Seven
Books. By George Dawson, M. A. Fol.

FINIS.

