THE BURNING OF THE Whore of Babylon, As it was Acted, with great Applause, in
the Poultrey, London, on Wednesday Night, being the Fifth of November last, at
Six of the Clock.

With a Relation of their Matchless Develish, Gun-powder-Plot; and their Oath
of Secresy: Also the Priests and Jesuits Prayer for the good Success of this
damnable Plot.

Semel in Anno ridet Apollo. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by R. C. over
against the Globe in Little-Brittain, 1673.

THE BURNING OF THE WHORE OF BABYLON, As it was Acted, with great Applause, in
the Poultrey, London, on Wednesday Night, (being the 5th of November last) as
Six of the Clock.
IT was the saying of good Bishop Latimer to his fellow-Sufferer, when he came
to dye at the Stake in Oxford, Be of good cheer Brother, for we shall light
such a a Fire this day in England, as by God's Grace the Papists shall never be
able to quench it; and how much this has been verified, let the World judge.
For, notwithstanding the Romanists have made it their business to quench the
fire of the Gunpowder-Treason, in the thoughts of the present Generation, yet
with all their Arrifices, they have not been able to do it, but the memory of
that never to be forgotten day, is carefully transmitted from the Elder to the
Younger, so that the Child, as well as the Man of years considers it; and the
middle-age, as well as either; nor is there any degree of men in the Kingdom
that have not (as they have had occasion) testified their abhorrency of the
Papist Principles and practices, the Zeal whereof is again renewed from the
Highest to the Lowest; and because that Religion has made such great use of
fire for its propogation, and the fiery Jesuit retains still his heat to blow
up all the Gunpowder, if it lay in his power; therefore Bonfires and Squibs are
the usual Trophies that the Juvenal fry in England make use of on that day, to
testify their joy and gladness for the wonderful preservation of their
Forefathers.

And now again, his Sacred Majesty, (whom God preserve) and his Parliament,
having so lately renewed their joint desires and endeavors for the Supressing
of the growth of Popery in this Kingdom, to the great satisfaction of all good
Subjects: The Citizens rejoyceing, seemed to swel the banks last Wednesday
Night, where you might have seen the broad Streets of London so thick with
Bonfires, as if they had been but one Hearth, and the Fireworks flying in such
numbers, that the Serpents flew like Bees through the Air, and could scarce
have room for one another to pass: The Bells were very early up that Morning,
and rung so loud, as if they had prefaced in a Jubilee.

BUt that being no more than what was common for kind, though not in degree;
The Apprentices were resolved to make a new Addition, which was, a large
Effigy of the Whore of Babylon, dressed up Cap-a-Pe, with all the Whorish
Ornaments, having a Cross and Two Keys in his hand; I know not if they were
the Keys of the Cellar that Guy Faux had, but I suppose they might belong to
Purgatory, because the Pope formerly kept one, and Donna Olympia the other; he
had a string of Beads in the other hand: and never more need you will say, to
fall to his Beads, when I shall tell you how near he was to his End: (I do not
think they were the same that Father Gardner carried with him to Tyburn;) he
gorgiously appeared with the Triple Crown on his head, and holding a Placate in
his hand, extended to the people, Proclaiming general Pardons; but I saw none
very forward to accept them, notwithstanding the Market was ready to be shut
up, and himself so near his End; in this posture he was carried, not in a
Chair, but as the Traitors heads are upon the Bridge, fixed upon a Pole in
Procession, all about the Poultrey Marketplace, attended with near an hundred
Torches, and more than a thousand people. This Ceremony lasted some
considerable time; after which, the Effigies was hung up, upon a high Rope that
was tied at two Garret windows, cross the Poultrey Street about two hours, with
a great Bonfire before it, lest it should catch cold by hanging so long in the
Air.

That being ended, there was a Hogshead filled with small fuel and combustible
stuff, which was set right under his feet; but such was the forwardness of some
of the Spectators, that they must employ some other weapons for his
destruction, some letting fly at him with Pistols, and others with
Fowling-Peices; but the fire over-powering it, soon spoiled their sport, by
burning the Mark; yet they were loath to omit the use of Guns, in memory of the
Monk that contrived them two hundred and ninety-three years ago.

Now having filled themselves with good Liquor, and gratified their own humors,
every Man and Boy went to his own home, and so the Play ended.

The Reader is desired to take Notice of the following matter, which stands
upon Record.

the deliverance of our Church and State from the hellish Powder Plot.
The Plot was to undermine the Parliament house, and with Powder to blow up the
King, Prince, Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very confluence of
all the flower of Glory, Piety, Learning, Prudence and Authority in the Land:
Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Alleys, Friends, Foes, Papists, and Protestants, all
at one blast.

The intent, when that irreligious achievement had been performed, was, to
surprise the remainder of the Kings issue, to alter Religion and Government,
and to bring in a foreign power: Sir Edmond Baynam, an attainted person (who
styled himself Prince of the damned crew) was sent unto the Pope as he was a
temporal Prince, to acquaint him with the Gunpowder-plot: and now to the Plot
it self.

The Sessons of Parliament being dissolved, July the 7th. Anno Christi, 1605.
and prorogued to the seventh of February following: Catesby heing at Lambeth,
sent for Thomas Winter, who before had been employed into Spain, and
acquainted him with the design of blowing up the Parliament house, who readily
aprehending it, said, This indeed strikes at the root, only these helps were
wanting, a house for residence, and a skilful man to carry the Mine: But the
first, Catesby assured him was easy to be got, and for the man, he commended
Guy Fawkes, a sufficient soulder, and a forward Catholic: Thus Robert Catesby,
JOhn Wright, Thomas Winter, and Guy Fawkes had many meetings, and conferences
about this business, till at last Thomas Percy came puffing in to Catesby's
lodging at Lambeth, saying, What Gentlemen, shall we always be talking, and
never do any thing? You cannot be ignorant how things proceed? To whom Catesby
answered, that something was resolved on, but first an oath for secresse was to
be administered: for which purpose they appointed to meet some three days
after, behind Clements Church beyond Templebarre; where being met, Percy
professed that for the Catho lick cause himself would be the man to advance it,
were it with the slaughter of the King, which he was there ready to undertake
and do.

No Tom (said Catesby) thou shall not adventure thy self to so small purpose,
if thou will be a Traitor, there is a plot to greater advantage, and such an
one as can never be discovered: hereupon all of them took the Oath of secrecy,
heard a Mass, and received the Sacrament, after which Catesby told them his
devilish devise by Mine and Gunpowder to blow up the Pasrliament house, and so
by one stroke with the destruction of many, effect that at once which had been
many years attempting: And for case of conscience to kill the innocent with the
nocent, he told that it was warrantable by the authority of Garnet himself the
superior of the English Jesuits, and of Garrard, and Tresmond (Jesuitical
Priests likewise) who by their Apostolical power did comment the fact, and
absolve the actors The Oath was given them by the said Garrard in these words:
You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to
receive, never to disclose directly, nor indirectly, by word, or circumstance,
the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the
exe-Cution thereof until the rest shall give you leave.

Niether were the Priests and Jesuities slack on their parts, who usually
concluded their Masses with prayers for the good success of their expected
hopes, about which Garnet made these verses. Gentem aufert perfidam credentium
de finibus:
Ut Christo lauds debitas persolvamus alacriter.


And others thus. Prosper Lord their pains that labor in thy cause day and
night: Let Heresy vanish away like smoke: Let their memory perish with a
crack like the ruin and fall of a broken house.

FINIS

