TWO General Epistles; OR, The BREATHINGS of LOVE, uttered from the pure Life,
to the whole Flock of God in England, Scotland and Ireland, and all other
places whersoever this shall come, Greeting.

Being a Wholesome EXHORTATION, tending to the Gathering, Uniting, and
Establishing of all the Faithful everywhere, into that which is Eternal.

Given forth by that faithful Servant of God, who, though he has lately laid
down the Earthly Body, yet he lives with his Maker for ever.

EDWARD BOROUGH.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

The first General Epistle, etc.
FOrasmuch as in these our days, the God of Truth has made manifest his Name
and Truth in the hearts of his People, and has gathered the minds of thousands
into it, to worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, in which he is
accepted; and of this Truth (which is but one, and there is not another) are we
made Witnesses and Ministers of, and have the Testimony in our selves that we
are of God, and are a good savor unto him, in them that believe, and in them
that perish; and we have the Testimony, That he that is of God hears us, and
we know the whole world lies in wickedness; and who are in the Truth, in the
Light, and in the Life, have fellowship one with another, in Holiness and
Righteousness, in that which comprehends the world, and condemns all the works
thereof, which are evil; and this Truth, Worship and Fellowship stands in
Christ Jesus the second Adam, whose Kingdom and Rule is not of this world, but
from Heaven, who according to his Promise, in his Counsel has made known his
Power, to the raising up a Righteous Branch, a Royal Priesthood, and Peculiar
People, zealous of his Name, to show forth his Praise and Glory, in Justness
and Righteousness, in Love, Mercy and Peace, and works of Purity, having our
Conversation in Heaven; and since that day of the manifestation of this Truth
of the Gospel of Peace and Salvation, which is the same now as was in the
beginning, which is in Christ Jesus the Light of the world, who is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, and changes not; I say, since that very day
has the Lord prospered his Truth, to the renewing of many into his Image and
Likeness, and to the turning of many from darkness to Light, and from Satan's
power to God, by the mouth of his Ministers, and through great sufferings, and
tribulations, oppressions, afflictions, and labors, has the Lord honored his
Name and his Truth in Nations, and given it a praise among all that fear him,
and has honored it, and exalted it in the sight of the Heathen, to the
confounding of the wise and mighty, and to the bringing out of the captivity of
darkness, sin and death, wherein in times past all have walked, while strangers
from the Life of God, so that thousands who have received the Truth, are
established in it, and cannot be moved nor shaken, but are built upon the sure
Foundation, their Faith standing in the Power of God, with whom the Arm and
Presence of the Lord God is, defending and preserving continually; and unto
such the Truth is precious, and the Way of the Lord, his Name, and Honor is
dear, yea, more than life or liberty, or any other thing which passes away;
who for the Truths sake, as it is in Christ Jesus, do daily give up themselves
to suffering, and to reproach (for well-doing, and not for evil) and love not
life unto death, that the Lord God and his Name and Truth may be honored; so
that in that Truth which is received and learned of the Father, daily do we
walk, in all purity and holiness of life, answering the Mercy and Love of the
Lord, in the exercise of a pure Conscience both toward God and man, in
patience, long-suffering and wisdom toward all, to the putting to silence of
gainsayers, rendering love and mercy toward our Persecutors, and are set in our
hearts to fulfill the Will of God in all things: And now whereas (that the
Scripture may be fulfilled) some may and have denied the Truth, which once was
received and loved, to the making shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience,
abusing the Mercy and Grace of God which to them appeared, and follow the
counsel of their own hearts, and not of the Lord; having lost the feeling of
the Spirit of the Father, and are and may be separated from us (in the
self-separation) through an evil heart of unbelief, that it may be made
manifest they are not of us, though they arise from among us, and may by
disorderly walking contrary to the Truth, cause the Truth to be evil spoken of,
giving occasion thereby to the Enemies of God to blaspheme his Name and Truth
in the Earth, and may be a stumbling to the weak, and an offense to the Way of
the Lord before the simple, through their Disorders and Confusions, raising the
rage of the Wicked against the Lambs of Christ, being not led in the Wisdom of
God, but in Confusions, taking liberty to their own hearts desire, fulfilling
the will thereof, without the Fear of God, above the Cross of Christ, in the
Nature uncrucified, and speaking high words in the presumption, and not in the
Light and Power of God, and acting in the vanity of the mind (in the pretense
of Truth and the moving of the Spirit) such things as Truth and the Children of
it, who are guided with the Spirit, cannot justify, but is judged, and denied,
and cast out from among the Children of Light, who walk in the Truth, and do
try the spirits whether they be of God. Therefore in the Fear of the Lord God
this is written, to go abroad among Friends and others, to inform and show unto
all, that the Truth, and we that are in it, Ministers of it, do stand clear
from all such, who act and speak out of the Truth, and contrary to it, in the
disorder and confusion, and not in the Fear and Counsel of God; and with the
Truth such are judged, and denied, and fellowship with them we have not, nor
their works do approve; though such once owned us, and were convinced of the
Truth, and received the Seed of the Kingdom into the unprofitable ground, yet
being separated from us, and gone out from the Truth, are not subject to it and
its Government, but are unruly and disorderly; We and the Truth do such deny,
and the spirit that rules them, being not the Spirit of Christ Jesus; and such
have done evil against their own souls, and against God, and are troublers of
the righteous Seed, and have and do dishonor the Lord and his Truth, in the
sight of the Heathen, causing the right Way to be reviled, and reproached, and
evil spoken of, through the offense by them; to the making sad the hearts of
some, whom God has not made sad; and even more especially, in that they
pretend to the Truth in their words and works, and professes to be in it, yet
secretly condemning, and openly reviling the Ministers of Righteousness, which
God has blessed, and does daily bless with his Eternal Power, to the turning
many unto God, and to the strengthening of the weak and feeble, which we with
many do witness, to be the Ministers of Life and Reconciliation, and there is
no other, and are established in it, and cannot be moved by the temptations of
the Devil, though the Wicked-one may revile for a moment, to winnow some, and
to try them, and to draw the hearts and minds of others into a snare, out from
the obedience to Christ Jesus, which do become mockers, and despisers and
subverters of the simplicity of the Gospel of Peace, and of the Ministers and
Ministry thereof, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, and there is no
other, though some harden their hearts through unbelief, and blind the eye till
they be past feeling, through rebellion against the Truth, which they hold in
unrighteousness, and not in the Power of God, having made the offense of the
Cross to cease, yet boasting in the liberty of Christ while they are
unmortified, having run from the Judgment, and not truly come through it, in the
finishing of Condemnation; and that spirit that goes out of the Cross is
subverted, and seeks to subvert others from the Truth as it is in Jesus, and
that spirit is denied fellowship with, though it have conformity in the
hypocrisy: Wherefore this is the Word of the Lord God unto you, that err
after that spirit, Be awakened, be awakened, remember and repent, and come to
your first work, to that which condemns you, lest the Lord by his Hand of Wrath
and Judgment upon you, make you an example of Misery and Destruction, to all
that shall hereafter deny the Lord and his Truth. Hear and consider, to the
Light in you all I speak; have you another Truth than that which has been
known and declared from the beginning? is there any other way to Life, than
which we have been Witnesses of, who have not handled the Word of God
deceitfully among you, nor sought yours, but you, nor preached our selves, but
Jesus Christ? and hereof we have the Witness in our Consciences, in the holy
Ghost. And is there any other Salvation than that which God has manifested,
which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World? Be awakened and consider;
Wherefore then do you separate your selves disorderly, and resist the Word of
Life, which once begot you toward the Lord? Consider what you are doing, and
whither you are walking, the end of your way is perdition, and that is accursed
which preaches another Gospel; how do you dishonor the Lord in the sight of
the Heathen, before whom you discover your nakedness, and your shame does
appear, having put off and cast aside your armor and weapon of Truth, whereby
you might have been defended; but scorners and fools take occasion through your
disorders and confusions, to blaspheme the Name of the Lord, and it is through
you: Oh be stirred up and consider, and search your hearts, and come to the
trial, ye that vex the Lord's Soul and grieve his Spirit, lest it cease to
strive with you, and you be wholly given up to fulfill wickedness, till there
be no place nor time of repentance found. And this is a Warning to you all in
the presence of the living God, that you may return to your first love, to fear
before the Lord, and to walk in his Truth, if there may be mercy, and to
fulfill his Will, which is the Light which you are lighted withal by Christ
Jesus, who is the Lamb of God, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the author and
finisher of Faith, and there is not another; and know this, you that deny Him,
who is given, yea unto you all, he will deny you before his Father; and of all
your blood I am clear thus far, whether you resist or receive, who am the lover
of your souls, sometimes loved of you, while you were lovers of the Truth; and
am now a Witness for the Lord and his Truth, and against that spirit which
leads you in the rebellion against the Government of Christ, which is Order and
Peace, out of which you have erred, to the piercing of your own souls; and
though you now exalt your selves against me, and the Truth, and boast your
selves as though you reigned, yet in the Day of the Lord, shall the Light in
you all, which now is darkened, bear witness to me, and of my faithfullness in
reproving you; and the Truth is for ever dear to me, and my soul delights no
less in it, though you rebel against it, in the heady, exalted, presumptuous,
high, wilful spirit, which is not subject to the Government nor Authority of
the Ministry of Christ; but Truth is over you all, and the Mountain of the Lord
is established above you all, and all your words, and works, and boastings, and
feignedness, and disorder, are denied, and in them we have not fellowship, but
the contrary; and do in the Authority of the Lord, even by the same Authority
which has begotten us unto God, and called us, and carried us in his Work unto
this day, deny you all, in that ground and state wherein you stand, till
repentance and returning from whence you are fallen, to the Light which Christ
has lighted you withal.

And all faithful Friends, this is the Word of the Lord God to you; Hear and
fear, walk in the Truth which ye have heard, and learned, and received of the
Father, in it dwell and live, and know there is no other than that which is
made manifest, which is sure to you all, and cannot deceive nor be deceived;
and be not shaken in mind nor troubled, though some deny the Lord, but let
their fall be a warning to you, to be more watchful, to be kept to the Lord,
lest you be tempted: and dwell in the Mountain of Holiness, which no Beast can
touch, where is a hiding place to preserve you in the time of trial; and I
charge you all in the presence of the living God of Life, let your minds be
settled, and hearts stayed in the Truth, which is the Foundation of God, and
know the Armor of God to gird you up to God, where no offense is taken against
Christ, nor against the way of Truth, but the Power of God does remove that
which would be offended, and tramples upon that which gives the offense, and in
this you will be preserved until the day of Salvation; and be aware of that
spirit which boasts above the measure, and of that which makes the offense of
the Cross to cease, for there hardness of heart and unbelief enters, and so
another is followed than the Light, and another joined to than Christ Jesus,
and there is the way to perdition; who go from the Light within them, they deny
God and his Truth, and follow the imaginations of the foolish heart, and run in
rashness and in the frowardness, and that ground receives the unclean spirit in
again, with seven worse, and the laiter end is worse than the beginning; and
this Truth does not change, which is the begotten of the Father, but is the
same for ever: So in it all be faithful and fruitful to the Father in your
places and callings, showing forth in all wisdom and pure conversation among
your enemies, to the putting them to silence when they speak evil of you; and
be Examples of Holiness one to another, that the Lord God may dwell among you,
and may never have cause to withhold his Presence from you, which is Life and
Peace, and Rest for ever: and believe not every spirit, but dwell in that which
discerns spirits; and if any say, Lo here, or Lo there is Christ, go not after
them without you, for you have not been so taught; but know the Christ of God,
the Lamb of God within you, and follow him, and obey his Voice; and be
established all of you, on this sure Foundation, whom God has laid, and no man
can lay any other, and if you build thereon and thereby, you shall never suffer
loss, but your work shall abide the fire, and in the Father's house your bread
you shall receive, and never shall hunger nor thirst, but the Life will be
refreshed and increased daily, and your Lamp will always shine, and you shall
never be darkened, nor stumble; for that which stumbles is out of the Truth, and
the ground stands to receive the seed of Satan, who is a devourer of the
simplicity, and the betrayer from the Truth; Therefore I charge you all in the
presence of the living God, that you hold fast the Faith and Hope which you
have received through the Gospel, that you may never be moved from the Grace of
God, and from the Love that has abounded in you, but may be found watching in
the door, with your Light shining when the Bridegroom comes; and, behold he
comes quickly, and his Reward is with him; blessed are they that tarry for him.

This is the Testimony of my Love unto all the Seed of God, who am as a
deceiver, and yet true, as not known, and yet well known unto the Lord. E. B.

THE Second GENERAL EPISTLE, to all the SAINTS whom God has called.
TO all the Children of Light everywhere, who fear and love the Lord, who are
begotten of God, and unto whom he is known in the Spirit and in the Truth; this
is a Testimony of the Father's Love unto you. Grace, Mercy, and Peace from him
that lives for ever. The God of Light and Life be multiplied in you all, that
you may daily be renewed in strength, and girded with Truth, and armed with the
whole Armor of God, and may be kept by his Power until the day of Salvation,
to walk in the Government and subjection to Jesus Christ, witnessing the Power
and Presence of God in you, and amongst you, giving you power to fulfill his
Will in all things; and that in all Righteousness, and out of all Evil you may
be led, and preserved unto the end, and in the end, to show forth the praises
of God in this Generation, as a People called of him, and redeemed by him for
his Glories sake; even so Amen, and Amen.

Dearly Beloved, be not ignorant, but this know, This is the Message which came
unto you, which is true and faithful, and everlasting, That the true God is
Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and this is the Message of Peace and
Reconciliation, and of Glad-tydings unto all that have sought the Lord, which
we received of him, and you have heard, and there is not another to be
declared; and all that have received it, are gathered up to God, and are in
Covenant with him, and one with another, and are in that which reconcileth and
joyneth unto Christ Jesus, the Husband and second Adam, who is the Lord from
Heaven, the Prince of Peace, the Savior and the Deliverer, who is made
manifest in Power, and condemns the Transgressor, and slaveth the Enmity, and
raises the Life out of Death; and this is he who kills and makes alive, even
the God who is Light, who brings down one, and sets up another; who makes War
against the Mighty, and gives Peace to the Poor, and besides him there is none;
he searches man's heart, and tries the reins, and knows the thoughts, and
every creature is manifest in his sight, who gives to every one according to
his doings; and this is he who stands in the Congregation of the Righteous,
even in the midst of us, and sits Judge among the gods; unto him must all
the gods of the Earth bow, and the inhabitants of the Earth must tremble before
him, and unto him every tongue shall confess, and the light in every man shall
answer when he arises to Judgment, who is a swift Witness to condemn or
justify all the children of men upon the face of the Earth.

This is the God of Truth whom we worship, and who will be worshipped in spirit
and in truth; who is the God of Abraham and his seed for ever, and with him
there is no change nor shadow of turning; and he has made known his Name and
his Power, and his wonderful works in this his day, and has caused his Voice
to be heard in the Earth; and the dead have heard, and now live.

And his Name is exalted on high amongst all that fear him and obey his Voice;
and he has given his Son a Covenant of Light, who lights every man that
comes into the world with the true Light of Life, or Condemnation; that all
who receive him may come to the knowledge of the Father, whom to know is life
eternal.

And this is the Christ, the Savior, in whom we have believed, and which we
preach, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the Foundation of God which
cannot be moved; The Word of God is his Name, and there is no other Name given
for Salvation: This is she that was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore,
and there is no other to be looked for; if any preach any other, let him be
accursed; and if any bring any other Message, let them not be received.

And all you who have believed in this Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the
World, and who have received the knowledge of this God, who is Light himself,
and that searches your hearts, I exhort you, and warn you all in his presence
that lives for ever, to wait upon him, and to fear before him, and to walk with
him for ever in uprightness of heart, which is of great price in his sight, and
forget not his righteous Judgments which he has made known, lest you wax fat
through mercies, and rebel against him, and become disobedient and gainsaying,
and so be destroyed from being a People; but be stayed upon the Lord, and let
your hearts be established with Grace, and be not tossed nor shaken with any
wind of the Doctrines of men, which is not from the Life of God, nor reaches to
the life in you, but begets into Idolatry, to worship other gods than he who is
Light; and be not troubled at temptations nor sufferings, nor at reproaches,
nor any other thing, but stand in the Counsel of God, and in his
long-suffering, and wait patiently upon him in your own measure of the Grace of
God received, which is sufficient to preserve you, that Victory over Death, and
over him that has the power over it, you may receive, to trample upon all that
which is contrary to the Life of God within you, and without you; neither be
you troubled nor offended in Christ if any among you deny the Lord, and
backslide from his pure Way through an evil heart of unbelief, and so become
disobedient children, and vex the righteous Soul; such shall bear their own
burden and condemnation in the day of the Lord; and know, that Truth changes
not, but is the same for ever, though the deceitful hearted through unbelief
depart from it, and choose their own ways, and despise the Counsel of the
Lord, to their own destruction; but be ye more watchful, faithful, and valiant
for the Truth upon Earth unto the end, that you may be found faithful Witnesses
unto the Name of the Lord in this crooked Generation, and may receive the
fulfilling of the Promise of God, and may witness God with you, the Emmanuel,
the Savior, God with us; and this is the whole Salvation, and there is no
other to be expected or witnessed than this, That God dwells in us, and walks
in us, according to his Promise; and all that know this, need not go forth to
the right hand or to the left, but Salvation is come unto us, he that takes
away sin, and saves from it, and from condemnation; and they who witness this,
are begotten by the Word of God, and born of the immortal Seed, and are new
Creatures; and there is now no Condemnation, but the reward of Righteousness
and Peace unto us, who are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and here we
witness the Lord is our God, and we are his People, and he sees no sin in us
who are born of him, nor remembers iniquity; but his Covenant is with us, and
the Kingdom is become the Lords, and his dominion is set up, where God is all
in all, where the Prince of darkness is cast out; and this is the end and
substance of all Ministrations, which we bear witness of: And I do exhort all
you who are called of God every where, patiently to wait in the Way of the
Lord, and in his Judgments to receive this, and to possess it within you, that
you may be worshippers of God, and doers of his Will, and may have the Witness
that you are accepted of him, and may know your Calling and Election sure,
where nothing that defiles can enter, but that may be taken away and removed;
and Him you may feel and witness, which Satan has nothing in, who is the
second Adam, and cannot be overcome, but is greater than the first Adam who was
overcome (though innocent) and is lost from the presence of God; but he in whom
there is no sin, and who cannot transgress, comes to seek and to save that
which was lost in sin, and to bring back that which was driven away by sin; and
He is greater than Innocence, and overcomes the Devil, and is called the Son
of God; and to him that overcomes, who is the Light of the World, is all Power
given of the Father; And know Him in you all to be the greatest, who is not of
the world, nor cannot bow to the Devil, to give you dominion and authority over
all the World, and the powers of Hell and Death, even He who seals up the old
Dragon in perdition never more to deceive; And they w^^ witness this, know the
Election which it is not possible to ^^ceive, or be deceived; and as every one
of you have received Him who is the Lord from Heaven, so let your Faith stand
in Him, and walk in Him; and let all your conversations be ordered by Him, in
all pure and blameless walking in the sight of your Enemies, that it may be
manifest that you are branches in Him, and that you have received power to
become the Sons of God, and that you are Heirs of the Inheritance which shall
not fade away. And all you that witness this, your eye is opened to see God,
and you are cleansed from sin by the Word of God, and you have received the
Peace with God, and glad-tydings from him in your own souls; and this is
Salvation by the second Adam: herein be established and settled, and look not
for another; for there is not any besides this Savior and this Salvation, but
if any preach another, believe them not; and if any cry, Lo here, and Lo there
is Christ without you, go not after them nor follow them, but know him within
you, which is greater than all; yea, if we our selves, or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Jesus than he which lights every man that comes into the
world, or any other Salvation than God with us, let us be accursed; for this is
the Gospel of our Salvation, Christ Jesus within us the hope of Glory, the
Power and Wisdom of God to rule and reign in us, by which we are changed from
Death to Life, and translated from the power of Darkness into the Kingdom of
his dear Son.

And now all Friends and Elect of God, who are called and faithful, you that
have received this Testimony which God has given of the Son, and which the Son
has given of the Father, which in faithfulness has been testified in this
generation, I exhort you all in the fear and counsel of the Lord, take heed to
that which you have believed, and heard, and learned of the Father, which is
the Truth as it is in Jesus, and shall abide forever; and be not removed from
your hope, nor given to change, but mind the Life of God in you all, which is
immortal, and is but one, and it answers to the Lord in Judgments, and in
Mercies one to another in that which is righteous and just, and witnesses
against all the works of the world, which are evil, and not wrought in God.

Ye that know this which is of the Father in you, dwell in it, and walk in it,
and be not shaken out of it, nor removed from it, for it is the Way of Peace
unto Everlasting Rest, where there is no sorrow, but Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the holy Ghost; and every one in particular have Salt in your selves to
savor withal, that you may resist the wicked-one in all his temptations, and
may not join to any thing which is out of Union, and contrary to the Life of
God, and to the Truth which you have received; that you may never be betrayed
of your hope, nor of the simplicity which is in Christ Jesus, in which the
Father is well-pleased; and let the Light of the World guide you in all things,
that your works may be wrought in God, never to be condemned, nor you to suffer
loss; knowing this first, That none are justified by him but them that are led
and guided by him; and to whom he is a Savior, he is also a Teacher, and he is
given to teach in all the ways of Truth.

And now let your fellowship be in the Power and Life of God, and know not one
another in words only, and in shows, and in outward appearance, but witness
one another in the Spirit and in the Truth, and have communion there in
breaking the Bread of Life, that Christ Jesus may be seen to be the Head in
you, and you Members to serve him, and one another, all receiving Wisdom from
the Head, and Virtue from the Vine ( Christ Jesus) that you may abound in Love,
Mercy and Peace, and all the fruits of Righteousness unto the Father, and dwell
in the Fear and Counsel of God, and be subject to his Will, not despising the
Cross which is the Power of God, which slayes the birth that is born of the
flesh, which is not heir of the Promise; but walk in the Cross daily, that your
understanding may be kept open to try and discern all spirits, whether they be
of God; and believe not every spirit, for lying spirits may arise among your
selves, and go forth from the Light, who are not in the Truth, but in the
feignedness and hypocrisy, with false visions and lying imaginations, handling
the Word of God deceitfully, corrupting and perverting the pure Way of God,
having the Form, but not the Power, having left the Power, and gone from the
Light; and such utter the words of Truth without the Life, and is but as the
Chaff to the Wheat, and they are to be denied and resisted, and not joined to,
lest Innocence and Simplicity be betrayed, and your Faith made void, and so you
be destroyed from the Life of God, and Death surprise you, and Darkness enter
into your dwellings, and so Unbelief, Doubtings, Murmurings, and Lustings after
Evil arise in you, and you be perverted from the Worship of the true God, and
grieve his righteous Spirit by bowing to Idols, and following of other Lovers,
and so the true God, which has brought you out of Egypt, and made manifest his
Power in you, be forgotten, and the Faith of his Son made shipwreck of, and
your latter end be worse than the beginning, and the Name of the Lord be
dishonored by you; and then woe be unto you, his Wrath shall suddenly break out
against you: Wherefore hear, and fear, and hearken unto the Word of the Lord,
He has caused his Light to shine forth, and his Voice to be heard; He has
proclaimed his Name among you, and has caused his mavelous Light to
approach, when you sat in darkness in the Land of the shadow of death; when
you were lost, he sought you; and when you were driven away and scattered, he
found you, and brought you home; when you were in your blood, and no eye
pittyed you, he had mercy upon you, and bound you up, and healed you; when you
were dead, he said unto you, Live, and it was so; when you were led captive by
the Devil, under the power of Death, he brake the Chains, and set you free; and
when there was none to help and to save, his own Arm brought Deliverance and
Salvation, and the Way of Life and Peace he set before you.

And now all this has his own Arm accomplished, that you should be a praise
unto him for evermore; and if you walk in the way which he has set before you,
and keep his Covenant which he has made with you, and fulfill his Will, and
walk in Righteousness, in Love and Unity, in Meekness, Lowliness, Humbleness,
and in Soberness and Watchfulness, and in Fear of his Name; then shall his
Presence never forsake you, nor his outstretched Arm cease to defend and
preserve you, but he shall go before you, and be your reward; and he shall be
your God, and you shall be his People; and you shall dwell in him, and he shall
be your hiding place; and he will be to you a Father, and you shall be his
Children, and his Blessing and Peace shall remain in your habitations for ever
and ever: but if any of you turn aside for a thing of naught after vanity, and
deny the Way of Righteousness, and forget the Lord, and kick against him, and
follow the way and counsels of your own hearts, and worship other gods, and
join your selves to strangers, and commit Adultery with other Lovers, and make
the Cross of Christ of none-effect, and turn from the Light of Christ within
you, and fulfill your own wills, and the desire of your own minds, and go out
of the Fear of the Lord into the liberty of the flesh (which is not the Liberty
in Christ Jesus) and so seek your selves, and strive for mastery to be one
above another, and so surmise evil one against another, and the bond of Peace
be broken, and vain contention and strife appear; then shall the Rod of God
smite you, and his Wrath be suddenly kindled against you, and you shall not
prosper, but his Countenance shall be hid, and the Terrors of the Lord, and
Lamentations shall possess you, and Peace shall flee far from you, and such
shall be cast out of the Camp of the Lord, and shall have no part in the
Inheritance, but the Blessing shall depart, and the Curse shall enter till
utter destruction; yea, and if any of you deny the Lord, unto whom his Way is
made manifest, he will deny you, and you shall have no part in him, but
Vengeance in flames of fire will he render upon the disobedient, manifold more
than if his Love and way of Peace had not been made manifest to you, and the
Light of the World is your Condemnation for evermore, if you turn from it.

And in the presence of the living God, I warn you all, Believe not that
spirit, neither follow it, which brings any other Message than what has been
declared from the beginning; believe not him which cries, Lo here, or Lo there
is Christ without you, or that draws from the measure of Christ within you,
to hearken to, or to be taught by any other thing; for that spirit is not of
the Father, which preaches any other Christ, than he that is the Light of the
World, and lights every man that comes into the World, and which brings
any other Message than that God is light in himself, and has given his Son a
Light into the World: And this is the true Testimony of the Father and of the
Son, and he that testifies any other Message, is to be judged and denied; he
is not a Worshipper of the true God, but out of the Truth, and in the Error,
and a Deceiver, and being deceived.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which ministers to others that
which it has not learned of the Father, but has the words without the Power,
and lives not in the Power of what it ministers forth in words, nor is not what
it declares, but is in the outward shows, in the hypocrisy and feignedness,
and reaches not the Life of God, but vails and covers it; and that spirit is
not of the Father, but is to be denied and judged, and not received nor
believed.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is at liberty in the flesh,
and makes the Offense of the Cross to cease, which is exalted out of the Fear
of the Lord, in the liberty of the earthly, which crucifies the Life, and
darkens the eye; and that spirit will boast of Joy, and Peace, and experience,
and knowledge, and speak high words in the airy mind, and that would lead you
out of your conditions to glory above the Cross, till you be past feeling of
the Life; and that spirit begets into feignedness and hypocrisy, and into the
love of the world which passes away; and beware of that spirit, for it is not
of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is hasty, and forward, and
rash, for that goes out of God's Counsel, and betrays the Just, and strives
to be greatest, and to be above the weak, and despises him, and would be
Master, and not a servant, and would rule, and not be ruled in the meek and
lowly Government of Christ, and that spirit will judge out of thoughts rashly
and unsavourily, and condemn another in secret in what it self is guilty of;
beware of that spirit, for it is not of God, but to be judged with the Life of
God.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which seeks it self to have praise
of men, and to be accounted, and would beget into divisions, and would have
parties to it self, and respects persons, and glories in gifts, and knowledge,
and parts, more than in the Giver, and admires men more than He that gives the
increase, and feeds of the knowledge in that nature which is to be famished,
and glories in what has been done by it, as though it had not received power
from the Lord, and is exalted as though it bare the root, not knowing that it
is born of the root; and that spirit spends its treasure which it received in
the Father's house, amongst harlots, and despises the poor, and seeks occasion
to glory over the weak, that it may be renowned; beware of that spirit I charge
you all, for it is not of the Father, nor to be followed, but to be condemned,
and resisted unto death.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which preaches not from the
measure of God received, and to be manifest to it in you, and approved by it
only, but speaks above the measure, and reaches* not to the measure of the
Grace of God; that spirit leads after words and outward shows, and cries Peace
to the Rich, and Judgment to the Poor, and the Word of God is not divided
aright, but heals up falsely, and daubs with untempered mortar, and cries Peace
where God speaks War; and cries War where God speaks Peace; and that spirit is
a deceiver and a betrayer, and feeds but the ear, and not the Life, and darkens
the Counsel of God by words without knowledge, and is not of the Father, but of
the world, and to be denied and condemned.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is not subject to rule and
order, and is not meek and diligent, and long-suffering, but heady, high and
untoward, seeking occasions against the Just, and watches for evil; that
spirit will not bear reproof, but is idle, sloathful and careless, surmising
evil, and backbiting, and conforms in appearance, making a fair show, but it is
not unto God, as appearing unto man; and that would go, and is not called; and
will not go when it is called; and seeks for the praise of men more than God;
and that is fruitless ground, and brings forth briars and thorns in secret,
which choaks the Seed of God: beware of that spirit, it is a lover of this
world; have no fellowship with it, for it is not of the Father, but a deceiver,
and is to be denied.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is tossed and unsettled, and
is given to change, and is not established with Grace; that is an Adulterer,
and hunts for the precious life, and seeks by flattery to beguile the Innocent;
that spirit is zealous for a moment, but is soon overcome, and is stony ground,
and brings not forth fruit to perfection, but withers, and its latter end is
worse than the beginning. That spirit is exalted into presumption, and in
peace, and cast into desperation and trouble, and the double-mind lodges in
it, and it is unstable in all its ways, and is a ground for the seed of Satan,
and to it there is no peace from God; and beware of that spirit, for it is not
of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again;

Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is more zealous than
knowing, whose zeal is without true knowledge, and stands in that which is
corrupted; that flourishes for a moment, but cannot endure for ever; it has
no root in it self, but is furious and passionate, and not long-suffering; that
spirit knows not it self, but would devour its adversary with bitterness, and
not gained by long-suffering; that is not the Spirit of the Father, but must be
denied in all.

Again;

Believe not that spirit which draws back into the world, into its lusts,
liberty, and fashions which pass away; that spirit forgets God, and draws
back, for his soul has no pleasure in it, but is vexed with it, where the
Cross is made of none effect, and the false liberty is walked in, which murders
the Life; that spirit is of the Devil, and is to be condemned.

And now all Friends of God everywhere, who know him and are known of him,
whom he has gathered out of this untoward Generation; be diligent in your
Callings, and keep your Meetings in faithfulness, waiting upon the Lord, that
you all may receive of his Fullness to be filled with it, and may be nourished
up unto himself, as Trees of Righteousness, the planting of his own right hand,
to spread forth his Name and Glory, as a People saved by him, and unto whom
there is none like besides. And this know and understand, that spirit is not of
the Father which confesses not the Son to be come in the flesh, who destroys
the works of the Devil, and takes away sin; and that Spirit believe and follow
which condemns sin, and destroys it, and takes it away, and so gives Peace
with God in your own Consciences, and leads you into all Truth, and keeps you
from all Evil: and you that witness this, the Son you know, and the Father you
know to dwell with you, and in you; and this is the first and the last; believe
in him, and follow him, and look not for any other; and in this the Father of
Life and Glory, whose Dominion is without beginning and end, stablish you, and
preserve you, Amen, and Amen.

I a beloved Brother, and a Companion unto all the Saints in suffering, and in
rejoicing, who have received this Testimony from the Father, do with it in this
Epistle salute the whole Church in the Love of the Father, as moved of Him by
his Eternal Spirit, who bears witness to me that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness, and that all that are of God hears us. And this
Testimony I give of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Truth, and of the
Salvation of which I am made a Witness, and against all that ever shall deny
it, or turn from it: And this is thus far the words of my Testimony by the
Spirit of the Father, not knowing when the time comes it may be finished, and
the night may come when no man can work:

Edward Borough.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
FOrasmuch as many who are partakers of the Father's Love, manifested in his
Son in measure, in whom these Epistles have found greeting, With the same Love
in the upright-hearted, to which it is a sure Testimony of Love from Life it
self, to the quickening, strengthening, confirming, and arming of all such as
have in the Love, Life and Power, heard, received and believed the Truth, as it
has been declared, and is in Jesus, in whom our Faith is standing; which Faith
works by the Love shed abroad in our hearts, wherein we are reaching after
each other in the sameness of Love, which is the bond of our Unity, wherein we
are called together to be joined in the purity, power and life of one Faith and
Love, therein to bear Testimony (as we have in our measures received) to, and
of the Everlasting Truth; wherein finding these Epistles of such manifold
service to the whole Body, both for instruction, exhortation, strengthening and
forewarning, whereby there is or may be a safe arming against all deceit and
deceivable spirits; Hence it is from the earnest love and desire stirred up in
many here among us that are faithful, whereby this they put in print, that
thereby the service may reach unto all who are worthy thereof in these Nations,
for to them is it sent, who are called of God; Therefore in the Fear of the
Lord let every one of us, to whom this comes, walk worthy of the Fathers Love,
Grace, Mercy and Peace, whereinto we are called in one Body, of which Christ is
Head.

A. D.


