THese are to certify all into whose hands this Book shall come, that these
Sermons contained in this Book (on Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose
Transgression is forgiven and whose Sin is covered,) Entitled Gospel
Remission, and Printed for Dorman Newman Stationer, are the painful and
profitable Labors of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, and published by the best and
most Exact Copy extant.

Jan. 17. 1668. Philip Nigh, William Greenhill, William Bridge, William Adderly,
Matthew. Mead, C. Helms.


There is now Reprinted The Christian Man's Calling, with Directions to
perform it in all religious Duties, Natural Actions, Particular Vocations,
Family Directions, his own recreation. In the Relations of Parents, Children,
Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, and in all conditions in his dealings with
all men in Company, in Solitariness, on a weekday from morning to night, in
visiting the sick, and on a dying-bed, by Geo. Swinnock, M.A. late of Great
Kimbal in Buckinghamshire.

GOSPEL REMISSION, Or a TREATISE showing, that TRUE BLESSEDNESS CONSISTS IN
Pardon of Sin.

Wherein is Discovered The Many Gospel Mysteries therein Contained. The
Glorious Effects proceeding from it. The Great Mistakes made about it. The True
Signs and Symptoms of it. The Way and Means to obtain it.


By Jeremiah Buroughs.

Being several Sermons Preached immediately after those of The Evil of Sin by
the same Author.

And now Published by Philip Nigh, William Greenhill, William Bridge, William
Adderly, Matthew. Mead, C. Helmes.


The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the People that dwell therein shall
be forgiven their Iniquities,

Isai. 33. -- 34. London, Printed for Dor. Newman, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Chirurgions Arms in Little Britain near the Hospital-gate, 1668.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THe provident care of God is manifested toward his People in the present
Preservation of, and provision for them. To have the mouths of Lions stopped
when we are cast into the midst of their Den; the Waters to be a wall about us
on the right hand and on the left, which in their own nature and tendency would
overwhelm us, to have the Bush burning, and not consumed, are as evident tokens
of the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, of Gods presence with and
owning of his afflicted People now, as in the days of old; yea to have Honey out
of the flinty Rock, Manna in the Wilderness, a voice behind us, Saying, This is
the way, walk in it; enforces as great an obligation to admiration and
thankfulness upon us, as upon the Israelites of old. Among'st the many English
Prophets who are dead, and yet speak, the Reverend Author of the ensuing
Treatise may challenge a place with the first Worthies: His Works, not my words
are the best Orators to commend him: That Scripture Encomium may be written
upon his Stepney and Cripplegate-Lectures, -- This and that man was born there.
For although many now living, do through mercy enjoy able Teachers and
Instructors; yet do they owe to him the Name of Father, as an Instrument of
their Conversion. I may boldly apply that saying to holy Burrough's, which was
once spoken of a Learned Divine beyond Sea: Meruerunt viri docti etiam post
funera vivere, ac docere scriptis posteros, quos infeliciter post eos nasci
contigit; in eo autem virorum ordine Burroughsium reponere, nemo praeter eum,
qui propriae diffidit virtuti, prohibebit.

These Sermons presented to thy view, are with the help of an able Learned
Divine, (who also heard these Sermons preached,) cast into that form of a Tract
that now thou see them in, without any material Additions or Alterations. The
time when the Reverend Author preached them, was next in order after those
convincing Sermons, of the sinfulness of Sin; so that this Gospel Soul-Reviving
Discourse was then a word spoke in due season.

In this Treatise thou have Gospel Grace stated rightly, the Justice of God
cleared, the Mercy of God exalted, poor trembling Sinners encouraged to come to
the Blood of Christ for Pardon, presumptuous sinners awakened out of their
deadly deluding Dreams of Heaven, when they are ready to drop into Hell. In a
word, here thou may take a view of the Love of the Father, the Grace of the
Son, the Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness, Cordial Waters of Life
for sinking and fainting sinners, here thou may behold Sin, Damning sin, sin
that God hates, and cannot but hate; Sin that God punishes, and cannot but
punish, taken off the poor believing sinner and laid upon his Surety; sin
condemned and punished in Jesus Christ, and the Believing Sinner justified,
pardoned, acquitted. If therefore thou prizest peace with God through Jesus
Christ, Pray for light to direct thee into a distinct knowledge of this Gospel
Truth, and take up this Book and read it, and the Lord give thee understanding
in all things, answerable to the Design of the Author, and the Prayer of him
who heartily wishes thy Salvation, and growth in the knowledge of God, and of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

C. Helmes.

The Stationer to the Reader.
IT is now long since I undertook the Printing of this Book, and as my
Encouragements were many, so I had obtained of one of those Reverend Divines
that have given their attestation to it, to peruse the Work, and had his
Testimony that he heard those Sermons preached; and upon Perusal of them found
not any thing Material left out, of what the Author Mr. Jer. Buroughs
delivered; and knowing that Mr. Peter Cole (who formerly Printed many of the
Author's Works) had long laid wait and endeavored to get this Copy out of the
hands of those that published the Author's Books, offering as great Reward for
the same, but could not obtain it. And now at last being so much wished
thereunto by his friends; being assured that as the whole is abundantly
spiritual and lovely in its Matter, and that wherein the very spirit and style
of Mr. Buroughs is manifested; so there are many things (as I am informed)
were never so much as touched upon, or handled by any other Writer, and yet are
of very great Importance to be known by all Intelligent and Sober-minded men, I
thought good, having this assurance from them, to certify so much to the
Reader.

Dor. Newman.

Some of the greater faults in Printing to be thus amended
Page 2. line 17. for sorrow read terror. p. 7. l. ult. to children add of men.
p. 15. l. 26. for thee r. him. p. 21. l. 32. for letter r. little. p. 30. l. 1.
to inlet of add all. p. 36. l. 37. after the first word cry add but it may be.
p. 45. l. 9. after pardon add and. l. 14. after in add to. l. 15. for run r.
ran. p. 56. l. 19. after how add then. p. 60. l. 3. after seeing add the heart
of. ibid. after Holy Ghost r. are for is. p. 81. l. 31. after horrible add
evil. p. 98. l. 6. for fourthly r. fifthly.

Gospel Remission.
PSALM. XXXII.1. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is
Covered.


CHAP. I. The Text Opened, and the Main Doctrine Propounded.
I Have, as you may remember, in many Sermons endeavored to show unto you the
malignity and dreadful evil that there is in Sin; And what more seasonable and
suitable Argument can we now treat of, than the blessedness of Pardon of Sin?
How sweet and acceptable will this be to such fou^s, that by the former
argument have been made apprehensive of the dreadful evil of it? How readily
will they say, with the Prophet, How beautiful are the feet of those that bring
(such) good tidings? Wherefore, me thinks, while I am reading this Text, I
should be like a man at an Echo, that hears the words thereof resounded back
again, by every broken hearted sinner in this Congregation, O, blessed, blessed
is the man indeed whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

A word spoken in season (says Solomon) is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver; and considering, Prove. 25.11.
how large I have been in opening of the Evil of Sin unto you, if ever a word
was spoken in due season, I hope it may be out of this Text: The word of
Reconciliation and pardon of Sin; and if God enable me to clear up unto you the
excellency of those Truths contained in this Scripture, I hope they will prove
in all your eyes to be as Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

The words read, are the first words of one of David's Penitential Psalms, and
they are indeed the genuine voice of a true Penitent; the very Character of an
humble Penitential Soul; he is one that has admiring thoughts of the
blessedness of the pardon of sin: I will not spend time in Analyzing the whole
Psalm, because the sweetness and blessedness of the Argument draws my heart to
come presently to it; And blessed may your ears be, who after hearing of the
dreadful evil of sin, may come to hear the blessed doctrine of Pardon; it is
that which God has denied to many thousands: And who knows but many even of
those that in this Congregation have heard the sorrow of that Doctrine, are now
gone (perhaps to their own place) and feel what they then heard, and much more,
and are past ever hearing the argument of pardon and forgiveness of sin: that
blessed sound shall never come to their ears; but the horrid noise of yelling,
roarings, and cursings of damned spirits, for the wrath of God that lies heavy
on them for their sin.

This Psalm in the title of it is a Psalm of David Maschil; that is, a Psalm of
Instruction; or, for Instruction: And what is a more useful Instruction than to
instruct the soul where true blessedness lies? And what is a better instruction
than to tell man the way of the pardon and forgiveness of sin? the way to true
happiness? The happiness of the reasonable creature is that which many wise men
thought to find out, but after all their search, they were much puzzled, and in
the dark, and could never come to find where it lay, by all the wisdom of the
flesh; only the rational creature is capable of blessedness, because it is
capeable of such an act as to reflect upon it self: that is the ground why the
rational creature is capable of blessedness, above all other creatures; no
creature can truly be said to be a blessed creature, but only the rational;
because no creature else can reflect upon its own condition to know it self.
But then not only to know our selves, but our own happiness, where our
blessedness lies; this must needs be a profitable instruction. No Philosopher
did ever give such a description of happiness as this is, Blessed is the man
whose, etc. yea David, who had a Monopoly of the comforts of this world to the
full, and had the Crown upon his head, says not, Blessed is he that is Crowned
and has a Kingdom. David that had the riches of this world, did not say,
Blessed is he that has this worlds goods. David that had honors, and was
reputed among the mighty men, did not say, Blessed is he that has worldly
honors. David that had many Victories over Enemies, says not, Blessed is he
that rides in Triumph over his Enemies. David that had sumptuous Palaces, and
the delights of this world, does not say, Blessed is he that has them. But in
the midst of all Outward good things, David enjoyed in this world, he finds his
blessedness to consist in this, The pardon and forgiveness of his sins; he
pronounces them and them only blessed, whose sin is pardoned.

This Instruction of the blessedness of Pardon of Sin, as it lies here annexed,
is of weight indeed, and of infinite concernment: Luther says, The Argument of
free Justification and Remission of Sin, is that that makes a Divine: and this
may be added to that, it is this that makes a Christian; To be instructed
rightly in the Justification of a Sinner, is that that makes a Christian. Nay,
although we had ten thousand Instructors in other things, not only in Natural
knowledge, but in Divinity too, in all the points of it; yet we could never be
wise unto Salvation, except we were instructed with this instruction, in the
blessedness of Justification and pardon of sin. Luther says, Let this Doctrine
lie dead, and all the whole knowledge of other Truths is to little purpose.
Therefore well may the title of the Psalm be a Psalm of Instruction: Blessed is
the man whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose Iniquities are covered.
Wherefore our Point of Doctrine according to the words is this, Doct. The
Blessedness of a Man, or of any Soul; consists in the free Grace of God
forgiving of his sin.

That is our point; the blessedness of any man or woman does not consist in the
enjoyment of any thing in all this world, but in the free grace of God
forgiving of his sin; It neither consists in any thing we can do or have, but
in the free grace of God forgiving of sin; and that is the meaning of that
Text, Romans 4, 6, 7. which St. Paul cites from this place of Scripture, observe
it, it is to this very purpose, even as David also describes the blessedness of
the man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are
they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are covered. The scope of
the Apostle in this place is, to declare the blessing of Abraham the father of
the faithful, consisted not in any thing he had or did, but in the free grace
of God forgiving of his sin, Gal. 4.15. says Paul, Where is the blessedness you
spoke of? for, I bear you record, if possible, you would have plucked out your
own eyes, and given them to me: Where is then the blessedness you spoke of?
What Is the meaning of this blessedness? certainly this blessedness in my Text,
it was this blessed doctrine St. Paul being first that brought it to the
Gallatians, concerning the free Justification of a poor soul by faith in Jesus
Christ, in the free pardon and remission of his sin by faith in Christ; this is
the blessedness spoken of: Now, because the Galatians at the first hearing of
this doctrine were so mightily taken with it, that they cried out, O this is a
blessed doctrine; Remission of Sin by the free grace of God through faith in
Christ, O this is the blessedest doctrine that ever we heard; they were so
taken with it, that if possible, they would have plucked out their eyes for
Paul, that brought them such a doctrine as this at their first hearing and
receiving of it. But afterward, the Galatians were turned aside by false
Teachers, that had taken off the edge of their affections to this blessed
Truth. Now Paul coming to reprove them, says, Where is then the blessedness you
spoke of, there was a time when I first taught you the Doctrine of the free
forgiveness of sin by faith in Christ, and you said it was a blessed Doctrine,
and your hearts were mightily taken with it, where is it now? How comes it to
pass that your hearts are so taken off from the esteem you then had of it?
Where is then the blessedness you spoke of? Thus it is usually, the Ministers of
Christ come and preach Doctrine to People that their hearts are taken with,
their spirits stirred, and they mightily affected with the first hearing of it;
but afterward by some sin, or the company of carnal friends, their hearts are
taken off, though while they were hearing such and such a Truth, their hearts
glowed and burned within them. God grant it may not be so with some of you, who
when you heard lately the Doctrine of the Evil of Sin, your hearts were
mightily affected, and you said, O what a dreadful evil is there in sin, in the
least sin; and being convinced of it, you began to reform; yet afterward you
fell off again. May it not be said of you, Where is the sense of the Evil of
Sin you spoke of? Where is that bitterness upon your hearts, on the convictions
you had of the evil of sin? Where is it? What is become of it? As St. Paul
says, the blessedness you spoke of, Where is it? What is become of all that
strength and power the Doctrine of Remission of Sin had upon your hearts? Take
another Scripture, Remission of Sin is the special Blessedness of the second
Covenant that God made with Abraham; when he came to Abraham and told him, In
his Seed all Nations-should be blessed, Gal. 3.17. compared with the 24. in the
17. verse he speaks of the Covenant made with Abraham, and that the Law that
was 430 years after, could not disanul the Promise that it should be of none
effect, verse. 24. Wherefore then served the Law? why says he, It was our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ: The scope of the Apostle is to show, that
there is a Covenant of Grace beyond that of the Law, and that the Covenant of
the Law is to bring us to the Covenant of Grace; and the principal thing in the
Covenant of Grace is in the 24. verse. The Law, says he, was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ* That we might be justified by faith, and thereby receive
remission of our sins, if the Scripture places blessedness in the remission of
sin: That it is so, I suppose is clear enough, the main business we have to do,
is to show how it is so; that is, to open unto you wherein the blessedness of
the pardon of sin consists, and show you in what particulars the blessedness of
pardon of sin may appear unto you: and to that there are many things may be
said.

CHAP. II. Of the Blessedness of the Pardon of Sin, which appears 1. Negatively
in the Evil it frees us from.
1. THat, that has been lately delivered of the Evil of Sin, may be of great
concernment to discover wherein the blessedness of pardon of sin lies, the
deliverance from so great an evil, as you heard, the evil of sin was; surely,
Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven. If sin be so dreadful an evil as
you heard, surely, Blessed is the man that is delivered from all that evil: if
it remain fresh upon your minds, what the evil of sin against God was, and what
it brought upon your selves; you cannot but say, this is one principal thing
wherein it appears, that man or woman is blessed that has his sin pardoned: If
any man or woman be in any great danger, or under any great evil or misery; and
if he be delivered from it, we say, that man is a blessed man, or a blessed
woman that is quit from such a woeful evil that was upon them; you account your
selves happy to be delivered firm any dangerous storms, and to have a calm; Are
not they then happy that are delivered from the evil of sin? Let me speak a
little to a poor sinner that understands what the meaning of sin is, and that
understands somewhat of the dreadful evil of it: I would ask of thee oh poor
sinner; What see thou? the answer will be, What see I? Oh I see the angry
Countenance of an Infinite God against me, whose eyes are as a flaming fire
looking with indignation upon me! I see a black dismal cloud of the displeasure
of the Almighty hanging over me! I see a most hideous and dreadful sentence of
wrath ready to fall upon me! I see woe, misery, and destruction pursuing of me!
I see blackness of darkness and desolation even surrounding me! I both see and
feel the woeful accusations of a guilty Conscience within me, condemning me;
continually grating upon my soul, and terrifying me with dreadful Visions of
eternal miseries to betide me! I see the chain of black guilt and horror on my
soul, that I carry with me wheresoever I go! I see the bottomless gulf of
eternal horror and despair with the mouth of it wide open ready to swallow me
up! Now then, this sight being presented before an enlightened and awakened
Conscience; Now comes in the pardon and forgiveness of sin whereby this
dreadful cloud is dispel'd, the tempest is gone; the darkness and misery
vanished away, and all evil whatsoever the soul is set free from, sin, and from
all the dreadful consequences of it. Is not this a blessed man, comparing his
former condition with his present state, looking on him as even now, having the
sense of the dreadful evil of sin upon his Conscience, and the heavy burden of
it on his back, ready to sink under it, into the gulf of misery, and now
pardon of sin comes; O what a blessed change is this! O blessed is the man
whose sin is pardoned. Now what God had laid unto his charge, or his own
Conscience, the Law, the Devil, or the World, it is all done away, all is
discharged and gone, blessed is the man that is thus delivered; Old things are
past away, and all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. it is meant not only of
Sanctification, but of Justification also, he is a new creature; Old things are
past away, and all become new. Brethren, by reason of the sin of man, there is
a curse upon the whole Creation, and this old Creation must come to confusion:
therefore it is an evil thing for any man to seek his happiness in any thing
here in the old Creation, for there is a curse upon it, and it will come to
confusion. But there is a new Creation of all in Christ, of all spiritual
things in Christ: Now a sinner when he comes to have his sin pardoned and be
justified, he come's into a new state, that comes in by the new Creation; the
happiness of the Children comes by, and consists in the new Creation; old
things are done away, and he comes to be seated in the new creation in Christ;
this is the first thing wherein a man or woman is blessed, Negatively, in being
delivered from so great an evil.

2. Of the Positive Blessedness of the Pardon of Sin.
Secondly, Positively, he is a blessed man whose sins are forgiven, if we
consider, the excellency of that mercy God makes that soul partaker of, whose
sins are forgiven, Dan. 9.9. To thee Lord our God belong mercies and
forgivenesses, forgiveness is the fruit of glorious mercies, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord is merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving inquity. Now I shall open this
positively, and show the riches of mercy in forgiveness of sin. When the
Scripture applys mercy to forgiveness of sin, it has diverse expressions,
sometimes calls it riches of mercy, Ephesians. 1.7. sometimes, plenteous mercy,
Psalm. 86.8. sometimes, Gods fullness of compassion, Psalm. 78.38. sometimes,
multitude of mercies, Psalm. 51.1. I might give diverse other places, but those
may suffice; it is rich, plenteous, fullness of compassions, and multitude of
mercies; When God forgives sin, he shows mercies in all these expressions. For
the opening of it unto you, I shall show you what abundance of mercy God shows
in the forgiveness of sin, consider merry 1. in the Efficient. 2. in the final
cause of it.

1. Of the Efficient Cause of Mercy in forgiveness of Sin.
First for the Efficient Cause: there is abundance of mercy God manifests in
the forgiveness of sin, he abounds in his mercy, there is a Sea, an infinite
vast Ocean of mercy, in which, the sins of the Elect come to be swallowed up,
though their sins be many, and great, and committed with many grievous
aggravations: yet when they come to an act of Justification, to God, to be
forgiven; I say, God comes to the soul as an infinite Ocean of mercy, that
swallows up all the evil in sin, attend unto it, Look as in the mighty Ocean,
whether you cast in a load or a shovel full of earth, the vast Ocean makes
little difference of either; so when a soul comes to God in Christ, when it
comes to Pardon and Justification, whether sins be little or great, it is all
one, the mercy of God makes no difference at all; take heed to what I say,
while I am speaking of forgiveness of sin, I shall make known so much grace,
that if you abuse it, it will be one of the most dreadful things that ever you
did, and therefore while I go along, take heed of abusing it, especially you
that desire to hear of the pardoning mercy of God; whether your sins be little
or great, when you come to pardoning mercy, it is an infinite Ocean that
swallows up all; those that have not their sins pardoned, whether their sins be
little or great, it makes no difference, they are truly damned for little as
well as great sins, both sinks down into Hell, and the infinite Ocean of wrath
and horror swallows up all; so in point of Justification, whether your sins be
little or great, it matters not, pardoning mercy swallows up all.

2. Of the Final Cause of Mercy in forgiveness of Sin.
Secondly, but further, as Mercy is an infinite Ocean that swallows up Sin, so
Mercy is the Final Cause. It is to this end that God might manifest the riches
of his grace; when God forgives any one sin, this forgiveness comes from Gods
mercy, and it is to this end, That God may declare before Men and Angels, to
all eternity, what the greatness and infinite riches of his grace is, what the
grace of God is able to do when God comes to pardon sin; it is for this end as
if he should say, Well, I am about now to pardon thy sin, and this work I am
about to do, it is for this very end, that it may be known to Men and Angels to
all eternity, what the infinite riches of the infinite grace of God is able to
do for poor sinners. Now certainly, that man is a blessed man, if the man whose
sins are pardoned has such mercy showed to him, and such a blessed work upon
him, as is to that end, that God may declare to all eternity what the glorious
riches of grace of an infinite God is; surely this is a great blessedness, when
God shall separate a man or woman for this end, it must be very glorious;
certainly therefore pardon of sin is no light and mean thing, but it must be a
most glorious work of God wheresoever it is: And this Consideration is a mighty
Argument to uphold a poor soul under trouble of sin, and a great encouragement
for him to come in for pardon: Do thou see O troubled soul Gods wrath against
thee, and do thou stand quaking at the apprehension of the evil of sin? let
not thy heart sink, come in, and cast thy self on the free grace of God, there
is a possibility for the pardon of thy sin; for when God comes to pardon sin,
the mercy God shows in pardoning of any one sin, he does it to the end that he
might magnify the riches of his grace to all eternity, and such mercy that
serves to that end must needs be glorious; And will not such mercy serve thy
turn, as must set out the infinite rich grace of God? God is pleased to
manifest thus much mercy for the forgiveness of thy sin; and where a sinner is
forgiven, it is this mercy that is manifested: when men judge of God by
themselves, they think slightly of him, when they judge of Gods thoughts by
their own: What is the reason that makes sinners have such slight thoughts of
sin, but because they judge of God by themselves, that he abhors sin no
otherwise than man does, and so hope they may do well enough, measuring the
infinite hatred that God has to sin by their own: so on the other side, the
sinner that is convinced of the dreadful evil of sin, is ready to despair; Why?
because he judges of God by himself; as if the mercy of God were no other than
the mercy of man; not considering the mercy of God in pardoning sin, is such
mercy as is to show his grace in the riches of it to all eternity. Well then,
that man to whom such mercy is shown must needs be very blessed.

CHAP. III. Of the wonderful Mysteries of Godliness in forgiveness of Sin.
glorious mysteries in it, the Argument stands thus; That man or woman for whom
God shall work, such a work as has multitude of glorious mysteries in it; that
man or woman is blessed: But where ever sin is forgiven, God works for that
soul such a strange work, the strangest that ever he did; a work that has so
many admirable mysteries in it, that in the opening of them will declare every
way that this soul is blessed. And this is the business I would now do, to open
the mysteries that are in the forgiveness of sin; and it is to this end, that
as I might set before you the great work of God in pardoning sin, so also that
you might have higher thoughts of it than ever you had before, for that is it I
aim at, to raise up the thoughts of men to the right understanding of this
great point of the Justification of a sinner, that so you may sanctify Gods
Name, by having such thoughts of it as the thing it self calls for.

Of the first Mystery, it is by means of a Mediator.
1. Where sin is forgiven, it is by means of a Mediator between God and the
Soul, it is through the Mediation of the Son of God, observe it, for there is
no point in all Religion is of greater use to understand, than this point of
the way of God in pardoning of sin, because of the many mysteries of God
contained in it; I hope I shall make it appear it is no slight work and
business: Mark then, when God pardons sin, it is always done through the
mediation of the Son of God; God never pardons any sinner as a Prince does;
when a Malefactor has offended him, he comes and humbles himself, casts
himself down at his feet, and cries, I pray Sir forgive me, and he says, Well,
I will forgive you; God never forgives any sin thus; and yet it is thus with
people when they come to God for pardon, most of them never think of any other
way. Friends, there must be a great deal more than so: for whosoever has his
sins forgiven, it must be by the virtue of the mediation and intercession of
the Son of God, he must stand up before the Father, and mediate for thy soul:
if all the Angels in Heaven stood up to mediate, it would not be sufficient;
but the Son of God alone must do it; it is as if a Malefactors condition was so,
that the mediation of all the Nobles could not prevail with the King for a
pardon, but there must be the mediation of the Prince himself to obtain it: So
I say, poor soul, thou may think it a slight business, but know if ever thou
art forgiven, it must be by the mediation of the Son of God, he must stand up
to mediate for thee, and plead, Oh Father let such a poor soul that has been a
Sabbath-breaker, a Liar, a Drunkard, an Unclean person, let his sins be
forgiven, and let him not be damned, Father put in his Name for pardon: I shall
not speak of it how Christ mediates, but that is and has been his work from all
eternity, to mediate and make intercession for those he saw before in the
eternal Council of God should live in such times; and whatever pardon of God is
gotten, it is through him; and if thou poor man ever come to be pardoned,
know Christ has been mediating to God the Father for thee; Oh Father, such a
poor creature that dwells, it may be, in such a Cottage, or in such an obscure
place, let his name be put in for forgiveness. And now, is not this a blessed
thing, that thou poor creature should have the Son of God to mediate for thy
name to be put in for pardon! this of a truth is so, if there be any truth in
the Divinity of the Word, it is in this, That all the forgiveness and pardon
any creature has, it is by the mediation of the Son of God, and his heart was
upon it from all eternity; surely here is abundance of grace in this one thing,
take heed of abusing it; this is the first mystery, you must not look for
pardon of sin in a natural way to cry for forgiveness, but you must go in the
Name of the Mediator in this mystical way.

Of the second Mystery, It is through Christ's undertaking the Debt upon himself.
2. The second mystery is this, It Is not Christ's entreating the Father will
serve the turn, If ever any sin be forgiven, I beseech you take notice of it,
for I speak in the Name of God, and therefore must take heed of speaking any
thing but the Truths of God unto you; if any sin be pardoned, it is not for the
Prayer of Christ, that will not do it; But God the Father says, Son, if you
would have the sins of poor souls forgiven, you must take the debt upon your
self, you must be their Surety, and you must enter into Bonds to pay
everyfarthing of what debt the sinners owe, you must pay all if you will
undertake for them, so it is, for I will never come upon themselves for it, but
on you: Certainly there are these transactions between God the Father, and God
the Son, from all eternity about the pardoning of any sin, however you commit a
sin, and think not of it, and cry, Lord have mercy upon me, and so you have
done with it, there is an end, you think that is all: But I say unto thee; if
thy sin be pardoned, Christ must take the debt upon himself, and be thy Surety,
2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us that knew no sin; the way of pardon
is by a translation of all our sins upon Christ, Christ himself God blessed for
ever, the Delight of the Father must be made sin for the soul that has sinned;
consider this, all the sins thou have committed, if ever they be pardoned, they
must be by virtue of the Covenant between God the Father and the Son: all thy
sin must be transmitted on Christ, all thy oaths, drunkenness, and wickedness
must be put upon him, and he must stand charged with them all: Oh you that are
so lavish in sin, and take such liberty to do wickedly; I say, if ever thy sin
be pardoned, it must be laid on his shoulders, run on as fast as thou will, if
ever thou be'st saved, at the best, yet thy sin must be set on him, and charged
upon his score. I remember that expression of Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin, the words are to be read out of the Original,
The Lord has made thy sin to pass over, to pass over from thee unto his Son,
he has laid them to his charge: This is the second mystery in point of
Justification, thou a poor soul stands charged with thy sin, and art in danger
of eternal damnation, rather than thou should eternally perish, God is
contented to pass over thy sins upon his own Son. Now they must needs be
blessed that God does so much for, and know thou if ever thy sin be pardoned,
God does do so much for thee.

Of the third Mystery, It is by Christ's Sufferings:
3. Where ever sin is pardoned, Christ stands charged not only with the sin,
but to suffer as much punishment for thy sin as if thou were eternally damned
for them; it is not such a pardon, as that there is no punishment to be
suffered, but whosoevers sins are pardoned, there is this agreement between God
the Father and the Son, that his own Son shall suffer as much punishment, as if
thou should suffer eternally the wrath of God for thy sin, there is this done
for thee; and surely that man is a blessed man for whom Christ is content to
suffer so much as thy sins comes to, or else thou must have been eternally
damned, this Religion and the Gospel teaches us, that we can never come to be
pardoned by any other way.

Of the fourth Mystery, Where Sin is pardoned, the Soul stands righteous before
God.
4. There is this mystery in it; Where ever sin is pardoned, God does not only
pass by sin and forgive it, but he makes the soul stand righteous before him;
every justified man stands righteous before the Lord. A malefactor may come to
a Prince, and be forgiven his fault, and yet not accounted a righteous man, he
may be looked upon as a wicked wretch still, though out of free grace the Prince
forgive him: But God never forgives the offense of any one sin, but that man is
set righteous before the Lord, this is done by an Act of Justification; I speak
not of Sanctification: A Prince may forgive a Traitor, but the Law is not
satisfied; but God when he forgives sin, takes such a course as that the
offense is not only forgiven, but the Law comes to be satisfied, and the soul
stands before God as a righteous person; and surely he that is righteous must
needs be blessed.

Of the fifth Mystery, This Righteousness is in another.
5. This Righteousness is in another, and it is a higher righteousness than
ever that of Adam's was in Innocence; this is a great mystery, that a soul
should stand righteous before the Lord, and yet in the righteousness of
another, not of his own, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. St. Paul counted his own
righteousness as dung that he might be found in him, that is in Christ, Not
having my own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness of God that comes in by faith; and so Romans
5. latter end, Christ is said to be our righteousness, ver. 19. As by the
disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many
shall be made righteous; it is a righteousness transferred upon us beyond our
own: Mark, in forgiveness, as our sins comes to be transferred and put upon
Christ, so the righteousness of Christ is transferred upon a justified soul, and
that soul comes to be righteous before God; surely then, blessed is that man
that comes to have the shining garments of Christ's righteousness upon him:
Ahasuerus could not think of a better way than this to honor Mordica more,
than to cloth him with the Kings Royal Raiment, and proclaim before him, This
shall be done to the man whom the King delights to honor; surely that man or
woman is honored indeed, that God shall cloth with the shining Robes of the
Righteousness of his own Son; thou that wast clothed with the filthy rags of
thy own sin and wickedness, and had no other garments to stand in, in the
presence of God; now he puts on thee the Righteousness of his own Son, and so
thy iniquity comes to be covered: Oh that is a glorious Garment! all the
Garments in the world bedest with Diamonds are but filthy Garments in
comparison of the Garments of Christ's Righteousness, that is put upon a man
when his sins are forforgiven.

Of the sixth Mystery, A near Union is made between Christ and the Soul.
6. When God comes to forgive sin, the way God takes is this, he brings a man
into such a near Union with his own Son as makes thee to be one with ^^m; yea,
so to be one with Christ as no two things in the world are joined so together,
as thou and Christ art; the Soul God pardons, he does it this way, it is not
thou have sinned and I will pardon thee, it is no such slight business, as I may
say, in a sinners pardon; No, for when God forgives thee, he makes thee one
with his own Son, so as no two things in the world are so near together as thou
and Christ; therefore the Scripture expresses it by the Union of Branch and
Root, Body and Members; that is a near Union of bones and flesh in one body: so
also the Union between Man and Wife is a near Union, but the Union between
Christ and a justified Soul is nearer than any of these: there is one
expression in Scripture that Christ uses, Joh. 14.20. You in me, and I in you;
there are no two things so nearly united, though the members be in the body,
the body is not in the members; so the branch, though it be in the root, the
root cannot be in the branch; but the Union between Christ and us, Is Christ in
us, and we in him; He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: It is a
spiritual Union, and the Union of spiritual things is the nearest that can be:
Now, Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven, because by this means, God
brings the Soul and Christ to such a near Union, that all natural Unions are
but dark shadows of it.

Of the seventh Mystery, It is by Faith, yet boasting excluded.
7. It must be by Faith, and that is the most glorious work that ever God
enabled a poor creature to do, yet boasting must be excluded, the Scripture
excludes boasting from both, not only from the Law of works, but the Law of
faith; but you may say, How can both be excluded both the law of works and the
law of faith? for works they may be excluded say some, because works are our
own, but faith is the gift of God; God inables us to believe, therefore there
can be no boasting of faith because it is the gift of God, but works are our
own; this answer is but a fiction, for if we be enabled for the performance of
any work, that is of God too; the work of any grace is the gift of God as
really and truly as faith is the gift of God, all gracious works are performed
by the grace and gift of God. Adam could not do what he did in Innocence, (...)
by the gift of God; and therefore to say boasting is excluded by faith, because
faith is the gift of God, will not serve the turn; therefore the mystery of
Justification is a great mystery, that notwithstanding faith is such a glorious
work, as it is one of the gloriousest works that ever any creature did, yet
that this should be excluded, by this I cannot but be persuaded, that there is
more in the work of Faith than in any thing Adam ever had; and that faith the
power of believing was not in Adam in the state of Innocence: Why? Because it
is now made such a grace as excludes all kind of boasting: For were it but the
stirring up of any power we had in Adam, it would no more exclude boasting,
than if God stirred up any other grace; as Love, Hope, Fear, and the like: But
that it excludes boasting, this may be the most satisfactory answer; Works they
could not exclude boasting? Why, though they were from the grace and gift of
God, yet they belonged to man's nature; for if God will make a rational
creature, he must give it those perfections that are due to that nature: Now
the Image of God was in some regard due to such a nature. But now, God when he
comes to give faith, he gives a higher thing than ever was due to the nature of
man; hence there is a greater mystery in faith than in any other grace; and
therefore it is a great mystery that God should justify a man by faith, and
yet this excludes boasting more than any other thing.

I, but the Scripture says, God imputes faith for righteousness; Object.
and when God inables us to believe, Is it not our own?

Yea, when we have it, it is our own; Answ.
and when we are justified, it is imputed to us for righteousness: but mark
what I shall say, it will be useful for the understanding that Text in Romans
4.22. Where, it says, faith was imputed to him for righteousness; ye must not
understand it thus, that is, that God did through the grace of Christ now
accept of Abraham's faith as his righteousness, whereby he should stand to be
justified by it in the sight of God; he did not thus accept of faith for
righteousness; no, not through the mediation of Christ, nor by virtue of any
Covenant made by God with Christ: God did never make any Covenant with Christ,
that whereas man did owe obedience to all the Law, and that should have been
his righteousness had he continued in it; but man now being unable to perform
it, that God would be now so favorable to him as that he would accept of faith
for righteousness, that is not the meaning of it, for the word in the Original
translated for righteousness, it is thus, it was imputed unto righteousness, it
is the same word used in Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto
Righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: Now
Confession with the mouth is not made Salvation it self, but unto Salvation; so
faith is not the righteousness it self, but unto righteousness, Object.
that is, by faith we come to get righteousness: But why says the Scripture God
imputed it unto righteousness; I take it thus, Answ.
that forasmuch as faith is so glorious a Principle (infused of God) above any
thing of our own, God is pleased to account of it as if it were our own, and so
imputes it unto righteousness; the truth is, it is not our own; no not so our
own as other graces are our own: but God in point of Justification is pleased
to impute it as our own, that we may come to have righteousness by it; as if it
were our own: Now this is a great mystery, that God in the work of pardon of
sin, should do it by the grace of faith, and that this excludes all boasting,
and yet righteousness imputed to it as if it were our own. Hence by the way,
let us take heed of the Opinion of those that say, faith it self is imputed for
righteousness, and that God through Christ accepts of faith as the matter of
our righteousness: The Papists say we are justified by works, and that God is
pleased through Christ to accept not of Faith only, but of Humility, Fear,
Love, Repentance, Joy, etc. though they be imperfect, yet he is pleased to
accept of these for our righteousness; says the other opinion, faith is our
righteousness, though God might require exact obedience to the whole Law, yet
he is pleased to accept of faith; both these Opinions are besides the truth,
and therefore there is the same danger in the one as in the other, and
therefore both to avoided.

Of the eight Mystery, God is infinitely Just, and yet infinitely Merciful.
8. The eighth particular is this, that shows pardon of sin is a great mystery,
because wherever God pardons sin, he is infinitely just, and yet infinitely
merciful; there is an admirable reconciliation, between Gods Justice and Mercy,
which shows it to be a great mystery: There are three great mysteries in
Religion, 1. The great mystery of the Trinity, that there should be diverse
Persons and yet but one God. The second is, that in the Person of Christ there
should be two Natures and yet but one Person. And then the third is, the
reconciliation of the mercy and justice of God in the forgiveness of a sinner.
Many people when they seek for pardon of sin, they only think of Gods infinite
grace and mercy, but not of his justice: But certainly, who ever he be that
comes to be pardoned, God shows himself infinitely just as well as merciful;
that he is merciful, that is clear to every one: But how does it appear he is
so infinitely just? for that there is a clear Text for it, Romans 3.26. To
declare at this time his righteousness that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus; so that God in the justifying of him that
believes in Christ is just as well as merciful.

Now then poor sinner, lay these together, that God should work so strangely in
bringing about the pardon of thy sin in such a mysterious way as this is;
certainly it does demonstrate that thou art a blessed man: I beseech you think
of what has been said, and lay it in your breasts; go away with this upon your
spirits, Lord, I indeed heard much of the evil of sin, and that it was a
greater evil than ever I thought it to be, and now I have begun to hear of the
mighty work of God in pardon of sin, I hope I shall for ever retain higher
thoughts of it than before. Brethren, there is nothing in the world that people
have slighter thoughts of, than of the pardon and forgiveness of sin, they
think it a slight matter. But if there were any work that ever took up the
heart of God from all eternity, and shows God to be a God, it is this about the
pardon of sin; this is a great doctrine, the doctrine of the work of God in the
justification of a sinner, it is one of the greatest Doctrines in Divinity, and
therefore that you might sanctify the Name of God in it, and give him that
glory that is due in this great work, it is needful to search, that we may find
out what is the work of God in it.

Of the ninth Mystery, When God forgives sin, for the present, he forgives all
to come.
9. The ninth mystery is this, and this may seem one of the strangest of all,
When God forgives a sinner any one sin for the present, he likewise forgives
him all the sins that ever he shall commit afterward, this is a mighty mystery;
for God when he takes a poor soul and forgives him his sin, he does not only
forgive him his present and past sins, but lays in a pardon for all the sins
that ever shall be committed by him afterward; this is a way of pardoning sin
proper to God alone; there is no creature pardons the offense one of another,
so as God pardons here; therefore the Prophet cries out, Micah 7.18. Who is a
God like unto thee that pardons iniquity and passes by the transgressions of
the remnant of his heritage? Who is a God like to thee; who in all the world
can pardon sin as God does? No Father pardons the sin of a Child, no Prince the
sin of a Subject as God does: Now, because this is a point of admirable comfort
to all the Saints of God, it is fit it be opened and made out, that when God
pardons sin at first, he gives in a pardon for all they shall commit
afterward; I manifest it thus, in Romans 8.1. the Apostle says, There is now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: from whence I argue, Except God
did pardon whatsoever sins should be committed when he justifies a sinner, then
at any time when a justified person sins, until he renew an act of faith for
pardon, there must be condemnation to him; for whosoever is in such an estate
as has any sin unpardoned, for that instant he is in the state of
condemnation: But there is no instant of time, when it can be said of any
justified person, that he is in the state of condemnation; I say no instant of
time, for though a justified person may fall into sin after he is justified,
yet at that instant when he falls into that sin, there is by God applied a
pardon, that was laid in before, although an act of faith be not renewed in
regard of that particular sin; that is the point I would make good, though it
be true, there is required as our duty an act of faith to lay hold on our
pardon, yea also it is required in respect of comfort too; for we cannot have
comfort of the pardon of a new sin committed, except there be a renewal of an
act of faith: But yet this renewal of an act of faith, though it be necessary,
because commanded; and for our comfort, yet no absolute necessity to free us
from condemnation; but being once justified by Christ, there is a pardon laid
up; so that upon any act of sin newly committed, this pardon is applied by God
himself, though we be not able by the renewal of a present act of faith, to sue
out pardon anew unto our selves. Nay the truth is, if this were not so, there
could be no instant of time, wherein a believer was not in the state of
condemnation; for there is no instant of time wherein a believer does not some
way or other sin against God: Further, it is apparent and undeniable, that
there is not a necessity of renewing an act of faith upon every sin committed
for the pardon of it, this Argument cannot be denied, because otherwise, there
must be a necessity of renewing an act of faith after the last act a believer
does; for in the last action a believer does in this world, there is some sin
it: Now if there be some sin in the last act of all, then there cannot be of
necessity required another act, for the applying of the pardon of that sin a
believer did do in the very last act he did in this world: those that hold a
believer cannot finally fall away, yet say, he may totally; many hold that if
once a man be justified, he can never go to Hell; but yet this they hold, that
he may so sin that he may be brought into a state of condemnation; he may be
brought into such a state,, that if he should die at that present he should
perish; but say they, God does take care that he shall not die, till there be a
renewing of an act of faith for pardon: I answer, there is nothing in Scripture
to prove, there is not any instant of time wherein a believer may not die; and
yet if he do die he must then perish, because an act of faith was not renewed;
true say they further, that all sins bring not into the state of condemnation;
there may be pardon of course for sins of infirmity, but other sins that wast a
man's Conscience, there a believer is brought into the state of condemnation,
till there be a new act of faith renewed for pardon. I answer, If any one sin,
bring a believer, into the state of condemnation after Conversion, where shall
we put the limits; as to say, if you go but thus far, you are not in a state of
condemnation, but if you go a letter further you are; God puts no such limits
in Scripture, but all sin in its own nature brings into a state of
condemnation, and yet no sin brings a believer into the state of condemnation;
therefore this is a great mystery of God in the pardoning of sin, when God
pardons the sin of a believer, he does not only pardon what he has done at
present, but for what he shall do he lays in a pardon, and Christ has
purchas't it for us, for all sins yet to come: it is like a Son running into
arrears, his Father comes and pays his debts; but because he sees his Son will
run further into arrears, he lays in so much as will pay all for time to come,
that if he run into arrears he shall not be cast into Prison: just so it is
with God, God pardons all our sins at first, and then he lays up a Pardon, that
if we run into arrears we shall not lie in Prison to be condemned and suffer
for them. This is a great mystery, and they that teach otherwise rob the people
of God of abundance of comfort that otherwise they might have, were this Truth
made clearly known unto them.

Object.
Is not this Doctrine a Doctrine of Liberty, If they have knowledge that God
when he pardons for what sins are past, and lays in a Pardon for what sins are
yet to come; May not People hence take liberty to sin? May not they say, that
though they do sin, yet there is a Pardon laid in before hand for them?

Answ.
Here thou speak as one that understands not the grace of the Gospel that
thus objectest, it is another manner of thing than thou art aware of; there is
not that malignity in the grace of the Gospel to cause such effects in the
hearts of believers. Luther compares sin to Lime, and the law to Water, that
makes the Lime hotter; but the grace of the Gospel says he is like to Oil, and
Oil will quench Lime, but Water will not; so the Oil of the Gospel will quench
the sins of men; and certainly the more there is of the grace of God revealed
in the Gospel, the more the lusts remaining in the heart of a believer come to
be quenched: this is an evident Argument of the great difference between the
mercy of God revealed in the Gospel, and received by faith; and that which is
received only in a natural way: you that are unbelievers, and receives the
Gospel only in a natural way, your lusts may be nourished, and you may take
liberty for wickedness: But if once you come to receive the mercy of God in and
through Christ Jesus, then that mercy will be the greatest opposer of thy lusts
and sin, as any thing can be in the world; certainly, thou know not the work
of God in Christ forgiving sin, that reason'st thus; I shall show you plainly,
The knowledge of the great work of the Propitiation by Christ, brings the soul
into a hatred of all sin, and is no nourisher of it, 1 John 1.9. the Apostle
speaks of the wonderful grace of God in Christ to us; If we confess our sins,
he is not only ready to forgive, but to cleanse us from them: And chap. 2.1. My
little children I write unto you that you sin not, that you take not liberty in
any sin; they might say, you write these things that we sin not: but we have
sinful natures, and so shall certainly fall into sin for all this: Well, for
the comfort of Saints, If any man sin, says he, we have an Advocate with the
Father; Jesus Christ is presently an Advocate though you sin through ignorance
and negligence, and do not renew present acts of faith to sue out a pardon: yet
says the Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ is an Advocate with the Father; the Lord
Christ stands before the Father pleading, that no evil may befall you for your
sin; this is the admirable privilege of the Saints of God, a most blessed
privilege they have by the Covenant of Grace; that when they commit a sin, and
may be take no notice, and may be Conscience is so benumbed at present, that
they go not to God to seek a pardon; but may be lie in sin a long time
together; yet says the Text, you have one that pleads your cause: and it is
from hence, that Gods wrath comes not out against you; because you have an
Advocate with the Father: Well says the 2d verse. And he is the Propitiation not
only for our sins, but the sins of the whole world; he means believers: Now in
the third verse. says he, Hereby we know that we know him, If we keep his
Commandments; as if he had said, If we do not take heed of sin and keep his
Commandments; we know not this grace of pardon, if any that here us Ministers
teach this Doctrine, and say they know him, and have no care to keep Gods
Commandments, it is quite contrary to what the Apostle says, he says, Hereby we
know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; this knowing of him, as it
is a means to keep his Commandments; so it is an argument we do know him when
we do keep his Commandments: verse. 4. He that says I know him, that is; Christ
to be a Propitiation and an Advocate, and keeps not his Commandments is a
liar, and the truth is not in him: That man that reasons thus, and says, Well,
I believe in Jesus Christ, and I know my sins are pardoned through faith in
him; yea, and all the sins that shall be committed, a pardon is laid in for
them, and I shall never enter into condemnation: Do thou say so, and yet
keep'st not Gods Commandments? Have not thou the Conscience, and the rather
upon the knowledge of this, to keep Gods Commandments? the Holy Ghost says,
Thou art a liar, and there is no truth in thee; and thou were never acquainted
with this mystery of godliness; when it is understood in a natural way, men may
abuse it; you may know what I mean by a natural way, and God knows you have
need of Information; by a natural way I mean by the light of Natural Reason,
and all other helps of learning on this side the work of the Holy Ghost: but
when men understand it by a powerful work of the Holy Ghost, they that know it
thus, this knowledge will make them more careful and conscionable to keep Gods
Commandments; and if any man say he knows it thus, and does not keep Gods
Commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

Further, If a man should reason thus; Well, if there be such a mystery in
pardon of sin, and that God when he pardons sin at first, lays in a pardon for
all sin afterward, this will make way for more sin: Take notice here, of the
infinite perverseness of the heart of man; suppose it were not thus, but the
contrary were true, that God indeed pardoned the sins of a believer coming to
him; but if ever he sin after pardon, let him look to it, he shall then be
under the sentence of death and condemnation; upon this a man's heart would not
be more engaged to seek after Christ, but would reason thus; Well, I may labor
and take pains, and suffer much to get a comfortable assurance of the pardon of
sin; but what of all this, the next day, the next hour I may sin again, and be
in the same case I was before, so that which way soever things go, men will
reason against God for their lusts; I shall put it to you, or to any heart that
may be supposed to have attended on God, yea, and has received grace; Which of
these Doctrines engage the heart most for God? either this Doctrine, or the
other; whether that you believing that God will pardon sin; yet if you fall
into any new sin, you are under a sentence of condemnation; or thus, that God
is so gracious, that he not only pardons sin for present, but for your
encouragement he so pardons it, that though you through infirmity fall again
into sin, he will not out off his kindness from you; Which of these is the
greater encouragement? certainly to a slavish spirit the one may be more than
the other: But to a spirit that may be supposed to have any ingenuity in it,
the latter words must needs far more engage him to walk with God all his days.
What, is Gods grace so free? that he should have such pity on poor creatures,
not only at their first coming in, and casting themselves on Christ, as to
pardon all their sins, though they be never so many and great? But also such a
Covenant upon my coming in, that God will discharge all sins that shall be
committed for time to come, though I be ready to fall into sin daily, yet I
shall not come into condemnation? O what will so infinitely engage a gracious
and ingenious spirit as this does! surely nothing like this. Now if this be
true, that man that is forgiven, is thus forgiven; not only for time past, but
also for time to come: Then blessed is the man whose transgressions are
forgiven, and whose iniquities are pardoned.

Of the tenth Mystery, God pardons a sinner, not because he is; but that he
might be changed.
10. The tenth Mystery is this, (for I would endeavor to show you what a
mighty work Pardon of Sin is, and raise up your hearts to have higher thoughts
of it than ever you had before) God does not pardon because a sinner has his
heart and nature changed, but that he might be changed. And thus the pardons of
God differ from all other pardons; a Prince pardons a Malefactor, or a Father a
Child: but upon what terms? a Prince expects his Subject should be changed as
far as he can discern; and a Father, (though never so tender) will not pardon a
Child, unless he come in and manifest a change of his disobedient spirit, and
then he pardons. God does not pardon because we are changed; but that we might
be changed: his Pardon comes first, Romans 4.5. a very strange place for this,
and may encourage any poor soul that is troubled for sin, to come in and lay
hold upon Gods mercy in Christ; But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted unto him for
righteousness. Mark, when God comes to justify a sinner, he looks upon him as
ungodly; he stays not till the sinner be made godly and then justifies him, as
a Prince stays till a Malefactors heart be changed, and he become a loyal
subject, and then pardons him: God is not so in justifying souls, he justifies
the ungodly; one that is ungodly coming to him, he justifies. This is a mighty
Argument, I name it for this end; because I would teach people, that
notwithstanding any sin or guilt that lies upon their spirits, yet they have a
liberty to come in and lay hold upon Christ for Justification; do not say, I am
ungodly, I am a great sinner, and have a vile heart, and I find not my nature
changed; and therefore, How dare I lay hold upon Gods grace for mercy and
pardon? yea, thou may because God justifies the ungodly; though thy nature
be not changed and sanctified, as thou say: take it thus, Thou must lay hold
of Gods grace for Justification that thou may be sanctified; not only
pardoned, but sanctified: Come but thus with thy heart affected to close with
the grace of God, that thou may be sanctified as well as pardoned; though
for the present thou feel not any Sanctification, yet thou may have right
to lay hold upon Christ as well as any one whatsoever.

Object.
Will not this be presumption for a sinner thus to lay hold on Christ?

Answ.
If faith were merely a persuasion that Christ dyed for them, or as many men
think; thus, (Well, God is merciful, and he will pardon me, Christ having
dyed;) there may be presumption in laying hold on Christ: But now as
Justification is a great mystery, so is faith; and faith is a mighty work of
the Spirit of God in the soul, that causes the soul to roll and cast it self on
the free grace of God in Christ, and venture it self and all its hopes for good
and happiness on him; there is not only a coming to Christ for pardon, but for
grace, holiness, light, good and happiness here, and for whatever it does
expect hereafter; it looks for all from him. Now when there is such a work of
God upon the soul, in casting it self on God in Christ, though there be nothing
at present but ungodliness in him appearing, yet such a one may and has right
to come unto God for pardon; for God justifies the ungodly, Romans 5.6. Christ
died for the ungodly; and verse. 10. If when we were Enemies, we were reconciled
by the death of his Son; when we were Enemies, and had base hearts full of
enmity against God, yet then Christ died to reconcile us unto God: thou may
then venture to come to him for pardon, and it is no presumption, though thou
see no change in thy self, yet he pardons that thou may be changed; now
here is a glorious work of God in pardoning a sinner, that God should pardon,
justify, and reconcile us when we were Enemies to him; here is a glorious work
of God for a sinner to be justified and reconciled, and yet when the sinner was
an Enemy unto him.

Of the eleventh Mystery, God himself purchases the Pardon.
11. When God pardons a sinner, he himself is fain to purchase the pardon, and
this is different from the manner of pardons among men: A Prince pardons a
malefactor, but the Prince himself does not purchase the pardon; and if one
have offended you, you pardon the offender: but you that are offended do not
purchase a pardon for the offender; possible some friend may come and purchase
a pardon at the Kings hands for an offender, but the King himself does not
purchase it: yet thus it is with God: God does not pardon any one sin, but it
costs God himself dear before he gets it; therefore it is not such a slight
thing to be pardoned; you must not think to go to God and cry mercy, and that
he will pardon (...), thus in a natural way God never pardons sin: but it costs
God dear, yea that which is more worth than all the world; if that could have
done it, God would rather have dissolved Heaven and Earth, than have given that
that he did give; What was that? It was the blood of his own Son: God gave him
up to death for the sin of mankind, and for the purchasing a pardon for man:
But some may say, What need God have purchased a pardon for man? Could he not
have forgiven him by his absolute Prerogative? I answer, there was need,
because of the satisfaction of Justice, he did purchase it out of the hands of
Justice; God was fain to lay down a price to Justice, before he himself could
pardon one sin: Justice must be satisfied before he could give out one pardon:
Well, take all these together, Christ must be our Surety, take the debt upon
himself, and suffer as much punishment as we should have done in Hell to all
eternity; and to make the soul stand righteous before God, yet this
righteousness to be in another; yea, a near union is made between Christ and
the Soul: And yet further, it is by faith, and yet boasting is excluded; and God
is infinitely merciful, and yet infinitely just; and when he pardons one sin,
he lays in a pardon for all sin for time to come, justifies the ungodly, pardons
sin, yet purchases the pardon: These eleven Meditations about the Pardon of Sin
make it appear to be a wonderful work of God; put these together, and then the
result according to the point will be clear and full, that, Blessed is that man
whose sins are forgiven: And surely if there be such a mysterious and glorious
work of God in pardoning sin; that man for whom God shall work such a glorious
work is a blessed man indeed. And now having done with this Argument of the
great mystery of Godliness in forgiveness of Sin; I proceed to another, and it
is this:

CHAP. IV. That Pardon of Sin not only is a Mercy in it self, but the
Foundation of many other Mercies.
4. Argument.
PArdon of Sin makes a m^^ blessed; Why? Because it is the Foundation of
abundance of other Mercies; it is an inlet to many other mercies, therefore a
great mercy; it is a leading mercy, it is as the Queen of Mercy, that has a
great and glorious train of other mercies attending on her; indeed, it is the
very foundation of all the mercies of the Covenant of grace, it is the principal
mercy, and the very foundation of all the mercies that are in the Covenant, and
the inlet and opening to them all; the Covenant of Grace is a rich Treasury,
has abundant store of mercy in it, and this opens to them all: The current of
all Gods mercies was stopped by man's sin; though God had an infinite Ocean of
mercy, yet the sourse and vent of all Gods mercies was stopped. Now, when God
pardons sin, he takes away the stop, and opens the sluice, that his infinite
grace and goodness may flow forth plentifully and sweetly to the soul, body and
state; yea to all that belongs to a believer: You may conceive Gods mercy to be
as an infinite stream of goodness, running with a full current toward his
creatures; for God delights in the Communication of himself to his creatures:
But now man's sin made a dam, and stopped the pipe, that not one drop of mercy
could come forth, not a drop of all that mercy that in the eternal purpose of
God he has appointed in time shall come forth to such and such a poor
creature; but when he comes to Pardon and Justification, he pulls out the plug,
and pulls up the floodgates and sluices, and then mercies come flowing in
amain; when sin is pardoned, then the full streams of all the mercies in the
Covenant of grace come flowing into the soul; well then, if it be thus, that
pardon of sin is an inlet to other mercies; then he that has his sin pardoned
is a very blessed man. I shall open this, That Pardon of Sin is the foundation
to, and opens the sluice to let in all other mercies, Jer. 31.31. Behold, the
days come that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the
house of Judah: here God opens his goodness, and tells them he will make a new
Covenant, not like that he made with their fathers, verse. 32. but this shall be
the Covenant, verse. 33. and he instances in some particulars, I will put my Law
into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother; saying, know the Lord,
for they shall all know me, etc. But what is the foundation of all this? at the
end of the 34. For I will forgive their iniquity and remember their sin no
more. I will make a new Covenant with them, and put my law into their inward
parts, and they shall all know me; I will come in with all my mercies and
blessings, Illumination and Sanctification; he mentions these instead of the
rest, as in a grant of great things some particulars are mentioned; but then he
comes in with a general; For I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their
sin no more: As if it should be said, Why? Lord will thou come in thus to thy
people in such an abundant way of mercy more than formerly, and let in these
graces of thy Covenant; Why? here is the ground of all; for I will forgive their
iniquity: so that forgiveness of iniquity is the special inlet of the mercies
of the Covenant. Now more particularly I shall show you what are those special
mercies, Pardon of sin is an inlet to, and that will further show the
blessedness of those souls that have their sins pardoned, because pardon of sin
is an inlet to many other mercies. As

Of Peace with God, that Pardon of Sin is an inlet to.
1. Peace with God, Romans 5.1 being justified, that is, pardoned through faith;
what follows, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; the ground
of our Justification and Reconciliation, it is not our Humiliation, no nor our
Sanctification; Observe it, the very bottom and foundation of our Justification
and Reconciliation, it is neither of these, (though we ought to be in the use
and exercise of them) but pardon of sin is through the free grace of God
applied by faith; this is the ground of all our Peace and Reconciliation with
God: And thus men and women should seek their peace with God; the main thing
they should lay the weight of obtaining peace of God upon, it is the work of
faith applying the Righteousness of Christ for pardon, rather than any work of
Humiliation or Sanctification by the Spirit of God; yet both these are sweet
and comfortable, when we found the bottom and main foundation of all our peace
on the free grace of God pardoning our sin, and justifying of us through faith
in Christ; Cod does not say, you that are great sinners, stay till you are
humbled and are brought to hate sin, and you shall have peace with God: No, you
may be much troubled for sin, and may leave it, and reform in many things, and
live better lives than before, and yet your peace not made up with God; How
then shall it be? thus, being justified by faith, looking up to the free grace
of God in Christ for pardon of sin, we come to have peace with God; and this is
a great privilege, but if you consider on the other side, a creature not
reconciled, cannot look upon the infinite Creator without terror and shakings,
and tremblings of spirit; he cannot have any thoughts of God, but he thinks of
him as his Enemy; and that all the excellencies of God are working misery and
ruin to him, this is a sad thing: But when pardon of sin comes, God is
reconciled, and all fears and terrors from the Almighty are gone; those fears
whereby the soul was afraid, God was secretly working ruin to it, are
dispelled; and if any judgment of God come close and near, and befall any in the
sight and hearing of a guilty soul, he would be thinking God is coming to me
next: But a justified soul may say, though the judgments of God be never so
terrible in the world, and in the Word, which before terrified my Conscience;
yet now my sin being pardoned, my soul is reconciled, and the Word of God
speaks nothing but good unto me, and all those fears that before so terrified
me are dispelled.

But may not a pardoned man have these fears, Object.
or somewhat of the nature of them resting on his spirit after he is pardoned?

Yea he may, but the ground of them is dispel'd and gone; Answ.
it is not the work of Gods Spirit that causes these fears, as it did before,
Romans 8.15. You have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the
Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father; may be you may have some fears,
but being justified by faith, you have not again received the spirit of
bondage; if hereafter you have any fears of Gods judgments and wrath against
you; it is not the spirit of bondage, the Spirit of God that causes these
fears, your own selves may mistake the matter; for those that once receive the
spirit of bondage, never after receive it; you may have fears through your own
mistakes, but not by the Spirit of God, as the spirit of bondage showing us our
bondage by our sins, and working terrors on the soul for it, these fears are
dispelled; for in our peace with God in the pardon of sin, the matter of
enemity between God and the soul is taken away; there is this in it which might
have been added in the mysteries: When a Prince pardons a malefactor, he gives
him his life, and he is glad, goes away, but the Prince regards him not any
more; and possibly he may yet have enmity in his heart against the Prince
still: But God when he pardons a sinner, not only is the enmity taken away, but
forthwith that soul is brought into the state of infinite friendship, he
receives the soul into his very heart; so that there shall be a greater and
more intimate love and friendship between his Majesty and that Soul, than ever
was between the greatest and dearest friends in the world, this is wonderful,
and yet this is so; for as when God comes to pardon sin, there is not only
taking away the guilt of sin, but the soul is made actually righteous in
Justification; so also there is not only a taking away of the enmity between
God and the soul that was there before, but he receives the soul into infinite
love, and takes him into infinite friendship with himself; Oh the sweetness and
blessedness of that man's state whose sins are pardoned! Reconciliation with God
follows thereupon, and he takes the soul into his bosome-love. Further upon
this there follows two things, Peace in Conscience, and with the Creatures;
being justified by faith he has peace with God, and as the immediate
consequence thereof, peace in Conscience and with all the Creatures.

1. Peace in Conscience, those fears and grating terrors that arose on guilt of
Conscience are gone, those dismal accusations of Conscience are stilled; though
it is true, a man's Conscience may trouble him after Pardon and Justification,
but it is through mistake, the ground of all those troubles of Conscience are
gone; it is with trouble of Conscience after pardon of sin as with the Sea, you
that are Mariners may see the wind at Sea raising the boisterous waves on
high, yet after the wind is quite down it is a great while before they be still
and quiet; so in men's souls it is guilt of sin that causes woeful disturbances:
but when God pardons sin, he comes into the Soul as Christ in the Ship, and
bids all be still; and though through our weakness, after the sting and guilt
is removed, Conscience is troubled, yet is God pleased to help the weakness of
his People sooner or later; not only to pardon sin in the Court of Heaven, but
in the Court of Conscience too, and then all fears and troubles are gone;
certainly those that know what the burnings, throbbings and ailings of an
accusing Conscience means, they know what a blessing it is to have Peace of
Conscience, a great blessing to have all well there, because the Soul has much
to do with Conscience, and Conscience has much to do with God, yea only to do
with God; and if all be well with that which has so much to do with the
Almighty, it is a great blessedness, blessed is the man that is thus pardoned.

2. There follows this also, Peace with the Creatures; If I should meet with
these in a full Text, each of them might require a Sermon themselves, to show
the excellency of a quiet Conscience and peace with the Creatures. But I must
but touch it here: God is Lord of Hoasts, and all the creatures stand armed
ready to avenge Gods quarrel, and not only do they stand in readiness, but
there is a kind of cry in the creatures to God to make them the Executioners of
his wrath; Shall I go and strike this Drunkard says one? and shall I strike
this Blasphemer says another? All the creatures in heaven and earth cry against
thee every day: But when God pardons thy sin, all the creatures presently
become thy friends; when the Judge has quitted a Malelefactor, the
Underofficers have nothing to do with him; Conscience and the Creatures they
are Underofficers, and when God is at peace they are at peace too; 2 Samuel
18.15.
When Joab came and stabbed Absalom, the ten young men that were his
Armour-bearers did so too; so if God come to a sinner unpardoned, and give him
a stab, all the Creatures will be ready to stab him too; but when God comes and
pardons thy sin, Job. 5.23.
He makes a league with thee and the stones of the field, as the Scripture
speaks; that is the first great mercy that flows in to the Soul upon pardon of
sin, and peace with God.

Of Gods Revealing his Secrets to those whom he Pardons.
2. This follows upon pardon of sin, God comes in a wonderful gracious way to
reveal himself to that soul; he comes to reveal his secrets to that soul he
pardons; and pardon of sin is the very ground of the Revelation of the Secrets
and Mysteries of God by the Spirit to that Soul, Jer. 31.33. among other
particulars in the New Covenant God promises they shall be all taught of God,
in Heb. 8. that Text is quoted something more fully than in the Prophet, verse.
10, 11. They shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to
the greatest: Mark, For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more: Pardon of sin is made the ground
of Gods teaching them his Covenant, They shall know me from the least to the
greatest; you little ones and young ones, if God please to bring you to Christ,
and pardon your sin, a glorious light shall come into your souls: God will show
himself in a glorious manner to you, there shall be another manner of light
shine into your hearts than ever before; the mysteries of God will be opened to
you, and you shall understand more than many of your fathers, who have not had
this mercy to be rightly acquainted with the Justification of a sinner; and
therefore you young ones, that much desire knowledge, the main thing to be
acquainted with, is this great Doctrine of Justification and pardon of sin; as
Luther said, Three things, Prayer, Meditation, and Temptations make a Divine;
so I say, the right knowledge of Justification makes a Christian, and they that
have not a clear knowledge in this point, do but bungle and are extreme weak in
all other points of Religion; but when once the soul comes to be justified,
what a glorious light is let into the soul, as you all know, that have been
made partakers of this grace? And you young ones, you may come to have sin
pardoned as well as others, and to have the knowledge of the mysteries of God
revealed unto you, 1 John 2.12. compared with the 13. I write unto you little
Children, because your sins are forgiven for his Name sake; even little
children, I write to you, your sins are forgiven; oh it is a happy thing for
young children to have faith wrought in them, and to have their sins forgiven
them betimes! and then in the 13. verse, I write unto you little Children,
because you have known the Father; Oh what an admirable light springs up in the
souls of little Children when their sins are pardoned! they come to the
knowledge of the Father; and this is the reason why many great and learned men,
that are men of excellent understanding in the knowledge of natural things, are
not acquainted with the mysteries of godliness, and think but meanly of them;
marvel not at it, for the knowledge of the mysteries of godliness, comes in by
pardon of sin; when God pardons sin and justifies a soul by faith in Christ,
then God opens the Covenant, and all the glorious mysteries of it to such a
soul: A Prince reveals not the secrets of State to a Traitor that lies under
bolts and chains; but if a Prince please to pardon him, and knock off his bolts
and chains, and raise him unto favor, bring him into his Privy Chamber, and
open his whole heart and all the mysteries of the Kingdom to him, here is a
great change; thus does God to poor sinners that he pardons: A soul that lies
under the guilt of sin, is just for all the world like unto a Malefactor that
lies in a dungeon, that has bolts and fetters on him; the guilt of sin is like
bolts and fetters on thy soul: Well, thou lie there fast bound; but when God
comes in with pardoning mercy, God sends to thee in this dungeon, and knocks
off thy bolts by pardon, and not only so, but calls thee into his Privy
Chamber, and opens his heart and bosom unto thee, and reveals those things
that were kept secret from the beginning of the world: Princes do not always
deal so with Malefactors, if they pardon them they think they have done enough
for them, they may afterward go and shift for themselves, they are not called
into the Privy Chamber to have the King open his secrets unto them; but it is
certainly so to every soul God pardons; he pardons none, but whom he calls into
his Privy Chamber, and reveals unto him the great Councels of his will, and
what has been the great thoughts of his heart, for the good of that soul from
all eternity; though some souls have more light than others, yet to no soul
that is pardoned but God comes in with a great and glorious light; and in
respect of the light of Nature, it may be called a glorious light: there is not
the weakest and poorest creature in the world that is pardoned, but he
understands more of the light of Gods grace and Covenant, than the greatest
Doctors or Rabbis in the world; and though he cannot speak or talk so much of
these things, yet he dares venture his soul on those thoughts he has of Gods
good will made known unto him in the Covenant; no Rabbin in the world, though
he can talk much of these things, yet he dares not venture his soul for the
eternal welfare of it and his estate upon God, to do with him as he pleases;
but a believing soul dares venture his Name, his Estate, his Life, yea his
eternal life on God, he dares to put them all into his hands, and to such a
soul, God will repeal his Covenant, Psalm. 25.14. God will grant this mercy,
that he will reveal his Covenant, and all the secrets of it shall be made known
unto him; you that complain of dullness of understanding; you say you hear
excellent mysteries and do not understand them, there is surely much in them, I
see some weight and excellency in them to be found out, and I hope God in time
will discover them unto me, but little I know for present; you take a course to
get understanding by attendance on the outward Ordinances, it is good to use
all means, as reading and conferring with other Christians, and pray over what
you hear; these are excellent: But the great and special means to get saving
understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel is this; Cast down your souls at
the footstool of God, and cry for pardon of sin; it may be guilt of sin is upon
thy heart, let that be thy work to get of the guilt of sin, and cry for Gods
justifying mercy in Christ; guilt being removed, God will let out to thy soul
the Revelation of his Covenant in a glorious manner, he will reveal his secrets
to thee, so that upon this there is a holy boldness a sinner comes to have in
the presence of God. Suppose a Malefactor come to Court under his guilt being
not pardoned; alas, he dare scarce look in at Court-gate; and when he comes, he
keeps in some outroom, and dares not stir any further than he is called; but
take another that is pardoned, he comes in boldly and goes from one room unto
another, yea into the very Presence Chamber, and there can open his mind fully
to the King, and speak out all his heart; and this is a great difference
between one under the guilt of sin and another that is pardoned; one under the
guilt of sin he dare scarce go to Prayer, and thinks God casts away his person
and his services, and that nothing is regarded; but when God comes to pardon,
he calls the poor sinner that was under trouble before, to come and draw near
to him, and says, fear not, open thy mind and heart to me, Lam. 3.55, 56, 57.
I called upon thy Name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon. 57. In the day that I
called upon thee thou drewest near, and said fear not: Every poor soul that
is justified, may say, God knows when I was under the guilt of sin, I was cast
into the low dungeon, and the chains of guilt were upon me there, but through
thy grace thou have heard my voice, hide not thy ear at my breathing, at my
cry; thou can not cry; yet if thou be one whom God has received to
mercy, thou may have confidence that God will hear the voice of thy
breathing: thou come to Prayer, and can not tell what to say; mark, can
thou breath, Gods ear lies open to the breathings of a soul he has received to
mercy, thou came to me, I was a great way off shaking and trembling, and thou
drew'st near to me, and said fear not, v. 57. so a poor soul under the guilt
of sin he stands shaking and trembling; but when God comes to pardon, he says
to thee fear not, and because thou dare not come to him, he comes to thee,
and says, peace be to thee, fear not, Heb. 10.16. the Apostle speaking of the
Covenant that God will make, in the 17. verse says, Their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more; and 18. verse, Where remission of sin is, there is no
more offering for sin; in the 19. verse he infers that now therefore, We have
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus; and verse. 21. Having
an High Priest over the House of God, let us (verse 22.) draw near with a true
heart in full assurance of faith; God having made a new Covenant, and said,
Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more; therefore we have boldness,
says the Apostle, to enter into the Holy of Holies: In the time of the Law
under the Jewish Pedagogy none might enter into the Holy of Holies but the High
Priest, there was but little access into the Holiest in the time of the Law;
but now when the Gospel comes, Christ having offered up himself a Sacrifice
there needs no more Sacrifices, he at once having purged away sin by his own
blood, has opened a new and a living way that we may come with boldness now
into the Holiest; so that a believing soul need now not stand a far off
shaking, but may come in to the Privy-Chamber, and enter into the Holy of
Holies, and draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith; and this
comes from sin pardoned: Oh blessed is he that has his sin pardoned, that has
such a privilege following thereupon, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness
and access with confidence by the faith of him, Christ being our High Priest we
have boldness, liberty of speech, so the Original; a great many know not how to
pray, and they think all the Prayers of the Saints have nothing in them but a
great deal of Nonsense, because they understand not what the work of God is in
the hearts of his people; the Saints have by faith in him liberty of speech,
there is a blessed freedom a gracious heart has, being once justified by
Christ, to open his soul unto God, which connot be done by any other way in the
world, to have liberty to pour out our whole souls into his bosom, is from
faith, and comes in as a fruit of Justification, David pardoned Absolon, but
would not let him see his face: but God never pardons any soul, but he gives
free liberty for that soul, to come into his presence and open it self fully
unto him; this is a second privilege, Pardon of sin is an inlet to many other
mercies.

Of Pardon of Sin making all other Mercies to be Mercies.
3. Pardon of sin is not only an inlet to many other mercies, but it is such a
mercy as makes all other mercies to be mercies, and without which no other
mercies would be mercies; by this all other mercies are mercies: when once a
soul comes to be pardoned, it may look upon all it has in a far more sweeter
way than ever it could before; by this he may look upon House and Land, Wife
and Children, Estate and Friends, he may look upon these as mercies indeed;
Why? for he has a pardon, his sins are pardoned; as a man supposing he is
charged, found guilty, and condemned, having a fair house, rich furniture,
sweet yoak-fellow and children, and all things he could desire; but says he,
What are all these to me seeing I am a condemned man? Well, he goes and gets a
pardon unexpectedly, and now he returns to his House, Wife and Relations again,
and all are sweet unto him, when he injoys them with a pardon, he looks upon
them with another manner of eye than he did before; thus there is this
difference between the enjoyment of outward comforts in this world when sin is
pardoned, and before it was pardoned; thou have Houses and Land, sweet
Yoak-fellow, and Children, trading at Sea and Land, and all things thou can
desire; but what is all this to thee, while guilt of sin lies grating on thy
Conscience? Well, God comes into thee with pardoning mercy, and takes away thy
sin, the guilt of which lay corroding on thy Conscience, then thou may look
upon thy Estate, Wife, Children, and all thy comings in to thee, as coming from
the same eternal Fountain of Gods eternal love, that Jesus Christ himself came
from; this is a mighty Argument to persuade men to seek after the pardon of
their sin, that you may have your comforts and enjoyments in this world in
outward things sweet unto you; and if there were no other reason to persuade
you to seek after forgiveness, this might be enough, that you may have all your
outward mercies in mercy to you; you may have an Estate, a sweet Yoak-fellow,
and sweet Children, and all thou can desire, and these are mercies, but they
are but such mercies as God may give to those that are Enemies unto him; they
are but outward mercies at the best, coming not to thee as fruits of the
Covenant, and so are not the sure mercies of David; nay, not worthy to be
accounted mercies. Consider but two things;

First, The guilt of sin upon thy soul, is so great an evil, that take all
these things at the best, they are but as a grain of Sugar put into a tun of
Gall; a tun filled up with bitter Gall, and one grain of Sugar put into it,
would not all the sweetness of it be swallowed up in the tun of Gall? so were
the Monarchy of the whole World made over to thee, yet if thy sin be
unpardoned, there is so much evil in it, as all that thou can enjoy is but as
one grain of Sugar put into a tun of Gall, the evil of sin would swallow it all
up.

Secondly, Thou know not what thou have, whether it be out of Gods love or
hatred; Nay, thou have rather cause to conclude, it is out of Gods anger and
hatred, than out of Gods love: How can thou then account it a mercy, when all
the comforts thou have, may come out of Gods infinite anger and hatred to thee,
rather than out of love? therefore till thou art assured of pardon, thou have
no mercy, thou can be assured of, is in mercy to thee: This shows,

1. The great vanity of men and women that look after pardon of sin, but it is
only at such times as God takes away all other comforts from them; as thus,
they think to satisfy themselves with the creatures while they can enjoy them,
while they can go up and down amongst friends, eat good cheer, and have all
coming in; but when God takes away all these, as on a sickbed, then they will
cry for pardon; Oh mercy Lord! oh mercy! I am a wretched miserable sinner, oh
mercy! Well, now you would have mercy, Why now, and not before? before you had
other things, and you quieted your hearts with them; and why not now, were not
they mercies? but I know not whether they were out of love or hatred; Well, yet
you quieted your hearts with them; and now they are all going, Do you now think
it a fit time to cry for mercy? Oh how infinitely wast thou mistaken, that thou
did not cry for mercy before! thou think it now a fit time to cry for
mercy; why? thou had no mercy that thou could take the comfort of as a
mercy unless thy sins were pardoned; and therefore thou have now cause to cry
for pardon, when sickness comes, and God takes away this and the other mercy,
thou think thou art left naked; if you knew all, you are naked now: and
therefore would you live a comfortable life in this world, and have your House,
Estate, and all Relations mercies to you; never be at rest till you have got
your sins pardoned and forgiven; this considered, might be a mighty argument
and means to draw the hearts of men to get pardon, that all their outward
things might be sweetened to them.

2. If all outward good be not a mercy unless sin be pardoned, then what good
will thou or any one get by the increase of sin? thou think it to be a good;
Why? all thou have now is not a good, is not a mercy; and do thou think to
get good by the increase of sin? when a temptation comes to draw thee to sin,
think thus, I have heard this day that all I have is not a mercy unless my sin
be pardoned, and therefore I can never get any mercy by the increase of sin:
Certainly did men and women understand themselves, they would easily answer the
Devil by this kind of reasoning.

Of Pardon of Sin making all afflictions easy to be born.
Wherever sin is pardoned, there follows this, that any thing that befalls
that man or woman is very easy to be born; an easy matter it is for any one
that has his sin pardoned to bear any affliction, and this is a great
blessedness; or rather take it thus, That either such a one may be assured,
that afflictions shall be removed, or otherwise made easy to be born; for
pardon of sin delivers us from abundance of afflictions that otherwise might
befall us in this world; though it is true, God lays many afflictions on his
people after their sins are forgiven, yet it is more than they know, but that
if their sins had not bin forgiven they might have had other manner of miseries
than they do now meet withal; perhaps you meet with some now, and more than you
did before, but for ought you know, those miseries you meet with now, might
have been sevenfold more than now they are, and another manner of wrath than
you now think of, Isai. 40.2. Cry, her warfare is accomplished, for her
iniquity is pardoned; where iniquity is pardoned, there warfare is
accomplished; if afflictions be not quite removed, yet they are made very easy
to be born, and that upon two grounds.

First, Because the greatness of the good that there is in pardon of sin, makes
the bitterest and saddest evil that there is in affliction to be as nothing; as
to instance, suppose a Malefactor that is condemned to some grievous and
hideous death, should have a friend at Court to sue for pardon, or he comes up
up to get pardon; Well, he comes and is admitted to come into the Kings
Presence, and he receives him graciously, pardons him freely, quits him fully
of all his guilt, and puts him fully out of all the danger he was in; perhaps
as he is coming from the King he loses his Glove or Handkerchief; Would not
that be an unseemly thing for a man, that after he has got his Pardon, yet
because he has lost his Glove, should whine and wring his hands, because of the
loss of his Glove; would not that be an unreasonable thing? Certainly there is
as much unreasonableness for any man or woman that has the pardon of their
sin, for them to wring their hands and whine, and keep a stir as though they
were undone because they are afflicted: For the greatest affliction that can
befall any in this world, compared with the good of pardon of sin, is not so
much as the loss of a Glove for the saving of any man's life by the Kings
Pardon; though your afflictions may be more than the loss of a Glove; yet your
pardon of sin is greater than any Kings pardon in the world: put these
together, and know hereby thy unreasonableness, and when to check thy self,
(having any assurance of pardon of sin) that thou should be so troubled at
any affliction, and have so much good from God in the pardon of thy sin:
Further, for those that are troubled at afflictions, I would put this to them;
either they are pardoned, or not pardoned: if ye are pardoned, why are ye so
troubled? if ye are not pardoned, then you had need to spend the strength of
your spirits by waving your grief for afflictions to seek pardon of your sins.

Secondly, Pardon of sin will make afflictions easy* because the soul may be
assured that the evil of affliction is gone; he that has his sin pardoned may
be assured, that there can nothing befall him in this world, but that if he knew
all, he himself would be willing with all his heart it should be so: And is not
this a blessed condition for any man, while he lives here in this world, in
which there is abundance of evil, yet to be in such a condition as that we
shall certainly know, that there shall nothing befall us as long as we live in
this world, but that, which if we knew all, we our selves would choose it, and
account it to be a better condition than any other? this is a blessed estate,
to be in such a condition as this is, for God to testify from Heaven unto us,
that it shall not be in the power of any creature in the world to do us any
hurt; for certainly so it is when once a man or woman is justified, God does as
much as speak from heaven to that poor soul; saying, Soul now you are safe, be
certainly assured that there is no creature in all the world can do you any
hurt, Psalm. 116.7. thou may say as David there, Return unto thy rest O my
soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; God has pardoned thy sin,
and delivered thee from death; and n^w my soul return unto thy rest: the word
translated rest in the Original is plural, return unto thy rests; there are
rests enough for a soul whom God has delivered and pardoned, all afflictions
to him are but as the Viper on Paul's hand that he may shake off, they will do
him no hurt; the sting of death is sin, and the sting of afflictions is that
they are the beginners of death: but to one that has his sin taken away, the
property of affliction is altered; they come not as acts of revenging Justice,
but as effects of Love and Mercy; the Principle from whence they come, and the
end to which they tend is differenced from what it was before; when Trespasses
are forgiven, Deliverance from Evil will follow after, as it is in the Lords
Prayer; true as you heard before in the former point, If once we come to have
afflictions as the fruits of sin, then they are heavy and grievous indeed; in
this case when affliction comes for sin, and sin comes to prey upon a man in
time of affliction, it is just as a Bayliffe set on by a cruel Creditor, that
comes to a poor man in debt, and he lies sick; the Bayliffe takes away his
Stools, Table, Bed and Pillow, and all he has to help and comfort him, leaves
him not a Pillow to rest his weary head upon: so when a sinner lies sick, and
under affliction, guilt of sin comes and takes away all thy comforts; if thou
have any Promise, as a Pillow to rest thy head upon, guilt of sin will take it
away; guilt of sin pulls and tears away every comfort, and every good that
sinners should have to refresh themselves withal in affliction: But when the
guilt of sin is gone, thou may lay thy head down in quiet, and rest upon a
Promise, and it will make affliction very easy, that thou shall have no cause
to make complaint as formerly thou had, Isai. 33. ult. The Inhabitant shall
not say, I am sick; mark the ground of it, for the People that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their Iniquity; when God comes to bestow this great mercy of
pardon, the Inhabitants shall not make such dolorous complaints of affliction
and trouble upon them: says Luther, strike Lord, strike, for I am absolved from
my sin; if once God has absolved thee, or any poor creature from their sin, it
is not in the power of any affliction to disturb them, Job 34.29. When he gives
quietness, who can give trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can
behold him? when God gives quietness, as he does in forgiveness of sin, then
who can make trouble? let there be never so many rumors in the world of war,
blood, and miseries, as if Heaven and Earth met together; yet if God give
quietness to the heart, in assurance of forgiveness of sin, who can bring
trouble? it is not in the power of all the world to disturb his s^ul whose sins
are forgiven; Pardon of sin is that peace the world cannot take away; therefore
blessed is the man that has his sins pardoned.

Of Healing, the fruit of Pardoning Mercy.
5. Where God pardons sin, he heals that soul and sanctifies it by the
immediate fruits of the Spirit, wheresoever it is, and this is a great
blessedness; who is there that understands the evil of sin that sees not this a
great blessedness, not only to be delivered from the guilt of sin, but also
from the uncleanness of sin too; and that Sanctification or freedom from the
power and slavery that there is under the bondage of sin is a fruit of
forgiveness of sin will appear by diverse Texts of Scripture. I shall not speak
to all, but only some that make this blessing to be the consequence or
immediate fruits that slow in upon forgiveness, Jer. 31.33, 34 there God
promises to put his law into our inward parts: But what is the ground of it? in
the 34. verse, I will forgive their iniquities and remember their sins no more;
the writing of Gods Law in our inward parts, delivering us from the power of
sin, and sanctifying our hearts comes in as a fruit of Gods forgiving us our
iniquities, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you; why? because you
are not under the Law, but under Grace: Now this is the great grace of the
Gospel, forgiveness of sin, you are under that, and therefore it is that sin
cannot have dominion over you; as if the Apostle had said, you may resolve
against sin, and do what you can to oppose it, and strive as much as possible
you are able to subdue it; yet so long as you remain under the law, sin will
certainly have dominion over you, and you will be under the slavery of it,
until you come under the grace of the Gospel, and partake of that, Col. 2.13.
ult. And you has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses; so that quickening and Sanctification is a fruit of forgiving of all
their trespasses, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin; and the strength
of sin is the law; but thanks be to God that gives us the Victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ, the strength of sin is the law. Gods Justice in the Law
giving men up unto sin, there lies the strength of sin. But now God through
Christ coming to men in the grace of the Gospel, there comes deliverance from
the strength of sin: perhaps some of you have lain under the burden and power
of sin, and you have thought the only way to get victory, has been to resolve
and strive against it, and you have done so, and yet you cannot get power over
your sins: I remember one writing to Luther, tells him that he had vowed and
covenanted against his sin, and yet his sin prevailed against him, until he
understood the grace of the Gospel; and so may be have you done, and yet your
sin prevails because you take not this course: try the work of faith in point
of Justification; renew your faith in God, for the forgiveness of your sin
through Jesus Christ, that is the ready way, try that course; you that have been
tired in laboring against corruption, you have resolved and prayed, and shed
tears, and yet that will not do; try this way, renew your faith daily in point
of Justification, by laying hold of the infinite riches of the grace of Christ
in the Gospel for pardon, for healing power to come in to help you against that
which holds you, and this will not hinder your duties; you may pray, resolve,
and fast as much as before, but be sure your great care be to renew your faith
in point of Justification, and there will come more healing power by that in
your souls than by any thing else; if once you can touch Christ, the bloody
issues of your sins that run before come to be dried up, which you could not
dry up, though you spent your time and pains, and did all you could do; here is
a great difference between Gods forgiveness and man's: a King may forgive, but
he cannot change and heal: but when God forgives, he heals and takes away that
evil disposition from thee that did so weaken thee for all good; Christ when he
comes, he comes with healing in his wings; now blessed is the man whose sins
are forgiven, for that there follows deliverance from the power of sin, and a
healing of the soul.

Of comfort against Death following on Pardoning Mercy.
6. Blessed is he whose sins are forgiven, because such a man may look in the
face of Death and Judgment with comfort; Death when he comes to a Natural Man,
he comes as a Messenger of God to arrest the Soul at Gods suit; but where sin
is forgiven, Death is made a means to bring thee to rest; that, that would have
arrested thee is a means to bring thee to thy rest, Heb. 2.14, 15. Christ came
to die: Now what was the great business he came to die for, it was to purchase
a pardon for sin, and by his death to take away the power of the Devil, and
deliver them that through fear of death were all their life time subject to
bondage; through the fear of death, and nothing in all the world can deliver
from the fear of death but forgiveness of sin, and then this makes a man look
on the day of Judgment with comfort; for one special end of that day is, that
there may be a Declaration of the Infinite Mercy of God in forgiving of sin,
Act. 3.19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; when he shall
send Jesus again which before was preached to you: Certainly as soon as ever a
man comes to believe, his sins are blotted out; I but when the times of
refreshing shall come, they shall appear to your own selves, and to all the
World, Men and Angels more fully than ever before, some Interpreters think; and
I dare not deny it, but that there will be a time of refreshing in this world,
before the great and terrible day, that Christ will make it appear that the
sins of the Elect Believers are blotted out in another manner than now it does;
but however it will fully appear at that day, and then that day that will be so
terrible to the ungodly, will be refreshing to the Saints; Why? because they
shall find their sins blotted out then, and that will make that day a
refreshing day unto them; Although the Heavens be all on fire, and shrivelled
up like a Scrowl, and there be dreadful shriekings of ungodly men; yet it shall
be a day of refreshing to the Saints, because their sins are blotted out: Oh
blessed is the man that has his sins pardoned now! for he shall have that day
to be a day of refreshing to him; but woe be to thee O soul, who ever thou art,
that have not thy sin pardoned; if but one sin stand upon the score not blotted
out, woe, woe will betide the for ever more; but they that find their sin
pardoned, shall find that day to be a day of such refreshing as ever they
beheld; and therefore blessed is the man that has his iniquities forgiven.

Of Security against the worlds Reproaches, the fruit of Pardoning Mercy.
7. Where God has forgiven sin, such a one need not care for the censures of
all the world, and the reproaches they cast upon him; the men of the world cast
many reproaches on the Saints, and say, they are hypocrites, that though they
will not swear, yet they will lie; that they are false, proud, and the like;
Why? now the soul that finds it self acquitted before the Lord, need not care
for all the censures and condemnations that can be cast upon him from the men
of the world, Romans 8.33. Having spoken before of the great grace of God in
Justification, in verse. 33. he speaks as if he had made a challenge to all the
world, let them all come in, let me see Who can lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? Why? because it is God that justifies: many will charge them of
grievous things; I but it is God that justifies: What will a man care if the
Prince have given him a pardon, though some kitchen boy, some shakeril about
the Court should rail against him, so long as the King has pardoned him;
Bernard has a notable speech concerning David when Shimei railed, David was
not troubled says he, he did not feel the injury heapt upon him, because he had
felt before the grace of God toward him; the feeling of Gods grace toward him
in pardoning, made him not feel the railings of Shimei; so Christ himself,
Isai. 50. ver. 7. he said before, I gave my back to the smiters, and hid not my
face from shame and spitting; they spit upon him: this is apparently spoken of
Christ; but what upheld him, verse. 7. For the Lord God will help me; therefore
shall I not be confounded for all this; therefore have I set my face like a
flint against all scorns, railings, and accusations in the world; but what was
the bottom of all this? mark, verse. 8. He is near that justifies me, who will
contend with me? let us stand together: Who is my Adversary? let him come near
to me; let my Adversary come and do his worst, he is near that justifies me:
true, Christ had no sin personally to be pardoned; but he had the sins of all
the Elect charged upon him, and upon that he suffered death. Now we are to
know, Christ is justified as well as Believer; and the very ground why a
Believer is justified, it is because Christ is justified himself; Christ being
justified, a Believer comes to be justified; this might have been opened in the
mysteries of Pardon of Sin: There is a justifying first in Christ as in a
common public person, and then by faith in our own persons. Now though in the
Fathers Justification of Christ he justifies us, yet not as particular persons,
but in him as a common person in the Name of all the Elect; and faith, that
comes in that we might be justified in our own particular persons, as before we
were in Christ as a common person: Now Christ is justified first, and acquitted
from all our sins, and this acquittance is made the ground of his challenge to
all his Adversaries in the world, though the Prince of Devils come with all his
power; yet says Christ, he is near that justifies me, and he will make my face
as a flint, it is God that acquits me, who is my Adversary? let him come near:
Oh its a blessed thing when thou have got the pardon of thy sin! thou need
not care for all the reproaches the world can cast upon thee; thou may go up
and down, and challenge any in the world to come in against thee, 1 Cor. 4.3. I
pass not for man's judgment, he that judges me is the Lord; the world
translated judgment, in the Greek it is man's day: Man has his day here, and he
thinks to weary out the People of God; why says Paul, I pass not for man's day,
he that has the supreme judgment in his hands, he has acquitted me, and I am
well enough.

Of the Foundation of Eternal Life laid in Pardoning Mercy.
8. Blessed is the man that has his iniquities forgiven; for this is the
foundation of eternal life; whoever has this mercy, has a certain pledge put
into his hands of eternal life, Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them he
called: whom he called, them he justified: and whom he justified, them he
glorified: thou who art justified, and have thy sin pardoned, thou shall
certainly be glorified: A Prince may pardon a man, but he cannot assure him of
eternal life, though he give him his natural life: But God if he pardon, he
makes it known to that soul that he shall live eternally with him in glory: Oh
blessed is he then that has his iniquities forgiven, for this is a pledge unto
him of eternal life.

Of Pardon of Sin being the bottom of all true Comfort.
9. Blessed is he that has his sin pardoned; for pardon of sin is the very
bottom of all true comfort: Be of good comfort your sins are forgiven; if
Christ speak but this word to a soul, though he be never so much dejected, it
is enough to raise any drooping soul from the gates of Hell it self. Be of good
comfort oh soul, thy sins are forgiven thee, Isai. 40.2. Speak you comfortable
to her, for her iniquities are pardoned: God calls to comfort her when her
iniquities are pardoned, this is the foundation of all true comfort: if you lay
any other foundation to build your comforts on, certainly that building will
totter and come to nothing, if this be not the foundation: You would fain have
comfort, and you are every one looking out for comfort; and indeed it is as
natural for the soul of man to seek for comfort, as it is for the fire to burn:
there is no man but would fain have comfort; now look to the foundation if you
would not have the building totter, lay a good foundation: Many lay the
foundation of their comforts in their sins, and others in the creatures; but
thou must lay it in the pardon of thy sin, in the free grace of God justifying
thy soul, and that building will hold; lay it there and thou shall be comforted
here and for ever hereafter. And thus we have done with that Particular, That
Pardon of Sin is a great mercy, because it is a foundation and inlet to many
other mercies: Blessed is the man that has his iniquities forgiven, that has
such a grand mercy, upon which many other mercies follow.

CHAP. V. Of Pardoning Mercy passing through a great many difficulties.
BLessed is the man that has his sins forgiven; for indeed, 5. Argument.
it is a mercy that passes through many difficulties before it comes to the
soul; and that that passes through many difficulties is strong and great
indeed, and therefore makes the man blessed, because it is grace that does pass
through many difficulties, it is an argument of a great deal of strength of
grace, when grace shall pass through many difficulties; as it is an argument of
the great strength of sin, when sin passes through many difficulties to bring
forth; a soul being set upon sin, there lies a great many difficulties in the
way, yet lust to that sin being strong, it will break through all difficulties
to get to it; so in mercy, when God comes with mercy to forgive a soul, this
mercy of God must go through abundance of difficulties before it gets to you,
which argues it to be wonderful strong mercy, and therefore makes him blessed
that partakes of it. When God made the World, it was done with a word speaking,
God said, Let there be light, and there was light: But when God comes to pardon
a sinner, Heaven and Earth must be moved; there must be a greater work of God
in pardoning of a sinner, than in making of the world; certainly the work is
greater and passes through more difficulties. As

First, All the wrongs that ever thou have done to God stand betwixt thee and
pardon; never did any man in the world wrong another man as thou have wronged
God: How sin wrongs God has in part been held forth to you, in the evil of sin
and how contrary sin is to the infinite holiness of God, yet mercy breaks
through that, yea above all, that great and difficult work of the satisfying
the infinite justice of God, yet mercy breaks through that, and there stands in
that.

1. This difficulty, that before thou can be pardoned, God must be made Man,
and yet must remain the same God he was before; thou cryest for pardon of sin,
or thou art undone; suppose now, that Gods bowels of mercy did even yearn
toward thee for to pardon thy sin, yet before this is done, there must be this
great work done; that God must be made man, and yet remain the same God he was
before; here is a mighty difficult work, a greater work than making of the
world, and yet mercy breaks through this.

2. Here Is this stands between sin and pardon, That when God is made Man, he
must die and be made a curse; and not only so, but God the Father must do it;
he must take his own Son and stab him for thee, he must himself take him and
put him to death, and himself must pour out his wrath upon his own Son, before
thy sins can be pardoned. Now that God the Father should take his own Son, the
Son of his delight, stab him to the heart, and himself put him to death, this
is a mighty great work; and yet this must be done before thou can be
pardoned.

2. There Is this difficulty stands in the way, That before sin can be pardoned,
the blind, dead, wicked, carnal, sottish heart of Man, must be raised up to
perform the most glorious Act that ever any creature did; which is an Act of
believing: yet says God, that thy sin may be pardoned, I will put forth my
infinite power to effect it, to raise that blind, dead, sottish, carnal, wicked
heart of man so full of all wickedness, to perform the greatest work that ever
any creature did, for so is believing; Gods mighty power is put forth to effect
this: Now there is all these difficulties lying in the way, and yet mercy
passes through them all to pardon sin; surely then, that soul must needs be
blessed that has his sin pardoned; that God sets his heart upon him so much,
that rather than he will not show mercy unto him, he will pass through all
these great difficulties that lie in the way; and truly on consideration of
this, before I pass any further, there are three Meditations that may be
collected hence, and may come with a great deal of power upon all our souls.

First, Then it must needs be a great taking the Name of God in vain, for any
man or woman to have slight thoughts of such a mercy, as pardon of sin is, that
comes through so many difficulties.

Secondly, This may come with power upon our hearts, if Gods mercy pass through
so many difficulties for the pardon of thy sin thou may be content to endure
much difficulty in seeking for the pardon of thy sin; thou see what an evil
sin is, and art more sensible of it than ever thou were before; well, thou art
seeking for pardon, and thou camplainest, thou have waited long for pardon, it
may be a quarter, or half a year, or it may be twelve months, and thou have got
little assurance of pardon, and thou find it much more difficult than thou
thoughtest it would be, temptations come stronger than ever, and the Devil
suggests more evil thoughts than ever; thou find duties hard to flesh and
blood, and thou art wearied and tired with temptation, these are some
difficulties; but yet art thou about that great work of seeking pardon of sin,
be contented to suffer some difficulties, yea ten times more than thou have; if
God see good to lay it upon thee, for Gods mercies pass through difficulties to
pardon thy sin, and if thou get'st through, though thou meetest with
difficulties, thou have no cause to complain at all; Why should not you be
willing to pass through difficulties in seeking pardon, when as Gods mercies
pass through many difficulties to come to thy soul; thou art going to God, and
seeking to him for mercies, and there lies many difficulties in the way; when
God was coming to thee, there lay many difficulties in the way, and yet he past
through them all; therefore thou may be content though thou meetest with some
difficulties in seeking the pardon of thy sins.

Thirdly, This may make us willing to go through any services, though they be
hard, if thou art in getting of pardon; Suppose God set us about some hard work
that has many difficulties in it, do not complain as if God were a hard
Master, when he sets you about any hard work; for be it known unto you, thou
art never set about any such hard work in all thy life for God, that has so
many difficulties in it, as the work of God in pardoning thy sin has; there
are more difficulties when God comes to pardon thy soul for sin, than in any
service whatever that Cod requires of thee; thou look upon the service of
God, and there are many difficulties in it; be contented, do not complain, for
God past through many difficulties to pardon thy sin; and this is another
consideration, the difficulties God passes through to pardon sin, is a great
Argument that that soul is blessed that has his iniquities forgiven.

CHAP. VI. Of Pardoning Mercy coming from the Fountain of Gods Everlasting Love.
6. Argument.
WHen God comes to pardon sin, it is such a mercy as comes from the fountain of
Gods Everlasting Love; other mercies do not; where this is not, you cannot make
them Evidences of Gods eternal love; if God give you health of body, good
voyages at Sea, and good comings in in respect of the world, you cannot draw
Arguments from hence, that God bears eternal love to your souls. But when he
comes to pardon your sins, it is a certain evidence, that God has set his love
on thee from all eternity; if there were a chain let down from Heaven, and thou
could take hold but of one link, it would certainly bring thee thither, both
ends would come together. Romans 8.30. here is a chain of many links let down, and
if thou can catch hold of the link of Justification, thou may certainly
catch hold of Predestination; for all hang together: if thou art justified,
then know for certain that thou art a predestined man or woman; whom God has
set his heart upon from all eternity to do thee good: and this is a great
happiness for a poor creature, while he lives in this world, to know that God
has set his heart upon him from all eternity to do him good; and indeed, we
can never be at rest until we come to this, if thy heart be right, thou can
not be at rest in the enjoyment of such poor fare as God casts to Reprobates,
thou must have other comforts than any thing the world can afford; if thy heart
be right, thou will never rest until thou come to know Gods thoughts in his
eternal purposes toward thee; it is no nicety nor vain curiosity, for men and
women to seek to know what were the thoughts of God toward them from all
eternity; it may be known, and God has revealed it, especially in the times of
the Gospel, God has opened his bosom to reveal unto his people the thoughts
he had of them from all eternity; and this makes a Pardoned sinner to be so
blessed; and this is more than any Malefactor can have from a Prince, he may be
persuaded to pardon him; and yet even presently his heart may be as much set
against him as against any man; yet now having got his Pardon, he thinks
himself blessed, and goes his way: But now, when God Pardons, it is not an act
of a day, but such an act as God has set his heart upon from all eternity to
do it; it is such an act as the infinite wisdom of God has been set on work
from all eternity to effect it: if a Malefactor come to a Prince for pardon,
and the Prince say, I have been setting my thoughts a work to pardon you, ever
since I heard of your crime, this will bring some comfort: But what is this to
the comfort God brings to the soul that he pardons; when God comes to a soul,
he does, not only pardon, he says not, soul I pardon thee: but know oh soul for
thy comfort, that this is a work that my wisdom and the councils of my will,
have been a contriving from all eternity, to bring about thy pardon with my own
honor, and here it is for thee, take it as a fruit of my eternal Councils;
therefore Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, because such
purposes have been taken up in Gods eternal Councils to effect it.

CHAP. VII. Of Pardoning Mercy, being a work that all the three Persons in the
Trinity are engaged in.
7. Argument.
BLessed is the man whose Iniquities are forgiven, because as there is no one
thing has taken up the heart of God more than this; so this is a work that all
the three Persons in the Trinity are engaged in nothing more, God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; as to instance.

1. For God the Father, in Isai. 43.25. he challenges this as his own glory, I
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my Names sake, and will
not remember thy sins; it is his Prerogative, I am he, God glories in it as a
peculiar, belonging to none but himself, Exodus 33.18. Moses desired to see the
glory of God, and God promised to make all his goodness pass before him; and
Exodus 34.6. he proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands;
and then to the point in hand, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin,
here is the glory of God; Would you have a demonstration indeed, that Gods heart
was set upon this as the greatest work that ever was done? take it in this,
that the very thoughts of effecting this by the death of his own Son, made God
very well pleased and delighted with his death; surely then his heart was much
set upon it; for rather than he would not effect it, he would part with his own
Son: Never was there such a hideous thing as the death of the Son of God; and
therefore if there were any delight to be taken in it, and that God the Father
took delight in it; there must be some great thing to sweeten it, such an
horrid thing as the death of the Son of God had need have some great thing to
sweeten it; what now sweetened this to God the Father, that his own Son should
be put to death? Why? nothing but this, that hereby sinners might come to be
redeemed, justified and pardoned, nothing else would sweeten it to God the
Father, but this does, Isai. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him; and
again, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; the Scripture says,
God takes no delight in the death of a sinner; and yet God did take delight in
the death of his Son, it pleased God to see his Son bruised: when God the
Father saw his Son under his wrath, swetting drops of water and blood under the
curse of the Law, it pleased God well; certainly then there must be some mighty
thing that must sweeten this, and make the death of his own Son a delightful
object to him; Why? the very thing that did it was this, that Christ being made
a curse, he thereby did redeem us from the curse, procured the pardon of our
sins, and reconciled us unto God; and this very thing sweetened the death of the
Son of God unto God the Father, therefore the heart of God was much in it.

2. For Christ, What was the business that brought him from the Fathers bosom,
made him content to take our nature upon him, to suffer, and to be a man of
sorrows, so as to delight in it? there was a kind of delight to Christ in
enduring the wrath of God; for with desire (says Christ) have I desired to eat
this Passover, because it was the Preparation to his Death and Sufferings of
the wrath of God, in all the fruits and effects of it for the sin of Man; and
when Christ came to institute the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and to give
his blood for the remission of sins, the Text says, He gave thanks; What did he
give thanks for? surely the thing for which he gave thanks for, (upon which the
Supper of the Lord is called the Eucharist, from the Greek word that signifies
Thanksgiving;) was this, that by his death Remission of sins should be
obtained: when Christ was to die and suffer all the wrath of God that was due
for our sins, Christ blessed God and thanked God the Father for it: surely
there must be some great matter to sweeten it; that he should be so affected as
to bless God the Father for that that cost him his life, and yet he did: Mark
what it is that satisfies Christ for all this, Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord
to bruise him, and his soul was made an offering for sin: all was laid upon
Christ; Well, but what did Christ look for for all this? Verse. 11. He shall see
of the travel of his soul and shall be satisfied; that that shall satisfy
Christ for all his pains, labor and sufferings, shall be to see of the travel
of his soul; What is that? What is the travel of Christ's soul? What? Why by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; as if Christ had said, this
is the very thing my Soul travels for, in all that I have done or suffered in
all my life, that I might but bring this great business to pass, to justify
some souls, to get the sin of those poor souls that are thine Elect pardoned,
and their persons justified: this my soul travels for, and oh Father let me but
see this, the travel of my Soul, and I am satisfied: Christ accounted it worth
all the travel of his Soul, in all he did and suffered, that he might justify
some souls, as if he had said, he would have no other boon from his Father but
only this; Father if thou will but recompense all my travel with this, I shall
for ever account my self that I am satisfied, and have enough: How should we be
satified with Christ, when Christ accounts the pardon of our sins satisfaction
enough? Shall Christ say, notwithstanding all my sorrows, let thy sin be
pardoned, and I have enough? Wilt not thou now say; and let me have Christ and
I have enough? Christ says to God the Father, let me have those souls pardoned,
and I have enough; Oh then do thou say, let me have Christ and I have enough:
Surely Christ is enough to satisfy thee, when the pardon of thy sin is enough
to satisfy him.

3. As the heart of God and Christ, so the heart of the Holy Ghost is in this
business too; the great work the Holy Ghost has to do in this world, and the
great business for which he was sent, it is to convince poor souls of the
righteousness there is to be had in Christ for Justification, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10.
Christ will send the Comforter; and first he will convince the world of sin. 2.
Of righteousness: What is that? that is, when the Spirit comes, he will clear
it up unto believers, and convince them that the righteousness that they must
have to stand righteous before God in, is the righteousness of Christ alone;
and this is a mighty work of the Spirit of God, and a work that would never
have been done, had not he come to have done it; it is such a great mystery
that we should be righteous by another righteousness, that it is above the
reason of all Men and Angels; all Men and Angels were never able to fathom this
infinite depth, it is above their apprehensions that ever we should come to be
righteous in Christ, and very few yet where Christ is made known, are convinced
of it: Those men that take up Religion in a natural way, they never are
convinced of the Righteousness of Christ, it is a riddle and a mystery to them;
only those few souls whom God intends eternally to save, the Spirit of God is
sent unto them from the Father and the Son to clear it unto them, that the
righteousness wherewith they must stand righteous before God, is the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; this is the great work of the Spirit of God, and
he comes on purpose to enlighten you in this great point, and to witness this
great Truth unto you, Heb. 10.15. Whereof the Holy Ghost is a witness, for
after that he had said before, this is the Covenant that I will make, etc.
verse. 17. Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more, as the Principal
part of the Covenant, and of this the Holy Ghost is a witness: This great Truth
of the forgiveness of Sins the Holy Ghost comes to bear witness of, and seal
this to thy Soul, that thy sins are forgiven; this is the great work of the
Holy Ghost, after believing to seal up the forgiveness of sin: and this is one
great reason why the Holy Ghost has the Title of Comforter, because as he
comes to convince of sin, so also to witness and seal up forgiveness of sin to
the soul: And indeed, as it shows the excellency of the mercy of forgiveness,
because the Holy Ghost is so much in it; so the greatness of it, that must have
so high a Person to witness it: and indeed, the Soul is not satisfied until it
have this special witness of the Holy Ghost; it is true, there may be probable
arguments drawn by signs of Gods love unto us; and the Holy Ghost may come in
those signs: but besides that, there is the immediate witness of the Holy
Ghost: to limit him to witness by signs only, is more than any man can have
warrant for; and this I say further, that all the signs of Gods favor that we
can have, will not satisfy the soul until there be this special work of the
Holy Ghost sealing and witnessing the favor of God unto us; 1 John 3. there
are many signs of Gods favor in that Chapter, Verse. 9. He that is born of God
does not commit sin. And Verse. 19. Hereby we know we are of the Truth, and
shall assure our hearts before him; and he that keeps his Commandemen^s,
dwells in him, and he in him, that is another sign, and Verse. 24 but the
conclusion of all is this; Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit
which he has given us; it is the Holy Ghost must convince and satisfy the
soul, of Gods love: many there are that would fain have their sins pardoned,
and would fain have some signs of it; and perhaps I may hereafter give some
signs. But now know, that all the signs in the world will not serve to quiet
the heart, but that it may return again to its former doubts, till God come to
pacify the spirit by the witness of the Holy Ghost; for it is so great a
matter, where once the Soul understands the infinite breach made between God
and it by sin, that it must needs be more than an ordinary work to assure the
Soul of Gods Reconciliation to it, and nothing can do it satisfactorily but the
Holy Ghost; he must come to the Soul to assure it of this thing: perhaps the
case of a poor Soul is thus; Suppose a Prisoner in Goal lies bound in fetters
for some great offense against his Prince; and some friend comes and tells him
there is hope of pardon; Oh, says he, it is too good news to be true; well,
another comes to the grate of the Prison, and tells that he hears from the
Court, the King has sealed Pardons, and put such a ones name in, this is some
comfort; but yet this frees him not from fears and doubtings. But now, suppose
the Favorite of the Prince come from the King himself, one that is of the
Kings Bedchamber, and one to whom the King opens his whole soul, and nothin^
^he King does but he is acquainted with it; he comes to this poor man, and bids
him be of good comfort, I come from the King, and bring you a Pardon from him,
shows it him, and says there it is, take it; Oh this revives his spirit, when
such a special Messenger is sent unto him: so in this case I may compare all
signs to be like some friend or other, that goes by the grate, and speaks of
the happiness of such a man that he is pardoned; but the soul is under such
blindness and fears, by reason of the guilt of sin, that God knows it is no
easy matter to persuade it of pardon: But now God for the comfort of those
that he intends good will unto, sends his own Spirit that lies in his own
bosom, and knows all his secrets, to declare the mind of God, and to say to
such a soul, Peace be to thee, thy sins are forgiven; now this satisfies the
soul.

But it may be here objected, How may I know it is the Spirit of God that
witnesses, and not my own fancies or delusions of Satan.

I answer, as we know the Sun by its own light, so we may know the Spirit by
its own testimony; and though there be may some ebbs, yet it will rise again;
there is such a witnessing work of the Spirit, by a kind of sweet and secret
intercourse between God and the Soul, whereby God over-powers all doubts and
fears; though I do not say, every one has it in a like sensible measure; yet
this I say, when this full assurance comes, although there may be doubts and
many questions before in the soul, for fear of being deluded, (for certainly
many are deceived and deluded) yet then the Spirit over-powers all doubts and
fears, and witnesses to the Soul its own work: Do not you say, because some are
deluded with fancies, that there is no witness of the Spirit; when as there is
scarce any point in the Gospel the Scripture speaks more about than this of the
witness of the Spirit: indeed they that judge of the mysteries of the Gospel by
Humane Reason, and understand no further than that reaches too, and that are
little acquainted with those converses that are between God and a believing
Soul, they may slight this witness of the Spirit; but you must know, there is
not any Soul that has assurance he shall go to Heaven, but it is wrought on by
a high supernatural and mysterious way; and if there were no other way to
evidence this to the Soul but by some signs, this would be no higher evidence
than by way of reason: But we are to know, as great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, so also great is the mystery of
godliness, God justified in the Spirit; God justified in the Spirit is a great
mystery, Christ's Incarnation is a great mystery, so is a Believers
Justification as well as Christ's Incarnation; so also the witness of
Justification is a great mystery; and therefore I beseech you look up higher
than for such signs as Reason may reach unto, and beg of God to reveal this
unto you, that thou may have the witness of the Spirit of God to testify
unto thee that thy sins are pardoned. Now blessed is the man, whose iniquities
are forgiven, seeing God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is so much in it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pardoning Mercy being a Perfect Mercy.
8. Argument.
BLessed is he whose iniquities are forgiven, for this mercy is a perfect
mercy, that is, where God does pardon any sinner, such a one stands as perfect
before God in point of Justification as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or any of the
Prophets or righteous men that ever lived in the world: thou poor Soul, Man or
Woman, Youth or Servant, if God come unto thee, and pardon any of your sins,
thou stand as fully justified as Abraham, Paul, Peter, or any of the
Apostles and Prophets; though in Sanctification thou fallest short of them, yet
though art justified as perfectly as ever they were: Justification is an act
that is done altogether and at once, therefore a perfect work; and this is an
Argument of infinite Consolation to the Saints of God, that the great business
between God and them in point of Justification is perfected; Psalm. 51.7. David
prays to God that he would purge him with Hysop and he should be clean, that
is, that he might be cleansed by Justification, by having the guilt of sin
taken from his Conscience by a renewed act of pardon; and then as it follows, I
shall be whiter than Snow: the Saints of God though they be Sanctified, they
are not whiter than the snow in Sanctification, but in Justification they are
whiter than the snow; no spot at all in them, Ephesians. 5.27. Christ presents his
Church unto himself without spot; in point of Justification every believing
soul is without spot before the Lord, Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld iniquity
in Jacob; that is, though God knows there is iniquity there, yet he sees is not
to charge them with it, or impute it to them; all is done away in that regard
by Justification: it is observable to this purpose, what we have in Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee, no spot in thee; there are
spots in respect of Sanctification; yea, but in respect of Justification it may
be said of her, There is no spot at all in thee; Thou art all fair my Love, it
is the words of Christ, he comes forth and says, Thou art all fair my Love:
Alas, when the Believer looks upon himself, his own duties and performances, he
sees nothing at all but spots, all besmeared and bespattered all over; why,
though thou look on thy self be spotted, yet Christ looks upon thee without
spot, and God the Father looks upon thee through Christ without spot, and says,
Thou art all fair, there is no spot in thee; thou think it may be, that if
God should make a discovery of thy heart to all thy Christian friends and
acquaintance, thou would appear so foul, that they would cast thee out of
their society, and never have to do with thee more; yet for all this, Christ
says, Thou art all fair, there is no spot at all in thee. Justification admits
of no degrees, no not in Heaven, thou art not more justified there than thou
art here; thou art now as perfectly justified as ever, and accepted of Christ
as ever: Sanctification is renewed day by day, it being a work of God within
us, we increase in it daily; but Justification is a work of God without us, and
so is perfected at once; and hence then this makes a pardoned soul blessed,
because pardon of sin is of such a nature, that it is a perfect work. Hence
then I will but touch it, Here is

1. Abundance of comfort to a pardoned soul, though thou art weak in
Sanctification, and it troubles thee to think, how far thou come short of
Abraham's faith, Moses his meekness, David's love, Paul's zeal, Solomon's
wisdom, and Job's patience; yet this know, that thou art equal in Justification
with Abraham, Moses, David, and all the Prophets; and this may be a mighty
comfort to thee against the weakness of thy Sanctification.

2. This should be a mighty engagement upon thy spirit; Has God made thee equal
to them in Justification? how should thou labor to be like to them in
Sanctification? think thus with thy self, Is the mercy of God so rich and
glorious come, though I be a poor, wicked, wretched vile sinner, that I should
be made equal to the greatest Saints in Justification? Oh how should I labor
to follow hard after them, and get as near to them as I can in point of
Sanctification: this Argument should come with power and strength upon our
hearts, to stir up all our endeavors to be like to them in point of
Sanctification, that are equal with them in point of Justification. How should
we imitate Moses his Meekness, David's Love, Paul's Zeal, and Job's Patience.

CHAP. IX. Of Pardoning Mercy being an Irrevocable Mercy.
9. Argument.
BLessed are they that have their Iniquities forgiven, for it is an irrevocable
mercy; when God pardons sin, he never revokes it again; it is true, the soul
that is pardoned may afterward commit many offenses, that may provoke the
displeasure of God against him, yet he shall never so provoke God, as to cause
him to revoke this mercy of pardon to all eternity; if thou art once pardoned,
thou art pardoned for ever: It is not so with God in pardoning as it is with
men; a King pardons a Malefactor on condition of his good behavior afterward;
though it is true, a Believer will be more careful of offending after he is
pardoned than ever before: But yet, God does not pardon me so much on condition
of my good behavior as of his free grace, therefore it abides: He does not say
to a poor soul, I will pardon you, but it shall be on this condition; that you
behave your self well, and if you be found tripping in any one thing, I will
recall my pardon back again: it is so with a Princes Pardon, a man that is
pardoned for his life, if that man afterward offend, perhaps breaks the Peace,
which in another man would not be so great a matter, for he could soon satisfy
the Law for it; but he that goes under pardon for his life, if he break the
Peace, it costs him his life; whereas another, if he strike a man, it is but an
Assault and Battery in him; but he that has his Pardon for his life, for such a
thing done by him, his Pardon may be revok't again, and it may cost him his
life: I hope you will not abuse this grace of God, I know not how to open it to
Believers but with a great deal of danger to others; but how much danger soever
it may be to others, yet it must be opened and delivered to Believers; it is
Gods mind that his grace should be made known unto them, he would have them to
know it to the full, that his Pardoning Mercy is irrevocable; and therefore a
Believer should not question his Justification upon every failing in his
Sanctification, this is a dishonor to the free and rich grace of God, if on
every failing we call in question that great work of the Justification of our
souls, either to say, or think, I indeed did hope before that God had pardoned
the sins of my youth, and all my ancient sins, but falling into sin again, I am
afraid all is undone; all that God has done unto me is undone again, and I
must answer for all my sins: this I confess will come upon the Conscience,
specially upon the committing of any new sin; but though it do, yet if ever you
have been assured of the pardon of of your sin, know, this mercy shall never be
recalled again: the foundation of God stands sure; and this is a fundamental
mercy that always abides: therefore as we observed in Cant. 4.7. Christ says,
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee; but in Cant. 5.2. you
shall find she was in a sleepy secure and sinful condition, as a man or woman
asleep, they might do what they would with her; men might impose what they
would upon her, put her in what posture they pleased, and yet she was
unsensible; but yet in this condition her heart was awake, I sleep, but my
heart waketh; there remained a Principle of grace alive in her: but mark what
Christ said, though she confessed she was asleep; yet Christ says, Open to me my
Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled: this was spoken when the Church was in
a secure sinful condition; yet this is the voice of Christ calling the Church
his Sister, his Love, his Dove, his Undefiled one, when she was in that secure
condition; which shows the grace of God in pardoning sin is not called back
again: and because this is a point wherein much treasure lies, I shall a little
open the Irrevocableness of Gods mercy in his Pardoning and Justifying Grace;
and for this I shall give you some places of Scripture, which being opened, as
they will show the greatness of the mercy; so they will afford abundant matter
of Consolation and Encouragement to every believing soul. The

First Scripture Expression I shall name is in Isai. 43.25. where the Lord
tells his people, that he blots out their transgressions; God seems to take
much delight in this Phrase, and therefore doubles it, I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
sins: Now this phrase of blotting out is taken from the custom of Tradesmen
that have their Books of Accounts, wherein they enter all their Debts that are
owing to them by such and such men: Now when these come to be paid, the
Debt-book is crossed or blotted out; if any of you owe a debt, when you come to
pay it, you call for the Debt-book to see it crossed or blotted out, and then
you assure your selves you shall never hear of it more. Now you must know, that
all sinners are debtors to the Lord; they are in a debt of punishment for want
or failing in paying him a debt of Obedience: many men by their sin run into
debt with God daily, and because God does not call for the debt presently, they
think there is nothing between God and them, but carry it as if all were well;
as many Gallants run into Tradesmens debt to hang fine Clothes upon their
backs, and ruffle it up and down in the world, and never think of their debts
till their Creditors come and arrest them, and cast them into Goal, and there
they lie in Prison, for all their ruffling it up and down in the world: Just so
men and women by their sin run into debt with God, and though God do not call
for the debt presently, yet they are recorded in Heaven; it is as certain that
every sin of any man or woman is set down in Gods Debt-book, as any debt you
owe is set down in your Creditors Book: and as certainly must your debts be
called for, and satisfaction and payment made unto God for them, as certain as
any Tradesman will call for payment of his debt: Now this is the work of
Justification between God and your Souls, if ye would know the nature of it.
When Jesus Christ sees a poor soul that God the Father has given to him to
save, thus run into debt, Christ comes and lays down a price before God the
Father, to pay this debt; and Christ sees that the debt be blotted out of the
Book: Now when God comes with pardoning mercy to a Soul, God shows the debt
Book to a Believer, and causes him to see all his debts blotted out; and by
that he certainly assures the Soul his debt shall never be called for again,
this is such a mercy as is irrevocable, it shall not be brought back again, the
debt being once paid shall never more be called for; this is the first
expression, and it is a blessed one: Many men that are run into debt, and are
in danger every hour to have some Bailiffs arrest them, they cannot look out of
their doors but they are ready to fall upon them; they would think themselves
happy, if they might have any that would come and lay down all, and satisfy
the debt, and that they might see the debt blotted out, they would think
themselves happy indeed: Well, know that it is so with God when he comes to
pardon sin, the Debt-book is blotted out, and all Bonds cancelled.

Secondly, Though they be blotted out, yet they may be before Gods face, and
God may see them, though he will not call for them again; therefore the
Scripture tells us, that God will take that course with the sins of Believers
as that he will cast them behind his back, and never so much as lay the debt
before his face to look upon them, Isai. 38.17. Thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back; that which Hezekiah spoke of himself, is true of every
believing soul, God casts the sins of every Believer behind his back; when a
man casts a thing behind his back, he does it to that end, that he might take
no farther notice of it; but though God cast a man's sins behind his back, yet
if they be not very far, he may easily turn his face and look upon them when he
will: therefore mark further,

Thirdly, Another Scripture expression, Psalm. 103.10. As far as the East is
from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us; thus God
expresses himself, to satisfy the souls of his people, that their sins shall
never be called for again; the East and West, it is an expression to note out
the utmost distance; the East and West are so remote, that those two Points can
never come together; so the sins that God has pardoned to any soul, they shall
never be called for again.

Fourthly, Though they be removed as far as the East is from the West; yet
God's eyes may look a great way off; though those Points be at so great a
distance to our eyes, yet not so to the eye of God; therefore there is another
expression that may make it more full, that God will never look upon their sins
again that he has once pardoned, he blots them out, he casts them behind his
back, he removes them as far as the East is from the West; and if that be not
enough to satisfy thee, Micah 7.19. He will cast them into the bottom of the
Sea; things that are cast into the bottom of the Sea, are utterly thrown out of
sight, never to be looked for again; Well, but though God cast them into the
bottom of the Sea, he may think upon them. Therefore

Fifthly, mark another expression, further to satisfy thee, God says, He will
remember them no more; they shall be so far from being thought upon, that God
says he will not remember them any more; but you will say, it is impossible for
God but to remember them; yea, but when God pardons, it shall be as Irrevocable
as if God did never remember them; there are diverse Texts remarkable for this,
Isai. 43.25. I will blot out thy transgressions, -- and will not remember thy
sins: I, may be not now (thou may say) But he will hereafter; see what is
said in Jer. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their
sin no more; neither now nor hereafter, I will remember their sin no more.

Sixthly, They shall be so forgiven, as that there shall be no more mention of
them; there shall never be the least mention of a believers sins before God,
and for that see Ezekiel. 33.16. it is spoken of every godly man indefinitely that
turns to God, and is a Believer, None of his sins that he has committed shall
be mentioned unto him; by the way, let men take heed how they upbraid the
people of God for any of their former sins: Perhaps you knew such a one in the
times of his ignorance, and you say he was a liar, a Drunkard; but now God has
revealed his mercy to him in the pardon of his sin, and God says he will not
mention them any more: Take heed how you cast their sins, committed in the
times of their ignorance, in their teeth, saying, oh you are so precise now, I
knew what you were a little before; Shall the God of Heaven say, he will not
mention them any more; and yet will you do it? God will take it very ill, at
your hands: this is admirable comfort to every Believer, that God will not
remember their sin any more; he would have thee to remember them, to humble thy
soul for them, and to renew thy repentance, but he will not remember them to
upbraid thee with them, nor would he have others do it. Beza speaking of
himself: when he was young, He made some vain and sinful Poems, which his
Enemies upbraided him with afterward, and casts them in his teeth, says he,
These men envy me the grace of God, because God has vouchsaf't to me his grace,
they envy me, and cast in my teeth the evil that I have formerly done: Oh what
a comfort and privilege is this to thee! Oh thou believing soul, though thou
were never so wicked and abominable before, yet I tell thee from God this day,
in whose presence thou stand that he will never remember thy sin any more;
and this may be a mighty encouragement for men and women to believe and turn
from all their wicked ways, though thou have been never so vile, abominable,
and wicked: yet be it known unto thee this day, that if thou will come in and
believe, God will never mention any of thy wickednesses more, they shall be so
forgotten as they shall never be mentioned; thou it may be, art afraid that
either here in this life, or at the day of Judgment all thy sins shall be
charged on thee; well, be not afraid, perhaps there are many of you that are
conscious to your selves of great sins committed; and you would give a thousand
Worlds to be discharged of them: Oh say some, there are such and such sins
committed, that are so great, that they cannot be forgiven; I may mourn and
grieve for them, but what shall I be the better? the sins of my youth lie so
heavy on me, and God and my own Conscience upbraids me; and what comfort can I
have in my life, when God and my own Soul upbraids me? Well, be of good
comfort, and be encouraged, this day to come in and believe this blessed
tidings, that where God pardons sin he will mention them no more, and he will
take it very ill at the hands of any that shall mention them to upbraid thee
for them.

Seventhly, Yet further, to set forth the fullness of this mercy, when God
pardons sin, they shall be so done away as that they shall not be found. Jer.
50.20. In those days, -- the Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will
pardon them, whom I reserve; and if I pardon them, then they shall be so done
away, as that they shall not be found.

Yet further, the righteousness Believers have in Christ is called an
everlasting righteousness, and therefore abides for ever, and cannot be
afterward taken away, Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined -- to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness; the
righteousness that is put upon thy Soul by Christ, in the pardon of thy sin, it
is an everlasting righteousness, and will abide everlastingly. Yet further,
Heb. 10.14. it is said, That Christ by one offering, has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, that is, justified; Justification being called by the
name of Sanctification, or them that are sanctified; that is, set apart to be
made partakers of the great blessing of the new Covenant, to have a share in
the blood of Christ for Justification; Christ by one offering has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified; therefore being perfected in Justification,
there is no recalling this mercy back again.

Once more, this mercy is set out by the typical service of the Scapegoat,
Levit. 16.20. On whose head they were to put all the sins of the People, all
their transgressions, and all their iniquities, and send him into the
Wilderness, or Land of forgetfulness, amongst wild beasts, never to be looked
after again; so are the sins of all Believers laid upon Christ, and carried
into a Land of forgetfulness, and shall never come to be charged any more: So
much for that particular of the Irrevocableness of Pardon of Sin, which shows
that blessed is that man or woman that has their sins pardoned, because they
shall never be recalled again.

CHAP. X. Of Pardoning Mercy, being such a Mercy as is denied to the fallen
Angels.
BLessed is the man that has his iniquities forgiven; for this is a mercy that
God has denied to the fallen Angels: 10. Argument.
God in pardoning thy sin, does more for thee than he would do for those
thousand thousand millions of Angels; it is a mercy that God has denied to
those millions of Angels that sinned against him: Suppose a poor wretched man
be guilty of Treason against the King, and as he is, so a great part of the
chief Nobility of the Land are guilty also, as well as he: But now when the
King comes to look upon them, he sets his heart on this poor man (that perhaps
begged from door to door) and says this poor creature shall be forgiven; I will
pass by his offense, and not only so, but advance him into high and great
favor at the Court, and condemns all the Nobles: Now if this poor man shall
see all the Noble men in chains, that were guilty but of one offense; and he
perhaps has been guilty for acting in a treasonable way 40, 50, or 70 years;
and the Noble men guilty but for one offense; and this poor wretched creature
sees these Noble men in chains, and knows that all they and every one of them
are condemned to suffer most dreadful tortures, to dye a most dreadful
torturing tormenting death: Now what a mighty aggravation is this of the mercy
of the King, that shall pardon the offense of this poor creature; how will he
stand amazed, admiring at the greatness of it; I that am guilty of the same
offense, yea more guilty than they, and that I shall be pardoned, and the chief
of the Nobility of the Kingdom must die a most torturing tormenting death, for
their offense; what a difference has the Kings favor made between me and
them: certainly this is the case for all the world, with any poor soul whose
sins are pardoned; God has done as much for thee, to the full; the Angels were
the most glorious creatures that ever God made, and thou art but a poor worm in
comparison of them; they sinned against him but once, and thou art guilty of
millions of transgressions, and yet God sets his heart on thee, and says, I
will do great things for thee, though I pass by thousands, millions of Angels;
I will magnify my rich grace to this poor creature in pardoning his sin, and
advance him to high favor, though I condemn them into everlasting chains of
darkness; now when a poor creature comes to see the infinite riches of Gods
grace that has made such a difference between him and the Angels: how will he
stand admiring of it? me thinks this should mightily work upon the hearts of
all poor sinners, and make them to say, What shall God pass by such excellent
creatures as the Angels, the most excellent creatures that ever God made, and
come to me a poor worm, to set his heart on me, and show mercy to me; Oh let me
pass by all the excellencies of the creatures to perform my duty unto him; Has
God past by the most excellent of his creatures that mercy might come to me? Oh
let me pass by all the glories and excellencies of any thing in this world,
that my Soul may come in; in a way of duty and service unto him: Shall God
leave the glorious Angels to show mercy to me, and to do good for me; and shall
not I leave my base lusts for him? Shall not I be content to leave any thing to
serve him? Shall I satisfy any base lust, with the neglect of him? God forbid.
This is another Argument, that they are blessed that have their sins pardoned,
because God does that for them that he will not do for the fallen Angels.

CHAP. XI. Of Pardoning Mercy being given to a few.
FUrther, Blessed is he that has his iniquities forgiven, because it is a
mercy that is given but to a little handful of the world, 11. Argument.
the whole world lies in wickedness, as carrion in a ditch, or as Prisoners
under the chains of guilt of sin, and yet that God should pull some of these
out, that lie as in a filthy Dungeon; this is a wonderful mercy. A Prince that
has many offenders, usually pardons the most, and executes the fewest; But God
usually executes the most, and pardons fewest.

But how comes this to pass, Object.
seeing God is a God of more mercy than any Prince; how is it that a Prince
should pardon most, and execute the fewest, and God do the contrary?

Answ. 1. Because the execution of many that are guilty,

Further, If a Prince should execute all that offend, he

Besides, the Prince executes the fewest, and saves the most; Because the
execution of a few may be a means to bring others unto allegiance: But when God
comes to execute Malefactors, the execution of some cannot be a means to work
good on others, especially at the great day; it is true, in this world God is
long-suffering, and executes a few, that it may be a means to work good on
others; But how is God said to be a God of rich and glorious mercy, and yet
pardons very few, and executes most; for all the world have been in Treason
against him: how is it that God pardons fewest and destroys most? I hope to
give you very good reason and satisfaction, in showing you how the infinite
glory of the mercy of God appears, and yet but few are pardoned; yea rather the
more, because that few are pardoned: God would thereby manifest the more his
glorious mercy.

1. It may well stand with the glorious riches of the mercy of God, that many
are destroyed and yet but few pardoned; thus, Because that God would have a
proportion between his Justice and Mercy; you say, he would have a proportion,
Is not be as merciful as he is just? Then there must be as many pardoned as
condemned. No, if God will observe a proportion between his mercy and justice,
and that he will have his Justice appear as well as his Mercy, then more must
be damned than saved; How does that appear? thus; Because the glory of Gods
Justice in damning twenty hundred, is not so much as the glory of his Mercy in
saving two; you may conceive it by what is ordinarily used among men: If the
King save but two men that are Malefactors, he magnifies his mercy as much in
that as his justice if he hang up a hundred: so if God save but two, his mercy
is as much magnified as his justice in damning twenty hundred, the reason is
this; Because there is something in the creature that calls for Gods justice,
that requires that: But there is nothing in the creature, that requires his
mercy; when God manifests his justice, he does such a work as is due to the
Creature; there is something in the Creature that challenges such a work from
God: but when God comes to manifest mercy, there is nothing at all in us that
should require such a work from God; no, his mercy is free, altogether from
himself, it is his own work, and proceeds from his own hearts love, and nothing
in us that may challenge it from him: Now seeing there is that in the Creature
that challenges justice, and nothing at all that can require mercy; therefore
if God show mercy but to a few, it is as great a glory to his mercy as it is to
his justice, if he condemn a hundred; but if he should save as many as he
condemns, the mercy of God would be beyond all proportion to his justice, but
because that cannot be, hence it is that few are saved and many damned.

Answer. 2. There are more damned than saved, because God would hereby manifest
his mercy the more to thee that art saved; by suffering so many others to
perish: this is one end that God has in it, that their destruction might set
out the excellency of the glory of his grace to thee. When a Limner would draw
a Scutcheon, or a Picture in Or, or any other curious colors, he lays the
groundwork in black, and then the beauty of the other colors will thereby
most appear: thou oh soul that have thy sin pardoned, know that God lays the
groundwork of thy mercy in the black dismal destruction of multitudes of
ungodly sinners, he gives them their due, that that is their right; but the
ultimate aim of God in it rises to this, that their destruction may make the
brightness of his glorious grace appear the more gloriously to them that are
saved; that the Saints whose sins God has pardoned, may in Heaven have this
argument to praise his grace so much the more, because they are culled out of
the mass and multitude of sinners that are damned; this will mightily inflame
the hearts of Saints in giving God glory in Heaven, when they shall see so many
thousands and millions of thousands cast down to eternal destruction; that God
should do this to set off the riches of his grace to them: How will this
inflame their hearts in giving God glory, and this God aims at as the top of
his glory that he might have a company to be the eternal objects of the riches
of his grace; and this shows the base and low account God has of wicked men,
that he lets them perish eternally, that he might magnify the glory of his
grace to Saints; What an aggravation is it of the greatness of Gods mercy to
Saints, when he is content that so many thousands of others shall perish, that
his mercy to them may more gloriously appear? As when a Prince has a Child
born, that he might show his honor to the Child in solemnizing the Christning
of the Child; it may be thousands of Oxen and Sheep shall loose their lives in
the solemnizing of the joy the Prince has in his Child: If the Solemnity of
the Joy the Prince has in that little Infant may be the cause of thousands of
creatures losing their lives, this shows the dear respect he has to his Child,
or else he would never let so many creatures go to the Shambles, but that he
might show his respect to his little Infant: So says God, there is a handful of
People that I have thoughts to do good too, to all eternity, and I have set my
heart upon them; and that I may manifest the greatness of my mercy to them, I
will let thousand thousands of others perish eternally, to be but as a black
ground for that glorious work, that I intend to manifest in the riches of my
grace in Christ in the pardoning of their sin: thus you see it is a peculiar
mercy, and therefore blessed are they that have their iniquities forgiven; for
it is a mercy that is peculiar to them only. Oh how ought they to bless God,
that he has called them out of the multitude, when he has left others to the
sway of their own carnal sottish and malicious hearts to go on against the ways
of grace; and all because he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy.

CHAP. XII. Of the Possibility of Pardoning Mercy, how it would be prised by
poor Souls now under wrath.
12. Argument.
FUrther, Blessed is he that has his iniquities forgiven, because the very
possibility of it to thousands of creatures now under wrath would be prised
more, than ten thousand worlds, to have but a possibility of it upon any terms;
those that are now damned in Hell, and see the strokes of Gods dreadful wrath
against them for their sin, that are now swallowed up in the gulf of misery and
condemnation; if they might have but any possibility to have their sins
pardoned; how would they prise it, if such a Messenger were sent from God to
Hell-gates to call there and to cry out, O ye damned spirits, behold a message
from the Almighty; I come unto you from him, and this is the message to let you
know, That there is a possibility upon some terms (that God will require) that
your sins may be pardoned, and you delivered from that dreadful wrath you now
lie under? How would the damned spirits sing and rejoice, and look about them
to attend this message? What acclamations would there be in Hell in the midst
of those fiery flames? What holding up of hands and rejoicing would there be to
hear of such a thing, that there is a possibility on any terms? they would not
stand to enquire what the terms were, whether hard or easy; they would answer,
let them be what they will, if there be but a possibility it is enough,
thinking every one it might be he: Well then, if the possibility of being
saved, would be received with such joyfulness by the damned in Hell; What then
is the Possession of it, and glorious knowledge of it to a soul that is already
pardoned, if they would all cry out, on supposition a message should be
delivered of a possibility that some should be freed from Hell, and have their
sins pardoned? They would all cry out, Oh blessed, blessed indeed is he that
shall have his sins pardoned, and be delivered from Hell! if they would give
this testimony, let us give it much more; Though there be a blessed difference
between their condition and yours, yet not long since there was not, it may be,
for ought you know, some of them might go to Church with you, sit in the same
Pew, and hear those Sermons of the Evil of Sin, which now they are gone to
feel, and are shut up in the bottomless pit, beyond any possibility of pardon:
But this is granted to you all that are before the Lord this day, In the Name
of God I can boldly preach this unto you, that if you come in and believe,
there is a possibility, yea even for the worst of all, they may come in and be
pardoned, Now if the damned in Hell would prise it so high, if there were a
possibility for them to be pardoned, shall not you prise it as high as they? as
I remember in setting out the evil of sin, that was one thing that aggravated
the sin of men above the Devils, that the Devils believe and tremble, and yet
some men will not do so much as the Devils; so now I say, if there were but a
possibility of pardon to the damned in Hell, how would they rejoice; and shall
not you rejoice more than the damned souls in Hell would? Bethink your selves,
if the damned souls in Hell would rejoice, if they had a message of a
possibility for them to be saved; me thinks you should not be quiet, if you
find not the same workings in your hearts as would be in theirs; Shall a poor
Minister be forced to say, there is less hopes to prevail with you than if he
were to preach to those in Hell? Shall he say, there would be better Auditors
in Hell than are here? God forbid it should be so, that there should be more
stirring in Hell (if they might but here of a probability of being pardoned)
than there is with you, if your hearts are not stirred at the hearing of this
blessed Doctrine of the Pardon of Sin; that there would be better Auditors in
Hell than you are, whose hearts are not stirred in hearing the glorious
mysteries of the Gospel opened, how a sinner may come to get the pardon of his
sins; God forbid it should be so.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pardon of Sin, being the special end of all Gods Ordinances.
13. Argument.
FUrther, Blessed is he that has his Iniquities forgiven, because forgiveness
of sin it is the special end of all the Ordinances of God; the Ordinances of
God that he has appointed and set up in his Church, attain their end in this
blessed effect, in the forgiveness of sin; and it is an argument their is much
blessedness in pardon of sin, because those precious Ordinances of Christ
attain their special ends in it; there are three great Ordinances I shall
instance in, the Word, Sacraments, and Discipline; and the people of God should
count themselves in a happy condition when they see those blessed ends wrought
on them, which God has appointed those Ordinances to effect.

1. For hearing, it is a great Ordinance that Christ has appointed, When he
ascended on high he gave gifts unto men; upon Christ's Triumphal Ascension to
God the Father, he gave this great gift unto his Church, that his Church should
have Pastors and Teachers; which by the way, argues the horrible wickedness of
those that slight Pastors and Teachers of his Church; because it is part of the
glorious gift of Christ when he ascended on high: Well, did Christ ordain
Pastors and Teachers for the preaching the Word; surely it is for some great
end and purpose that he has in it, there is surely some great glory he intends
to reap by it. What is the end for which Christ has set up this great
Ordinance? 2 Cor. 5.18. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to
himself, and has committed to us the Ministry of Reconciliation. Ministers of
the Word are Ministers of Reconciliation that God has given to his People:
what is that? read the next verse, to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their tresp^sses unto them: Now then,
there is a word of Reconciliation, and this is committed unto us, God has
appointed that we should have this Word of Reconciliation to convey it unto
you; What is this? to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their sins; so then forgiveness of sin is the end of this
Doctrine of Reconciliation, that there should be forgiveness and pardon of sin
to poor souls in and through Christ Jesus; so that this shows the great scope
of this Ordinance, and the end of it, to wit, forgiveness of sin: therefore no
wonder we stick in this Point, because the great business we have to do, is to
declare the Ministry of Reconciliation, when a Minister is about that, he is
about the work that God has appointed him to do; all other Doctrines are but
to make way for this, and to teach people how to walk worthy of it; and this is
the only taking Doctrine to all those that God has appointed this mercy too,
though we as Ministers of Christ preach against the vanities and profits of
this world; but this is not the main thing, not the right method of Preaching
to work upon the hearts of People, nor the great end of Christ's Ascension, he
did not give gifts principally for these things, but that men should be able to
reveal the great Doctrine of Pardon of sin: Ministers need not keep a stir to
get esteem and love, and to make themselves honorable among the People; if
they did but apply themselves to Preach this great Doctrine God has set them
about, That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself not imputing
their sins, they cannot but gain honor in the hearts of those that God has
appointed this mercy too; (Many complain they want respect and honor, let them
take pains in this Doctrine, and they cannot choose but they must get honor,
if once this Word of Reconciliation take hold on any man's heart by Faith and
Repentance; let men speak against such a Minister never so much, say what they
will of him,) his heart will not be taken off from him, but will be ready to
answer as the poor blind man did the Scribes and Pharisees who raised on
Christ, Joh. 9.24. Saying, give glory to God; but we know this man is a sinner:
He answered whether he be a sinner or no, I know not; One thing I know, that
whereas I was blind, now I see, be it was that opened my eyes; thus he answered
their slander: and so when others clamor against a Minister, and speak evil of
them, that soul that has his eyes opened, he will say, I am sure God has done
great things for me by him: he has showed me the evil of sin, and the sad
condition I was in by nature, and he has revealed to me the exceeding riches
of the mercy and grace of God, and my soul has sound it so, God has come to
my soul in his Preaching: Now such a Ministry as this will certainly engage the
hearts of people to them; it is not the man so much as Christ in the man, and
this is the end of our Ministry, not to tell this or that conceit or story, but
to show you the riches of the grace of God in the pardon of sin, and the
Justification of your Souls through Christ Jesus, your Acceptance and
Reconciliation through him, this is the first Ordinance.

2. The Sacraments, for what purpose has Christ ordained them? the main end
for which they were ordained is for Sealing, in the Supper is sealed up Gods
mercy in the pardon of sin, Matthew. 26 28. Christ tells his Disciples, The Cup
is the blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the Remission of
Sin; as if Christ had said, this is the great Ordinance to seal unto People the
pardon of their sins: Brethren, the King does not use to set his Broad Seal to
trifles and toys, and fancies, but unto things of great concernment and
consequence, they must be such that shall have the Broad Seal: so here, because
pardon of sin is such a blessed thing, the Broad Seal of Heaven is ordained to
seal it; and when the Sacrament is administered rightly, it is no other but the
Broad Seal of Heaven to Seal up the pardon of thy sin; and so should men and
women come to receive the Sacrament, they should think this day is a
sealing-day; as in Courts of Justice they have their Sealing-days, and it is
usually said, such a day is a Sealing-day, so a Sacrament day is a sealing-day,
sealing up to you the the great blessedness of forgiveness of sin; a Soul
thinks thus, I am a poor wretched vile sinner before the Lord, woe unto me;
thus and thus have I done, woe is me. But I have heard of the riches of Gods
grace in pardoning my sin; and this day God calls me to come in, and have the
pardon of my sin sealed with the Broad Seal of Heaven, that my soul may be
assured, and I may go away in peace, and be comforted and quieted in the great
business that lies upon me, those sins of mine that have so grated on my
Conscience, and for which I have had dreadful apprehensions of the Clouds of
Gods displeasure hanging over my head; this day I am to go to have the sealing
of a pardon of them all: Thus should men and women come to the Sacrament with
such thoughts upon their hearts, as an Ordinance appointed and ordained by
Christ for the sealing up the pardon of their sins.

3. The third Ordinance is the Ordinance of Discipline, whose sins soever you
remit they are remitted, Joh. 20.22. and those who are cast out of the Church,
and then received in again, find it to be an Ordinance of Christ, to assure
them of remission of their sins. It casts out those that are scandalous, and
when they repent it receives them in again, and thereby assures them of the
pardon of their sins.

A Transition to the Application. Having done with the Explication, if you
would run over and make some recollection of what has bin delivered of the
glorious blessedness of this mercy of forgiveness of sins, you might see the
effects following thereupon. I have showed you the abundant grace of God that
is declared in the forgiveness of sin. I have showed you the many mysteries
that there are in it, and that it is an inlet to many other mercies; I have
showed you the great difficulties it passes through, and how much the heart of
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was in this mercy; I showed you, it was a
perfect and an irrevocable mercy, a mercy denied to Angels, and showed but to a
few of mankind, compared to those that are past by; I have showed, it is a
mercy, the very possibility of it would make the damned to rejoice, and it is a
mercy, that is the end of all Ordinances: And now having come to some period of
the Explication, methinks that Scripture comes presently into my mind, that
notable place in Romans 8.31. If these things be so, if God thus gloriously
appear, in the riches of his grace for the pardon of sin; What shall we then
say to these things? the Apostle after he had spent some time in opening the
Doctrine of free Justification, for the working it upon the heart of the
Romans, and his own heart too, says, What shall we say to these things? the
holy Apostle stood as a man amazed at the wonderful richness of the grace of
God in pardoning of sin; in the verse before, having said, Moreover, whom he
did predestinate them he called, and whom he called, them he justified; and
whom he justified, them he also glorified: And having spoken much to the point
of Justification in this Chapter, he concludes at verse. 31. Now what shall we
say to those things? as if he had said, Lord, how does thy glory appear in the
Justification of a sinner, and pardoning his sin through Jesus Christ? that we
cannot but stand amazed at the greatness of thy glory appearing herein! that we
know not what to say, there is so much of thy glorious grace appears, that our
mouths are stopped; What shall we say to these things? So now, after we have
heard of these glorious things, of the glorious Revelation of the grace of God
in and through his Son, working in such a glorious and mysterious way of
godliness for the justifying of a sinner, and pardoning of his sin; if we could
now sit down as men and women amazed and astonished, as having our hearts so
filled with the glory of these things, as being not able to express our selves,
but even sit down amazed at the brightness of the glory of them; it would be an
excellent fruit of our attendance in hearing those things, we should sanctify
the Name of God in it; and it would be very happy for us; but if not while we
are here together, yet, get into your Closets, and look into this mystery of
godliness, and recollect what you can of that which you have heard; and let
this consideration lie warm upon your hearts and thoughts: O Lord! what shall
we say to these things? that God should have such thoughts of such mercy and
grace in the pardon of sin, as we have heard; What shall we say to it? and
though for the present your hearts be not able to express more, yet by
meditation; sure the fire will kindle, and bring forth some admirable
expressions in glorifying the Name of God, or in singing some Psalm to his
praise, or in doubbling and trebbling that blessed acclamation with the
heavenly Host, Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, on Earth peace, good
will toward men; O here is the good will of God toward poor wretched vile
men; Glory be to God in the Highest; Lord, What is man that thou should be
so mindful of him? thou have made him a little lower than the Angels; nay, as
you have heard this day, God has set him above those Angels that sinned against
him; Christ would not show mercy to them, they could not be pardoned; this is
for poor sinners in the world, a generation of those that seek him, that have
this great mercy of pardon and forgiveness of sin revealed to them; What shall
we say to these things? the Apostles expression may help us to make way to the
Application, and as I have told you we should sanctify the Name of God, in
standing amazed at the wonderful grace of God that gloriously appears in the
Justification of a sinner, as we have opened in many Particulars. And now we
have many things to say in the Application of these things, for the answer to
that question, What shall we say to these things? attend in the fear of God,
and you shall hear in the Application what shall be said to those things, you
have heard in the former Doctrine.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Dishonor that is done by Men to the Pardoning Grace of God
by slighting of it.
FIrst, this we have to say to those things, Surely if the Pardon of Sin be so
great a mercy as you have heard, and that there is such a wonderful work of God
in it; then it must needs be a horrible and vile thing to sin against this
grace that the heart of God is so much in; to dishonor this great work of God
must needs be a very vile and horrible thing: And this has been my intention,
my very plot, as to set forth the greatness of the grace of God in the mercy of
forgiveness; so also to keep you from sinning against this grace. If he be
blessed upon whom such a great and glorious work of God is wrought in
forgiveness of sin; then it must needs be a most horrible and dreadful thing
for any man or woman to sin against this grace of God; and horrible to
dishonor such a great work of God as this is.

Quest.
But who are they that dishonor this great work of God? or how many ways may
we be guilty in sinning against this great mercy of God in forgiveness of sin?
I shall show first who they be that cast dishonor on this great work of God;
and Secondly, Show the greatness of the sin, what a dangerous thing it is to
sin against this great work of God in pardoning sin.

Answ. 1.
First, They sin against this great work of God in pardoning sin that are
altogether careless, who little or nothing mind it, or scarce spend any time
about it: there are a generation of men and women in the world, that have sin
and guilt enough upon their spirits, yet they scarce ever call to mind, or
question what are the terms between God and their own Souls, how things stand
between God and them? what God has to charge them withal? whether God has any
thing against them, yea or no? How few of you now this morning that are come
into the presence of God, have had your thoughts working thus? O my soul how is
it with thee? How does matters stand betwixt God and thee? What guilt is it
thou have upon thy Spirit? What has Divine Justice to charge thee withal?
Conscience speak freely and fully: What is there in Heaven against me? Is there
any thing upon Record that I am charged withal? How is it between God and me? O
what strangers are most men unto such thoughts as these! but go on in a sleepy,
secure, and dead hearted way, either they believe there is no guilt at all upon
their spirits, or no great evil in that guilt, or else think it is no great
matter for God to pardon; you are very solicitous for the flesh, what you shall
eat and drink, and what you shall put on; and for your Estates, how to get and
increase in the world: But to make up the Records between God and your Souls,
to get them discharged, and the Records of Heaven cancelled that are against
you: O how seldom do these things take up your thoughts? know you that are of
such careless spirits about this great matter of pardon of sin, that it is a
great aggravation of your sin, that you are so careless about that great work
of God in pardoning sin, you are careless and spend but a few thoughts about
that; that has (as I may so speak with holy reverence) taken up the heart of
the infinite God from all eternity: certainly, there is not any in the world,
not any of the works of God toward his creatures has taken up the thoughts
and heart of God so much as this one work of the pardon of sin, and yet your
thoughts are not taken up with it, you little mind it: certainly there is a
great disproportion between your thoughts and Gods; whereas those that are
godly, should labor to work as God works; and those things that has taken up
the heart of God, should take up their hearts; whereas those things that are
even unworthy of an immortal Soul take up your thoughts, and those objects that
take up the thoughts and heart of God about pardoning sin, your own Consciences
can tell you is very little in your thoughts and hearts: Certainly my Brethren,
were the thoughts of men and women taken up about this serious and great
business of getting pardon of their sin, it would prevent and cure them of
thousands of other vain, slight, foolish and wicked thoughts; there are, I
suppose, many of you begin to be sensible of sin, and of the base wandering,
filthy, unclean, and wicked thoughts of your hearts; and you say, O that we
could but help our selves against these wandering, vile and wicked thoughts;
surely this would be a great help, if you would get your thoughts possessed with
serious subjects, it would have a great deal of weight in it, to help you
against those light and vain things your thoughts work about. Now of all
subjects in the world, this is the most serious about the grace of God; How his
infinite wisdom has wrought to reconcile himself to your souls, in the
bringing about the pardon of sin, and making peace between himself and the
Children of men. Now if you would take up your thoughts about the great
business of getting pardon of your sins, it would take off your thoughts from
other things: Suppose a man have a vain, slight, wandering, foolish heart; yet
if he were condemned to die some dreadful tormenting death, his thoughts would
quickly be taken off from other things, and taken up about using means; if
there were any possibility to deliver himself from death; Jerome in one of his
Epistles has this Relation of one that was troubled with vile thoughts, and
he, that he complained unto had this device, I name it not to approve it, but
he had this device, he brought the man to have a charge of a crime laid against
him, and caused him to be brought before a Judge, and put into Prison, and
afterward he came to him, and asked him, How is it now with you? Does your vain
thoughts still abide with you as they were wont to do? he gave him this answer,
says he, I cannot live, and what shall I now think of Uncleanness and
Fornication? I am in danger of my life, and I have now no time to think of such
things; and that helped and cured his thoughts: from this we may see, that if a
soul was possessed of the evil of sin, and the danger of condemnation, the
necessity and great consequence of a pardon; what a mighty means would it be to
take off your thoughts from other things, and turn them upon this; and
certainly, who ever you are, whose thoughts are not mightily taken up about
this great subject of the pardon of your sins, you take the name of God in
vain, and do not sanctify him in this great work of his; and know this, you
that spend your days sleeping in security, your damnation sleeps and slumbers
not; and until your sin be pardoned, the infinite justice of God is working
your doom, for the full satisfaction of it, that is the first thing they
dishonor God that go on in secure courses without minding such a great thing
as the pardon of sin is.

Secondly, Others dishonor God, who in stead of making it their great business
in this world to get their sin pardoned, they make it their great work to
increase the guilt of sin, by heaping up more and more guilt and so make the
flame greater, and add to it continually; you would think it a very
unreasonable and desperate thing in a man, that being condemned to some
grievous and dreadful death, yet there being a pardon propounded, and some
possibility of it, and a friend for this very end get a Reprieval of the King
for two or three days, that he might have time to sue out his Pardon; suppose
such a thing: Now then, if this man in this time of Reprieval that is given for
this very end, to seek a Pardon, should call for good cheer and music,
merriment and sporting, and not only so, but fall into railing against the
Prince, increase his guilt, and provoke the Prince more and more against him;
Would not every man say, this man is worthy of the greatest extreme
tormentingest death that could be devised? Nay, I suppose, should you hear of
such an one condemned to die, and had his life given him for this very end, you
would think, surely this man will spend these days in another manner than ever
he spent his time before: you that would think so of such a man, it may be some
of you, before the Lord this day, are guilty of the same evil, for this is a
certain truth, that all the men in the world have been condemned to eternal
death, and all the time of your life is given you for this very end, a few days
that God gives you for this very purpose, merely that you might have a little
liberty to sue out your pardon, and make up your peace with God: O that men and
women would but understand this, what they live for, that all the time of their
lives is given them to make up their peace with God; you are to know it is
given for this end, merely as a Malefactor has a Reprieve to get his Pardon;
this is your very condition, you stand before the Lord guilty of eternal death,
but God in his patience and long-sufferance gives you a few days to live to sue
out your Pardon, and if you let this time slip, and these days be gone, I
profess to you this day, before the Lord, that mercy it self shall never save
you; I would but know of many of you, how you spend these days? you are not
certain of one day, it may be not an hour; Do you spend these days in making it
the great business and work of your Souls to sue out a Pardon? Let me speak to
you, and O that you would speak it in secret between God and your own Souls,
and that you would answer in the Name of God every soul present, to this
Question, Soul have thou made it the great work and business of thy life, above
all things in the world, to sue out thy Pardon, and seek for Reconciliation
with thy God, and a discharge of thy sins? I verily fear that many of you that
hear me this day, if we could but hear Conscience speak, would answer, What? I
make it the great work and business of my life to sue out a Pardon, God knows
it has been the great work and business of my life to increase my guilt; there
is not a day goes over my head, but I have brought more guilt upon my self by
wicked Oaths, taking Gods Name in vain, neglecting his Worship, abusing of his
creatures, perhaps by drunkenness or uncleanness; methinks your Consciences
might misgive you, when you are so far from making it the great business of
your lives to sue for pardon, that you make it your great work to increase your
guilt; Do thou think ever to get pardon of thy sin, so long as thou go on
to increase thy guilt, and make thy self more vile? the lives of many people
are such in a course of wickedness, that it bespeaks them that either they are
resolved to perish eternally in their sin, or else to make it to be as great a
burden to the mercy of God as can be in the pardoning of their sin; if it be so
mighty a work of God to pardon sin, observe what I say; it follows from the
point wherein I opened the wonderful work of God in pardoning any one sin;
think thus, Is it so great a work of God to pardon one sin? Shall I go on then
to add sin unto sin to make the work greater? Friend, if God pardon but one sin
in thought that thou have been guilty of in all thy life, it would be a work
that would yield thee matter of praise to all eternity; and will thou be so
desperate then as to add sin unto sin? As suppose a man had some grievous
disease, and it would be the strangest work to cure him that ever was wrought
since the Earth and Heavens were made, if this man should go on by intemperate
courses, to increase the malignity and venom of it day by day more and more;
what a desperate thing would this be esteemed in him, especially if he were in
a possibility of cure; yea, and perhaps he could tell others, that there is
some possibility, and yet he goes on to increase the malignity more and more;
how would every one think this man's courses unreasonable? O that we would
consider of the unreasonableness of the dealings of men with God; men are
ashamed to be unreasonable in their dealings with men, but in their dealings
with God, they are as unreasonable as can be imagined; you are guilty of many
sins, have you hope to be forgiven, yes, you will say, you have hope; have you
hope? if God deliver you from any of your sins, he must do such a work as is
greater than the making of Heaven and Earth; what do you then to increase your
sin, when it is so great a work to pardon your sin: O! the horrible wickedness
of men and women to increase their sin, Josh. 22.17. I may allude unto it, and
it is an argument of great force, Is the iniquity of Peor too little, from
which we are not cleansed to this day? so I may say to sinners going on in
their sins; Is the iniquity of Peor too little, from which you are not cleansed
to this day? What, is the iniquity of your youth too little that you committed,
and misspent your time when you were Prentice, or lived in such and such a
family? Is that sin too little to magnify the grace of God in pardoning of it,
but that you must add more and more unto it, as if you would tempt God to try
and see whether God would extend his mercy further and further? we tell you in
the Name of God, and say to you, the sins you have committed already are so
grievous, that it must needs be a wonderful work of God to forgive them; and
what, must you needs add more and more, and tempt God to extend his mercy
further? Take heed of tempting God to extend his mercy further, for though God
may be pleased to extend his mercy thus far; Who shall prescribe God how far he
shall go? Who can tell but that the thoughts of God toward thee are thus, that
he will go thus far to pardon thee, but if thou go on in sin, who can tell
whether he will go on to pardon further? It Is true, when God comes to pardon,
he will do them all away; but know thou that go on to increase the guilt of
thy sin, thou may find it, as many thousands have found it a mighty hard
thing, which has cost them much anguish and distress of spirit, to get the
pardon of their sin sealed in the Court of Conscience, though it was sealed
before in Heaven; O the anguish of spirit it has cost them! and do thou
still go on to heap up more and more sin, as if the pardon of thy sin was
nothing? there is a great deal of reason in this, to cry to sinners to stop in
the course of sin; for thou have gone on enough already, go no further, that is
a second abuse of the mercy of God in pardoning sin.

Thirdly, They abuse the mercy of God that have extreme slight thoughts of
pardon of sin, that think to have it at any time, when they will, it is but
repenting; as it was said of Lewis the xith, King of France, That he wore a
Crusifix in his Hat, and when he had committed a sin, it was but taking it down
and kissing of it, and all was well again, so many Idolatrous Papists, they
have as slight thoughts of pardon of sin as can be, if they commit a sin, they
make no more of it, but go to a Priest to shrieve them, or kneel before a
Crucifix and knock their breast, which is a thing soon done, and all is well
again; certainly it is a great dishonor to God, for any man to have slight
thoughts of the pardon of sin: It is such a work as if ever any thing put God
to it (as I may say) to pardon sin, and yet to salve his Justice, it was this
work; and certainly, if ever God have love to thee, thou will change thy
thoughts about this; and certainly, the slight thoughts men have about this, is
the cause many times why they are held so long under the spirit of bondage;
when God begins to work upon them, and stirs the Conscience, and lays the guilt
of sin home upon it: how long are they before they can have any assurance of
pardon? and in just judgment it is so, because they had slight thoughts before
of the pardon of sin. I remember it is storied of Pompey, when one of his
Captains came to him, and told him he wanted men; says he, I can but stamp my
foot upon the ground and bring forth so many men presently; but when the Enemy
came, this Captain came to him again, and said, where is your men now; but then
he could not get them when he was in distress and had great need of them; as
many think they can do great things with a word speaking, as if all must be at
their beck presently, but when they come to it, they fail and find it
otherwise; so many make it a small matter to get pardon of sin, they think to
do it with a Lord have mercy upon us, at their deathbed, or the like; but when
they come to it indeed, God makes them to know, It is the greatest business
that ever they had to do in, in all their lives; there is nothing that God is
so jealous of as his honor, and specially about this great work, and
certainly, were it not that God is very jealous of his honor, and would cure
the slight thoughts that men have of this great work; there needs never be so
much humiliation and workings of the spirit of bondage; and certainly, did we
but know the greatness of this work, how would sinners snatch at any
opportunity or hint of Gods favor appearing to them? they would do as the
servants of Benhadad, 1 King. 20.33. diligently observe if any thing would come
from him, and hastily catch at it, they watched that if any thing did come from
him, that did make any way to that which they sought after, and did hastily
catch at it; so, did a soul understand the pardon of sin, what a great work it
is, he would be so far from having slight thoughts of it, that he would come
clothed in Sackcloath, and every Sermon would be watching and enquiring, what
has God spoke any word to my soul or no? And if any word fall from a Minister
concerning this great business, such a soul would catch greedily at it, and
lose no opportunity to embrace it, Psalm. 32. is very remarkable to this
purpose, David found it a very hard thing to get pardon of his own sin, verse.
4. and he acknowledged it, and God forgave him, verse. 5. what follows? verse. 6.
For this shall every man that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou
may be found; as if David in this language spoke thus, O all you poor
sinners, that sin against God, think it an easy matter to get pardon of sin;
know, I have found it otherwise, it cost me dear before I could get assurance
of pardon; and therefore for this cause let every one that is acquainted with
the ways of God, seek to God in due time, and not put it off from time to time,
for the business is not so slight to put it off: many abuse the example of
David, and think because he sinned, they may take liberty to sin, but they
consider not what abundance of sorrow it cost him to get his pardon; it cost
him so much as that he tells them, for this cause every one shall seek God in
due time: many think they may put it off till any time; but mark what David
says, For this cause every man that is godly shall seek thee in a time when
thou may be found; he does not say, I have found mercy in the pardoning of
my great sins, and for this cause men shall be bold to put it off to any time;
no, but for this cause those that are godly, and have any acquaintance in the
ways of God, will seek God in a time that he may be found; and if those that
are godly, that have sin pardoned in the Court of heaven, find so hard a matter
of it to get it pardoned in their own Consciences; how does it concern thee
that perhaps have thy sin neither pardoned in the Court of Heaven, nor in thy
own Conscience, But art in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, how
concerns it thee to look to it? that is a third sort that abuse the mercy of
God in having slight thoughts of the pardon of sin.

Fourthly, Those that seek for pardon but are unsensible of the greatness of
the work of God in pardoning, they do not put it off, but seek it for the
present, but how? with extreme unsensibleness; they do not come before God with
brokenness, trouble and contrition of spirit in seeking after pardon of sin;
many they repeat of their sins before God, and have a gift of Prayer; it is
that which would make a man's heart to tremble, to consider how many have a
great gift in Prayer, and will be praying half an hour, and will repeat
abundance of their sins, make Catalogues, and tell large stories of their sins,
bring in all the aggravations against them for their sins; judge themselves,
and speak mighty words against themselves for their sins, and yet all this
while, God knows with a desperate, dull, dead and senseless heart for their
sins; it may be others that join with them, their hearts are broken with their
expressions, and yet in the mean time thy Conscience may tell thee, thy heart
is desperately hard before God, and not sensible at all of what thou speak;
thou were putting up Petitions to God, and yet with as dull and senseless a
spirit, as if thou were speaking of a matter of no consequence at all; this is
a high degree of taking the blessed Name of God in vain; for we are to know,
the Name of God in forgiveness of sin is a most glorious Name, and we had need
to take heed how we speak to God in this business, that we take not his Name in
vain, for he will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain; we had
need to look to the sanctifying of Gods Name in this thing: Many a man will
think it of himself, that to swear and blaspheme is a taking of the Name of God
in vain; and why is it so? because it is a sin against the 3d Commandment, Thou
shall not take the Name of thy God in vain, etc. for my part I cannot but think
that to make large Confessions of sin, and yet with a senseless dead heart, is a
high degree of taking the Name of God in vain; (mistake me not, if thy heart be
sensible of thy unsensibleness, thou art not of those that take the Name of God
in vain; God accepts of this, it is the rational part of the soul that is taken
with this, and this is pleasing to him, though thou can not bring the
sensitive part of the soul up to this thing; but I speak it of those that have
got a formality in crying and confessing of their sins, and yet are unsensible
of them; yea, it may be, glory in this, that they can in the Church thus speak
of their sins, and have such expressions before the Lord; take heed of this, if
you would show your parts and abilities, let it be in something else, and not
to come before the holy God; and before others in a holy duty to vent your
parts and abilities there: it is a dangerous thing for any to meddle so in this
kind, Heb. 9.22. as he says there, without shedding of blood there is no
remission; so I may say without the blood of thy heart, without the bleeding of
thy heart there is no remission, or at least a being sensible of thy
unsensibleness; if thou can not mourn then mourn that thou can not mourn,
be sensible of thy unsensibleness, and then God may accept of thee; but
otherwise without this kind of blood there is no remission; that is to
sanctify the Name of God, consider this note, it may be of use many ways, that
is, to sanctify the Name of God, when there comes to be in my heart a
disposition suitable to the work of God I have to deal withal; suitable to the
manifestation of God in that thing I have to deal with God in: if any ask, What
is it to sanctify Gods Name, I would answer thus; To sanctify Gods Name in
any thing, it is to labor to get an answerable disposition to that thing that
I have to deal with God in; when I am to deal with God in any work, according
to that work I must have a disposition in my heart suitable to it; as to
instance, I sanctify Gods Name in Prayer, when I speak of Gods glorious
Attributes and Titles then, when there is an answerable disposition in my heart
to those glorious Titles that I speak of; so I sanctify Gods Name when I
confess my sin before God the Judge of all the World, in having an answerable
disposition in my heart suitable to this Judge; and then I sanctify Gods Name
in seeking pardon of sin, when I have an answerable disposition in my heart to
the greatness of the work of God in pardoning sin; therefore all of you must be
careful, when you entreat God to pardon sin, to entreat him also to sanctify
his Name; How is that? entreat God to manifest that glorious work to your
souls, and then labor to get your hearts into an answerable disposition
suitable to that great work; you that go to God every day in seeking pardon of
sin; have you been apprehensive of the greatness of it; Has God showed you the
greatness of his work in it? or further, since the time that you have heard of
the greatness of the work; have you been casting in your souls how to get an
answerable disposition suitable to these Divine Truths? Certainly, so far as you
are wanting in that, so far you art short of sanctifying Gods Name; and for
time to come, this must be the great work of your souls, to get answerable
dispositions in seeking pardon of sin, that may be suitable to the great work of
God in it; if one that comes to seek to you, to Petition you to remove some
evil one that has offended you, if he come slightly, you will say, you must
come after another manner; Shall a poor man or woman expect such a kind of
coming from a Child, Servant, or Inferior; and yet shall he or she go in a
senseless way to God in seeking pardon of sin, and think to obtain it thus? you
go about it unsensibly, and your hearts are not stirred, but when Christ came
he was sensible of it, in seeking to God about this business, Heb. 5.7. -- In
the days of his flesh, observe, Christ in the days of his flesh, did offer up
Prayers and Supplications; How? with strong cryings and tears, What? shall
Christ be so sensible of the weight and burden of sin, when he was to suffer,
that he should seek the Father with such Prayers? if he had said but one word,
it had been a Prayer; but he sought him with Prayers, and Prayers with cries
and supplications; and not only so, but with strong cries and tears: let thy
heart be rebuked this day for the senslessness of it, in going to God in such a
slight manner in seeking pardon of thy sins.

Fifthly, Those are to be rebuked that in seeking pardon of sin, d^ indeed but
dally with God and triffle with him; they are not at all serious in it; whereas
if there be any business in the world, wherein we had need to be serious, it is
in this? But you will say, Who are they? Quest. Answ.
there are four or five sorts that do but dally with God in seeking pardon of
sin.

1. Those that cry, and seem to be very earnest with God in crying to him for
pardon, and yet still continue in love to their sins, and abide in the practice
of them in an ordinary course and way; I do not speak of those that seek truly
for the pardon of their sins, and yet may sometimes be overtaken with them
again; but I speak of the common course of People; they come to God and entreat
him to forgive them, and yet continue still in them, I speak not of those that
are senseless in the acts of Confession of their sins, but of those that cry
mightily unto God for pardon, and yet live in the practice of those sins they
cry to God for pardon of: as for instance, consider every one of you what sins
have been in your course of life; I put this to you, either you have prayed to
God to forgive them, or you have not prayed; if you have not prayed, then you
are most horrible Atheists; but I thank God, I pray every day: Well, you pray
to God for forgiveness of sin, and yet live in it daily: O how do people thus
dally with God; pray against sin, and yet commit sin, and fall to it again;
pray again, and commit it again, and this is the very way that many people
take; they draw out the thread of their lives, and spend out their day of
Salvation in trifling with God; they pray that God would be merciful to them in
forgiving their sin, and yet go on to commit sin; they do not think what a
strong engagement against sin Praying is; I beseech you note it, every one of
you that pray against any sin, every Prayer thou make for pardon of sin, is a
mighty strong engagement from God to you to take heed of sin afterward, may be
you have not thought of this; you say, you pray every morning, consider what
you do; if you have any care of your souls, you will not rest merely in such a
form as your Fathers and Mothers have taught you; but if you have any care of
your souls, you will consider in Prayer to God, and say, Lord I am guilty of
such and such sins, such sins my nature is most prone unto, and such sins I
have lately committed; well, I will humble my soul before God in Prayer, and
entreat God to forgive me; it is not Prayer to mumble over a few words, this is
to prate and not to pray: but when you solemnly set your selves to examine your
own hearts what you are guilty of, and protest against your sins solemnly in
the presence of God, and say, Lord this and this particular sin I am guilty of;
Lord I was drawn to such and such sins the day before in such and such company,
O Lord forgive my sin, and forgive me these and these particular sins; this is
the way to seek pardon of sin aright: Do you do so? this will be a mighty bond
upon your hearts to think thus within your selves; Lord, What have I been
setting my self solemnly in the presence of the Almighty to confess my sins,
and prayed him to forgive them; what care have I need to take that I fall not
into the same sin again? Thou that have come this day, and confessed and prayed
against thy sin, do not fall into it again; you that are apt to break out into
passion, when you find your selves begin to wax hot, if you would but take so
much liberty as to bethink your selves, that you have been praying to God this
morning to forgive such a Passion: it would be of mighty concernment to help
you from going on in Passion, or any other sin, to consider that you have been
praying to God for pardon and forgiveness of it; you that do not consider this,
but confess your sins in the morning, and then go on again to commit sin; you
make more work for the next time: you come to confess sin, as in Solemn Days of
Humiliation, men will rip up all their sins, but before another day come, they
have made work for another and another day; and this is the reason when men
come to confess their sins before God, of their trifling with him and were it
not that God is a God of infinite patience, he could not bear it; might not he
say to you, you came seven years ago, and told me of your Pride, Passion,
Earthly-mindedness, and the like; and do you now come and tell me the same
again? were not God infinitely patient, he could never bear this dallying with
him, for the truth is, it is nothing else but infinite dallying with God, Jer.
3.5. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, my Father, thou art the guide of
my youth? they seemed to cry to God; O thou art my Father and the guide of my
youth, there are but these words named, but it is like they opened their sins
before God, and cried for mercy: O says God unto them, Thou have sp^ken, and
cried out of the Anger of mine that is gone out against you for your sins, and
yet thou have spoken and done evil as thou could; this is an evil thing, and
heavy to be laid to the charge of any man, to confess sin, and pray for pardon,
and yet commit it again; know this day you that have been confessing sin, and
yet go on in sin; know this thing, I tell you it is but dallying with God: many
men and women do ravel out their Prayers this way; they make excellent Prayers,
and when they have done they ravel all again by falling into the same sin.

2. A second sort are those that seek earnestly the pardon of some sins, and
yet still keep the love of some other sin, and yet think to obtain pardon of
them, this is but dallying and trifling with God about this business; you never
set your selves yet seriously about it; when you cry against some sins that are
against the Light of Nature, and it may be your Consciences fly in your faces,
and the Word of God has stricken you for them; but there is some other secret
haunts of villainies, that your hearts close withal, and yet you think to obtain
of God forgiveness of the other, and go on there: O thou vain soul, thou vain
man, know that though thou should cry thy heart out for the forgiveness of
one or more sins, yet if thy heart secretly close with some other sin that thou
have secret haunts after, the bonds of the guilt of that sin will hold thy soul
in chains eternally; except thy soul be rent from that sin as well as from any
other, thou understandest not the way of God in the dispensing of his grace to
the soul, if thou think God will pardon some sins, and give thee liberty in
others: thou sottish soul, know that when thou go to God for pardon of sin,
thou must go with a heart resigned up from every sin, or else thou losest all
thy labor, and art held in the chains of them all.

3. Those that never look after their Prayers to call it into Question what
answer they have had; I have prayed to God, but have I got any answer in my own
heart, or has God come in, in any Ordinance, and sealed to me my pardon; thus
the soul should look after pardon in Prayer, and all other means; Many pray,
but never look after their Prayers whether God hear or no, Psalm. 85, 8. I will
hear and hearken what the Lord God will speak; thus the Psalmist, and thus it
would be with thee, if thou did not dally with God; after thou have cried
for pardon, thou would be listening at Heaven gates, and looking toward God:
What answer does God give? I have prayed and there comes no answer, the soul
that sets it self in a solid and serious way to seek for pardon, will be often
looking out, and remain much troubled till an answer come: Many cry for pardon,
but are not troubled till God give answer, they deal with God as Pilate did
with Christ, ask't him What is Truth? but never stayed to have an answer, but
went his way; so we do but dally with God in our Prayers and Petitions, when we
ask for forgiveness of sin, and neglect to look after an answer.

4. As those that look not after the answer of their Prayers dally with God, so
those that follow not their Prayers with answerable endeavors, they Petition
that God would be merciful unto them; but what are the endeavors of your souls
after your Petitioning? if there be not endeavors to attend upon the means of
grace that God uses to speak peace to souls in, all your Prayers are nothing;
but of this I shall speak afterward, you are to search into the Covenant, and
enquire after the Saints what course they have taken, and what means they have
used to obtain pardon.

5. Those that pray for pardon, yet are satisfied with other things; as thus,
they pray for pardon, but if the world come in they are satisfied and quieted
with that; as a Child that has a piece of Gold given him and an Apple, he will
be stilled with the Apple; so many men sue to God for this great work of pardon
of sin, but let God give them health and accommodations in the world, they are
satisfied and contented with them, and little or never seek after the pardon of
their sin; that is a fifth sort that are charged this day before the Lord that
do but dally with God about seeking pardon for their sins.

Sixthly, They that are quiet upon weak and slight Evidences dishonor God;
certainly they have not those high thoughts of the mercy of God in pardoning
sin, that content themselves with poor Evidences about it as most do; come to
many people, and ask them, What? you hope that God will pardon your sins; yes
we do hope, but upon the poorest Evidences imaginable: those Evidences they lay
the weight of the pardon of their sins upon, are such broken reeds that it
would make a man amazed, that understands what the worth of a poor soul is,
that they should venture so great a thing on so slight a reed; What is the
reason? because they have but slight thoughts of the forgiveness of sin: that,
that a man puts a high valuation of, he will make sure; but that which he
slights, he is not so intense in; as to instance, if one give you in payment
Silver, Gold, and Farthings, you take the Farthings and do not tell them, but
you tell the Silver, and the Gold you not only tell it, but weigh it too; What
is the reason? because you little esteem of the Brass, and so will not tell it,
you more esteem the Silver, and therefore tell that; but the Gold you not only
tell but weigh it, because you have a greater esteem of that than the other;
this is an argument, may convince the men of the world, that their esteem of
earthly things is more than of Heaven and their souls; because they labor to
make earthly things more sure than the things of heaven; a worldly man to make
sure his Estate will have Bond upon Bond, and Seal upon Seal, and carry his
Evidences to Counselors, and say, I beseech you Sirs, see whether there be not
some flaw in them, I shall lose all my money if there be but a crack in my
Evidences; he is mighty careful of this, because he has such a high esteem of
his worldly concerns: But how does it appear that men have but poor low
thoughts about the pardon of their sins, because they content themselves with
such poor mean Evidences; for had they a high esteem of it, they would labor
to make pardon of sin surer than any thing in the world. To wind up all, those
that know what pardon of sin is; how do they spend their time, and lay out
themselves to get assurance? Take this one note, Because God sees those that
are his own people understand what forgiveness is, have a high esteem of it,
and are very solicitous about it, he condiscends in his kindness to assure them
by all sorts of ways and means; methinks God deals with them in this manner,
the poor soul stands shaking and trembling, crying our, Oh! that I might have
my sins forgiven, and have assurance of it; Why, says God, what way do you take
to make things sure from one to another? says you, first we give our word one
to another, 1. The Word.
says God you shall have that, I give you my Word; What have you else?
Secondly, say you, we cause it to be written; 2. Writing.
well says God, you shall have it written, and this is a great mercy, the
Covenant of grace is written; we have it not from hand to hand, as our
forefathers had: What do you else require? Thirdly, you say to have witnesses;
well, says God, you shall have witnesses, in things between man and man, In the
mouth of two or three witnesses every thing is established, Matthew. 10.16. 3.
Witnesses.
Now God in reconciling a Soul to himself, brings no less than six witnesses to
confirm a Believer in assurance of his grace and favor to him, 1 John 5.7, 8.
There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost; and three that bear witness on Earth, the Spirit, Water, and Blood;
three in Heaven, and three on Earth to assure thee of forgiveness of sin, that
is a third way; Is there any other way? yea Lord: Fourthly, 4. Oath.
we use not only to have a word, and this word put in writing, and witnesses
affixed to it; but we use to take an Oath: Well, says God, I will swear and
take an Oath, to make my Covenant of grace sure to your souls, Heb. 6.13. when
God made a Promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he swear
by himself, and this is in the 18. verse, (an admirable Text of Scripture) That
we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the
hope set before us; there is hope of Gods grace through the Reconciliation of
Christ Jesus, and this hope the soul runs to as to a City of Refuge, when his
guilt, like the persuer of blood follows him; Well, says God, this poor soul
notwithstanding will have doubts of my grace; now that it might have strong
consolation, I have swore that I might make my mercy sure to such a soul,
that is a fourth way: but is there any thing else you use to make things sure
between one another? Yea Lord, Fourthly, we put our Seals to it, an Oath taken
may soon pass over, 5. Seal.
but a Seal that abides: says God, I will do that too, I will give you Seals,
and there are diverse sorts of Seals; there is first the Broad Seal of Heaven:
What is that? that is nothing else, but the very Printing of the Image of God
on the Soul, that is the Broad Seal of Heaven. And as the Broad Seal of
England, has the Picture or Image of the King stamped upon it, so the Broad
Seal of Heaven is nothing else but the Image of God stamp't or imprinted on the
Soul. 2. There is the Privy Seal of the Holy Spirit of God, which is the
persuading and assuring of the soul of its interest it has in Christ and God
the Father. In 2 Timothy 2.19. you have Gods Privy Seal, The Lord knows them that
are his, and they having his Privy Seal know themselves to be the Lords, Cant.
6.2. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine; so Paul, Gal. 2.20. being sealed
with this Seal, says of Christ, He loved me, and gave himself for me; he was
persuaded and assured of salvation, 2 Timothy 1.12. Romans 8.38, 39. This Privy
Sealing is like the New Name, Revel. 2.17. Which no man knows saving he that
receives it. And to this you shall have a third Seal Baptism and the Supper of
the Lord, that is, to assure you, that the end of the Sacrament is to Seal up
Pardon of sin; God saw that his People would be very solicitous, and therefore
added all these ways of assurance to them; when you therefore come to the
Sacrament, you should come with a sense upon your souls of the great need you
have of the grace of God in pardoning sin, and come to it as to a Sealing-day;
you have many fears and doubts; come so as that you may have the grace of
pardon sealed to your souls; take heed of coming so as to have your condemation
sealed: for certainly, all Ordinances if they work not for that end that they
are appointed, they turn to another and quite contrary; as the Word, if it be
not the savor of life, it is the savor of death; and so the Sacraments, if
they seal not the pardon of thy sins up unto thee, they seal up the sentence of
death and condemnation; therefore look to it, as often as you come unworthily to
the Sacrament, you have so many Seals of death and condemnation set upon your
souls: Take heed you do not come to take another Seal of death; it is much to be
feared, many in this place come to take the seal of eternal death upon their
souls: but those that come worthily, though administrations be not in that due
order as they should, yet God may be present with his own Ordinance to give
them comfort from it, and help their Evidences by it; I must conclude this,
those that content themselves with slight Evidences about this great work,
dishonor the grace of God: you would have us preach of mercy, and indeed it is
a blessed Argument which our souls delight much to be preaching of, because we
find so much sweetness in it, and for which our souls shall expatiate
themselves in glorifying God to all eternity; but we are withal jealous of your
dishonouring of God in this mercy, and therefore it is that we labor so with
you, after the laying open of this mercy, that you may not abuse it: for
certainly my Brethren, there is nothing in the world God takes to heart more,
than the dishonor that is done to his pardoning mercy; and nothing more
aggravates the sin of People than to have slight thoughts of this great work.

Seventhly, This is a great dishonor to Gods pardoning mercy, for men to put
off the seeking of it to the worst times that possible can be; Is it not the
ordinary way of most people, to put of the seeking of the grace and favor of
God, Pardon of sin, and Reconciliation, till the time of sickness, and the time
of death? they go on all their life time in sinning against God; but when they
are lying upon their sick-beds and deathbeds, Lord have mercy upon me, pardon
me, forgive me, a wicked wretch that I have been; these kind of words we hear
from men at that time: O that God would forgive and pardon such and such sins,
and then perhaps they will tell some particular sins if they think they shall
die, they will open themselves to the Minister, or to some faithful Neighbor
in the disclosing of their particular sins, and beseech them to pray to God for
mercy; but if they have any hopes to escape, they will keep them in, and be
loath to rip open the sins of their lives: This I say, for any to put off the
seeking unto God for his pardoning grace till that time, it is to put a great
dishonor upon God, for it is a putting of it off to the worst time that
possible can be. And that makes much to the dishonor of God: For

First, Those men seek pardon of sin, when sin is leaving them, or they must
leave sin whether they will or no; when you have served your own turn of sin,
after you have had as much supposed pleasure as you can, then you think to be
delivered from the guilt and punishment of sin; what is there but a mere
selfish spirit in seeking God now, and God sees it so; it is not seeking after
pardon of sin that you may honor God in his infinite grace, for then you would
seek after it now, and the honor of God would be dear to you now; but you seek
it at such a time merely out of respect to your selves, this is a great
dishonor to God, It is the first born of Gods glory to pardon sin; and for God
to see men and women have no higher ends in seeking pardoning grace, but merely
to save their own skins; How may God look upon them with disdain? What shall I
magnify the riches of my grace so wonderfully in this work of my pardoning
mercy? And shall my creatures seek after it for no other end, nor higher aims,
but merely to save their own skins? you bring down the grace of God, that that
is the top of his infinite Majesty and Glory you put to a low and base end;
therefore put not off seeking it to the last, it is a great dishonor to his
grace.

2. It is the worst time, because you come to seek after pardoning grace when
it is the time of Gods wrath, Prove. 11.4. the time of affliction, and trouble,
sickness, and death, is called the day of wrath; Riches avail not in the day of
Gods wrath; Riches avail for comfort at present, but in the day of wrath they
will not: God has his day of affliction, and his day of wrath, he has his
time to come to visit men for their sins: Now then, for people to come to seek
to have the pardon of their sins when Gods time is to visit for sin, that must
needs be the worst time that possible can be, I reason thus, and consider of
it; if God does deny his mercy in the day of mercy, is it likely, that he will
grant mercy in the day of wrath? while you are alive, and have liberty, health
and opportunity to come to hear the Doctrine of the Justification of a sinner,
and forgiveness of sin opened, you are to know it is the day of Gods grace; Now
is the acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation and of grace; when God
gives liberty and oppertunity, thus to have the mysteries of the Gospel opened
unto you, this is the day of Gods grace: Now if God deny you grace in this day
of mercy, that you are not so much as enlightened, your souls melted and your
hearts stirred; Do you think that now you are upon your sick-beds or
deathbeds, which is a day of wrath unto you? for so it is to those that have
not their sins pardoned before, it is a day of wrath, and Gods time of visiting
for sin; Is it likely that God will now show thee mercy? I beseech you
consider, the usual way of Gods working on men is according to his Ordinance:
Now the ordinary way of Gods conveying grace is by the Ministry of the Word;
Did God ever appoint any other way to convey Christ, and grace to thy Soul?
give me a Text for it; Where do you find a Text in Scripture of any other way
as an Ordinance appointed by God, for the conveying of his pardoning grace in
Christ to any Soul? No, it is in the Ministry of the Gospel, and by faith, that
lays hold of the pardoning grace of God, by coming to hear the Word preached;
Now if God come not in that time to work upon thee, and to bestow mercy in his
own appointed way, it is not likely he will come any other way: I remember in a
Treatise of Mr. Bolton's, he has this expression, Let any one give me an
example, that ever any one that lived under a powerful Ministry, and not
savingly wrought upon that way, was ever wrought upon any other way; many he
says may be stirred, but for his part he knew none that was so stirred by
affliction to the conversion of their souls, if God had not before in the
Ordinances of grace wrought upon them: then it must needs be the worst time
that can be to seek pardon of sin in a day of trouble or affliction, because
that is usually a time of Gods wrath visiting for sin.

3. The work of the Soul in seeking after Gods pardoning mercy, and applying of
it to himself, as it is the excellentest work that ever a creature did perform,
so it does require the most exquisite work of the Spirit that ever was
required, or that ever any creature was set about; it is the most intensive
work of the spirit of man, the applying of the grace of God in Christ, and the
closing with it for Justification, it is the highest, most exquisite, most
glorious and most admirable work of the spirit of man that ever was in the
world, and it requires the greatest intensness and strength of a man's spirit
that ever any work did: Now then to put this off till such a time as a man's
strength is gone, and he through diseases unfit for any thing, and when as all
the strength he has will be little enough to help him to bear his pain, this
must needs be the worst time; you are mistaken if you think the applying of
Gods mercy in Christ is but in saying Lord have mercy upon me; No, it is Gods
putting the heart of man to do the most glorious work that has the greatest
operation in it that ever he did. I remember it related of one that lived
wickedly, and diverse sought to reclaim him, says he, come when I am upon my
sick bed, that is time enough; and afterward he being sick, was put in mind of
it; you said you would do it then: but then he swore a great Oath, saying, What
is this a time to repent in? because he then felt so much trouble and anguish
that took up his thoughts, that he was stirred with indignation to be put upon
repenting then, in a time when he felt so much dolor of spirit by the pains
that were upon him; Is this a time to repent in? if that be not, then do it
betimes.

4. It is the worst time, because God shall lose a great part of his end in
pardoning sin; for when God pardons sin it is to this end, that his poor
creatures might honor and worship him in ^his world, and do him service; but
now to seek for Gods pardoning grace when thou can do him no more service in
this world; How can thou think that he will accept thee then? He came to
redeem us, that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our lives; and he knows there is no such way to engage the heart of man to
serve him as pardoning grace; for when once a soul sees it self delivered from
those Enemies of sin and of the Law that would destroy him, his heart will be
mightily set to honor God and serve him in holiness and righteousness all his
days; and therefore to seek for pardon when thou can do God no more service
in this world, must needs be the worst time; for how know thou that he will
accept thee then? I beseech you observe one Text of Scripture that is abused by
many people; for I suppose that I am speaking to a great many very ignorant in
the ways of God, and therefore I desire to speak plainly unto you, there is one
place, though misapprehended and mistaken, that is the main prop of many carnal
hearts, as it is read in some Books; At what time soever a sinner repents, etc.
I know no such Text of Scripture; it is true, there are Scriptures tending that
way that do not limit the time; but no Scripture does express it so: many
people run away with that expression, as if it were so; there is no Text of
Scripture has those words; there is one Text of Scripture this is taken out
of, but that is spoken to another end, and therefore you had need to examine
what is spoken, it is Ezekiel. 18.21. this comes the nearest to those words, mark
this Scripture, and see what you can have from thence to defer the seeking of
Gods pardoning mercy and grace till sickness and death; But if the wicked shall
turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die; here
this Scripture does not limit a time, though it says not, At what time soever;
it says, if he turn from all his sins, and keep all my Statutes, and do that
that is lawful and right; so that this Scripture promises mercy to one that
turns from all his sins, and will keep all Gods Statutes, and so do all that is
lawful and right: But now, if you put it off to the time of sickness and death;
How can you do all this? Turn from all sin and keep all Gods Statutes then, or,
How can you do that is lawful and right then? it must be then when you can keep
all Gods Statutes, as well as turn from all your sins; so that if you take all
together, there is not so much encouragement to that which is so frequent in
your mouths; At what time soever a sinner repents, it must be at such a time as
that you must keep all Gods Statutes: but further, God speaks here to the Jews
according to the condition of the Covenant of works, because they made account
to be justified by the Law; says God you will put it off, and think at last to
turn from your wicked ways, and that I will have mercy on you; I but look to
it, if you will repent, it must be such a repentance as must be joined, with a
keeping all my Statutes; therefore those that do not understand the way of the
Gospel, but depend upon a repentance on their deathbeds, God will hold you to
this Scripture, that you must repent at such a time as that you must keep all
Gods Statutes, then you see, this is the worst time of all, to defer repentance
till your sick-beds or deathbeds; for how can you keep all Gods Statutes then,
and do all that is lawful and right then?

5. It is the worst time, because all the tag-rag, all the base and v^lest
wretches in the world will come in then; And what have thou no other spirit,
but to defer coming in till then? Have thou no more care of thy soul, no more
love to God and his ways, but to put it off till such a time, as all the
abominable wretches in the world will come in? that is the seventh way in
dishonouring the pardoning grace of God, by seeking it in the worst time that
possible can be.

8. The Eighth way of dish^nouring the pardoning grace of God, and the most
considerable of all, is the seeking and expecting of it any other way, but only
through the Mediation of the Son of God; I told you in the opening of the
glorious mysteries of pardoning grace, that it must be done by a Mediator: Now,
not only gross ignorant people, but many others dishonor the pardoning grace
of God, they are not sensible of this; that it is such grace that only comes
through the Mediation of the Son of God: We have too low thoughts of the
pardoning grace of God, if we do think there is a possibility of attaining it
any other way than by the mediation of him, that is God-Man: If we think our
crying to God at any time will do it, or our roaring out in anguish of spirit,
forty, fifty, or sixty years is enough to do it: or that there is any thing to
attain it by, under the mediation of the Son of God, we have too low thoughts
of the pardoning grace of God, we give not God that honor that is due unto it.
Luther has a notable expression to this purpose, It is a horrible blasphemy if
you presume to pacify God by any works, it is an excellent speech; so I say,
it is horrible blasphemy and intolerable to think to have any thing in the least
of your own, to presume upon that God will be pacified with it, whereas God
cannot be pacified by any other means, then by the infinite price of the Death
and Blood of his own Son; one drop of which is more precious, than all the
creatures of Heaven and Earth; God will say, Have I revealed such a way of
being reconciled with my Creatures, and that at such a rate and infinite price
as the death of my own Son? Shall his life and blood go to procure pardon (one
drop of which is more worth than ten thousand worlds) and when all this is
done, shall my creature think to put me off by a poor work of their own
prayers, tears, good meaning, or the like; or with the most glorious work that
they can perform? for the greatest and most glorious work that they can perform
is not near worth so much as one drop of the blood of Christ. And if you have
not such high thoughts of Gods Pardoning Mercy, that it must be procured by
that which has more worth in it than all the Creation besides, you do
dishonor it, by having such low thoughts of it, when as you think to obtain it
by any duty that you can do; you think God is a merciful God, and you hope upon
your reforming and performing duties of Obedience, that God will be pacified
toward you for all that is amiss: Certainly when you have these thoughts of
Gods pardoning grace, you make it to be but as common and ordinary pity toward
one in misery; but the grace of God is a higher thing than common pity and
compassion, and it is a mighty dishonor to God to have no higher thoughts of
it, that you think of it but as of common pity and compassion that one creature
has unto another; or if you think it differs from that pity one creature has
to another, it is but a difference in degrees;; only you think it is a little
higher in degree: but you must look upon it in another way, and as another kind
of pity then one creature bears to another; it is true, Gods pardoning his poor
creatures is in pity and compassion, but it is through the death and
satisfaction of his own Son; and if you think to procure it any other way than
by the mediation of the Son of God, you look upon it but in a natural way, as
nature will dictate unto you; for nature will dictate, that the beholding of
one crying out in misery will move pity and compassion, and you go no further:
But you are to know, the pardoning grace of God, is the most supernatural and
mysteriousest thing in all the Book of God; therefore when God works in us, we
must act faith upon it in a mystical way, or act faith upon it as a great
mystery; and therefore you that have been made sensible of sin, it may be you
have thought of Gods grace for the pardon and forgiveness of your sins, and for
to quiet the trouble of your spirits; Have you done that? there is I suppose
many a poor soul may say, I have been often with God when no eye saw me, but
only Gods, seeking the pardon of my sin in trouble of spirit; you have done so:
but has your eye at that time been fastened on the Son of God, as the great
Mediator between God and Man, to interceed to God the Father for the obtaining
this mercy, by making satisfaction to infinite Justice: Together with your
cries for pardon, have your eyes been upon the Son of God at the right hand of
the Father, pleading for man? Have your hearts been taken with the great
mysteries of godliness, and wrought upon by the infinite grace of God? Have you
put forth a mighty power of the Spirit of Faith, to tender up to God the Father
the Atonement that his Son has made by his blood and death for your sins? Have
you seen that the pardoning grace of God is so high, that it is impossible to
be reached unto by any thing you can do, but only by the mediation of the Son
of God? If it have been thus with your spirits? then you have somewhat of the
sense of the great work of God in this thing; but otherwise, though you have
been never so much wrought on and have had floods of sorrow, and have cried
never so earnest for the pardon of your sins, yet except you have had some such
kind of thoughts of Gods grace, as these are, upon your hearts, working after
God this way, you were never thoroughly acquainted with the way of Gods
pardoning grace, and so you have dishonored him, by having too low thoughts of
it, except your hearts have been raised to this height, Psalm. 51.7. in that
time when David was on repenting, he called unto God to purge him with Hysop;
David desired the renewing of the assurance of Gods mercy in Christ, in the
pardoning of that horrible offense he had committed; and therefore prays that
he may be purged with Hysop: What is the meaning of that? there is a great
mystery in it; in the time of the Law when the blood was sprinkled, it was done
with a bunch of Hysop; and it was a Type of the Blood of Christ that was to
make an Atonement, Levit. 14. They were to take a bunch of Hysop to sprinkle
withal; Now says David, Purge me with Hysop, that is, apply to me the blood of
Christ, for I have need of fresh applications of the blood of Christ; I have
sinned against him, and have done what in me lay to bring my self under Gods
wrath, and have brought new guilt upon my soul: Now for the assurance of thy
love to me, let there be fresh applications of the blood of thy Son; let there
be a new sprinkling of the blood of thy Son upon me: I suppose many of you in
reading this place, did not think of the meaning of the Spirit of God in it,
that may be a great help unto you, when at any time you are seeking the pardon
of your sins, to cry to God to be purged with Hysop; O Lord* sprinkle the blood
of Christ afresh upon me; for I know that all my Prayers and Tears, and all
that I can do, cannot purge me from the guilt of that sin I have committed
against thee, except thou purge me with Hysop; that is, by applying of the
Blood of thy Son unto me: And this is the Eighth way of dishonouring the grace
of God, in seeking for it any other way than through the blood of his Son; and
remember when you are seeking it, that it may be the last time; and therefore
remember you look up to God for it in, by, and through the death of his Son;
for otherwise, though you are never so earnest in Prayer, you dishonor this
grace: It is an easy matter to convince men and women, that they are guilty of
dishonouring the grace of God, if they seek for pardon in a negligent and
sluggish way; but now, though you are never so sensible, and put forth never so
much strength in seeking for it, yet you dishonor God, except you look upon it
as such a high thing that can never be reached unto, but through the mediation
of the Son of God.

9. The ninth way of dishonouring the grace of God is, for any one to venture
on sin, the rather because they hope they shall be pardoned, that dare to
venture on sin on that ground, hoping that God will at last pardon them, I
spoke before of those that did nothing else but increase their sins in stead of
seeking pardon of sin, and of the miserable sad condition of such: But those we
now speak of, are not such as are come to this height of sinning, to do nothing
else but increase their sins; but such men and women who being convinced of
sin, and if they were persuaded that God would never pardon that sin, they
would find knots enough to stop them from the commission of it: but because
they have some hopes that God will pardon, therefore on that very ground they
venture on sin; it is true, it is an offense, but God is a merciful God, he will
forgive though it be an evil: there is more evil and mischief in this than thou
can imagine; What, art thou convinced of sin, and will thou venture on sin
merely on this ground, because thou hopest that God will pardon thee? I may say
unto thee as Peter to Simon Magus, Act. 8.22. Pray O pray to God, that if it be
possible, this thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee; for this thought of
thy heart has so much malignity in it, and is so great a provocation against
God as possible can be imagined, (except the sin against the Holy Ghost,) for
any man or women to venture on any sin in hopes of pardon: some will say, What
need we be so strict, and trouble our selves so much? God is merciful, and
therefore they think upon that ground; they need not be so strict; this is a
horrible degree of turning the grace of God into wantenness, Jude 4. the
Apostle speaks of such there, that professed they did believe in Christ; mark
what he says of them, There are certain men crept in unawares, -- ungodly men
turning the grace of God into laciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ; it is a most dreadful place, if there be any one in the
Congregation that have ever had the glorious light of the Gospel revealed to
them, that can reason thus? I do such and such things, yet God is merciful; O
that God would convince thee of this evil, give me leave to open it unto you,
how men creep in; they were Christians, and were come into the Church; but how?
they crept in cunningly; the Saints of God were not aware of them, they crept
in amongst them; here by the way, we may take notice, that in a Church there
ought to be none admitted Members, but such as there may be some testimony of
godliness in them; for if any be ungodly, they are such as creep in unawares;
the Church of God should keep them out, such as creep in unawares should be
kept out: many cry out, they will not have communion with any Church, because
there are some wicked men in it; and others say, while there is a Church on
Earth, the tares will be among the corn, and chaff will be among the wheat: be
not deceived, I know none in the world that does think there is any
Congregation so pure, but that some ungodly one may creep into it: but
consider, to have some evil ones in the Church is one thing, and the Church to
have power to cast them out, that is another thing; it is true, they will creep
into the Church, but when they are crept in, and appear to be ungodly ones, we
must do our duty; tell them of their faults, and if they will not hear us, we
must tell it to the Church; and if the Church have power and will not deal with
them, it need not at all hinder our communicating with them: but here lies the
case, Whether we should withdraw, because evil ones are among them? or, Whether
we can join with that Church wherein there is no power to keep them out, and
after they are crept in to cast them out? they will creep into the Church, they
came in unawares; but the state of the Church should be such, that they should
suffer no evil men to come in, and if they do come in, it is unawares to the
Church, by making a Profession of Religion; for the Church can go no further
then what does outwardly appear unto them: if men make a Profession of
Religion, and have a conversation agreeable to it, the Church can go no
further; but for a Church to admit al, if they be no swearers, no adulterers,
of gross livers in any other sin, although they make no Profeson; nay, if they
do but hire a House in the Parish, it is enough to make them members of the
Church, and when they are in, there is no power to cast them out; and if a
power heretofore, the remedy was worse than the disease; it was such a power as
was never ordained of God: Whether we should join with such a Church or no; or
whether we should withdraw, because there is some evil ones among them is
questionable? surely none can imagine there should be such a pure Church in the
world, as that there should be no tares among them; But if there be a power in
every Church to admit of none but such as have an appearance of godliness, and
if after being crept in, they proving otherwise, that there is a power to cast
them out; let these things be granted, and then though many ungodly ones will
unawares creep in, yet it is no hinderance at all to join with them in all the
Ordinances of God: that is the first thing said of them; they creep in. 2. He
says they were such as were ordained of old to condemnation; those that turn
this grace of God into wantonness; that is, abuse this pardoning grace of God
by taking liberty to sin; surely they are such as should be kept out of the
Church, and if they creep in, they should not be accounted members, but should
be cast out, when they appear to be such as were of old ordained to
condemnation: then those that abuse the grace of God to wantonness, and think
they may take liberty to sin because God is merciful to forgive sin, the
Scriptures says, they are of old ordained to condemnation. Thirdly, They are
ungodly men, such that have no godliness at all in them, but are mere carnal
and worldly men; it is a terrible thing for a Minister to say to any of you out
of the Word of God, thou art an ungodly man or woman. Have thou not turned the
grace of God into wantonness, and abused it, when thou heardest that God was
merciful? Have thou took liberty to sin? thou art an ungodly man; for thou
turnest the grace of God into wantonness: The blessed grace of God that should
be the chief means to keep men from sin; thou make it an advantage to further
sin: And mark further, Fourthly, Thou denyest our Lord Jesus Christ; thou
talkest of Gods mercy in Christ, but thou deniest the only Lord God and our
Lord Jesus Christ; What a heap of expressions are here, to set forth the
condition of such men that turn the grace of God into wantonness? 1. They creep
in. 2. Were of old ordained to condemnation. 3. They are ungodly: And 4. they
deny the Lord Jesus Christ: Methinks this one Text should daunt the heart of
every one that is before the Lord this day; never to presume upon acting of
such horrible wickedness, to sin because of Gods pardoning grace, for there is
so much evil in this, to presume on sin because God is willing to forgive sin,
that those that understand the glory of Gods grace, their hearts cannot but
stand amazed and rise with indignation against it, Romans 6.1. What shall we say
then, Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? -- some there were that
did abuse the grace of God to sin; How does the Apostle rise with indignation
against that abominable wickedness? he does not grant it, but reject it with a
horrible indignation, God forbid, What? to sin that grace may abound, God
forbid: What? to make use of the grace of God to further sin; Shall we stand to
answer these men, in the horrible reasoning of their hearts? No, they are to be
cast of with detestation and rejection, with a God forbid, that there should be
any of such vile and wicked hearts thus to abuse the pardoning grace of God:
Suppose you forgive one servant a fault, and another servant should say; well,
my Master has forgiven him, I will do so too; upon that ground, if thou commit
the same offense, he will not forgive thee, because thou offendest
presumptuously, which is a most horrid thing. Let me a little further reason
the case:

1. It is an argument of an abominable heart, that has no way to keep it from
sin, but only guilt, and fear of wrath and Hell; Thou make not the grace of
God an argument to keep thee from sin, nor the evil of sin in it self; which is
a great dishonor and wrong to God; there is more evil in sin it self, setting
a side the consideration of the guilt and punishment of it, there is ten
thousand times more evil in sin it self, than all the punishment in Hell will
countervail; and thou have no way to keep thee from sin, but only the guilt and
punishment; it is an argument of a base wicked heart.

2. Suppose there were no evil of guilt or punishment, yet an ingenious
gracious spirit would never do it; What shall I sin, because God will pardon?
Shall I venture upon it? no, I will never do it: grace reasons to a quite
contrary end; that is an excellent Scripture in Tit. 2.11. The grace of God
that brings Salvation; it is this grace that reveals the pardon of sin; this
precious grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men: But to
what end? teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; the grace of
God that brings salvation, it teaches us these lessons; not such a wicked
lesson that we should presume to sin, on hopes that God may pardon it: No, But
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and that we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly; and not to take liberty to sin, to lie, steal, be
filthy and the like, because God will pardon; no, it teaches other manner of
lessons than these; and then it follows, looking for that blessed hope and
appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; mark the Text, there
is a great deal in it, when the grace of God that brings salvation, and mercy,
and pardon of sin is revealed, it teaches us these Lessons; because of the
grace and favor of God is revealed to us, that we should deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and then we may with comfort look for the blessed hope and
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; but otherwise you can
never look for that blessed hope: let me speak to those that reason thus, that
they may venture on sin, because of Gods pardoning grace; Does the Revelation
of the grace of God teach you to live ungodly, and in worldly lusts? Can you
look for that blessed hope with comfort, and expect the glorious appearing of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ? it is impossible, you cannot, it is
not a blessed hope that you have, but a cursed hope; that all shall be well at
last, though you live ungodly and wickedly, and for the appearing of the great
God; certainly it will be a terrible appearing to thee, that made Christ who
came to dissolve the works of the Devil, to be a means to uphold the works of
the Devil.

3. Did ever any Child of God make use of Scripture to reason for sin in such a
wicked way, for to presume to sin, because God is willing to pardon? you cannot
give me one example in all the Scripture of any of those that God has showed
mercy to, that reasoned after this manner; I can give you examples to the
contrary, how the Saints have reasoned otherwise, Psalm. 130.4. mark the
reasoning of a gracious heart, But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou
may be feared; he reasons from the pardoning grace of God, to draw up his
heart to the fear of God; as if he should say, Lord, I have heard much of the
Doctrine of the pardon of sin, and the great workings of thy grace to effect
it, and of thy readiness to forgive, this is the end of it, that thou might
be feared; this is the effect this doctrine works in a gracious soul, and it is
a good sign if you reason after this manner; but there is forgiveness with
thee, that thou may be feared: If those Sermons you have heard of this
Doctrine be a means to implant the fear of God in your hearts, this is a
blessed sign they have had a good effect upon you; when you reason thus,
Because Lord, I have had so much of thy grace and mercy in forgiving my sin;
through thy grace my soul shall fear thee more than ever before, and fear to
sin more than ever before: those that have hearts answering this Text, it is a
good sign that the Word has had a powerful efficacy upon them: take another
Text, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits; Why? who forgiveth all thy iniquities: Mark, it is a Psalm that David
made of Gods mercy in forgiving of sin, the consideration of which makes him
call upon his soul, and all that is within him to bless the Lord: Does God show
so much grace as to forgive sin? then bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name; it is not reasoning thus, God forgives iniquity,
and therefore O my soul take liberty; thou need'st not be so strict: But bless
the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name: those that
have strength to do any thing for God, this is an argument will stir up all
within them to bless God, when they see God appearing so infinitely gracious to
them in the forgiveness of their sins; they so reason, that all they have, or
can do, should be given unto him.

4. You that think, you may take liberty to sin because God is gracious, and
venture on it, because you conceit that God will never punish; think of this,
the example of the damned in Hell, they are flying in the face of God because
they know that God will never pardon; and thou sinnest because thou hopest God
will pardon; which is the worst of the two: the Devils and the damned are in
such a condition, as that they know that God will never pardon them; and
therefore they always curse God, because they know he will not pardon: but God
offers pardon, and tenders grace to you, holds forth Jesus Christ to you, and
his blood and sufferings for the pardoning of you, and you blaspheme because
you think he will pardon; of the two methinks you should judge the second sort
worst; you blaspheme because you hope God will pardon, and the other blaspheme
God because they know he will not pardon; It Is something worse to take liberty
to sin, because you hope God will pardon, than they that sin because they are
out of all h^p^s of pardon. Thou that take liberty on this ground to
blaspheme the Name of God; What think thou will become of thee another day?
now thou do blaspheme, because thou hopest that God will pardon thee; ere
long thou may come to that condition to blaspheme God eternally, because, he
will not pardon thee: As I make no question, but many Swearers, Drunkards,
unclean persons and the like, have gone on in sin on this ground, because they
hoped that God would pardon them; are now gone to their own place, and
blaspheme because they find that God will never pardon: so that thou that
blasphemest now, it may be thou shall blaspheme eternally, but it will be
otherwise, thou do it now on hopes that God will pardon; thou shall there do
it, because thou shall have no hopes that he will ever pardon.

5. Thou that sinnest now in hopes that God will pardon, if God inlighten thy
mind, these things will be an intolerable burden to thee; and if there be any
thing that will endanger the sinking of thy soul into the bottomless gulf of
despair, it is like to be this; you now give way to the reasonings of your own
hearts, to further sin from the consideration of Gods pardoning mercy; the same
reason that furthers sin in you now, from the consideration of pardon, will
make you have further thoughts of despairing of Gods mercy: Suppose thou go
on a great while, and heapest up sin on this presumption: Let me put this unto
thee, either God will inlighten thy Conscience, or he will not do it; if he
never do it, thou art eternally lost; but if he do it, if he come at length and
awaken Conscience; then what a load of anguish and trouble will lie upon thy
soul, that will make thee cry out, O Lord, I have not only sinned: but now I
come to seek for mercy; my mouth is stopped with the thoughts of that mercy that
I have abused: Now nothing but free grace can do me good; my Conscience tells
me how I have abused this grace, I have presumed on sin because of this, I have
made the thoughts I had of this grace a means to further me in sin; and now
with what face can I go to seek this grace and mercy? these will be stinging
thoughts to thee another day; when a Minister shall come to apply the grace of
God to thy soul, thou will say there is mercy with God to pardon sinners, but
not for those that have abused the grace of God as I have done; Manasseh, and
Paul, it is true, they committed many great sins; but did they ever commit any
sin upon this ground, in hope of pardon: O look unto it, let none go out from
the presence of the Lord this day, with thoughts to venture on sin, because ye
hope it may be pardoned; to venture on sin on that ground, is the most horrible
cursedest thing that can be.

Tenthly, A tenth way of dishonouring the grace of Gods pardoning mercy; as to
sin in hopes of pardon, so to sin after pardon, after God has revealed this
grace unto you; then to sin, this is a great dishonor to this grace: Many that
have been in trouble for their sins, and in their trouble have cried to God for
mercy, and God has spoke peace to their souls, and has told them that their
sins are pardoned, and that he will cleanse their souls from the guilt of sin
by the blood of his own Son; and yet after all this, they have again fallen to
their former sins: I have spoke before of this degree of dishonouring Gods
pardoning grace, but now I am speaking of a further degree; not only to fall
into that sin you have sought for pardon of, but to fall into that sin, that
you have some comfortable assurance of pardon of, 1 King. 11.9. The Lord was
angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord, that had
appeared to him twice; remember, has not God appeared to some of you twice,
and given you assurance of his love and pardoning grace? God came with sweet
comforts and rejoiced your souls; and what do you turn from the Lord after he
has appeared twice to you, and said unto thee, thy sins are pardoned? this is
a grievous thing, Ezra 9.14. Should we again break thy Commandments? --
Would not thou be angry with us, should we again sin, would thou not
consume us? so after God has delivered us from condemnation, the guilt of sin,
and the spirit of bondage; What? to trespass again, it is just with God to be
angry with us, Psalm. 85.8. The Lord will speak peace --, but let them not
return again to folly; if God speak peace, O return not again to folly; I
appeal unto you, has God ever spoke peace to your souls? Have you heard the
voice of gladness speaking in your hearts, saying, Son, or Daughter be of good
cheer, go in peace, thy sins are pardoned? Have you not heard this? if you have
not, you had need to get it; if you have, then return not again to the same sin
that God has graciously pardoned. 1. Return not to the same sin. 2. Return not
to any other sin. 1. Return not to the same sin; it is a question, and a great
case of Conscience, Whether it be possible for a Child of God after God has
dealt unto him the pardon of sin, whether he may commit that sin again? some
have denied it; I remember some ancient Divines, Origin and Tertullian upon
those words in Heb. 6. For it is impossible for those that were once
enlightened, -- if they shall fall away to renew them by repentance; he applies
it to the sin of uncleanness; and says he, a second repentance is not promised
in the Name of Christ to Adulterers and Fornicators; thus I may boldly say, we
do not find any certain express example in all the Book of God, of any Child of
God that did fall into the same gross outward sins after an actual repentance,
and making up his peace with God for sin; we find no express Scripture: I do
not say, we find no example of the Children of God that have not committed the
same sin again, as Peter and Lot, but we find no example of any gross sin that
they have fallen into: mark it, after their repentance and reconciliation; what
was done amiss, was done before they came to have it laid home unto their
Consciences, and applied unto their hearts for the humbling of their souls in
making their peace with God: True, David committed Adultery, but never the
second time, after he had his bones broken, he fell not again: and so Peter,
after he went out and wept bitterly, he never denied his Master again; and so
Abraham equivocated, but we read not, that after any actual renewal of faith
and repentance, that he committed that sin again: a wound while it is open, and
not fully closed, it may bleed again; but when it is fully closed, to bleed
again is dangerous; and so any of the people of God, after the actual renewal
of their faith and repentance, you cannot give me an example that any of them
have fallen into the same sin again; I do not absolutely deny it, but I say it is
a dangerous thing, God has not left an example; he has left examples that his
Children have fallen, but not after they have renewed their faith and repentance,
that they have fallen into the same sins again; I speak not of inward thoughts, I
know that they after repentance will return again; but for any outward gross
actual sin after the renewal of faith and repentance, they have not returned
again to commit the same sin: when once a joint is out, or a leg broke and set,
usually that joint or bone is stronger than before; and so I might show you
after they have sinned, and been set again, they have been stronger than
before: a Child of God falling into sin is just like the breaking of a bone,
Gal. 6.1. And you that are spiritual must restore such a one; the word in the
Original is put him in joint again; any godly man or member of a Church that
falls into sin, is as a bone out of joint, and you that are spiritual must set
it again; if once you have a bone out of joint, the longer you let it go, the
more painful it is; so if you fall into any sin, the longer you let it go the
more unweildy you will be: No marvel you cannot go about your business
handsomely, when you have a bone out of joint; but has God been so merciful as
to put you into joint again; you know what Christ said to the man, Thou art
made whole, etc. so I say to you, you that have sinned, and God has pardoned
you, set you in joint again, Go your way, you are made whole, take heed of
sinning again least, a worse thing befall you.

2. A second sort that dishonor the grace of God, are such that though they
fall not into the same gross sins again after pardoning mercy, yet are
negligent in the ways of God; loose, slight, v^in, sensual, carnal,
dead-hearted in their conversation, and do not answer the grace of God revealed
to them, but are more drossie in their spirits than before; It may be for the
time wherein they were seeking this grace of God, they were strick't in their
conversation, in their ways conscientious; and in every thing walked close
with God, durst not for their lives omit a known duty, attended on the Word
with a great deal of patience, their hearts closed with it, and it was as meat
and drink unto them; and in their conversation they were very fruitful in the
places where they lived: But now having had some comfortable assurance of Gods
mercy pardoning them, after this they are grown slight, vain, loose, and dead
hearted; this is a very grievous evil where ever it may be charged: It is a
very great evil for any to abuse Gods general Bounty, Patience, and
Long-sufferance, and the good we receive from God in the use of the creature;
but far worse to abuse the grace of God in Christ, manifested in pardoning
mercy: I shall show this to be a great evil, and shall labor to convince you
of it.

1. Consider and call to remembrance what the days of old were? How in former
times it was with you, when you were seeking the pardoning grace of God? then
you thought if ever G^d come in to my soul, and give me any assurance of pardon
of sin, How infinitely should my soul be engaged to bless God, and how shall I
for ever be bound to give up my self, soul and body; what I am, and what I can
do to live to the praise of the grace of God; if God come in to my soul and
pardon this sin of mine, the guilt whereof lies so heavy upon my spirit; I
appeal unto your own Consciences, Did not you think in your own thoughts, that
it was impossible that ever you should come to live as you do? certainly if the
thoughts of many people might this day appear, they cannot but say, Time was
(when I was seeking after the mercy of God, to pardon my sin that lay upon my
Conscience) I thought with my self thus; he is a blessed man) indeed that has
assurance of this, and if ever I had peace spoken to my soul, I thought my life
would have been such, that (in my apprehension) I thought it was impossible
that I should have grown to this dullness, deadness, slightness, and vanity,
that now I see I am, then now as Paul said to the Galatians, Where is the
blessedness you spoke of, time was you said the pardoning mercy of God it was a
blessed thing; where is that blessedness you spoke of, that after you have
received it, you should grow wanton, loose, and slight? What, have you not a
mightier Argument to draw your hearts to God, after he has spoke peace, than
ever you had before? The apprehension of guilt, danger, and trouble of spirit
for sin, that was an Argument to keep you from sin before; but if God have
spoken peace, in applying this pardoning grace; Have you not Arguments, of
another nature than these, which are far more powe^ful? Certainly, those that
know the grace of God in Christ know that there is no such powerful argument as
the grace of God in Christ in pardoning sin, to keep up the heart to God, and
to keep from sin as this, no such argument in the world that is like to this;
the eyeing of Gods grace is a special thing to quench and keep down lust;
whereas those that sin after this mercy, whose lusts and corruptions overcome
the power of this pardoning mercy, they are deprived of the best and most
special spiritual helps, that can be to keep from sin; Phil. 4.7. The peace of
God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds in Christ
Jesus; the word in the Original is very significant, shall guard your hearts;
this is the emphaticalness of the phrase; as if the Apostle had said, The sweet
peace of God, is such as passes understanding, and shall guard your hearts; as
indeed the peace of God that comes to flow out from the sweetness of the
pardoning grace of God is such, as passes understanding; but yet after all
this, there will be many dangers, and you are to be involved with many
temptations; but this peace of God will be a guard to your souls, to keep you
from sin and temptation: The soul of a Believer that has peace spoken to it,
is there compared to a Captain in War, or a Prince that apprehends himself in
some danger, sets a strong guard about his Person to keep him from danger: Now
what is the guard, that keeps the soul of a Believer from temptation and
danger? It is the peace of God, that is the greatest and strongest guard in the
world; if you complain of sin and temptations, and that you are afraid that sin
will surprise you; What guard would you have to keep you? The peace of God is
the best guard that can be: Now after this has been a guard unto you if thy
sin break in upon thee, as fully, and as freely, as if there were no guard at
all; thy condition is very sad.

2. Let me further speak to such that sin after the pardoning grace of God, and
do not walk answerable to that grace that was let forth in witnessing the
pardon of sin; it is a thousand to one thou will loose thy evidence; it is true,
it is irrevocable in Gods heart, yet thou may carry it so, that by thy loose
walking, thou may loose the evidence of it in thy own soul, and it may be as
sad with thee as if thou were not at all pardoned; we are to know that when an
Evidence is given in, concerning pardon of sin, every renewed act of sin is a
blot to that Evidence: A man that having Evidences of Lands, or an Estate, will
keep them fair; but if he should suffer them to be blotted, one blot after
another, perhaps so blotted as neither he nor any one else is able to read
them; it may cost him a great deal of trouble before he get them renewed again;
so it is with a poor creature that has got some comfortable Evidence of the
pardon of sin, but giving way to temptation, commits a sin, and there he gets a
blot; and then, the next temptation, coming possibly to worldly Mindedness,
Passion, Unbelief, slightness of Spirit, Vanity, Sensuality, and abuse of the
Creatures; by often yielding to these, he gets more and renewed blots; so that
if his Evidences be looked into, they will be found so full of blots, that no
marvel in a time of temptation they cannot read them; possibly some that are
skilful in the way of God, and the nature of the Covenant of grace, may pick
out somewhat of the meaning of them; but thou have fallen so souly from God that
thy Evidences are so blotted and blur'd, that in thy own apprehension thou
can see nothing, but that thy condition is as dangerous as ever it was and
as uncomfortable, thy Evidences are so blotted that thou can not read them
thy self, and so have no comfort by them, and it is to thee as if thou had
none at all; this is the duty, and would be the comfort of every Christian,
that when they have gotten their Evidences, that they would keep them so clear,
that they might read them every morning, and run and read them, and not stand
pooring and beating their brains and hearts, and fret themselves, because they
cannot find such and such a thing that was to them an Evidence of the pardon of
their sins, this is through their neglect; and if they had been careful to have
kept their Evidences clear and plain, O the comfort they might have had to have
read them every morning: If the Pollution of sin recoil back again, no marvel
the sense of guilt of sin upon thy Conscience recoil back again; if God have
committed such a Jewel to thee as the Evidence of pardon of sin, and thou
make no better use of it, it is just with God to take it out of thy hands, and
keep it in his own; and though he show mercy at last unto thee, yet thou may
not know it while thou art in this world; it is a very hard thing to recover it
again: those that have had the pardon of sin sealed unto them, have by their
falling into sin afterward, so darkened and lost their Evidences that they
could never recover them again; as David, see how he cries out, Create in me a
clean heart, and restore to me the joy of thy Salvation; David saw all was
gone, and that there must be a new Creation and Restoration; Restore to me the
joy of thy salvation; O the joy that once I had, and now have lost; O Lord that
I may have it once again: David had a little sensual pleasure for a while, but
he paid dear for it, he lost the joy of Gods Salvation: What think you, David
would have given to have got it again? for ought we know, he never had it so
fully as before: Those that have had some comfortable Evidence of pardoning
grace, and afterward through their negligence, looseness, and vanity, have lost
it, may never come to enjoy the comfort of it again as formerly they did; and
therefore when Peter had sinned against his Master; mark, when Christ came to
Peter, says he, Love thou me? he answered, Lord thou know I love thee;
Christ puts it to him again; Love thou me? he would not take his first
answer, but puts it to him the second and third time, Love thou me? as if
Christ had said to Peter, look to your self, it is not any present sudden work
that can recover your Evidences again; you that have sinned and darkened your
Evidences, had need to put this Question to your own hearts again and again, to
get it sure, that you love Christ, and that Christ loves you.

3. Thirdly, Let me speak to such as sin after pardon, it may justly provoke
God to deal with you, though he do not take away his everlasting love; yet to
deal with you as a Slave rather than a Child; I mean, in following you with
sore and heavy chastisements, though he may save your souls at last, yet it may
cause God to meet you with such sore and evil things in this world, that for
that sloth and sluggishness of your hearts you may pay dear for it, before you
die; truly so may be the dealings of God with his own Children whom he pardons,
Jer. 2.14. God is speaking there to his own people: Is Israel a servant? Is he
a home-born slave? and at verse. 18. What have thou to do in the way of Egypt?
so thou to whom God has heretofore received to mercy and pardon; but thou have
walked so, that Gods ways to thee seem to be such as it may be said, Is this
man or woman a servant? Is he a home-born slave? God speaks it with pity,
Israel is my dear Son; How comes it to pass that he is as a home-born slave?
What, is he a servant, and brought into such a condition as a servant or a
slave? What is the matter? Why? he is in the way of Egypt; so it may be said to
thee who walk in the sensual drossiness of thy spirit; Have thou not been in
the way of Egypt? Are thy ways such, that Gods dealings with thee are as if
thou were a servant, and a home-born slave? Where is that filial ingenious
spirit of thine, that God is fain to deal with thee as now he does?

4. Again, thou that sinnest after pardon, thou come to aggravate thy sins
more than the sins of the wicked, in some regards; those that are wicked, and
go on in their vile ways against God, you cry out of them as wretched
creatures, base, filthy, drunkards, swearers, liars, false men and women in
their dealings, such as are not to be dealt withal in the world, you think
these are wicked; but you that sin after mercy, your sins have an aggravation
upon them beyond theirs; for they never knew what Gods sweet pardoning mercy
meant; they never heard God speak peace to their souls, as thou have to thine;
they never had the secret Visitations of Gods Spirit, nor the warm beams of
Gods mercy shining into their hearts; they were never acquainted with such
things; and therefore though they go on in sin, after which they have bin
accustomed, it is not so much to be wondered at: But thou that haste had a taste
of the sweetness of Gods love in Christ, in pardoning mercy; for thee to sin
after this, it is a greater aggravation than the sins of the other; and as it is
a greater aggravation than the sins of the wicked, so thy sin goes more near to
the heart of Christ than the sins of the wicked and ungodly do; the sins of the
most prophanest wretch in all the Town do not go so near to the heart of
Christ, as those that are committed after receipts of mercy from Christ; What,
you my sons to do thus and thus against me? I remember it is reported of Caesar,
when many with their Poinyards came about him, and stabbed him in the
Senate House, at length comes Brutus, whom he had done much good for, he comes
and gives him a blow, he looked upon him, and cries out; What, thou my son
Brutus, will thou give me a blow and stab? It went nearer to the heart of
Caesar, to have Brutus come and give him a wound and stab, than for all the
other that came round about and stabbed him; so Christ may look upon thee, for
whom he has purchas't pardon, shed his blood, and laid down his life for; What,
thou my son, will thou sin against me? for wicked wretches that are strangers
to him, no marvel if they sin against him; but for you that are his sons, his
redeemed ones, that have received such pardoning grace and mercy; for you to
sin: this goes to the heart of Christ more than the sins of the ungodlyest
wretch in all the Parish, And would you not be loath to do more against Christ
than the vilest wretch in the Parish? you that have received so much mercy from
Christ: Further, other men's sins anger God, but no men's sins grieve the Spirit
of God so, as the sins of those that have received pardon; they go to the heart
of God, and greive the Spirit by which they are sealed; the Spirit of God that
has sealed to your souls the pardon of your sins, let not that Spirit be
grieved; it is a greater sin to grieve the blessed Spirit of God than you are
aware of. Further, yet once more, you bring a disgrace upon the Doctrine of
Assurance of Pardon: We preach that a man may not only have some good hopes
that his sins are pardoned; but we say God has revealed such a fullness of
riches of grace in the Gospel, that a man may have certain and full assurance
of the pardon of his sin; as if he heard a voice from Heaven, speaking to him
by name, thy sins are pardoned; or as if when Christ in the days of his flesh,
said to any one, son, go in peace, thy sins are pardoned; certainly, there may
be as full assurance of pardon of sin, by the witness of the Spirit of God, as
if such a voice came from Heaven: But our Adversaries say, open but that gap,
and it is an open way for men to take liberty to commit any sin; What need men
care what sins they commit, when they know they are pardoned? that has been
objected against us; but now we say, there is such a virtue in the grace of God
going along with pardoning of sin, that heals the soul, as well as comforts the
soul; we answer it thus, but you take away our answer, and digrace that blessed
Doctrine of Pardon of Sin; for wherein does it appear, there is such a healing
power in the assurance of the pardon of sin? if it be so, then you would walk
more strictly than any man in the world can do, in the time of the greatest
horror of Conscience that possible can be; and this would bring an honor to
the Doctrine of Assurance; but you by sinning after pardon, How do you disgrace
this blessed Doctrine, and take away the answer out of our mouths? So much for
the present, to be spoken to those that dishonor the pardoning mercy of God by
sinning after pardon.

CHAP. XV. Of the Dishonor done to the Grace of God by not resting on it. 2.
Of the Evil of it.
THere is one sort more that are great dishonourers of the pardoning grace of
God, and they are those that think they honor him, and yet dishonor him
exceedingly, such as being apprehensive of the greatness of their sins, the
vileness of them and their own misery, by reason whereof lie down in a sullen
desperate discouraging mood, under the wait and burden of them, and are ready
to turn against themselves, saying; certainly, my condition is such, as I must
expect no other but to lie for ever under the burden of my sins, and bear for
ever the punishment of them; I have heard much indeed of the riches of the
pardoning grace of God; but for my part, my condition is such, that little
expectation I have of being made partaker of it; certainly this kind of sullen
discouragement, in lying under our sins, is a mighty aggravation of our sin,
and exceedingly dishonorable to the pardoning grace of God; many that are
thus, let them hear never so much opened of the riches of the Gospel, and the
infiniteness of the grace of God; all is nothing to them, it raises them not
from the sullenness of their hearts, and the dicouragement of spirit that hangs
upon them; they are like to those in Exodus 6.9. that Moses spoke unto, but they
hearkened not for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage; God sent Moses to
show them the grace (of God, to deliver them from their bondage; but says the
Text, they hearkened not to Moses, only for anguish of spirit, and for cruel
bondage; so many People when God comes to awaken their Consciences, there is so
much anguish in the sense of their sin, that they hearken not to what is said;
let them hear never so much in private or in public, they are just where they
were, the same complaints, sullenness and objections as before: you may answer
all their objections against the grace of God, that they know not what to say,
but go away for half an hour, and they will have the same objections as if
never any thing had been said unto them, certainly there is more evil in this,
then you are aware of, this limiting and determining of Gods grace: it is true,
there is reason to judge your selves unworthy, and that God may deny you, but
that God will deny you is another thing; there is a great deal of difference in
these: some when they are put upon the use of means, will confess they ought to
attend upon them, and that they will do it, but yet when I have done all, I
have little hopes that God will deliver me, but I shall dye and perish in my
sins, as that woman 1 Kings 12.17. says she, I am a poor Woman, I have but a
handful of meal in the barrel, and a little Oil in a Cruse, and am gathering
two sticks that I may eat it and dye; so much as I have I am preparing, and
when I have eaten this I must dye, thus says many a soul, I may go hear the
word and pray, but to little purpose; But I will go and do them and then I must
dye. It is but little that I can make of Prayer, when I have spoken two or
three words, I am presently distracted with wandering thoughts. Two or three
sticks I may lay together, but when I have done that, I must dye. Now know and
consider this day, what from God shall be said unto you, thou much dishonourest
the pardoning grace of God.

First, Know it is very low thoughts thou have of the pardoning mercy of God,
and what Christ has purchased, and what God has intended from everlasting, in
the Covenant of grace, to those souls for whom he intends good; and though for
his intentions he keeps them to himself (and would not have thee meddle with
that) till he manifest them in the work of grace, yet in the mean time having
revealed no further, but that thou may have it as well as any other, he
expects from thee that thou should venture thy self upon his grace through
his Son Jesus Christ, and though thou say thou art vile, unworthy, and after
the use of means, that thou art unprofitable, vain, full of wandering thoughts
and deadness, and therefore thou can not expect grace; know that thou have
but mean thoughts of the grace of God, that sett'st such things as these
against it, these are poor low unworthy things to set against the grace of God,
and they do lower the grace of God too much; that set such things as these
against it. A Scholar would think it a dishonor to him, for one to come to
reason with him, and bring nothing but poor low weak objections that are not
worth the answering, he would think it a disgrace to him; certainly it is a
dishonor to the grace of God, to set such things as these against it, thou
look upon it in a natural way, and do not consider, it is the great
design of God above all things in the World; to magnify his grace in pardoning
of sin; certainly were this understood, these things would be counted too low
and unworthy to be set against such a design; when it is the greatest, God
has to magnify his name in.

Secondly, Thou judge of God according to thy own thoughts, and this God will
take exceeding ill, as they Psalm. 50.21. Because I kept silence thou thoughtest
I was altogether such a one, as thy self; It Is a great evil to measure God by
our own thoughts, and there are two ways of dishonouring God by it.

1. The way of the carnal secure sinner; he measured God by his own thoughts,
he thinks God is not so strickt to be angry for every fault; and if thou
offendest, that if we go and cry him mercy, he will be pleased again. We think
it an easy matter to please God, and because God is silent, we think he does
not hate sin as he does, that's one way of dishonouring God.

A Second way is when a man comes to be troubled for sin, and conscience
enlightened; then we think slightly of God another way. It may be thou have a
hard heart and would not pardon one that provokes thee again and again, thou
would not pass by such and such offenses, and thou think God is so too,
thou think God to be like thy self, and that he cannot bear with thee in
such and such things, because thou can not bear with others. This is to judge
God by our own line, but know, that the thoughts of Gods pardoning grace are as
far above ours as the Heavens are above the Earth; and therefore we must not
measure God by our own thoughts.

Thirdly, Thou dishonourest the pardoning grace of God, by having low thoughts
of it, because it is contrary to the Scriptures. For the main scope of all the
Scriptures is to magnify the pardoning grace of God, and to set it out in its
greatness to to thy soul, and thou make it thy main work to under-value it,
Luther sais, the scope of the whole scriptures are but this, that we might know
and acknowledge God to be a gracious and merciful God, and a greater then
Luther speaks this; that is a notable Text of Scripture in the Acts of the
Apostles 10.42, 43. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify, it is he that was ordained of God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name; whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

Mark, to him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name; whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins: So that it is the scope and
intention of all the Prophets, to witness this to a poor soul, that whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sin: You will say, whosoever
believes on him, but there is all the Question: but thou hindrest thy self of
believing, thou would have assurance before thou do believe, thou must
believe that thou may have it, that is, thou must venture and cast thy soul
upon this grace of God; all the Prophets witness this, that whosoever believes
on him shall receive remission of sins; therefore by thy sitting down in these
sullen discouraging thoughts of thy heart, thou give a lie to all the
Prophets of God, thou giv'st not a lie only to our preaching, for certainly so
it is, God sees it so, but to all the Prophets of God: now when God makes it
the work of all the Prophets to witness forgiveness of sins by Christ, will thou make it thy work to object against it.

Again, Know that thy reasonings are quite contrary to the Scriptures, for thou
reasonest, that pardoning mercy will not be thine, because thy sins are so
great, Psalm. 25.11. David cries to God to pardon his iniquities for they are
great, he makes the greatness of his sins, an argument to drive him too God,
not from God, and this is Gods own argument. Genesis 8.21. I will not again curse
the Ground any more for man's sake; why? for the imaginations of Man's heart are
evil from his youth; one would have thought it should have been thus, the
imaginations of man's heart are evil, and therefore I will do nothing else but
curse the ground. No says God, I will not, because the imaginations of man's
heart are evil from his youth; as if he should say, if I should never leave
cursing till man leave sinning, I should always be cursing, so says God, If I
should never pardon sin till man's sins are less, I should never pardon at all.
So in Hosea 2.13, 14. You have God reasoning there like to this here; She went
after her lovers, and forgot me, sais God, 14.v. Therefore will I allure her,
and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. For she had
forgotten me, and went after her lovers; see how the Scripture makes that an
argument of Gods mercy. Take another Text in Isaiah the 57.17. For the iniquity
of his covetousness, I was wroth and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he
went on frowardly in the way of his heart. Mark what follows; I have seen his
ways and will heal him, and will restore comfort to him and to his mourners,
he went on frowardly in the perverseness of his Spirit says God, I have seen
his ways and will heal him: thus God expresses himself to the end of the Chap.
to encourage the hearts of those that are sencible of their sins, and would be
sensible of the evil of sin, and account it a great misery that they cannot be
sencible of it, the Lord would encourage them, therefore the greatness of sin
is no discouragement at all.

Further, The way that thou take is the way to perish, there can be no good
in that way, thou may pine away in thine iniquity, but for to get any
Council, help, comfort, or mercy: be assured thou can not, therefore reason
as the Lepers, 2. Kings 7.3. If we sit here we shall certainly dye, if we go to
the Camp of the Syrians they can but kill us, let us arise and go: And it was a
good going to them, for they met with that, that helped and relieved them; So do
you say if I sit down thus, there is no way but I must dye, but however though
I should never get any comfort or help, yet it is better venture that way than
the other: thou know not what thou mai'st meet with, may be thou think it
humility to sit down in this way, but know that most desperate pride may be
under it, and stand with such discouragements. We know the most proud spirits
may be the most discouraged spirits, as the Devil, the Scripture sets him forth
to be as proud as Lucifer, yet none so proud as spirits under such
discouragements: there may be much pride in discouragements, therefore take
heed least there be any secret pleasing of your selves this way, though you be
in some trouble, yet if you feel there is a secret pleasure in that smart that
falls upon you, and some kind of contentedness in going your own way, as many
men though they meet with abundance of Crosses, yet if they go their own way,
it pleases them much; take heed, there may be desperate pride at the bottom of
all this.

Ob.
If this be to dishonor the pardoning grace of God; what would you have us to
do? (We would not speak it were it not so, to what end is it for us to study,
and pray to God for light and help to open the grace of God, if a little
discouragement of heart and sulleness of Spirit, shall turn all aside, and make
all that we say to be of none effest: therefore great reason there is that we
should tell you this is a great dishonouring of the pardoning grace of God:)
but what, would you have us to doubt no more, but go on and persuade our hearts
our sins are pardoned and there is an end?

Ans.
No, if I should say you could do this, it would be in vain for me to say all
this, for it is not in your power to cast off all fears of Gods anger, and
presently persuade your selves your sins are pardoned; this is not in your
power to do: and therefore this is not the thing I put you upon, it must be the
mighty work of God; in the 2. of Ezech. When the Prophet had done in the end of
the 1. Chap. the next verse of the 2. Chap. he says, Son of Man stand upon thy
feet, but that was not enough to raise the Prophet, no not for God himself to
say Son of Man stand upon thy feet but together with the voice of God, verse
the 2. There enters into him the Spirit of God, and sets him on his feet; so it
is with the Ministers of the Word, we speak to souls that are cast down under
the burden of their sins, to stir up themselves that they may not always lie
down drooping, but stand up on their feet; But together with our speaking, God
must speak and convey his spirit to the soul before it is able to stand up.

Quest Well, but what would you have us to do?

Answ. These are the things I would have you do.

First I would have you turn your fears of presuming, into fears of
dishonouring the grace of God. I would have you be as fearful that Gods grace
should be dishonored by unbelief, as now you are fearful lest you should
presume upon Gods grace; those that are secure, they fear not lest they should
presume; but those whose consciences are awakened, their great fear is least
they should presume upon Gods grace, and dishonor it by presumption; if thou
fear thou should dishonor the grace of God by presumption, why should
thou not fear lest thou should dishonor it by unbelief, as well as by
presumption? certainly the strength of this temptation is from the Devil. Those
that have their consciences troubled for sin, he labors to keep them from
venturing on the grace of God, least they should presume; but the way to cut
the Sinews of this temptation, is to fear rather least thou should dishonor
the grace of God by unbelief; many look not at unbelief as a great sin, but God
is displeased at thy unbelief, as much as by those that do presume.

Secondly, The thing I would have you to do, you that are under the checkings
of Conscience for sin, and full of doubts that God will not pardon, and you
cannot be persuaded your sins are pardonable. Labor to set the greatness of
the pardoning grace of God in the fullness of it, to the utmost you can, before
the eye of your souls, That it may be before you; though you cannot reach to
it, yet set it before you; you do not know what an efficacy the pardoning grace
of God has, by being presented before your souls, and kept there; no marvel
you find not the power of it, when as you set it not before your eyes, the
efficacy of Gods grace lies much in presenting it before your souls. The Brazen
Serpent, if they looked not to it, it would never heal; So though the pardoning
grace of God, be in books and Sermons; yet unless it be before your eyes, and
you fix and fasten the eye of your souls upon it; it will never heal you:
therefore keep it before your eyes, Psalm. 5.3. There is an excellent
expression; In the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
I suppose many of you in the morning will not neglect prayer to God; but mark
the expression, I will direct my Prayer; It Is not I will say my prayers, but
direct my prayer, there is a great emphasis in it. I will level my Prayer
aright, and dart up my soul aright to Heaven, and observe the way that God
would have me; and so direct my heart in prayer to him. It may be some of you
go thus far, not to content your selves with a dead hearted sluggish Prayer:
But what do you look to all the day after? what shall wandering and discouraging
thoughts bring you to look down all the day? Would you look up to your morning
Prayers, and what you prayed for, there would come a great deal of efficacy
upon your souls.

Thirdly, Be careful to keep your hearts stirring and active, be afraid of
deadness and dullness; take heed of such thoughts, Why should I pray and read,
when as I have no heart to perform any duty: Up and be doing, and the Lord be
with you; if ever your hearts were active at any thing in the world, it ought
to be in this, if once you give your selves liberty to lie down, and the
activity of your Spirits be gone, you are in a sad condition, twill be very
difficult to get them up again; take heed of a sullen heart, you may be very
active, and yet calm, quiet, and patient, there is a great conjunction between
these two, when I am active and yet calm, stilling of my heart under God, and
yet stirring of my heart unto God, these two are joined together in those whom
God directs unto himself.

Fourthly, Renew thy resolutions, that what ever becomes of thee, whether God
will ever speak peace or no to thee yet so long as thou live, thou will do
what thou can; to honor his name, and keep from sin: Keep thy heart under
the power of this resolution.

Fifthly, Keep thy heart in a waiting frame, use the means, lie at the Poole,
as the man that lay many years waiting for the stirring of the Waters met with
help at last; so do thou keep thy heart in a waiting frame, and think with thy
self if mercy come at last, it will recompense thee for all thy waitings and
pains.

Sixthly, Be willing to catch hold of any beginnings of Gods discoverings of
himsef, if it be but a little glimpse make much of it, and bless God for it:
Many in their trouble seek to God for pardon; but they are always complaining,
either to their Neighbors or themselves; but seldom express themselves in
Thanks-givings: Now, you should observe what God has granted, what beginnings
and glimpse of his grace appear; look and see if there be not a little cloud,
the bigness of a man's hand, it may breed a shower, a shower of grace may come
after it; but take notice of it, when it is but the bigness of a man's hand: it
is a great evil in such as are under trouble of Conscience, because they find
not full Assurance presently, they think they receive nothing at all: Well,
wait upon God under these directions, and as you shall not be so guilty of
dishonouring the pardoning mercy of God; so 'twill be a means to bring great
good unto your souls. We have now done with the several ways of dishonouring
the pardoning grace of God; and because God is very jealous of this, and takes
it exceeding ill; I have been the larger in it; now I am to show the evil of it.

Of the Evil of dishonouring the Pardoning Grace of God.
First, There is this evil in it, because it is a sinning against mercy, which
God accounts his glory; a man takes it exceeding ill, if he be wronged in his
Goods, or good Name, or in any thing he apprehends an excellency in; and (mark
it) The greater excellency a man apprehends in any thing, the greater evil he
accounts the wrong that is done to him in that thing: As a covetous man, if you
wrong him in his Estate, he presently as a mad man cannot bear it, because you
wrong him of that which he counts his greatest excellency; so a Scholar, a man
of parts will rather you wrong him in any thing than account of him as a Dunce,
because he accounts his parts and learning his greatest excellency, therefore
he would not be wronged in that: so you that are Mariners, and have skill in
sailing, and in the Art of Navigation, if one vilify your work, and find fault
with you there, it is as if one touched your freehold, you cannot bear it; Why?
because you account it your excellency; so it is between us and God, if we
wrong God in that which he accounts his excellency, he cannot bear it; Now the
pardoning mercy of God is that which God counts his excellency and glory, Exodus
34. when God descended to show Moses his glory, his Pardoning Mercy was one of
the great Masterpieces, wherein God accounted his glory to consist, more than
in the making of Heaven and Earth: Now for God to be contemned in that wherein
his glory consists, must needs be a great dishonor to him; the mercy of God
comes from the bowels of his compassions; Now if you strike one on the arm or
shoulder, it is not so much as if you strike him on his bowels; when you
dishonor the pardoning grace of God, you do as it were spurn at the Bowels of
God and Christ, and he accounts it so: certainly you that can hear this, and
neglect it, and prize and prefer every base just before it, you do as it were
go up and down kicking and spurning at the bowels of God; and that Child that
should spurn at his Mothers bowels, is not so much to be blamed as thou art
that go on in sin, after thou have heard the pardoning grace of God opened
to thee, thy going on in sin is a spurning at the very bowels of God.

Secondly, This aggravates the sin of such men above the sins of the Heathen;
their sins are nothing in comparison of those that live under the Gospel, and
have the grace of God opened unto them; at the Day of Judgment, when thou
hear them condemned for sins against the Light of Nature, they may say,
Lord, What shall become of these? we never heard of such grace and pardoning
mercy in Christ as you heard of, that have lived in such and such a place, and
have had the pardoning mercy of God opened to you; if they do not plead against
you, yet it will be made known before all Men and Angels what you have heard,
and what has been preached unto you, and what God has done for you; and for you
to continue in sin, your sins will thereby be aggravated, and your condemnation
heightened.

Thirdly, Your sin is above the sin of the Devils; the sin of the Devils is not
so great as yours is that live under the light of the Gospel, and have the
pardoning grace of God preached to you: for though the Devils blaspheme God
continually, yet their sins have not this aggravation upon them that yours
have; God never came and told them, he was willing to pardon their sins; nor
did Christ make any purchase for them by his blood; but to you is the Gospel
preached, and pardon offered daily to you* Are not your sins greater then, than
the sins of the Devils? Would not you account it a great aggravation of any
ones offense, that has wronged and injured you, and should seek for pardon,
and yet you rather seek to him, and offer pardon to him, and sue to him to
accept it, and he goes away and contemns you; would not you account this a
great aggravation? know, thy sinning against this grace, makes thee to be in a
worse condition than Beelzebub himself, that is the chief all the Devils; he had
never this aggravation, which is a dreadful one to sin against the pardoning
mercy of God; so that the very Devils may complain against you, and say, O Lord
we sinned against thee, but thou tookest advantage against us presently for one
sin; but how have these sinned against thy pardoning mercy, that has been
offered to them again and again, which was never offered us?

Fourthly, I might show you the evil the Scripture says of it, take two or
three Texts, Joh. 3.18, 19. He that believes not, is condemned already, and
verse. ult. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him; it sticks
fast upon such a one, and that place in Heb. 10.29. If they that sinned under
Moses Law died without mercy, who had but little of this grace revealed unto
them; How much sorer punishment shall they have, that sin under the Gospel,
under the full revelation of this grace; but to conclude all, there is nothing
will be such an aggravation of thy torments in Hell, as these Sermons of Gods
pardoning mercy, if thou go on in sin: When we speak of the pardoning grace of
God, we cannot do it without trembling hearts; Why? Because we know God will be
exceeding quick with those that have the grace of the Gospel preached unto them:
And therefore when we come upon this argument, we cannot but do as a Physician
that is giving his Patient a Potion that is of mighty operation, that will
either cure him, or dispatch him suddenly, if it cure not: A Physician cannot
but come with a trembling hand, with such a Potion, when he knows it must work
one way or other: we know God is exceeding quick with those to whom he reveals
his pardoning mercy in the preaching of the Gospel, and those truths we preach,
will have a quick operation either to bring you out of your sins to Salvation,
or else they will quickly dispatch you for condemnation, Mark 16.15, 16. Go
says Christ, and preach the Gospel to every creature; and he that believes
shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned: As if Christ had
said, go open the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Justification of a sinner by
the freeness of the grace of God through Christ Jesus, and whosoever will come
in and believe, and close with it shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned: there is no trifling in the business, he that believes and
comes in shall be saved; but he that believes not shall perish, he shall be
damned; let people know when they have the Gospel preached unto them, there is
no trifling, no dallying with it, it is not to be put off; he that comes in,
shall be saved; but he that stands off shall perish, shall be damned, and shall
know that I will fetch up my glory from him another day, in another way; as if
Christ had said, Go preach, make quick work of it; either come in and be saved,
or stand out and perish: And so John when he came to preach the Doctrine of
forgiveness of sin, Matthew. 3.10. says, Now the Axe is laid to the root of the
tree, every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into
the fire: Now also the Axe is laid to the root of the tree; Why not before? No,
all that while they went on in Ignorance, and understood not sin, and the grace
of God brought unto them, for the pardon of their sin all that while; God let
them grow, though they bore no fruit, or but ill fruit: but now also the Axe is
laid to the root, -- If he bears not good fruit now, he is hewn down and cast
into the fire. Now, when you hear of pardon of sin, and grace revealed in the
Gospel, either you bring forth fruit, or you do not, if you do not, God is
peremptory; if you come in and embrace the Gospel, you shall be saved; but if
you do not, the Axe is laid unto your root to cut you down: the Gospel makes
quick work with you, as Paul says in 2 Cor. 2.14. it is so strong that it kills
with the very savor of it, it has such a savor as it can kill with the very
smell of it; To him that believes, it is the savor of life unto life; but to
him that believes not, it is the savor of death unto death, Act, 17.30. In the
times of Ignorance God winked, when men understood not what the evil of sin
was; but now he commands all men to repent: before you heard the dreadful evil
and malignity that is in sin, God might wink at you; but now he commands you
all, having heard so many Sermons of the evil nature of sin, to repent, or else
God will be very quick with you, Heb. 4.12. an excellent place, The Word of God
is quick and powerful; but what word is it? mark, in the 2d. verse, Unto us,
says he, was the Gospel preached: It was the Word of the Gospel, and verse. 8.
If Jesus had given them rest: It is that rest spoken of in the Gospel; and mark
what he says in the beginning; Let us therefore fear, least a Promise being
left of entering into rest, any of you should seem to come short of it: Let us
therefore fear, for the Word of God is swift, and will make quick dispatch: No
Sermons make such quick dispatch as Sermons of the Gospel; fear least any seem
to come short: let us fear, least any of us should go on in any way that makes
it seem to appear we reject the Gospel. It is very observable what we find in
Gods dealings with Israel of old; we never find God swearing against them, till
they rejected the Land of Canaan, and preferred Egypt before it; when the Spies
were sent forth to search the Land, and brought some of the Grapes of it, Numb.
13, 14. Chapters, and told them what an excellent fruitful Land it was; but
because of some difficulty in the getting of it, they fell a murmuring; then
God took up a solemn Oath they should not enter into it, though they had
provoked him ten times, yea forty years in the Wilderness, yet God never swear
against them till that time: That soul is in a sad condition, that God shall
swear in his wrath it shall not enter into his rest: Thou that walk in the
Wilderness of thy sins, and have thy heart hardened against all the Truths of
God. But now, if God has come in to thee, and opened Canaan, and brought you
any clusters of those Grapes; revealed the mysteries of the Gospel and
pardoning grace through Christ: If you now hang off, and be longing after the
Onions and Garlic of Egypt; fear and tremble, least God should swear you
should never enter into rest: you that are wicked, unclean persons, that went
on in sin, though you had some light of Nature that caused Conscience to check
you; yet God was patient, and your condition was not so dangerous then. But
now, after the hearing of this grace of the Gospel and pardoning mercy, a
Drunkard, an unclean person, or a vile liver now, is in a thousand times of
more danger, least God should swear against him now than before: Take heed in
every act of the renewal of thy sin, thou art in danger, least God in his wrath
swear against thee that thou shall never enter into rest.

Quest.
Well, If the case be so, then you may say; What shall we do that we might not
dishonor this sweet and precious grace, but that we might honor God in it?
Answ.
Is this the frame of thy heart, to be careful above all things in the world,
that thou might not dishonor this precious grace? Does thy heart work thus?
Lord, whatever I have been heretofore, though I have been a negligent vile
wretch; yet for time to come, it shall be the work of my soul to give up my
self unto whatever God shall speak unto me, that I may not dishonor God: Is
this the frame of thy spirit? The Lord keep it so. Now that I might direct you
in this great Point, I shall 1. show who they are that are pardoned; for that
will be a foundation for direction; and then 2ly, show you what you ought to do
to get it, what we are to put you upon, if you find not Evidence of it: And
then 3ly, What is to be done for the honoring of the grace of God by those
that have some comfortable Evidence of it.

CHAP. XVI. Of the several Mistakes of Men about the Pardon of their Sins.
OUr work now is to show who they are that have their sins pardoned; for there
is nothing in all the world so much concerns us, as to know how things stand
with us in relation to God and our souls, whether we be pardoned or no; for a
mistake in this is a wonderful mistake; and yet how many thousands are there
that venture the weight of this great business upon poor, weak, and slight
grounds, yea rather on mere suggestions of their own hearts? and therefore we
must first labor to convince men of their mistakes about pardon of sin; and
then lay down some sound Evidences of pardon, in which there may be true and
solid peace. People are exceeding apt to mistake in point of pardon of sin,
hoping that God has pardoned them, and that they shall not be laid to their
charge, but upon very slight grounds that will deceive them; And therefore I
desire this day you would look upon your selves as arraigned before the great
God, as one day you must be: And let your hearts so hear, and attend to what we
deliver, as if God should speak to you, and say, Thou sinner, such and such
things thou art privy to, and have been guilty of, What can thou say why the
sentence of everlasting death should not be past upon thee? why God should not
declare against thee according to his Law? I suppose, scarce any of you but
have some hope that God will never proceed against you according to his Law;
for indeed, if he do, you are undone for ever. But what are the grounds of your
hopes; why you think God will not proceed against you for your sins, but will
pass them by, and forgive you? let us a little examine the grounds of it, for
it is of very great Consequence; and certainly many people are now sunk down
into the bottomless pit of Hell, by resting upon false grounds; I shall labor
to discover the weakness of their standing, that rest on false grounds, the

First, Is this many, think that God has pardoned their sin, because it is but
little they have been guilty of, and for that they think there is a pardon in
course; were I guilty of such horrible wickedness, and notorious sins, as many
others are; then I think it would go hard with me; I should be afraid, things
between God and me were very grievous, but the sins I have been guilty of, are
no such great sins; I hope God will pass them by: God forbid I should think he
were so strickt as not to pass by such small sins as those that I have been
guilty of. For answer to this

Answ.
1 Know thou do not understand, what the evil and malignity of sin means; If
thou think the least sin does not make such a breach between God and thee, as
all created power in Heaven and Earth, can never make up again: if you do not
believe that all those Sermons preached unto you about the evil of sin, are lost
unto you. But know, as a little Penknife may stabb you to death; as truly as a
gash of the greatest Sword, and a little shot out of a Pistol may kill you as
well as a Canon bullet; So a little sin may prove your eternal ruin as well as
a great one: and therefore that is no argument that God has past by your sins,
because they are little ones; and for that consider this one thing I am further
speaking of:

2. Gods pardoning mercy is his own, to do with it what he pleases; and
therefore that God may show his prerogative, he will sometimes to some, pardon
their great sins, and others he will damn for little sins; you think your sins
are not so great as other men's, and therefore you think that God will forgive
you; do not deceive your selves with this, God will do with his mercy what he
pleases. What if he will pardon the most notorious gross sins in others, and
damn thee for thy sins in thoughts? what if he will pardon the most notorious
uncleanness and murder in another, and damn thee for a wanton thought? he may
do it, for his mercy is his own: For this take the example of David and Saul
compared together, David committed many sins, but especially those two of
Adultery and Murder, and yet God pardoned him, but Saul committed far less sins
then those, and yet God cast him off for ever; the things on which God laid the
casting off of Saul were these two sins.

1. He did not stay till Samuel came, when Samuel had appointed a time to come,
he deferred it to the last minute, and Saul was in a great strait, he tarried
for him long, and he thought he must not go to war except he offered Sacrifice
before, and he ventured to offer it himself, and did not stay out the full
time; he staid so long till he thought that Samuel would not come, and then
that he did was but to offer Sacrifice to God, and yet God lays this very
thing unto his charge as a cause why he would cast him off. 1 Samuel 13.13.
Samuel tells him that God had thought to establish the Kingdom for ever unto
him, But now he will not; you are gone Saul for this sin: the 2. sin in
Scripture on which God lays his casting off upon is this, God sent him against
the Amalekites, and bad him destroy all, but he spared the fat of the flock,
and the King. Now the sparing of the fat of the flock was done out of a good
intention, he professes it was that the People might have of the fattest to
offer in Sacrifice to God, a good intention and yet for this God tells him,
that he would rend the Kingdom from him, for that thing, 1 Samuel 15.28. True it
is, that though Saul was guilty of other sins, yet if you observe the story,
you shall find that these were the two sins for which God puts the casting
away of Saul upon. And yet David committed murder and adultery, and was not
cast off; why? Why if God will show his prerogative, what has the creature to
reason with him for it, if he will damn Saul for his sins that were less, and
pardon David's that were greater, what have thou to do with that? his mercy is
his own: Thou think it may be because thou could put a man off with this
reason, my sins are small, and therefore I may be forgiven them because they
are not so great as others: Grant it may be so, yet know that it is not so with
God, he may pardon great sins in others, and yet thou may perish eternally
for the least sins of all, and therefore take this for a Conclusion; If thou
have no other ground for the pardon of thy sin; but because they are little
ones; I pronounce in the name of God against thee this day, thy sins are not
pardoned; But stand upon the file, and thou shall externally perish in them, if
thou have no other ground then that, to show for the pardon of them; and
therefore never make that an argument, that they are pardoned, because they are
less then others.

Plea.
Secondly, Others it may be will plead, my sins are not many; we are all
sinners, but I have not multiplied and increased my sins as others have done. I
shall answer to that briefly, know that one sin is enough to damn thee, Answ.
as fully as a Million of transgressions reiterated again, and again; One chain
is enough to hold thee in everlasting darkness, and God may damn thee for one
sin, as well as for never so many thousands, as you have heard, he did the
Angels for their first, and but one sin; and therefore though thy sins are not
many, that is no argument at all. Further, we may observe in the way of Gods
pardoning mercy; he pardons some that have gone a long time on in their sins,
and makes quick work with others that have been but a little time in sin, and
that we may see in the example of Manasses and Amon; compare those two
together, in the example of Manasses you shall find that he reigned some 55
years; he was a notorious vile sinner against God; and yet he reigned a long
time in it, his conversion was but late. 2 Kings 21.1. He was 12. years old,
when he began to reign, and he reigned 55. years in Jerusalem; and almost all
this time he went on in committing most notorious abominations, and yet God
pardoned him. But now mark, his Son Amon comes after him, and perhaps he might
reason thus, my Father lived thus and thus, and for a long time had his lust
and desires, and why may not I venture to do as my Father did; and so he went
on in his Fathers wickedness; but now mark, God comes presently upon him, and
lets him live but two years, and there is an end of him. Manasses continued 55.
years, and his Son comes after him, and he would go on in his Fathers steps,
and God presently cut him off; so though some may continue in whoredom, and in
other abominations, and perhaps live in Outward prosperity many years, 40 or 50
years, yet God may pass them by, and then if thou sinn'st after their example,
he may come upon thee for the first or second act, cut the off, and send thee
down presently to Hell; and therefore do not say, my sins are but few, and
therefore God will pass them by, that is no argument at all.

Thirdly, The third false ground that others apprehend their sins are pardoned
is this, because the guilt of them does not lie upon their Consciences; they
think they are not guilty of their sins, and say, they were committed a great
while ago, and a long time has past, and they heard not of them; and therefore
they think they shall never hear of them more, God has quite past them over,
because they were committed a long time since, and they have not heard of them.
Answ. Do not deceive your selves in this, for the sins that you have committed
twenty, forty, or sixty years ago, though thou never heard'st of them since,
it is no argument that they are pardoned; for they may be on the file in
Heaven, stand there upon Record, and lie as a debt against you all, though they
were committed eighty years ago; it is no argument a Malefactor is pardoned,
because the Assize is not to morrow, or next day; it is true, God will have his
Assize for some sooner; but for you he has reserved it till another time; and
therefore it is you hear not of you sins, Exodus 32.34. In the day when I visit,
I will visit their sin upon them: God has his day, and perhaps his day is not
come to visit; and therefore thou think thou art discharged, because the day
of Gods Visitation is not come to thee. And Secondly, know further, that though
thy sins were committed a great while since, yet in regard of Gods Eternity,
they are to him as if they were committed this morning before thou came to
the Assembly, although you committed them forty or fifty years ago, yet to God
they are but as a sin committed yesterday; it may be you think your Consciences
would fly in your faces, if you were drunk yesternight, and should come to the
Sacrament this morning; and certainly he must be a desperate wretch, a
monstrous notorious villain, that should dare to come to the Sacrament this
morning that was drunk the last night, the last week, and never made his peace
with God, his Conscience may fly in his face if he were not a Monster: but now,
your sins that were committed forty or fifty years ago, know they are to God
as if they were committed but this morning; for Gods eternity consists not in
passing and coming; but in this, that there is no succession with God, no time
past, nor time to come with God; all time to God is as a perpetual now: and
therefore all thy sins that thou have committed in time past, is in the eye of
God as if they were committed this very hour; there is a great deal of need to
understand this rightly, for the humbling of men and women, by causing them to
look back upon their sins, and to lay them to heart; for they are thus
presented before God, as if they were committed this very moment, Job 14.16,
17. Do thou not watch over my sin? my transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou sowest up mine iniquity: God watches over your sins, and will come
upon you for them; they are sealed up in a bag: sometimes when I have seen the
Clerk of the Assizes draw out his Indictments, such a one for murder, and such
a one for Felony; it put me in mind of this Text; those Indictments against men
were put up in the Clerk of the Assizes bag, it may be a good while before: and
now at the Assizes they are drawn out and read openly in the face of the Court;
so are thy sins all put in a bag, and God in the day of Visitation he pulls
them out, and reads them openly before Men and Angels. We have an example in
Scripture, how God did come on men for sins committed a long while before, as
the example of Joseph's Brethren, who sold him, and after this they went on and
never heard of it till a long time after; it appears not that their Consciences
were troubled till two and twenty years after they had committed that sin; till
they came into Egypt, and were in affliction, and then their Consciences began
to fly in their faces; for the sin they committed against their Brother: Joseph
was seventeen years old when he was sold, and when he stood before Pharaoh he
was thirty, there is thirteen years; and then seven years of plenty, and two
years of famine before they came into Egypt; there is two and twenty years,
before their Consciences did fly in their faces for their sin against their
Brother: Take heed what you do; for the sins of your youth may be a torment to
your old age: it may be you little think of it; but remember, when you are old
God may come and reckon with you for the sins of your youth: it is and should be
a great argument to make people to take heed of sin; for those sins thou
committest now may do thee a mischief forty or sixty years hence; as in the
natural body, many young men though they feel no distempers in their bodies for
the present, and so care not for their diet, nor how to avoid Surfits: yet
after they grow old, then they feel their distempers in their joints and bones,
which is no other than their drunkenness and intemperance when they were young;
so it is in regard of the soul, many in their younger years do greatly follow
after wickedness, and because they hear not of it, they go away and never are
troubled; but afterward in their old age, God comes upon them for the sins of
their youth: Joab when he was young committed sin, but when his hoary head was
on him, God then came to him in wrath for it; and therefore think not all thy
sins are pardoned, because it is a great while ago since they were committed;
but rather reckon up thy former sins and bewail them, and do not rest on this
ground, because it is long since they were committed, it is not to be built upon,
you must look for other grounds, or else you are undone for ever, for this will
certainly fail you.

Fourthly, Others reason that God has pardoned their sins, not only because
they have been committed a great while ago; but they have had prosperity, it
has been well with them, and God has done them good; and certainly if God had
not pardoned their sins, God would never have let them thrive; I shall speak
but little to this, for these reasonings are very vain, (there are others I
shall more insist upon; know this, thou make it an argument of Gods pardoning
mercy, it may rather be an argument of Gods eternal curse, for God to suffer a
man to prosper much after great sins committed, it is a sign that God has
given that man over to hardness of heart, which is the most dreadful curse in
the world; after God had rejected Saul, 1 Samuel 14, 15. Chapters you may read
Saul had a great deal of success in his way immediately after God had cast him
off; so though God have cast off a man or a woman, yet that man or woman may
have much success in their way; you that are Mariners, you cannot draw an
argument, that because you have had a good Voyage, and have past such dangers,
(though you have committed many sins,) that God is at peace with you, and that
all your faults are past over; no, you may have many good successes in in your
Voyages, and yet perish at length for the sins you have committed in your
Voyages; and so you may have good success, as Saul had good success in war, and
yet was cast off for all that.

Fifthly, Others say, we are not so vain to make outward prosperity an argument
or ground that our sins are pardoned: but we sorrow for sin, repent of them,
and turn from them, and rely on Gods mercy through Christ that our sins are
pardoned, these are arguments of a higher nature than the former; and if there
be true sorrow, unfaigned repentance, reformation, and a trusting in Gods mercy
through Jesus Christ, they will be good arguments indeed: but now I shall show
you there may be all these, and yet sin not pardoned; yea a relying on Christ
at least, so as people may think they rely upon Christ, and yet not sin
pardoned.

1. Though these things we mentioned last may seem to be hard, yet the trial of
them is a very safe and wholesome thing, because if you mistake in this, you are
undone; you will examine Evidences for your Houses and Lands; do so in the
great matters between God and your souls: And for sorrow for sin, I shall make
it plain, there may be a great deal of sorrow for sin, and yet sin not
pardoned; you know the example of Ahab, 1 King. 21.27, to 29. verses, And it
came to pass when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put
sackcloath upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloath and went softly;
when God did but send the Prophet to tell him of his sin, presently upon the
Prophets words he rent his clothes, which was a sign of extreme sorrow in those
times, and then he put on Sackcloath: he put off his Princely Robes, his brave
Apparel, and put on Sackcloath, and that not for an outward garment, but upon
his flesh, and then fasted and lay in Sackcloath, and went softly as a dejected
man: the pride and stoutness of his heart seemed to be so much abated, that God
takes notice of it in the 29. verse, See thou how Ahab humbles himself
before me; and because he did so, the judgment was deferred for a while; yet
certainly Ahab's sin was not, or ever should be pardoned, though he put on
Sackcloath and humbled himself before the Lord: I appeal unto you this morning,
Are not many of you hoping for pardon of sin, and yet come far short of Ahab?
all you do in your repentance, is to say, God be merciful unto me, I am sorry,
Lord forgive me, and there is an end, all is done presently; but Ahab went a
great deal further, and yet his sin was not pardoned: Take the example of Esau,
you know what the Scripture says of him, He sought the blessing with tears, and
yet found no place for repentance; and in being rejected of the blessing, it
was a type of his rejection of Heaven; some carry it thus, to prove there may
be tears, and yet no true repentance, that is a truth; Esau was very much
troubled, and shed many tears, and yet there was no true repentance: but I
rather take the meaning of the Text thus; he found no place of repentance in
his Father Isaac; his Father Isaac had given the blessing to Jacob, and would
not call it back, though he sought it with tears; there was no place for Isaac
to recall it any more, though he shed many tears, yet he went without it; so
that there may be much sorrow, and thou may seek the blessing with many
tears, and yet God may be so turned against thee that there will be no place
for repentance, that is, God will not call in that that is out against thee.
And of Judas it is said when he saw Christ was condemned, that he repented; it is
said he did repent, yet Judas was not pardoned; so that you see plainly, there
may be repentance, and yet sin never pardoned: Indeed, true repentance has
ever pardon going along with it; but the Scripture speaks of a repentance that
may be without pardon; therefore when thou say thou repentest, you must not
look upon it so, because you repent, therefore your sins are pardoned, as if
every repentance was true; for thou mistakest in the work of repentance, thou
think this to be repentance to Salvation, for thee to be sorry at the very
heart for thy sins; certainly thou may be sorry at the heart, and yet perish
for all that; I make no question but Judas was sorry at his heart, and wished it
had never been done, and if it were to do again, he would never do it; there is
as much expressed, he repented, and he brought the 30 pieces again; he was not
only sorrowful, but made satisfaction; he brought the money back again that he
had got in a wicked way: and therefore if you think this to be true repentance,
you are mightily mistaken, but wherein is it that we fail? It is not for me now
to enter on the Doctrine of true Repentance, I am to speak of it so far as to
convince men, that it is not a ground for hope of pardon of sin: Mark it, when
it is thus with thee, thou repentest because thou see that sin will bring thee
into danger: Now, thou have had the pleasure or the profit of it, and thou
see now it will bring thee into trouble and danger, thou art sorry that ever
thou did it: certainly, if God would be satisfied with such kind of sorrow,
he might have enough of it in Hell; for there is yelling and sorrow, because of
the troubles that sin has brought upon them: to sorrow because of the trouble
that our sins bring on us is merely natural, and flows from nature it self, and
far from a saving work of repentance; therefore the repentance many hope to
have, What is it? when we tell them of their sins, they say, they hope to
repent; What do they mean? Why? they would take the pleasure of sin, and when
the punishment comes, they would be sorry for it, and repent of it: the
ordinary way to put men off from this plea, is to tell them How do you know you
shall live, or that your hearts shall not be hardened? but suppose you do live,
and that you have a heart to do as you say, yet your repentance may fail you;
if your repentance be no other than that which comes for sorrow of sin, because
of the punishment, it will fail you; certainly that repentance that must go for
current in Heaven is of another nature: possibly I may show afterward what is
true and false sorrow; but for the present I shall show where the mistake lies:
Whosoever therefore that builds their believing of the pardon of their sin
merely on their sorrow, and such kind of sorrow, they are like a man that would
erect a great Building, and lay the foundation of it in a quag-mire, or on the
sand, as the Scripture speaks, when storms come the building falls; I shall
speak hereafter to those that build on the Sand; but these build on a Quagmire,
on a few tears, sorrow and trouble of spirit they have upon the apprehension of
punishment of sin: this building will fall in time of straights and danger; and
this is the reason why people that depend upon sorrow never have peace: for how
can I tell the measure of sorrow I am to have before peace be spoken, and then
if they feel not sorrow, they are questioning again: it is a dangerous thing to
lay the hopes of pardon of sin upon our own sorrows; where or how then shall we
lay our hopes? why, upon the sorrows of Jesus Christ, there you shall find the
surest ground (there may be some mistake there too, but for the present I shall
not stay on that) we must look ten thousand times more at the sorrows of Christ
than at our own sorrows; and therefore when your hearts are troubled, and you
look for mercy, depend more ten thousand times on the sorrows of Christ than on
all your own sorrows; for your sorrows for sin cannot satisfy Gods Justice;
and that that must be a ground of hope for the pardon of my sin, must be
something that must satisfy the justice of God; for though there be never so
much sorrow, yet it will not satisfy Gods justice; and consider further, True
sorrow rather follows the work of Justification then preceds it; as thus, I am
not therefore pardoned because I mourn; but because I am pardoned, therefore I
come to mourn; so stands the Truth in Divinity in point of Justification and
Repentance: you pervert the order, if you think because you mourn, and are a
little sorrowful, that therefore you shall be pardoned; the truth is, if your
mourning and sorrow be a work of true saving grace: you mourn and sorrow
because you are justified; sorrow of true repentance rather flows from pardon,
then pardon from it; when God pardons sin, he lets out the graces of his
Spirit, and then comes sorrow as a fruit or Evidence of Gods pardoning love and
Reconciliation; for though God may give outward favors to a man that is not
pardoned; yet God never gives his Spirit to work any saving grace in the heart
till he is reconciled: it is a fruit of his pardoning grace and favor, and
because he has justified thee, he sends his Spirit to work sorrow and
repentance: Many think Justification flows from sorrow; but thou must come to
sorrow and repentance another way: know that all true sorrow flows from
Justification; all that sorrow before Justification, it is but Legal sorrow,
and reveals something that may hinder the soul from Christ, as sin, and the
terrors of the Law, and the wrath of God; but it does not interest the soul in
Christ; this I affirm as most certain Divinity, that there is no sorrow whereby
any soul is interested and planted in Christ; the sorrow that is wrought in
them before Justification, in order of nature, may be a means to bring them to
God, and make them enquire after Christ, and stir up their hearts to take away
those things that do hinder from Christ; but it does not interest the soul in
Christ: you do not understand the way of the Gospel, if you think that sorrow
interests the soul in Christ; no, that must be by faith laying hold on him for
Justification, and then comes sorrow of repentance after; thou may see thy
self an undone wretch for sin, and lost for ever, and nothing in the world can
quiet thee; all this may be by the work of the Law: but then God comes and
shows thee his grace in Christ, and enables thee to close with it for
Justification, and then comes in Evangelical sorrow, mourning and melting
sorrow more than ever before: but now it comes in another way from the Spirit
of God melting the soul, because it has sinned against Jesus Christ, who has
so graciously appeared to it in his pardoning mercy to the soul; so that now
you sorrow because you are pardoned, for it comes as a fruit of faith laying
hold of the pardoning grace of God; and then there is no such argument in the
world to melt the heart with sorrow, as when faith tells the soul that sin is
pardoned; and though thy sorrow was little before, and now is greater, thou
need'st not be troubled, if God make thy humiliations greater for sin after the
knowledge of thy pardon; for the revelation of Gods grace in the pardon of thy
sin, is the most excellent means to humble the soul in the world: the sorrows
of Gods Children after pardon, as they work on their own hearts so on Gods
heart too; God is mightily taken with it: when once thy sins are pardoned, then
God makes thy heart melt to him as his does to thee: but the sorrow of one that
is an Enemy to God does not soften Gods heart; there is a great deal of
difference between the sorrow of Gods Children, and the sorrow of others; they
make sorrow the ground of pardon, this God accepts not: it is true, you may
sorrow for sin, because it may be a means to bring you to Christ; but that that
justifies the soul is Union with Christ by Faith, and all that sorrow that
works Repentance to Salvation flows, from Gods grace in Christ, having
justified you. Justification is the first thing that estates thee in
blessedness; sorrow does not first state thee in a blessed condition, but is
merely a fruit of that blessedness thou art stated in: certainly these things
are the Truths of God; so that when you look for blessedness any other way, you
look for it merely in a natural way, or as a Heathen may do; a Heathen knows he
ought not to offend God, and he knows he had need to have mercy from God, and
that he ought to be sorrowful for his sins; I might give you many examples for
it, but I must hasten: those then that seek after pardon of sin this way, do
but seek for it merely in a natural way.

Secondly, Others say, I am not only sorry for my sins, but I reform; and is
not this a ground of pardon? Know likewise, that there may be a leaving of sin,
and yet sin not pardoned; for that take the example of Herod, it is said, He
heard John Baptist gladly, and reformed in many things; he was a great deal the
better for John's Ministry, and yet Herod was not pardoned: this is a notable
example for you that come to hear Sermons, and seem to be much affected, let me
ask you in the Name of God, and let Conscience answer, What is it you reformed
since you heard all those Sermons of the Evil of Sin, and now of the Pardon of
Sin? What Evils have you reformed in your families, and in your own hearts? I
cannot but hope that many of you may say, through grace these and these evils
were in my family before, but now I have reformed them; and these evils I did
before, but now I have left them; I hope many can say so, and blessed be God
for this fruit of our Ministry if any thing be reformed, if Sabbaths be better
kept, and Duties in family set up, and private Exercises of Religion performed;
that you are not so proud, passionate, and froward as before: O that it may be
said so, it is worth our labor to restrain sin, that God may not be so much
dishonored, if there were no more done: but we preach for further and higher
ends, that souls would not stay in reforming; for Herod heard John Baptist, and
did many things; and Judas cast away the money, he repented and would not keep
the money, there was a kind of reformation in both Herod and Judas; but this is
no ground to build upon for pardon of sin; As those that depended on their
sorrow for pardon, built on the quagmire; so those that depend on their
reformation, build upon the sand; the one by his sorrow and trouble for sin,
seems as it were to be in the work of humiliation, is like a man that digs deep
for a foundation, but does not cast out the old mould, but builds upon it; the
other seems like one that not only digs deep, but casts out the old rubbish,
and brings in new mould, new earth: lays by and casts away his former sins, and
does the contrary good; but now, though they go further than the former in
casting out the old rubbish, and bringing in of new earth, yet after all this
is done they build upon it, and do not build upon the Rock Christ; they bring
in the new earth of their own Performances and Duties, and this they build
upon, and do not build upon the Rock Christ for the pardon of their sins, and
Justification of their souls before God, and here they fail, and this is their
undoing, their mistake in this; and yet it is most sure, that every one of us
would mistake in this; if God did not reveal in the Gospel another way to
receive Pardon and Justification in his Son, we should certainly all of us rest
here, and go no further; no man or woman in the world, that never heard the
Gospel went further than this, and so far one may go without the Gospel; we may
dig deep, cast out the old rubbish, and bring in new earth; this we may do, and
not hear of the Gospel: And therefore we have a great deal of cause to bless
God that we may hear the mysteries of the Gospel opened unto us; for certainly
we should else go no further, and if we go no further, we should certainly
perish; and therefore if we go but thus far, it is not building on the Rock
Christ; hence the ground and bottom of faith for Justification cannot be in
Reformation, or in any thing in the creature, it must be in something above and
without us, and yet by faith, (wrought in us) though without us; I mean the
Rock Christ, and the Foundation that is laid for the forgiveness of our sin in
Christ, that must be the Foundation of our faith, and not in what we do our
selves: For

1. Know, that all Reformation in the world will not satisfy for the evil that
you have done for the time past; this I would convince you of, and be you
willing to hear it, it may be of great use unto you; when we preach Christ and
free grace, it is to bring you to Christ; our preaching down of works is not to
keep you from doing of them, but from resting in them: that which I aim at, is
to bring you into an enquiring frame of spirit, a restless condition, that so
we may bring you to that which is the true rest; and we shall be as glad to
bring you into the true rest, as now to bring you into restlesness: Know, all
Reformations for time to come, will not satisfy God for time past, it will
not: amongst men, if you have run into arrearages with your Landlord for Rent,
and you bring him a quarters Rent when there is three or four quarters behind,
or may be two or three years, if you should think to pay the Rent of two or
three years with bringing the last quarter, it would be accounted a foolish
conceit; so would it be, if with God you should think the duties you do at
present, should satisfy for all the arrearages you have run into for time
past: you do not understand Gods way, if you think that God will be satisfied
for all that is past by what you do at the present: Suppose what you do now
were perfect, and for all time to come you never committed one sin against God
any more, yet all this would not satisfy for time past, this looks but at time
to come, and does not at all take off any thing for the time past: Besides, you
may see matter enough in your best Reformations for God to condemn you, not
only for your former sins, but sins in your reforming; but if there were no sin
in that, that would be no satisfaction for that which is past: Mark this, That
which must be the ground of the pardon of thy sin, must be that that must
satisfy for thy sin past, and for all thy sins to come; and that was opened
unto you in opening the mysteries of godliness in the Pardon and Justification
of a Sinner.

2. Know this, that God accepts of duties, not for the duties themselves, but
because he accepts of the person that performs them; God does not accept of the
duties, and then of the person, that is not Gods way: but he accepts first of
the person, and then of the actions: God never accepts of what we do, till he
accepts of our persons; As Abel, God had regard to Abel 's person first, and
then to his offerings; so God has first regard to the person of any man, and
then to his Offerings: thou think thou art a poor wretched creature, and
then thou think it may be, if I had such and such parts, and could do thus
and thus, then God would accept of me; I tell thee, all thy parts and
performances are cast away, till God accept of thy person; St. Paul was
blameless according to the Law, and yet he accounted all loss for Christ; for
he knew, that when God revealed the Gospel to him, that he could not be
accepted for his righteousness; but his person must first be accepted, and then
his righteousness: So that the way of new Obedience, and the work of
Sanctification, are the qualifications of the man that is justified; but not
the conditions required for the Justification of his person; it is not that that
justifies the soul, the Justification of the soul comes not through these, but
these flow from Justification; and until a soul understands this, he never
rightly performs duties. Therefore further, to conclude this, though good Works
and new Obedience are good Nurses unto Faith; yet if you make these the Mother
of your Faith, your faith is but a Bastard faith; these are not the right
Mother of Faith: if your faith be begotten out of your Duties and Performances,
and your faith have no other Mother than these, then your faith is
illegitimate, and not true born, it has not the right Mother; The right Mother
of Faith, is the manifestation of the freeness of Gods grace in the Covenant of
the Gospel, showed unto the Soul through the mediation of the Son of God: this
laid open to the eye of the soul, by the mighty work of the Spirit of God,
raises and creates faith in the soul; this is the generation of true saving
faith, the faith of Gods Elect, as the Scripture speaks; Duties and
Performances cannot be the Mother of it; it is of a higher birth than that
birth that arises out of Parts, Duties, or Performances whatsoever; thy faith
will not inherit, if it be base born: through faith we come to inherit the
Promises; and if thy faith has no other foundation than thy sorrows and
reformation, thy faith is illegitimate, and not that that shall inherit; it is
not of the right kind that will bring thee unto Salvation: thus you see what
mistakes there may be in this great Point of the Justification of a Sinner, and
in being made blessed; and therefore we had need look to it to be sure, that
what we rest upon will hold, least when we come to lay claim, and make
challenge of blessedness, our hold deceive us: Many think the main matters of
Religion to be nothing but believing in Jesus Christ, and crying God mercy: you
see by these things that I have spoken, that there had need be much workings of
spirit in the way of Religion, and mighty strong teachings of the Holy Ghost to
lead the soul; for there may be many mistakes, and to prevent and remove those
mistakes that lie in the way to get peace with God, it is a matter of great
concernment, and not a slight business to be done suddenly.

3. Others say, we trust in the mercy of God, and in this I am to speak to two
sorts. First, Those that are most grossly ignorant, that have no other ground to
hope for pardon of sin, but because they hear that God is a merciful God: Know
thus much, that notwithstanding what you hear of God, that he is merciful, and
not willing that men should perish: yet the Scripture reveals clearly to us,
that notwithstanding God is gracious and merciful, yet the greatest part of the
world perish in their sins; there is nothing more clear then this, that most
people in the world do perish; and therefore to say God is merciful, is not
enough; you may be sorry for sin, reform, and say, God is merciful, and yet
perish: if these three were enough, what needed the son of God to come, and
take our nature upon him, and be made a curse for Man's sin, lay down his life,
and shed his precious blood, why might not these three have been joined
together, and so Christ never have come? for though Christ had never come, I
might have been sorrowful, and I might have reformed and said God is merciful,
though Christ had never come: those that never knew Christ, nor heard of him
yet, they may be sorrowful, reform, and say God is merciful. I beseech you
consider this note, I can never be pardoned and saved, in such a way, as it
might be done, though Christ had never come; I can then never be pardoned and
saved by all the means I take for pardon and Salvation, if those things might
be done though Christ had never come; and if you have nothing else but them to
rest upon, then you can never be saved; put this to your hearts, what have I
wrought in my heart, that I might not have had, if Christ had not come into the
world; certainly the most things that most people have to rest upon, for pardon
and salvation; they might have had though Christ had never come into the world.
Further, Thou say God is merciful, True, the mercy of God is sweet and a
blessed argument, and our souls much delight to open the grace and mercy of
God; and I have endeavored to open to you what is revealed in the Gospel; yet
Gods mercy is free, though he delight to glorify his mercy: and he has
thousand thousands of Subjects, to glorify his mercy in, though thou perish
eternally. Though thou perish eternally, yet God may be glorious in the
blessedness of his mercy: God has others to magnify his mercy unto besides
thee: a beggar comes and asks an alms of a man, and he gives him none, that is
not an argument the man is not merciful, for he has other objects, that are
more suitable and fit; though he give not to every one, it is no dishonor to his
compassion; so it is with God, he has thousands of objects to bestow his mercy
on; though thou perish. Further, Thou say God is merciful, and thererefore
thou hop'st for pardon: Why? God is and has been merciful to thee beyond all
that thou can conceive, God has showed his mercy to thee already: thou say
God is merciful, true, or else thou had not been alive at this present: that
thou should hear and see, and have all thy members whole, and the use of all
thy senses, and that thou should stand here this day under the means of
grace, and that thou should hear God call on thee to repent, and believe in
his Son, while thou walk'st on in thy sin, and art dead in sins and trespasses:
he sends his son and spirit to thee, to tell thee that he would rescue thee,
and give life unto thee; again, is not here rich mercy, perhaps thou have had
thy portion of mercy already, that God intends for thee, yea so much mercy,
that all the Angels and saints will give acclamations to God, for that mercy
thou have had, though thou perish; God has many ways showed mercy to thee, in
so much as that the very devils themselves will acknowledge that God was very
good to his poor creatures.

Further, Thou speak of mercy; have not thou abused and turned mercy into
wantonness? perhaps the mercy thou speakst of, now is at this very present
pleading to God against thee; saying, how have I been abused by this wretched
man? the more my beauty and excellency has been displayed, the more wicked he
has grown; what if mercy be now pleading against thee? even those mercies that
thou have abused; and therefore thou had need to look for somewhat else to
settle thy soul upon then this, to say that God is merciful; this is to the
first sort, those that are grossly Ignorant.

Secondly, There are others that mourn, pray and reform, and then have some
kind of relyance on God to pardon them, for his mercies sake; and therefore to
them I shall say thus much: Know, the mercy of God must be received after Gods
own way; he has appointed the communications of it, and so it must be
received; otherwise it can never attain to such an effect as the pardon of thy
sin; note this, that all the mercy in God considered, as he is creator of
Heaven and Earth, and not let out through the Mediator Christ Jesus God-man it
never wrought to the pardon of any one sin, and therefore if you look upon the
mercy of God, and do not look to the right way of the conveyance of it, you may
most dangerously mistake: The ground and bottom of faith, that justifies is not
merely to cast ones self on the mercy of God, (for there is none, but in a
natural way know that God is a merciful God) but the main ground of
Justification, or of justifying faith, is the free grace of God through Jesus
Christ; That God is merciful through a Mediator: Otherwise the ground of your
faith is but on a mere confused notion of the mercy of God, which will
certainly fail you; a heathen may have as much to be the ground of his faith,
that the great creator of Heaven and Earth, pitties those that are in misery,
and I am a poor creature in misery; I Will cry to him, and i will reform my life, and
i will rely on him; thus far a heathen may go: but the ground and bottom of faith
is not the mercy of God in general, but the mercy of God in and through a
Mediator; observe a little further, the ground of justifying faith is not thus,
that God for Christ's sake will forgive me for what Christ has done to purchase
my pardon, but there is another work of faith in the souls of believers, though
the soul apprehend it not; it is not the work of faith in justification, to
believe that Christ has paid so much as my debt comes to; but thus, the work
of faith is to bring the soul unto Christ, and to pitch it upon the person of
Christ, to be made mine first, and then the righteousness of Christ to be mine:
It Is not thus, I believe this is my debt, and there is so much money to pay it;
but this is the work of faith, to bring thee to be married to such a person;
and so the debt is transacted on him to whom thou art married, and he will
discharge the debt, because thou art married to him; so that the ground of
faith is not to look unto God merely through his son that so I may have pardon;
but thus, I must come to have Christ to be mine; I must be married with Christ,
and so through my union with the person of Christ, I come to have all that
Christ has done and suffered to be made over to me; and therefore when I come
to look upon the riches of the grace of God in the mediation of his son; I must
come with an eye of faith, to be married unto Christ, and Christ with me, the
riches of Gods grace in Christ was opened before; we now make use of it as a
trial to show the danger of false grounds in relying upon God for pardon.

Further, Though it be through the mercy of God to pardon sin; yet it does not
work thus, viz. You have sinned, and my law requires such and such obedience,
to be performed on such terms, or else you must perish, but I through my mercy
will remit something of the rigor and strictness of the Law: And most people
confess, that by the strictness of the Law they are condemned, but they hope
the mercy of God will grant some remission of the Law; as it is with men, if
all Penal statutes should be executed it would be very hard; but there is a
Chancery to abate something of the rigor, and strictness of penal statutes;
and thus men think to come to have pardon, and deal with God after the manner
of men; you think the crying to God for mercy will abate something of the
strictness, and severity of the Law; but you mistake in taking this way to get
peace and reconciliation with God; to look upon Gods mercy to lie in this, to
remit something of the strictness and severity of the Law: No but the work of
Gods mercy lies in this, to find out a surety for you, and to transact the
debt upon him.

Further, Consider the work of Gods mercy in justification of a sinner, when
faith lays hold upon it faith, must not lay hold upon it as a mere single Act;
but look at all the concomitants of the work of Gods grace, in making way for
the justification of a sinner: The mercy of God works many ways, and faith
must exercise it self on Gods grace, according to the multiplicity of the work
of it, in bringing about the justification of a sinner; as thus, you have
sinned and you cry to God for pardon, but the mercy of God does not work thus
to pardon you, as it is a single act, but the mercy of God works thus to mankind.
First, he is pleased to enter into a second covenant with mankind after he had
broken the first. A second work of Gods mercy, is to set his wisdom on work to
find out a way how mankind should be reconciled unto him, and his sin
pardoned, and yet that God should be no looser; this was the work of his
infinite wisdom. And Thirdly, when this is found out, this can be done no other
way, but only through the Son of God taking man's nature upon him, and suffer
for him; then here is the mercy of God, to be willing to send his Son to mediate
for poor creatures; and then a further mercy in giving thy soul to his Son; he
sent not his Son that all might be pardoned, but a certain number that God the
Father had given to his Son from all eternity: now there is a great work of Gods
mercy in passing by others, and giving thee to his Son: And further, It is a
work of Gods mercy in the powerful Ministry of the Gospel to reveal this: And
then further, It is a work of Gods mercy to draw thee to close with his Son,
and thereby to unite and marry thee to his Son: And then further, It is a work
of Gods mercy to assure thee of the pardon and justification of thy soul; it is
a great deal more for faith to look upon God in this manner, than to come in
such a way as this; God is merciful, and I trust in his grace that he will
pardon me: we mistake mightily about the mercy of God, when we do not look upon
it in an Evangelical way, as it is revealed in the Gospel: Further, know thus
much, that if Gods mercy will work so far for thee, as to pardon thy sin, and
save thy soul: certainly it will work so far as to take away the power of sin,
and let thee not live in the filth of thy sin: Many think Gods mercy will do
great matters hereafter, but nothing now in comparison of what he will do
hereafter; they think he will give them outward blessings now, but keep
spiritual things till hereafter: Certainly this is an infallible truth, If Gods
mercy work not so powerfully here in this world as to bestow spiritual good
things on thee, thou may be assured that it will never work so powerful on
thee as to save thy Soul in the World to come* Can it be thought a Prince
pardons a Malefactor that he shall not be hanged, and yet suffer him to lie in
Prison and rot in the Dungeon? this were but a poor pardon, a half pardon, to
be delivered from the Gallows and rot in the Prison: Certainly, whatever a
Prince may do, God never pardons a sinner so; to show him mercy to save him
from Hell, and yet to lie rotting all his life long in sin; no, God when he
pardons, he delivers and shakes off the fetters; as we shall see further;
therefore thou that say thou hopest in Gods mercy that he will pardon thee;
let me ask, What has he done for thee? if thou think that Gods mercy will
work so strongly hereafter to save thy soul, certainly it will be as strong for
thee here to sanctify thee; if it work not so strong on thee now as to
sanctify thee, certainly it will never work so strongly for thee hereafter as
to save thee.

4. Others say in the last place, we are not only sorry for sin and reform and
trust in Gods mercy, but we rely upon Gods mercy through Christ; and therefore
we hope we shall be pardoned: this I might speak much too; we must rest there,
but there is a mistake there too; the relying on Christ is not relying on him
by acting of some transient thoughts that passes over, but it is an abiding
thing; when men hear there is no way to be saved but by Christ, and they cannot
deny it, and because they are loath to think they are such as cannot be saved,
they are loath to have such ill thoughts of themselves, and hearing this is the
way, and no other, therefore they will persuade themselves that they shall find
mercy through Christ: Now what great work is this so to rely on Christ; the
work of faith is a mighty work, it is not a short transient work, a few
thoughts upon thy heart to be saved by Christ; No* wheresoever faith is right,
and a true reliance on Christ; it is a mighty work of the Spirit of God,
working this grace in raising the soul higher than it self, and carries it
through and above all difficulties: when it brings the soul to rely upon God
there may be great mistakes, when People say, they rely upon Christ; and
therefore take this for conviction, Relying on Christ is not barely to think my
sins are pardoned by Christ, but it is a receiving of Christ, a possessing of
Christ, a coming into Christ, a living in Christ, and a bringing Christ to live
in me; it is eating of the flesh of Christ, and drinking of his blood, and so
finds nourishment and strength from him as really as the body by the meat and
drink it takes; that abides with it, is strengthened by it; so does faith to the
soul: therefore faith is not a slight notion like water running through a Pipe
that leaves nothing behind it; for so the thoughts of most People are; but it
is such a thing, as brings Christ into the soul, and the soul into Christ, and
so feeds and lives upon him; this is relying upon Christ for pardon; so as to
have the concomitants and comforts of pardon continually going along with it:
Now you have heard these things, go away and beseech God to settle things
aright in your souls, say to your hearts, Lord I see that settling of the heart
aright upon Christ for justification and pardon of sin, is another manner of
business then I was aware of, and I am persuaded that if I had died before, I
should certainly have dyed under some of these mistakes; Lord settle my heart
aright in this great business: Do not go away with such thoughts as these, the
Minister speaks of such mistakes, but I hope it is far otherwise; do not
venture to put off what we say with such slight thoughts; when we speak unto
you we speak in the Name of God, and it is a horrible taking of the Name of God
in vain, if we examine not what we say unto you by the Word; And therefore know
you are charged this day in the Name of God to look to it, and examine your
hearts what grounds you go upon for the pardon of your sin, that you may not
mistake; in which we shall give you some further help in laying down some
positive grounds that you may rest upon for the pardon of your sin.

CHAP. XVII. Of the true Evidences of Forgiveness of Sin.
BUt if it be asked, Who are they that have their sins pardoned? surely they
are not many, this Text puts it in the singular number, Blessed is he that has
his sin pardoned, and by that which has been delivered about the mistakes, it
appears there are not very many; but yet some there are, and this is the work
of this day in the Name of the Lord to declare to some poor souls this day
their sins are pardoned; this is the message from the Lord I am to speak to
them; (I hope diverse in this place,) as from Christ, Son and Daughter be of
good comfort, thy sins are pardoned; And blessed is that man and woman that
this day shall hear that joyful sound, in their hearts, and that shall have the
Spirit of God witness unto their spirit; that as I have heard, so I have felt
this day that what signs of forgiveness of sin have been delivered, I have felt
them in my own soul; Well then, What are they? to insist upon them. The

First is that the Apostle gives in Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
Justification consists especially in the remission and pardon of sin: Now the
Holy Ghost says, whom he has, called them he has justified; would you know
that you are justified, and that your sins are pardoned, the Spirit of God
shows you, it is not a note of mine, but it is that which comes from the Holy
Ghost; whom he has called them he has justified; Vocation is a certain
Evidence of Justification; this Vocation or Calling is the second link that
does unite those two links of that golden chain together mentioned in that
place, the first link is the foreknowledge of God, Gods Predestination; and
then there is Vocation the next, after that Justification, and then
Glorification; the first chain in the link is, that God from all Eternity
predestinates some persons to have their sins pardoned; but there is Vocation
comes in between Predestination and Justification, and after that
Glorification: so that while I am giving Evidences of Justification here in
this Text, I shall give Evidences of Predestination and Glorification too; for
these are linkt altogether: Many People look only after Justification, they
hope their sins are pardoned, but they look not to any other link of the chain,
as Calling and Vocation, whom he has called, them he has justified; but the
question then is, What is this Calling? What do you mean by that, how shall we
know whether we be called or no? in 2 Pet. 1.10. he bids them there to give
diligence to make their Calling and Election sure: Mark, as here Predestination
and Calling are put together, so their Calling and Election, says he, Give
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: Election is first sure in
respect of God, but Vocation is first in regard of our selves; make that sure
and then you make Election sure, Justification sure, and Glorification sure
too; then what is Vocation? for answer to the Question, Know, there is an
outward call and an inward call; when God sends the Ministers of the Word to
reveal the Gospel, and the way of Salvation, that is no other but Gods calling
men's souls from the ways of sin and death to come into the ways of life; all
that come to hear the sound of the Gospel preached unto them; let them know,
that is Gods call to sinners to come in and repent; God calls to the Drunkard,
the Unclean person, and all others that live in sin to repent; when you come to
hear the Word God calls you, and God requires of you, as you would have God to
hear your cry when you are calling for mercy in the day of your distress, hear
my call, now I call and cry in the Ministry of the Word; Would you have me to
hear you when you cry to me? do you hear me now I am calling to you: O that
People would understand the Ministry of the Word, that it is the call of God
for sinners to return and repent of their sins, that they would look beyond
man, and know that it is the voice of God by them; and therefore it is a
dangerous thing for People to neglect, resist, or rebel against the Ministry of
the Word; and there is some good hopes that God has some souls in such a place
that he intends everlasting good will unto, where he sends the Ministry of the
Word; God does not use to send the call of the Gospel to a place, but there are
some souls to be called: And therefore

Secondly, Besides the Outward Call, there is an Inward Call, and that is it
the Apostle speaks of: Many have the Outward Call of the Word to Faith and
Repentance, and yet they perish eternally: But those whom God intends to save
and has love to indeed, he comes to them with an Inward Call, and this Inward
Call of God is on this wise: God beholds the poor wretched sinner going on in
the ways of sin, death, and perdition, and he comes to him by a secret and
powerful voice, speaking to his very heart, O Sinner, consider where thou art,
What art thou a doing? Whither art thou a going? What is the end of thy way
like to be? thou art going from God, from happiness and life, to woeful misery
and blackness of darkness, to the infinite gulf of eternal Perdition; O turn,
turn, O sinner out of these vile abominable dangerous ways, or else thou art
undone for ever: Behold, here is the way of life set before thee; behold my Son
sent into the world for the Propitiation of thy sin, and to bring thee into the
ways of godliness, which is the way to eternal life; O turn sinner into these
ways: Now this voice of God calling to the Soul of a man or woman, it comes
with power, it has an over powering strength in it, to prevail upon the heart;
it is much like that secret voice mentioned in Isai. 30.21. And thy Ears shall
hear a word behind thee, saying, this is the way walk in it, when you turn to
the right hand, or to the left; it is a Promise of Gods mercy unto his People to
convert them unto himself; those that were only in an Outward Profession, says
God you shall hear a voice behind you, saying, this is the way, turn in unto
it; and so it is when God calls a sinner from the ways of death and destruction;
such a sinner hears a voice behind him; it may be he has come many times to
Sermons, and heard a voice many times without him and before him; but never
before, a voice within him and behind him, an inward secret voice speaking to
the soul, O sinner turn out of thy sinful ways; Why will thou die and perish
eternally? for God to come thus secretly, and to reason with the soul by a
voice behind it; and it is not bare reasoning, but a voice that has a power and
efficacy from God going along with it, that carries on this work in the soul,
and causes the heart to listen and to yield unto God; when God calls to the
Soul to come into the ways of life, the Soul answers, Lord I come, and with a
trembling frame of heart cries out with Saul at his Conversion, Lord, What will thou have me to do? No more now, what sin will have me to do? and what this and
that; and the other lust will have me to do? No, now I see the ways of Life and
Salvation are the only blessed ways; Now Lord, What would thou have me to
do? Now Salvation is come to that Soul, and Reconciliation with Jesus Christ;
For whom he has called, them he has justified. Observe the efficacy of that
call spoken of in Isai. 30.21. Thine Ears shall hear a word behind thee, etc.
and then follows the fruits of it, and ye shall defile also the covering of thy
graven Images with Silver, and the ornament of thy molten Images of Gold, thou
shall cast them away as a menstruous Cloth; and shall say unto it, get thee
hence; the sins they before lived in was Idolatry, and their hearts were much
taken with their brave Images over-laid with Silver and Gold; but when they
heard the voice behind them, they looked upon those things they so much
delighted in, that was so brave in their eyes before but as menstruous
clothes, which are the most filthiest things that can be, and cast them away
as filthy rags, with indignation, saying, get thee hence; as one that takes a
rag in his hand, and looks on it and sees it all filthy and defiled, presently
he throws it away with abomination, and says, get thee hence; so this is the
call of God, when the Soul hears behind it a secret voice that many hear not;
it may be, many thousands hear the outward voice of the Minister telling them
of the evil of sin, and their abominations, and a poor Servant, or a poor Youth
that stands in the midst of the crowd, he hears a voice behind him that others
do not, a secret voice, (besides the general voice) which is a prevailing
voice, that the soul falls down and yields presently, before he goes out of the
Church, and says, Lord this day thou have convinced me of the evil of sin, and
thou have this day showed me the way of life and salvation, Lord I come unto
thee; though he saw nothing, and though no body else hear that voice, yet there
is a secret voice of God unto the soul; though he stand in the midst of the
crowd and no body else hear it, yet at that instant pardon of sin came to that
soul, and reconciliation by Jesus Christ: now when this comes into the soul, he
will not let such and such sins be there any longer, but says, Get you hence, I
will have no more to do with such and such beloved lusts and Idols that I set
my heart upon, Get thee hence; and those men that God calls to himself,
certainly when they hear this voice behind them, though they now plead for
Idolatry and Superstition, and why should not we do as our forefathers did? yet
if once they come to hear this secret voice of God, and God show them the way
of his Worship in the purity and beauty of it, they will say, get thee hence to
those things as vile things, get ye hence, I will have no more to do with you;
this is the way in the ordinary call of God, and though God sanctify some from
the womb, yet afterward by a mighty work of the Spirit he discovers unto them
what the soul is by nature; there is somewhat like this even in those that are
sanctified from the womb, though God in an extraordinary way draw the soul out
from sin into the ways of life; but generally there are in the ordinary way of
Gods working, these three or four voices calling to the soul. 1. Says God to
the soul, O soul thou art made for God, and for Eternity. 2. O soul thou art
now in the ways of Hell, and of eternal perdition, and must of necessity perish
in it. 3. O soul, behold here are the ways of life and salvation revealed unto
thee, and set before thee in the Gospel of my Son. And lastly, O soul come in,
and thou shall have favor and acceptance in my Son; these are the four voices
in Gods call; I do not say every one hears them plainly and distinctly, yet
they do for the substance of them in the ordinary way of the dispensation of
Gods grace: Every soul that God justifies they are thus called of God, and it is
a prevailing call, that brings them in to submit unto it: Again, concerning
this call of God, because the Scripture speaks much of it, I shall show a
little further; mark it, That soul that once hears the call of God to bring it
into the ways of life, that soul will evermore depend upon Gods call in all
other things; if God has called me out of the ways of death, into the ways of
life in obedience to that call that my soul has yielded too, I shall be
evermore under the power of Gods call in all other things, let God call me to
what he will, to what service he pleases, to whatsoever difficulties and
sufferings he shall think meet, my soul is content, and says, Here I am, Lord
speak, thy servant hears. Now for a soul to be so under God, as to wait upon
the call of God to any duty, service, and employment, that it dares not go
about any thing but according to the call of God; this is a good Evidence that
such a soul has been acquainted with that great call of God, that powerful
call of God to bring him off from the ways of sin into the ways of life and
salvation. Further, those that have been acquainted with this call of God,
there is an answerable frame and disposition in their hearts, to call upon the
Name of God for assistance, direction, and a blessing on all they undertake;
they delight now to repair unto God and call upon him; as God calls unto them,
so they call unto him; for that is the way of God according to his work in the
soul, he puts a gracious frame into the soul answerable to it: As in Election,
those whom he elects, when God calls them home he puts a gracious disposition
in their hearts for to elect him; as God chooses the soul from the world, so
the soul chooses God above all things in the world, the soul answers to God:
God sets his heart on the soul, and says, I will choose thee for me; the soul
again sets its heart upon God, and says, I will choose thee for my God; as God
calls the soul to come and live to him in the ways of grace, while he lives in
this world; so the soul calls on God for his assistance, that he would give his
help in unto him on all occasions; and therefore the Scripture gives us this
expression for the whole worship of God, Romans 10.13. Whosoever calls on the
Name of the Lord shall be saved; that soul that is acquainted with Gods call,
that soul calls on God again: And by the way, those that are thus called, are
fittest for Church Communion; I mention this, because the word translated
Church comes from a Greek word that signifies to call out; that which in
Scripture is usually called a Church, signifies nothing else but this, a
Company of People called out of the ways of sin to the embracing the ways of
Godliness; so that the Church should consist of People called out of the ways
of sin, by the powerful and efficacious voice of the Spirit of God; and they
that are thus called have their sins pardoned; you say, you hope God has
justified you; you read what God says, and what has been presented unto you;
they who are called they are justified; then Calling, in order of nature, goes
before Justification; this you will find in your own hearts, and if not, this
you must do, when ever you come before God to hear the outward call, you must
come with a waiting frame of heart to hear the inward call, and call upon God
with such a disposition; say, Lord I have been taught that there is an outward
call of thine in the Word, and an inward call, and I am going this day to hear
thy Word calling me out of the ways of sin, O that I might have together with
that the inward call of thy Spirit, when shall I hear that secret voice; this
is the reason, though I have been convinced many times at the hearing of the
Word, yet my sin has prevailed against me, because that inward secret powerful
voice has not come to my soul; that is the first Evidence, whom he has
justified, them he has called. A

Second Evidence is this, Whomsoever God pardons he receives into Covenant with
himself; all pardoned sinners are Covenanters with God: God pardons no soul but
such an one as he brings into the Bond of the Covenant with himself, that is
the way of the conveyance of the grace of God for the pardon of sin, to bring
the soul into the Bonds of the Covenant; the Scripture is evident in this, that
forgiveness of sin is made a special fruit of the New Covenant, that is clear
enough, Jer. 31.33. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
New Covenant with the House of Israel, etc. what is the special end of that
Covenant, I will forgive their Iniquities, and remember their sins no more; But
how does that come in? it comes in by way of Covenant, I will make a New
Covenant; I will first receive them into Covenant, and then they shall have the
fruit of this New Covenant, that their sins shall be forgiven, and their
iniquities remembered no more: The New Covenant is a mystery to most people,
and yet it is a certain truth, the pardon of thy sin, and thy eternal good
depends upon it; thou art one that God has brought into Covenant with himself,
if thou be or ever shall be pardoned, as God will manifest to thy soul, that
he has through his Son tied and bound himself to thee to be thy God, that
whereas before thou were departed from him, and an enemy to him, yet now he is
pleased to call thee to enter into a second Covenant after thou had broken
the first, and were cast off by reason of that breach, God is contented to
enter into a second Covenant with thee, to be thy God in and through his Son;
thou art to come in and join in this Covenant; for to a full Covenant there
must be assent on both sides, there must be a mutual engagement of either
parties; when God reveals this to thy soul, that though thou be by nature an
Enemy to me, and have broken the first Covenant that I made with the Children
of men, and art cast off, yet be it known unto thee O thou wretched soul, I am
content to enter into another Covenant with thee; there is a second Covenant
for life and salvation that I have made with poor man through my Son, and I
require that thou should come in, and give up thy self in an everlasting
Covenant to make me to be thy God, and to close with me and my Son in
whatsoever I call thee to, in whatsoever thou have or can do to give up thy
self to the power of me and my Son; this thou must engage and tie thy self
unto, in the strongest Bonds that can be; this is the nature of the Covenant:
we know there were two Covenants, and all the good of mankind in the first
Covenant depended on this, his closing with the terms of it: Now the terms of
the first Covenant was, Do this and live; but that is broken, and we have lost
our ability: Now the second Covenant is, Believe and live; and the soul that
God pardons, he brings into the Bond of the second Covenant; it is brought to
come and give it self up to the Lord, and to be content to bind it self with
all bonds unto God, that he and he only shall be my God, as I desire him to be
mine, and his grace and mercy to be mine; so all that I have or can do, shall
be his; I surrender up my self, and engage my soul to be his for ever, my
Estate, Abilities, whatever I have, or can do, shall be his: Now put this to
your own souls, you hope your sins are pardoned: But has God brought you into
the Bonds of the Covenant? Has God engaged himself to you by his Word, to be
your God? and on the other side, Are your hearts engaged to him by the
strongest Bonds that can be; and if there be any other Bonds that are stronger
to tie your souls to God; Can your souls say, the Lord knows I am content and
willing to be engaged; and that you will account it your happiness to be tied
in the strongest Bonds that can be? if it be so with thee? Now peace be to thy
soul, thy sins are pardoned: as on the one side, God has made a Covenant with
thee, so on the other side he has brought thee to be in Covenant with him;
then be of good comfort, thy sins are pardoned.

Thirdly, Those whose sins God has pardoned, he has translated them into the
Kingdom of his Son; the Scriptures express these things diverse ways, and they
have a diverse consideration in them: Now I ground this note out of Col. 1, 13,
14. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son; mark what follows, In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood the forgiveness of sins; forgiveness of sin is the end of
Gods translating of us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in giving Redemption
through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sin; so that whosoever God has
given Redemption to through the Blood of Christ, even the forgiveness of sin,
that is, forgiveness of sin being the special part of the Redemption we have by
the blood of Christ, such an one is translated into the Kingdom of the dear Son
of God; What is that you will say?

1. This notes a great change that there must be upon those that are pardoned,
because the Scripture expresses it thus, they are translated into another
Kingdom, a Kingdom of the Son of God, the dear Son of God; it is dear mercy of
God that translates a soul into the Kingdom of his dear Son; it seems naturally
we are in another Kingdom, and have another King besides the Son of God, and
have another Sovereign; it is certain we are so naturally, we are under the
power of Satan, and in his Kingdom; but now when God comes to redeem a soul,
and grant forgiveness of sin, he translates out of that Kingdom, and such a
soul refuses to be a subject to Satan any longer, or a servant to his lust any
longer: but now Christ shall be my King, the Son of God by whom I expect
Reconciliation, he shall be my King, and his Laws shall rule in my heart, and
his Scepter shall sway in my soul; now no more shall my own thoughts, counsels,
opinions, will, and affections rule me, but Jesus Christ shall be set up upon
the throne of my soul, and he shall be my King; I before was led (a poor vile
ignorant wretch) by the customs of others, and example of others, and what they
required of me by their laws in the matters of his worship; but now Christ
shall be my King, I will expect my law from him; and all obedience I do to man,
it shall be in order to this Christ my King; this is a translation into the
Kingdom of God, when the soul feels the power of Christ ruling in him, and
overswaying him, and the soul looks up to Christ for its protection and
provision, and desires above all things in the world, to set up Jesus Christ as
his King in all the ways of his Government, both in his own heart, and the
world too, and longs to hear that voice, when it shall be said, The Kingdoms of
this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever: Thus those that have redempt on through the
blood of Christ, even the forgiveness of sins, they are translated into the
Kingdom of his dear Son; and as the Scripture speaks, They have the Kingdom of
God within them; that is an expression of the Holy Ghost in the Gospel. Now
this you are to examine your hearts upon; What of the Kingdom of Christ you
have within you? Do you live and walk as one that has the Kingdom of Christ
within you? Is Christ as King and Sovereign over your thoughts, words and
actions? And do you look to him for the law of your thoughts, words and
actions, and walk before him as your Sovereign Lord, depending on him to know
his will continually, and fear and honor him as a King: If the Kingdom of
Christ be in you, that is, if the Gospel have an effectual work upon you; for
the Gospel in the power of it is ordinarily expressed by the Kingdom of Heaven;
when the Word comes to any place, the Kingdom of Heaven is said to come; it
would take up a great deal of time, to show wherein the Holy Ghost calls the
Gospel the Kingdom of Heaven; but it is called the Kingdom of Heaven, because
it is the Kingdom of Christ that is Lord from Heaven, and Christ rules in it by
the preaching of the Gospel: But now, though it be the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Kingly power of Christ be in the preaching of the Gospel, yet this does not
prevail upon all sorts; it is like a net that is cast into the Sea, the meaning
of it seems to be nothing else, but that the preaching of the Gospel among a
multitude of People, is like a net cast into the Sea, wherein some are caught,
and others remain worldly, filthy, and good for nothing, that is the meaning of
the Text, and not any warrant at all for mixed Communions; but only thus; where
the Preaching of the Gospel is, there are some fishes good and worthy to be
received, and others that are to be cast out: Now, as there is an external
Kingdom, so there is an internal Kingdom of Christ within our hearts; Jesus
Christ himself sets up his Throne in the hearts of every man and woman whose
sins are pardoned, that is a certain truth; and this day in the Name of God I
pronounce unto you, that if your sin be pardoned, Jesus Christ has set up his
Throne in your hearts; and if you find any other Throne and Lord but Christ to
rule you, know from God that your souls are yet in the gall of bitterness and
the bond of iniquity, and your sins are not pardoned; but that soul, who in the
Preaching of the Gospel can say, Blessed be God I have felt Christ come into my
heart, and prevailed upon me; and now Christ's Laws are the Laws I desire to be
ruled by; God knows I know but little of them, but I will labor to understand
them better; therefore I come this day, that I might know more of the Law of
God, and that Jesus Christ might rule more powerfully in me than ever he has
done; if this be wrought in thee, I say unto thee in the Name of Christ, be of
good comfort, thy sins are pardoned, God will show good unto thee when this
world is ended; thou art one that Jesus Christ has brought into his Kingdom,
and set up his Throne in thy heart, and therefore thou may be assured that
he will take thee at last into his everlasting Kingdom.

Fourthly, Where God forgives, he gives much; giving follows forgiving; God
never forgives any, but he gives much to that soul whom he forgives: As in that
case when the Apostles preached the Doctrine of forgiveness and pardon of sin,
the Holy Ghost fell upon them; so certainly, where the Preaching of pardon of
sin has power through the Ministry of the Gospel over a soul; God gives much
to that soul; and there are three things especially that God gives presently
unto the soul whom he pardons, which have all been mentioned before in opening
the blessedness of pardon of sin; and therefore I will but mention them now to
strengthen this note of trial.

1. Has God forgiven thee? then he has given his Spirit to inlighten thee in
the great mysteries of Salvation; thou pleadest thou art ignorant, and art not
Book-learned; if God have so great a favor for thee as to pardon thy sin, he
will give thee understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel, Jer. 31.34. where
God pardons sin, they shall have this mercy to be taught of him.

2. God will give this unto thee, he will write his Law in thy heart; that is,
he will work in thy heart a suitable frame and disposition to his Law; that thy
heart and the Law of God shall be like two copies, that have the same things in
them, and vary not one title from one another; there shall be a sutableness
between thy heart and the Law of God; not only to do that which God requires,
because I must do it; but because I find it suitable to the new nature bestowed
on me: he will write his Law in the heart; and therefore I pronounce before the
Lord this day again, that whosoever has his sin pardoned, and his iniquities
forgiven, that God has writ his Law in the heart of that man or woman by the
finger of his own Spirit; that heart of thine that was as a heart of stone, God
will write his own Law thereon, as he did on the Tables that Moses broke;
though always thou have not a real sight of it, yet such a thing is there, and
is a comfortable assurance of the pardon of thy sin.

3. God gives healing mercies to cleanse thee from thy sin, Jer. 33.8. I will
cleanse them from their iniquities, and pardon all their sins; cleansing from
sin and pardon of sin, they ever go together; if God pardon thy sin, he
cleanses thee from sin; do not look therefore only after pardoning mercy, but
likewise after cleansing mercy; those whom God has joined together, let no man
put asunder; pardoning and cleansing God has put together: God may bestow
other mercies, as health, strength, and success in outward things without
pardon; but never cleansing from sin without pardon of it: and therefore if
thou find thy heart cleansed, Peace be to thy soul, thy sins are forgiven.

Fifthly, Besides these, those whom God pardons he puts a glory upon them;
there is a glory put upon all pardoned sinners; they are indeed glorious
creatures in the eyes of God and Angels, yea, and there is a glory put upon
them that the Saints of God are able to see; perhaps that glory is not seen by
the purblind eye of the world that are in darkness; but those that have their
eyes in their heads, may see a glory put upon every soul that is pardoned, and
for that, that Text is clear, Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also glorified: it is not spoken only of that glory the
Saints shall have in the highest Heavens, when they shall be in glory with
Christ; but of that glory God puts upon the soul in this world, it is not said,
them he will glorify; but them he has also glorified: there is no justified
soul but is a glorified soul, this is a certain truth in Divinity, That at that
instant any soul is justified, at that instant he is glorified; in Jer. 33.9.
there is an expression somewhat like unto that, and it follows upon pardon of
sin; And it shall be to me a Name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all
the Nations upon Earth, etc. that is, I will put glory upon them, and so they
shall be to me a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the Nations in
the world: you will say, How is that? What is the glory of a justified soul?
certainly the soul that is justified is glorious; God puts a glory on it by
those glorious graces of his Holy Spirit that he endows the soul withal; there
is no justified soul but has the glorious graces of the Holy Spirit put
presently upon it, and so it is beautiful and glorious, yea the only glorious
object that the Lord Jesus Christ delights in in all the world: take the
poorest soul in the world, God putting his Image upon it, there is a greater
glory and luster on that soul than is on all the Heavens and the Earth besides;
take all other creatures in their greatest glory, and God sees not so much
glory on them as on any one soul whom he has justified; for so it is, Holiness
and the graces of Gods Spirit are called the glory of God himself, Romans 3.23,
24. For we have all sinned and come short of the glory of God; What is it to be
deprived of the glory of God, but the loss of that Image of God that man was
made in: but when a man is justified, that glory of God is put upon him a
fresh, upon his heart, his understanding, his will and affections, and that
makes the Lord to delight to dwell with thee, converse and have Communion with
thee, because of that glory that he has put upon thee; so there is a glory
also in the life and conversation; for on every soul that God justifies, there
comes presently a new luster upon their life and conversation: All those that
have lived in horrible wickedness and base courses; now when they are changed,
and they manifest the graces of the Spirit of God shining in their conversation
through the whole course of their lives, in meekness, patience, humility,
heavenly-mindedness, and the like; there is a luster on their conversations, to
those that are able to judge of it, they see it; and the world many times is
dazzled with it, they see a glory on them, and are convinced, that certainly
there is a work of God upon these men; and in their good moods they are wishing
to die their deaths, and that their ends might be like theirs: the poorest
servant, or child in a family, that was vile before, yet being justified, there
is a luster in their conversations that convinces Parents and Governors, and
makes them see an apparent difference between what they are now, and what they
were before; though they contemn it, yet they know that God will own that
difference that he has made to be his own glory, and will declare it one day
that this was the thing that was glorious in his eyes: And therefore now would
you know whether you are justified; Are you glorified? What glory of God is
come into your hearts, and appears in your lives and conversations? Can you
say, my life is so, though I have many weaknesses, yet I hope something of the
glory of God appears in me? for so it must be; there is no soul God justifies,
but God inables him to live so, as the glory of God shines in the conversation
of such a one: Now if these things be so, what cause have you to fear, you are
not a justified person? but for the present, many times it does not appear; for
most of you darken the glory of God in your lives: you that are justified
should show it forth more in your conversation among all with whom you have to
do, and then what a beauty and Evidence of your Justification would it be unto
you.

Sixthly, Those whom God pardons, he makes them know what pardon means; thou
hopest thy sins are pardoned; Do thou understand, and know what has been
said about it? certainly those whom God pardons, he causes admiring thoughts in
the soul of the excellency of this blessedness of the pardon of sin; the soul
is taken with the admiration of three things. First, It admires at the freeness
and the riches of Gods grace. Secondly, At the price that was paid for pardon.
Thirdly, It admires at the wonderful good it is brought into, and that which
the soul receives by this blessedness of the pardon of sin; other things God
may bestow on men and women, and they know not the worth of them, and do not
mind God in them; but when God bestows pardon of sin, he makes the soul have
admiring thoughts of it, and to know what it is, Jer. 33.9. And it shall be to
me a Name of joy, a praise, and honor, and they shall fear and tremble, for
all the goodness and prosperity that I procure unto it; certainly if others
shall do it, much more themselves; those whom God pardons he bestows such
mercies upon, as that the soul shall even stand amazed with a trembling heart
and an amazed spirit, to behold all the goodness that the Lord shows to it:
Now, have your hearts been taken with it? you may know much of your Evidences
if your hearts have been taken with admiring thoughts of it; for certainly when
God pardons sin, he does it to magnify his grace, and set out to Men and
Angels in the infiniteness of it, what his grace can do to poor souls; if this
be Gods end, as certainly it is, then it must needs be that those whom God
pardons, he gives such grace as shall cause the soul that it shall have
admiring thoughts of it; Has thy soul seen so much of the grace of God, that it
admires at the greatness and goodness of it? be of good comfort, thy sins are
pardoned.

Seventhly, The more assurance God gives of pardon, the more the heart melts
before God in mourning for the sins that God has pardoned, according to the
manifestation of Gods mercy in pardoning, so does the soul by the work of Gods
grace melt in holy mourning, even for those sins that God has pardoned: many
think they must mourn for sin to get pardon, but when they are pardoned, Why
should they mourn then? I have spoken to that before, that many mourn to get
pardon; but I say, they mourn, because they are pardoned: I manifest it thus,
in this evidence I give of pardon of sin; that according to the degree of
knowledge the soul has of pardon of sin, the heart melts before God for all
sins that are pardoned, the 51. Psalm. is exceeding remarkable, David laments
his sin exceeding bitterly, but mark the Title of that Psalm, To the chief
Musician, a Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto him; after he had
gone in to Bathsheba: Now would you know what Nathan did when he came unto
David, you shall find if you read the story of David's Adultery and Murder, 2 Samuel 12. Chap. it was to bring the news unto David of the pardon of his sin;
first Nathan convinces him of his sin, that he should do it before Israel, and
before the Sun, and having convinced him, he says further, the Lord has put
away thy sin: Now a secure heart might go away, and say, all is well, I shall
not dye, God has pardoned my sin, I need not be troubled any more about that
matter: But mark the Psalmist how he cries out to God, Have mercy O Lord upon
me, and blot out all my transgressions, wash me, purge me; and then he prays
for restoring mercies for his broken bones, and then cries out for further
assurance; the very grace of God that Nathan brought to him of the pardon of
his sin, that very grace of God did melt and break his heart so much the more;
after God had sent to him the pardon of his sin, he mourned more than ever
before; we never read that David was so much troubled for his sin as in this
51. Psalm. that was after Nathan, had come unto him: Now if you find that at
that time when God is pleased to come unto you in the Ministry of the Word, or
in private to declare unto you the pardon of your sin, and to give you the
comfortable Evidence of it, that then your hearts are most devoted to mourn for
them, and to melt before God, Be of good comfort, thy sins are pardoned.

Eighthly, Another note is this, that according to the degree of pardon of sin,
so all other graces grow; the knowledge and assurance of Gods love in Christ in
the pardon of sin, it causes all other graces to grow proportionably, as you
have it in Ephesians. 3.19. about the knowledge of the love of God in Christ; mark
the connection, he desires That they might comprehend with all Saints what is
the height, and depth, etc. and to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of God; What is the love of
Christ? the love of Christ is the procuring cause of the forgiveness of sin
bebefore God the Father; and when you know this, this will fill you with all
the fullness of God: Mark, first It brings God in to the soul; And secondly,
Fills the soul with God; And thirdly, Fills the soul with the fullness of God;
And fourthly, Fills the soul with all the fullness of God; when you come to know
the love of God in Christ, if any thing in the world will fill the soul with
all the fullness of God, this will: many will say, they hope their sins are
pardoned; Do you so? then you know the love of God in Christ; for this is a
special work of the love of God in Christ; to pardon sin; now the Apostel says,
when you come to know this, you come to be filled with all the fullness of God;
What is the fullness of God? as faith increases with the rest of the graces, so
you grow fuller and fuller in Gods fullness; and so you grow more into a fuller
assurance of pardon of sin: now the soul can say, as I find more assurance of
the love of God in his Son, so I find my soul more filled with this grace of
the fullness of God Alas, when I was under the Law, God and I were strangers, I
felt little of God in me; but now I begin to know the love of God in the
Gospel, I begin to have my soul filled with fullness of God, not with chaff and
dross and filthy things, which heretofore my thoughts, will, and affections
were filled withal; but now it is otherwise with me, my soul is now filled with
all the fullness of God; certainly that soul that can say thus, may well go a
way with that word of Christ spoken to the woman, Luk, 7.50. Go in peace, thy
faith has saved thee, Romans 5.1. The Apostle speaks of pardon of sin, being
justified by Faith, we have peace with God; that is, God revealing
justification by Faith in Christ: it brings peace with it; and, by whom we have
access, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and not only so, but we glory
in tribulation, knowing that, etc. What knowledge is this? It Is this, that we
are justified by Faith and so come to have peace with God; How does this cause
the heart to be enlarged? we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, and not
only so, but we are strengthened and can glory in tribulation; our hearts grow
up to that strength, that whatsoever tribulations we meet withal, we are able
to bear them with patience, and not only so, but to glory in them, we not only
grow up to bear that which many cannot, but to rejoice in them, that is more,
and then to glory is above rejoicing: Now, Do you find that the assurance that
you have of the love of God, brings strength in to your soul, to enable you to
rejoice in hope of the glory to come? as if the Apostle had said, let what will
become of us for the present, what though the world scorn us, hate, persecute
us, yet we rejoice in hope of the glory that is to come; and this makes us
glory in tribulation; knowing, that tribulation, works patience; patience,
experience; and experience, hope: Here Is a working of several graces together,
and this may help many a poor soul; O says the soul at such a time, I had a
great deal of assurance of pardon of sin, and much joy thereupon; But have not
Hypocrites joy? yes certainly, a Hypocrite may have wonderful ravishments of
spirit, and flashes of pardon of sin, but yet there is somewhat wanting in
other graces; but how shall I know that my assurance of pardon of sin is right?
thus, according to the degree you have of assurance of pardon, you have an
answerable degree in the growth of other graces, as Humility, Patience,
Heavenly-mindedness, Self-denial, and the rest, according as your faith grows,
so you have a proportionable growth in all other graces; faith is as the root,
and the more sap there is in the root, the more will the branches grow: those
people that are so full of assurance, and never doubted, as they say; but as
for other graces they are empty, as the Fear of God, Meekness, Patience,
Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness and the like; certainly, if thy faith be so
high, and thy other graces so low, thou have much cause to fear thy faith is
not right, it is not the faith of Gods Elect, as the Scripture speaks, it is not
precious faith; for according to the degree you have of that, all other graces
will grow; you hope that your sins are pardoned, How come you by it? the soul
that has true pardon of sin, has fetched it from Heaven in a right way, in
Gods own way; How is that? it is on this wi^e; the soul that sees it self lost
and undone through the guilt of sin, God revealing his infinite riches of grace
in the Gospel, such a soul seeing God on his Throne, holding out his Son,
God-Man as Mediator to make an atonement, it by a mighty work of faith, closes
with that glorious way of Reconciliation by the Son, that it sees God the
Father tender to him, and so fetches grace out of the Treasury of Gods bounty,
in the way of the Gospel, in an Evangelical way that was before opened. Examine
now, Have you fetched out your pardon through the way of the Gospel, that the
soul by a mighty act of faith has been willing to venture its self and its
eternal station on the Son of God? Have you looked on Christ as a mighty
Mediator, as one able to save you? then you have acted faith in a Gospel way,
and your sins are pardoned: Again, Are you pardoned? then you are sealed, that
you heard likewise of; there is the Broad Seal of Heaven that stamps the Image
of God upon the soul, as the Image of the King is on the Seal of the Kingdom;
so the Image of God, the Broad Seal of Heaven is stamped upon the soul, which I
mention that you may make use of it in examination.

Ninthly, Whomsoever God pardons, there will be an answerable work in thy soul
unto the work of God in justifying thee; as in Election and Vocation, so in
Justification; How is that? thus, that as God notwithstanding all thy sin,
accepts of thee to his grace and love; so notwithstanding all the trouble and
afflictions that are in Gods ways, thou will accept of God and his ways; he
accepts of thy soul notwithstanding thy sin, thou will accept of him and his
ways notwithstanding all evils and afflictions that accompany company them;
there are woeful evils of sin that accompany thy soul, yet God will accept of
thee; so there are great evils in the ways of God, Afflictions that accompany
them, yet thou will accept of them and think it reasonable: What, shall God
accept of my soul, notwithstanding all the evil of sin; and shall not I accept
of Gods ways, notwithstanding all the evil of affliction and trouble?
certainly, the soul that is pardoned, cannot but answer God so far as this;
Will God justify me notwithstanding my sin? I will justify God,
notwithstanding any trouble, affliction, difficulty, or sufferings that may
befall me in his ways, and I will justify the ways of God; this is both an
Evidence and a duty; God justifies our souls though they be very sinful; we
have cause to justify Gods ways, though they be very troublesome; if thou do
not so, thou art none of Gods child; for wisdom is justified of her Children:
thou hopest thy sins are pardoned, and that God will justify thee; and wilt
not thou justify him? Does not thy sin hinder Gods grace to thee; and shall
trouble and affliction hinder thy glorifying God? O man! thou have too vile a
heart, and too base a spirit, to be one of those that God has pardoned; if
thou were a child of Wisdom, and one whom God has pardoned, as God has
justified thee, so thou will justify God: This note may meet with those that
in company hear Ministers and the ways of God cried out against, and yet have
not a word to speak to justify God, perhaps Gentlemen and others spoke ill of
Gods ways, and thou stand speaking, and have not a word to say for God and
his ways; Do thou think God has justified thee, and do thou hear God and
his People, and his Word reproached, and thou have not a heart to justify God?

Tenthly and lastly, Those whom God pardons and forgives, he puts in them a
merciful frame of heart to forgive others; and that upon Divine grounds: there
is a kind of natural forgiveness: many will forgive, but it is as a Heathen
forgives another; and it is a shame for many that profess themselves
Christians, that they do not go so far; but you must forgive in a spiritual
way, for that is the way that accompanies padon of sin, to forgive, because I
have had more forgiven; such a one has offended me; but how much more have I
offended the Lord; and if the Lord forgive me, ought not I to forgive him? you
know in the Gospel he that had so many Talents forgiven him, and afterward
went and took his Brother by the throat, how ill the Lord took it, that having
forgiven him so much, he should exact of his Brother the utmost farthing; Has
God forgiven thee thy sin, which had he not, it would have everlastingly
chained thee in torments, and wilt not thou forgive? for as it is an Evidence,
so it is a duty and a part of Prayer in that divine Directory called the Lords
Prayer, Matthew. 6. Forgive us as we forgive; and in another place it runs thus,
forgive, for we forgive; therefore thou can have no Evidence that God has
forgiven thy iniquities and pardoned thy trespasses, except others be in thy
thoughts forgiven too: I might have given diverse Scriptures, but I mention it
as a duty, that you that have any knowledge of your sin pardoned, would make
this as a ground to forgive your Brethren; say, Alas poor wretch, has God
forgiven me; was there ever such a distance between my brother and me, as there
was between God and me; and has God forgiven, and shall not I forgive my
brother? It is impossible a soul should be made acquainted with the rich mercy
of God in forgiveness of sin, and have not a meek spirit to forgive his
brother: Nothing can take away the rugged sowrness and rigidness of one man
toward another, but the Oil of Gods grace in pardoning of sin; and that coming
once into the soul, makes the soul to be of a sweet, mild, gentle, kind and
tender frame: Observe this, you that have rugged natures, you say it is nature,
and you cannot help it, if any thing change it, it is the mercy of God in
pardoning thy sin; is there not so much in the grace of God in pardoning thy
sin, as to change that rugged nature of thine? certainly there is: else thou
have little hope that thy sin is pardoned; therefore if God have pardoned thee,
thou must go and do so likewise. I am persuaded many of you hope't and longed
for this Note the signs were given forth in one Sermon.
Sermon, and I desired to be the larger, because I would lay the Evidences full
before you; here you have had the blessed man and woman described unto you, but
there is but few of them, few can go away and say, as we have heard, so it is:
But I hope diverse of you can, it was for you that it was preached and sent from
Heaven that you should feed upon it, and it is as needful as the bread you eat.
But there is one thing more, that is very meet to annex to all that has been
said for; without that, I am afraid there are many to whom the consolation of
this Text and Point belongs to, will go away with little comfort, because they
know not how to apply them; and that is to give some rules how to make use of
these signs, and be able to apply them; and by the same rules you may come to
know any other notes of Trial concerning your spiritual Estate, and to make use
of them in any other particular whatsoever.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Rules how to apply the Evidences of Pardon of Sin.
IT is a matter of great concernment to us, to try whether our sins are
forgiven; for in times of danger our hearts are ready to sink; but the Evidence
of this, that our sins are forgiven will hold up our hearts in the midst of the
greatest dangers whatsoever; if Heaven and Earth should meet together, if I
have assurance of this, for so it follows after David had pronounced him
blessed whose sins were forgiven, Verse. 6. Surely in the floods of great waters
they shall not come nigh unto him; there may be floods of great waters: but he
that has his sins forgiven, God shall preserve him and compass him about with
songs of deliverance; but they that have their sins compass them about, shall
have horror and terror to compass them about; but says David, having
assurance his sins were pardoned, Thou art my hiding place, and thou shall
compass me about; therefore if your hearts close with those Evidences given,
you may have comfort in the great water-floods, God will be a hiding place unto
you; it concerns very much to labor to put this out of doubt, and not to put
it off to a sickbed, or deathbed time of examination; but now to those
Evidences there is another thing, which is of great concernment in this Point,
and that is to give some rules how to make use of those or all other Evidences
that shall be given at any time for trial of any: Especially for the trial of
our states in point of Justification or Sanctification, but they will be
helpful to the use of any other Evidences whatsoever.

First is this (that you may be able to apply those rules of Trial and
Evidences given) though you cannot find them all, yet if you find but any one
of them, you may receive comfort from that, though you feel not the rest; you
may be assured that the rest are there: Many a soul, many times hears Evidences
of the happy condition in point of pardon of sin; and it may be, there is one,
two, or three, that they can catch hold on; but there are some others they
cannot take hold of them: if thou find but one of them in thy heart, though
thou can not feel or see the other, yet God does see the other to be there
within, though they be not made so sensible to you; and therefore soul take
hold of that which you can see or feel, and be assured the other are there,
though they are not seen; if thou can take hold of one linck of a chain, and
all the other be fastened to it, thou may be able to draw the whole chain
unto thee; for by taking hold of one link thou take hold of the whole, though
thou touchest not the other; so in the work of Gods graces, they are as a link
united to one another, and if you can lay hold of one link you may be assured
of the other, although you see them not; it is with many in this point as it is
with some ignorant man, the Physician tells him, he must take such a thing that
must have these and these ingredients in it; and when the Apothecary has
mingled all, it may be but one of these things can be seen in the color and
outward appearance; perhaps some one syrup may take up all the color in the
outward part; and when it is brought to him, says he, I must have so many
Ingredients in it, and I see but one; I, but though you see but one, yet there
may be the efficacy of all in it, though but one give the color; so it is with
the graces of Gods Spirit, though at the present some one appears, yet there
may be the efficacy and power of them all in the soul, though there appear but
one; perhaps it is in this case, as among many ingredients you can see and taste
but one, yet there may be the power of twenty there, though neither seen nor
tasted; so it is with the work of God in the soul, sometimes it may be, that
there is but one grace to be seen, tasted, or felt, and yet where that one is,
there are all the other; so that, that is one rule, when you look for Evidences
and Signs, if you can find but one in your souls, all are there; as it is in
sin, where one sin has Dominion over the soul, though the others be not seen,
yet we are to know, that other sins have dominion over the soul too; though
some men live under the slavery of one sin more than another, as one man under
the power of Covetousness, another under the power of Ambition, or any other
sin; this man may be thought to be under the power of but one sin, but the
truth is, he is a slave to all sin, every natural man that is out of Christ, is
under the power of every sin, he is a slave to the Devil in every sin; but by
reason of the constitution of his body, and for some outward respects, he may
refrain from some particular sins that do not so well suit with him, whereas if
it would serve for his own ends and purposes, he could as well commit any sin
as that one; this is a certain truth, Whosoever makes not Conscience of every
sin, he makes Conscience of none; though he refrain from the practice of some
others, it is not out of Conscience, but for by-ends; therefore he that is
under the power of one sin, is under the power of every sin: Many think all men
are sinners, and for their parts they have but a few; such a sin I cannot
leave, but I am free from all others; Do thou keep from all sin but one? God
will find thee under the power of every sin, and God will charge thee at the
Tribunal as under the power of all sin; so now on the contrary, Gods people are
mightily troubled that they cannot find the work of Gods graces in all of them;
such an one they find, but they want it in another, because it is not so
evidently stirring as the other; but as the truth is certain on one side, of
the wicked; so it is true on the other side of the godly; that where there is
one sin there is every sin; so where there is one grace, there is all grace;
there is the power of godliness in every grace where there is one grace; that is
the first rule to help us in making use of the Evidences before given. The

Second rule is this, When ever we have found any one Evidence, upon serious
examination, in the presence of God, and now it appears not positively to the
contrary at the present, but thou art merely dubious of those things that
heretofore thou have felt, because thou do not feel them now, in this case we
may and should have recourse to what God has wrought heretofore, and build upon
the former workings of Gods Spirit upon us; true it is, when we come to give
Evidences in our Ministry of those that have grace, we may meet at such a time
with them as that they have sense of nothing, and in such a condition as that
they are not able to know their own hearts, nor feel any workings upon them:
Now, if it be merely from want of sense, and that the contrary positive evil
appear not, but only the want of feeling of what thou had and felt
heretofore; thou art to have recourse to the days of old, as David often speaks
that he would remember the days of old; it may be you will say, some Hypocrites
have thought they have been in this condition, they have had many slashes, and
yet they have proved naught, how can we have recourse to what was before when
God did work upon me, I can indeed remember when God did draw my heart, and
then I thought I could have closed with any Evidence out of the Word, I felt
such workings in my heart, but I might do all that and yet all be but in
hypocrisy. I answer, that certainly the bare want of sense is not ground
enough for me to think that all was in hypocrisy; for this, consider, if I
groan under it as under an affliction, and would fain feel those former
manifestations I had formerly, and that I can take little comfort in my present
case, and that my soul is continually longing and panting after the workings of
Gods grace that I heretofore had; if this be so, and that there is nothing to
the contrary, thou fallest not off to sin, or to the world to satisfy thy soul
in sinful ways, and that thy heart is yet panting after God; if it be thus with
thee, thou may take the comfort of what thou had before, and feed upon it
as Provision laid up before hand for thy soul, as if thou had it present.
But Hypocrites that fall off from the visitations of Gods Spirit, they fall not
off only to a want of sense of those former movings and workings of the Spirit,
but their hearts come to be satisfied with something else, and they take up
with some other contentments; and it is not a want of feeling only, of what they
had heretofore, but their hearts run out from God into other ways of sin and
wickedness, so it is with Hypocrites, but thou have this testimony, that it is
not so with thee, that although thou do want the present sense of the work of
God upon thee, yet thy heart longs after God, and thou art unsatisfied in this
condition, and it is the greatest affliction that ever befell thee, and there is
nothing else that thou lets thy heart run out unto, but thou art longing to get
thy heart into that blessed frame that thou wast in heretofore; then certainly
peace be unto thee; thou art to look back upon what thou have had heretofore,
and wait upon God for his return again, for he will come, and thy soul shall
rejoice again in him; As that Martyr Mr. Glover, a little before he suffered,
the Spirit of God seemed to leave him, and he was in extreme darkness, and had
no feeling of any Evidence of Gods love to him, yet he was to dye the next day,
and all his Evidences were lost in his own apprehension, yet his friends told
him, that God would appear, and desired him to give them some sign, if God did
come unto him; that night he was in darkness, and until the Officers came to
carry him to the Stake, he had yet no sense or evidence of Gods love, but when
he was tied to the Stake, he cried out, He is come, He is come: so that you
must not argue, because you have no present sense, that therefore you have no
evidence of your good condition; but if you have had it heretofore, you may
build upon it that your state is good, although you have no present sense; that
is the second rule.

The third rule is this, To help you how to make use of signs, when you would
put your selves on trial, you must take heed you do not cast your Estates for
the trial of your selves on times of temptations; judge not of your estates by
what you find and feel in times of temptation, for they are very unfit times to
determine your condition upon a trial then, as when temptations are exceeding
strong, and horror and fear comes into the soul; and perhaps some hear may
know what I mean, when I speak of horror and fear coming in strongly upon
them, then it is a time that you had rather need to call upon God, and fall
down upon your knees to Prayer, then to look to the trial and examination of
your selves at that time: It is with many in this case as it has been with
some that have been struck with horror of death before the Judge, and have had
the Book given them to read, though they have been good Scholars, and able to
read before, yet when the horror of death has been so upon them they have not
been able to read one word; and so it is with many of Gods children in times of
strong temptations, they are not able to read their Evidences; as Children when
their eyes are blear'd and blinded, give them the Book and they cannot read
thereon: so when your hearts are under great temptations and afflictions, this
is not a time of trial; then by the way, if it be not for a godly man, much
less for a wicked man: many wicked men put it off to the day of death, and
never so much as put themselves to trial till horror of Conscience or fears of
death put them upon it; it is an ill time for Gods people to try themselves
then: Suppose you would weigh Gold, you will not do it in a storm or wind; the
trial of our estate is like the weighing of gold; for we are to weigh our
selves by the balance of the Sanctuary, that we may know whether we shall be
weight when God comes to weigh us; for every soul must be weighed, and woe be to
those to whom God shall say as he did to Belshazzar, when the handwriting
appeared upon the wall, it was so terrible to him, that his knees smote one
against another; But what was that? Thou art weighed in the balance, and art
found too light: such a hand will many find one day: Poor soul that thoughtest
thy self in a good condition, and that thy sins were pardoned; thou art weighed
in the balance, and art found too light; therefore it concerns you now to
weigh your selves in the balance of the Sanctuary: when you weigh gold, you
must not hold the Scales in the midst of wind, storms, and tempest that
hurries the balance up and down; but it must be in such a place that you may
hold them steadily that nothing may stir them; for in the wind the lighter may
be blown down, and the heaviest uppermost; but if you hold them in a still
place, you may try to a grain: so the Soul of man is like the Scales in the
wind, in a time of temptation thou will have enough to come in to turn the
balance, lift it up, and make thee seem too light; and therefore when you
would weigh your condition, do it when your hearts are composed, and you are
your selves; when your hearts are quiet, then lay your souls to the balance:
many weigh their hearts in a time when trouble and affliction is upon their
spirits, but they cannot do it, all they do then is nothing; there are but two
things then to be done, either to open your condition to some or other that may
help you; or else fall down upon your knees in Prayer to God, to get help from
him to support you under, and deliver you from the temptations that are upon
you: but then it is no time for a man or woman to try themselves, in times of
strong temptations, when it may be said, a man or woman then is scarce
themselves.

The fourth Rule for trial of your Estates is this, That when you find the Word
on your side in any thing, never let go your hold of the Word, when you are
persuaded the Word speaks well of your side in such or such a thing, never do
any thing against it; as we must not receive any comfort but by the Word, so we
must not reject any comforts but by the Word; some may say, I find something in
the Word that makes for me, but I am afraid I am not thus and thus qualified;
but do you find any thing in the Word that gives you ground to think so? we
must rest upon the Word both ways, as we must not receive any thing to build
our comforts on, but it must be from the Word; so we must not receive any thing
to trouble us but it must be from the Word; it must be the Word must wound men;
for the Consciences of men and women are under the power of no creature, but
the Word: Now as there is no power in any creature in the world to raise a
dejected soul, and to comfort a troubled Conscience truly but the Word; So the
people of God are to know, that they are so above the power of all other
things, that nothing in the World should trouble them but the Word only: as
they should account it a weak vain thing to rest in the opinion of others for
the comfort of their souls, that are in a good condition by what they find out
of the Word; so they should account it a vain thing to rest on their own
conceits in time of trouble, or in the saying of others, besides what they have
out of the Word; the soul says, I am afraid my state is not good; But O my
soul, is there any thing in the Word that says thus; that they that are thus
and thus are not pardoned: As I must not conclude I am pardoned, but must bring
something out of the Word that says it, so I must not conclude my state is bad
without the Word, say so too; but I find many distempers and many wanderings in
my soul; give me leave to ask you this; where does Gods Word say that such a
man that has a great many wandering thoughts is not justified? where does the
Word of God say that a heart that is under the remainder of some corruptions,
and the soul labors under them as much as under any burden in the world; where
does the Word say that that soul is not justified? many people in the case of
trouble of Conscience, although they have some evidences and good ground out of
the Word for them, yet will have many fears and doubts because of the remainder
of such and such corruptions in them; but now the ground of their doubts is
their own fears, and nothing out of the Word; and so when any speaks and
applies the Word unto them, they cannot say but it is suitable to their
condition, and that God has shown mercy unto them; but so soon as you are gone
the fears and suggestions of their own hearts prevail against them, to take
away all their comforts more than all the applications of the Word prevailed to
uphold and continue their comforts; it is just with many that are gracious in
the case of fears and doubts, as it is with the wicked in regard of their
hopes, a wicked man has the Word against him, that he is not in a good
condition, but his own self-love and conce^ encourage him to presume that he is
in a good estate; now he regards his own opinion and conceit, and presumes upon
that, that his estate is good more than on whatsoever is said unto him out of
the Word that it is not so: so the people of God, although they are in a good
estate, yet their own fears so damps their hearts that makes them question that
it is not so, but the ground of it is their own fears, as the ground of the
wicked in thinking their estate is good is from their own opinions; so the
People of God many times from their own conceit and opinions, rather than from
the Word, think their estate is bad: Take this Rule, As you must receive no
comfort but out of the Word; so you must not receive any trouble but from the
Word; when you receive trouble any other ways, you do not consider that God has
laid your estates so high that all your troubles depend on nothing but the
Word; and therefore answer all with Scripture, when the Devil casts temptations
before thee, bid him prove that thy estate is not good from the Word, I have
this out of the Word to prove it is so, and thou have nothing to the contrary:
in other things you will not be baffled, as in your Evidences for your Estates;
suppose a man come and lay claim unto it, although you cannot perhaps make out
your title clear, yet you will bid him prove the contrary, and show what
grounds he has to lay claim to it; it is not the clamours and talking of other
men that will make you quit your hold, or satisfy you that it was never
rightly yours: But let the Devil come and clamor against your souls, and you
are ready to join with him, and say, it is so indeed, I am an hypocrite, and I
have no true grace nor spiritual life, my soul is under the curse of the Law
and dominion of Sin still: how unworthy do you carry it to the blessed Spirit
of God, and all the grace and goodness of God that has been manifested and made
known unto you concerning the pardon of your sins? How unbefitting is it that
on every clamor of Satan, and stirring of corruptions in your own hearts, that
you should raze the foundation of all your comforts by calling all the work of
God presently into question: Many a poor creature, that finds by Evidences out
of the Word that their estate is good, they go away cheerful, but if the next
day there be any stirrings of corruption, they let go all, and raze the
foundation of all their comforts: walk not so unworthy of the grace of God,
depend upon the Word, as for your troubles, so for your comforts; as you are
not comforted with any thing but from what the Word of God speaks to you, so be
discouraged with nothing, but where you find the Word of God against you.

The fifth Rule is this, When at any time you are put to seek your Evidences,
and cannot find them, the best way is rather to renew than to spend time in
finding of the old; as suppose any man or woman be searching out such Evidences
for Salvation which they had before, and cannot find them; it may be they are
poring upon their own hearts for such and such workings as they have had
heretofore, and cannot find them, and so are ready to conclude that all is
naught, and lie down as people disconsolate, because their condition is not
good, they cannot find such Evidences as heretofore they had; now in this case,
the best way is, if I cannot find my Evidences, or the use of them I had
before, to renew them, the time I spend in seeking and discouraging of my
heart, if I spent it in actings and workings of my heart after God, for the
renewing of my Evidences, perhaps I might have renewed them in that time; as in
matters between men and women in this world, they have Evidences that would
clear the matters in differences; but perhaps they cannot find them, or they
are grown so old that they cannot read them, and they spend a great deal of
time about them, whereas possibly, did they go to the Court of Roles, they
might have them renewed with less charge and time; so it is with the soul, when
it cannot find such and such Evidences, it spends a great deal of time, and
sits down in discouragement and disquietness of heart, when as perhaps in less
time thou might have renewed them; as thus, suppose thou art looking after
this Evidence of thy Calling, for God calls whom he justifies; Now thou art
looking after thy call, and thou art troubled that thou do not remember how
God did work upon thy heart then, or heretofore, and a great deal of time is
spent; cannot you find how 'twas with you then? No, then fall upon this course,
listen to what voice of God thou hear now in thy heart; say to thy soul, Do
not I now find the work of God in me; do not I find him now drawing of my heart
out of the world unto himself, and does not my heart listen unto this call? for
the call of God is not only at first conversion, but God is always calling and
drawing the heart from the world unto himself; if thou can not make use of
the work of God heretofore, make use of his present work upon thee: Again,
those whom God justifies, they enter into Covenant with God; for it was by way
of Covenant (as I told you) they give up themselves to God in an everlasting
Covenant: But when did I come into Covenant with God? I am afraid I am not the
man or woman in Covenant with God, I cannot remember any such work; perhaps thy
heart sinks down within thee, because thou can not clear up this work of
entering into Covenant with God heretofore: Now the time that thou spendest in
seeking after this work, spend it in entering now into Covenant with God at this
present time; it will be no hinderance to thee that thou can not find what
was heretofore, if now at this present thou can surrender up thy self to God
in an everlasting Covenant, this is enough, do it: Now if you can find your
hearts, now come in, and yield up your selves into Covenant with God, you may
have the comfort of this Evidence as fully as if you clearly remembered all the
former transactions, and the work of God upon you in your first entering into
Covenant with God: Again, those that had their sins pardoned, I told you, were
brought into the Kingdom of Christ; but you will say, I cannot remember how I
was translated; Take now upon you the Scepter of Jesus Christ; many trouble
themselves, saying, I never found such humiliations and troubles for sin as you
speak of, or as others have found; How is it now with your souls? Do you find
sin now a burden to your souls? Is it not the greatest affliction? If you were
put to your choice, had you not rather suffer any thing in the world than sin
against God; and not only out of Convictions of Conscience, but because you
find a frame of spirit in your hearts suitable thereunto? for an Hypocrite he
may have Convictions of Conscience, but the frame of his spirit is not suited
thereunto: in you there is a frame of spirit suitable to the convictions of
Conscience within you, though you cannot remember you have had such sorrows and
troubles in convictions for sin, as others have had, while they were under the
spirit of bondage, yet you may be comforted by the present frame of spirit that
you have; and so in the like cases, if you cannot find your old Evidences, fall
to work to renew your Evidences, and do not spend time in lying down under the
discouragements of your own hearts.

The sixth Rule is this, When you examine your selves to find out your
Evidences, carry this thought along with you, that you have to deal with God in
the Covenant of grace: and this will be of mavelous use unto you; perhaps to
some these are very dry things, and they see but little in them, and scarce
know what they be; but I hope there be many others that have knowledge of an
eternal state to be between God and their souls; I hope I speak things will be
very precious to them; yea, I say unto many of you; for while I am in this
argument, I am speaking to such as have had the fear of God fallen upon their
hearts, and they have made it the great business of their lives, above all
things in this world, to know how terms are between God and their souls, to
know how it stands with them for their everlasting estates; I know abundance of
people scarce ever call these things in question, to whom these Rules will be
of little or no use at all; but if I speak to some, or any one troubled soul to
help and direct them, though I do no good to others I shall think my time well
spent; wherefore then in your examinations ever carry this with you, that you
have to deal with God in the Covenant of grace, and not in a Covenant of works:
Certainly, that many are so troubled in their Consciences about their eternal
estates, it is on this ground, because they look upon God in the way of the
Covenant of works; if they find any corruptions stirring and breaking forth,
and temptations strong upon them, they think presently all is naught, and that
God will never accept of them; What is the reason? If we had to deal with God
in a Covenant of works, the least stirring of corruption, it is enough to cast
the soul down into eternal horror; as Adam, though he had never so much
goodness before by the Image of God upon him, yet one sin eternally cast him,
if there had not come in a Covenant of grace: Now, though people will
acknowledge there is a Covenant of grace, yet upon the stirring of their
corruption, they carry it as that it serves for no other use than if they had
to deal with God in a Covenant of works, and as if there were no Covenant of
grace at all: Now, what a dishonor is this to the riches of Gods goodness in
the Covenant of grace, that tells us, We are not to be judged for our eternal
estate by the Covenant of works; and tells us, that he that must be our Judge
for our eternal condition, is our Advocate with the Father: and tells us also,
that God accepts of the uprightness and the sincerity of the heart, and that
the want of perfection shall never damn thy soul: He that stands before the
Lord to make atonement, and to be our Advocate to plead with the Father for us;
he it is that must be the Judge of our eternal estate; and therefore when I set
my self before the Lord, I consider that I have to deal with him in a Covenant
of grace: Suppose I find and feel such and such corruptions and weaknesses in
me; Is it not possible that my estate is happy by the Covenant of grace?
Collect your selves, and say, Why do I determine of my everlasting condition?
Have I to deal with God in the Covenant of grace, and cannot these
imperfections stand with it? Why do I make such conclusions that my state is
naught, because of the stirrings of such and such corruptions? The doubts and
fears of most Christians arise from hence, because they have not a clear
understanding of the difference between the Covenant of grace and the Covenant
of works; there is nothing in the world would so satisfy the Consciences of
men and women, so as a clear understanding of the Covenant of grace and the
Covenant of works: Many people cry out of the Preachers, that they disquiet and
trouble the hearts of people by their Preaching; the truth is, no Preachers
occasion so much the trouble and perplexity of Consciences, as those that
preach Morality and merely the way of duty, and never come to make them see
clearly the difference between the Covenant of grace and the Covenant of works;
and I appeal unto you, who are they that most quiet and settle your
Consciences, and satisfy your spirits; Are they not those Preachers that open
the difference between the Covenant of grace and the Covenant of works?
Certainly those Preachers that show you what the Covenant of grace is, are the
only men that quiet and satisfy Conscience; and it is a truth, that nothing can
do it but that: You that are Christians, how should you then labor to get a
further insight into the Covenant of grace; and instead of other Discourses
less useful, let this be the subject of your discourse, the difference of the
Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace, or the blessings of this Covenant;
and that this is the Covenant that we must depend upon, notwithstanding our
weaknesses: And now I am speaking of this Covenant, that weakness may stand
with the Covenant of grace, many that have carnal hearts may be ready to abuse
it; take notice how dear the comforts of your souls cost God, and God will have
his Ministers to comfort you, though the revealing of such things will endanger
many a man's soul: God is content to hazard the damnation of other men to
comfort you; for certainly those things that we speak for your comfort will be
the damnation of many others: O rich grace.
Think thus, O Lord must the comforts of my soul cost so dear, and that for my
comfort many souls are hazarded, who by taking occasion to sin, abuse that
grace that is reached forth to me, and so are like eternally to perish: O then,
what need had I to make good use of this grace that comes to me with the hazard
of the souls of so many others? If a man should bring some precious Balsom to
apply to a wound, and tell him there is not one drop of it but cost a thousand
pound at least, would not this be highly prized? Now, when we come and show you
any thing that may comfort your hearts and satisfy your souls, we must reveal
such things, that not only cost much, but the least dram of Gospel-comforts
cost that which was of infinite worth, and it is valuable two ways: first, every
drop of the Balsom of the Gospel cost the blood of Christ; but besides this,
the very revealing of it must cost the damnation of many souls, and yet God is
content to venture that that you may be comforted: We in the Name of God come
and preach the grace of the Gospel, and we think many will be hardened by it,
and grow more secure, and abuse Gods mercy; but then we satisfy our selves
with this, that the comforting of any broken troubled soul is so precious in
the eyes of Jesus Christ, that he is content to venture the hardening of many
other souls; if they will be hardened let them be hardened, Christ is content to
venture it; and hereby we see how precious these comforts are; therefore you
had need to prize them, and not cast them off: as suppose a Captain for the
saving of the lives of two or three men should venture the lives of a thousand
men merely to save the lives of two or three, were not these men's lives very
precious to him? so Jesus Christ he ventures the hardening of the hearts of many
for the comforting of a few; therefore it shows your comforts are precious
things, you should not easily put them off, for they cost dear.

The seventh Rule in applying Evidences is this, That when you cannot see the
work of faith reaching to Assurance, yet labor to put forth the work of faith
of Adherence; there may be much of the workings of the faith of adherence,
where there cannot be the faith of assurance; that is certain, there may be
true faith adhereing to Christ for the pardon of sin where the soul has no
certain assurance of it: Many poor creatures are crying out, and saying, if I
had faith of assurance, and a full persuasion my sins were pardoned, I could be
comforted; but because they have not attained to a full persuasion and
assurance, they think they have no grace at all; but there may be faith in the
pardon of sin, where there is not a reflect act of the soul, whereby I come to
know it has faith, and that its sins are pardoned, 1. Joh. Chap. 2.3. he shows
there that there may be knowledge, and yet not know they do know; Hereby we
know that we do know him, if we keep his Commandments, hereby we know that we
do know him: now knowing of Christ, and knowing that we do know him, is not all
one; there is a knowing, and a knowing that we do know him; so there is a
beleiving and a knowing we do believe: there may be a true work of grace, that
I may know Christ, and know him to salvation, and yet not know that I do know
him, that is, by a reflect act of faith, a knowing that I do know him; so then,
where there is not a faith of assurance there may be a faith of adherence; that
is, when the soul sticks to Christ, and can give it self unto, and venture it
self upon Christ for pardon of sin, life and Salvation; that is faith of
adherence: suppose in seeking my Evidences (many of them being taken from the
effects and friuts of faith) I cannot find them, and so cannot put forth a
reflect act of the soul, which is faith of assurance, yet I may at that time
have a faith of adherence; thou may feel thy heart stick to Christ, and thou
may venture thy soul on Christ; that faith will save thee, though you have
not a faith of assurance; that is, though you cannot find such Evidences
whereby you may draw up such a conclusion, or make up such a judgment that you
are pardoned; yet if you have a faith of adherence, that you can stick to
Ghrist, and venture your souls on him for life and Salvation, and all that is
good; that faith will save you; and therefore upon examination of your
Evidences, when you cannot get up to such acts of faith as assurance is, live
then by a faith of adherence, stick to Christ, say, here I will resolve to live
and dye, venture on the grace of God in Christ: Now for the soul to do this, it
is a mighty work of faith; for if you can venture your souls on Christ, you
will venture your Estates on Christ, your Names on Christ, and all that you
have on Christ; and therefore remember, if you have not a faith of assurance,
then venture your selves on Christ by a faith of adherence, and comfort will
come in that way,

Eighthly, If at any time you feel comforts from Evidences flow in upon your
souls, and that you are able to apply the comforts to your selves, that the
Lord has spoken to you by such and such signs of a pardoned sinner, take heed
you do not rest much upon Evidences; but then at that very time, think with
your selves, though now I have comforts, I may loose them, and God may call me
to another condition; God never granted these helps unto me for my Saviors
that I should rest upon them, they are but bladders to help me to swim, and God
may take away these, and call me to live upon the mere actings of faith, and
not at all on sense, that's certain he may do it, for when we bring these Signs
and Evidences of grace, as they come from faith, and are effects and fruits of
it, they are but as bladders to help young swimmers that cannot swim without
them, and learn them to swim; but those that have got the Art, though the
bladders be taken away, they can swim; but take them away from the others, and
they will sink; so that these Evidences are for young and weak Christians that
cannot live on primary acts of faith, which a strong Christian can do, when all
other things are taken away; and therefore when we feel the comfort of any
signs depend not on this, the Lord may take them away; and because he delights
in the mere actings of faith, that is the reason why God withdraws himself from
the souls of his people, that they shall not have the use of Signs and
Evidences as they had before, because he would teach them to live on the more
necessary acts of faith; God loves the voice of Job, though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him; I will venture my soul upon him, whatever becomes of me;
when there is nothing else to rest on but God, then to live by actings of faith
merely on him, he delights much in this; and therefore take heed you do not
rest so much on signs, as if all your comforts were lost and you undone, when
you cannot have such use of them as you have had heretofore.

Ninthly, when you have at any time lost the use of signs, do not determine
that all is gone, and that you shall never have the use of them more; this is
that that mightily hinders many poor Christians that are in trouble of
Conscience, because they cannot find the evidence of the pardon of their sins,
and that God accepts of them in what they do; what do they do presently? they
yield to the horrible sentence of damnation against themselves: Gods Spirit,
say they is now gone, and he will return no more; he will never come any more
unto me: take heed you do not fasten on any such kind of thoughts as those are,
to determine of your own estates, or that Gods Spirit will not come again: but
do you humble your souls before the Lord, and wait upon him.

Tenthly, When at any time all Signs and Evidences fail you, and you are ready
to determine that all is gone, yet even then keep up good thoughts of God; As
the Spouse in the Canticles when her Beloved was gone, yet she prized him, and
said He is the chiefest of ten thousands in Cant. 5. when she was asked; What
is thy beloved? says she, he is thus, and thus, and then concludes, He is
altogether lovely; and this was at such a time as he was gone, yet she retained
good thoughts of him; so it is a good sign for any soul, that when trouble of
conscience is upon them, or any other trouble, that they retain good thoughts
of God and Christ and the ways of God, when the soul says, whatever become of
me, though I perish for ever, yet God is good, his Word, his ways are good, his
Gospel, and the Covenant in his Son is good; and whatever troubles are upon me,
yet God is righteous; and though God justify not me, yet I will justify God;
if there be any soul that cannot find his Evidences, or any of those signs
before spoken of, you may make use of this; if you cannot find any other, do
what thou can to justify God; thou art afraid that God will not justify
thee, do thou justify him; sometimes it is with many men, as with some
wretched servant that has dealt falsely with his Master, and may be all the
while he can make any advantage of his Master for his own ends, he will speak
well of him, but if his Master turn him out of doors for his wickedness, then
he rails on him; it is ordinary for bad servants to do so when they are turned
away for their wickedness; and so it is with many, when all goes well with
them, then they like well of the ways of God; but if they come to such a
condition as that they think that God will cast them away indeed, and that they
are like to perish, then they begin to have hard thoughts of God, and by
degrees they speak against God and his ways; take heed of this, although you
want the Evidences of his love and mercy, yet retain in your hearts good
thoughts of God and of his ways, and this will be a special help to bring into
your souls the comfort and assurance of your Justification; and now I have done
with this argument, I have showed you who it is that has his sins pardoned, I
have showed the several mistakes, and I have showed you certain infallible
grounds from Scripture Evidences of the pardon of sin, and Rules how to make
use of those Evidences; and now upon what you have heard, you have testimony
and assurance of the pardon of your sins, or you have not; if you find your
hearts do not answer to these Evidences, or that you are afraid that your sins
are not pardoned, then take a use of Exhortation to put you on to seek after
this blessedness.

CHAP. XIX. Of Exhortation to seek after Pardon of Sin, with Cautions and
Rules, how, and what we are to do.
I Am now come to a use of Exhortation, and it concerns us all, either those
that are not pardoned, or those that have assurance of the pardon of their
sins; for there is none that have assurance but may make use of it: Christ
taught his Disciples to pray daily for the forgiveness of their trespasses, as
well as for their daily bread; and what we are to pray for, we are to seek
after; so that it concerns all; blessedness is desirable to all, it is as
natural for man as a reasonable creature to desire blessedness as it is for the
fire to burn; only here is the great mistake in the world, all would have it,
but they look not for it in the right way: Now after all that has been said,
that thou may not have slight thoughts of the pardon of sin, and say, I hope
they are pardoned, and the like; I shall speak to awaken thee: suppose thou
were now set on the brink of the infinite Ocean of Eternity, and the
bottomless Gulf were ready to devour thee, and the Records of Heaven were
opened, and there showed thee that thy sins were not cancelled, but remain upon
the file? What thou would then do, do it now; for this is our time, and this
is the great work of our lives, not to cumber our selves about many things, but
about this one thing, to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; this
is the great work to seek to secure this blessing of the pardon of our sins,
which is the foundation of all; in the obtaining of it we obtain all blessings;
it ought to be our chief care, and we ought to lay out our chief strength and
endeavors in seeking of it; and if God would be pleased to put his hand to
your hearts, and turn the stream of your thoughts and endeavors, the very
turning of your hearts after this business is a great mercy; there is so much
blessedness in it, as not only the obtaining of it, but the very motion of the
heart this way is worth all the world, in Act. 2. we read, there were many
thousands that had their hearts pricked at hearing the Word preached, and they
cried out men and brethren, What shall we do to be saved? O that there were a
disposition in the hearts of men to cry thus; we see it is our blessedness if
we have it; and if we have it not, we are all cursed for ever; What shall we do
to get it? Mar. 10.17. we read of one came running after Christ, saying, What
shall I do to be saved? O that your hearts were now in such a frame to come
running after Christ, saying, What shall we do that our sins may be pardoned:
but before I come to any thing else, it is necessary by way of caution or
proviso to say three or four things.

First, This; that although I must seek after God for the pardon of sin, yet
know there is nothing in a natural man that is or can be acceptable; all his
endeavors have not that in them that can gain him acceptance with God: But
then to what purpose are we to endeavor to do any thing? yes, we must be
striving after the pardon of sin, although without Christ we can do nothing;
and a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit, yet it is to purpose that we be
doing, for God likes well the exercise of the work of common gifts; though they
are not saving, and to eternal life, yet God likes the exercise of them so far
as there is any thing good and commends them; when that young man came to
Christ, Mar. 10.21. Christ looked upon him and loved him, though not with such
a love as to save him and bring him to eternal life, yet God did discover love
to such a one; therefore it is to some purpose that a man should put himself on
doing what he can, if it be only for that. 2. It is to some purpose that the
heart be stirring after God and Christ, because hereby we shall evidence that
we are not so negligent of God and Christ, and the things of eternal life as we
were before. 3. It is to some purpose, for in the stirring of the common works
of Gods Spirit, God many times comes in with saving works; for God works not
upon men as upon stocks or stones, but God puts them on by stirring up the
common works of his Spirit, and at that time when they are most in stirring, it
is Gods usual way to come in with the saving works of his Spirit; therefore it
is not to no purpose that we are putting on poor creatures to do what they can.

The second Caution is this, That whatsoever any one does in seeking after
Christ before he has union with Christ, it is not to be reckoned on as the
condition of the Covenant of Grace or a Gospel-work; there are no preparatory
works for the receiving of Christ, that are the condition of the Covenant of
grace; though they be such things as we must follow after, yet they are not the
condition of the Covenant of grace: Now that that is the condition of the
Covenant of grace sanctifies him that has it, and follows upon our union with
Christ; though God uses to carry on the soul in the way of legal terrors,
humiliations, and the like; yet these are not the work of the Covenant of
grace; and therefore this may help many a poor soul about terrors of Conscience
and humiliations; that are troubled that they never had those degrees as others
have; why as they do not prepare and fit thee for Christ; so the want of them
is no hinderance to the receiving of Christ.

The third Caution is this that follows on the other, That though you put your
selves upon the use of all means to the receiving of Christ, yet take heed you
do not rest in any of those preparatory works, there is a great deal of danger
in that; many souls mistake, and it is to be feared it is in this, the resting
in something that they have done; it may be God has awakened their Consciences,
and they fall upon working, upon humbling and reforming themselves, and here
they rest; but this is a mistake, you must not rest until you find you are in
Christ, and until there be an union with Christ and your souls; the work is not
therefore done because you are humbled and reformed, and run another course to
what you did before. for Romans 9.16. It Is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy; not of him that wills, that is,
that has some good affections to it; nor of him that runs, that is, though
his endeavors be never so strong, yet it is not of him neither: many think they
have peace in their souls upon their good desires and endeavors; when their
hearts are mightily stirred, and they wonderfully enlarged, then they make no
question but all is done, and they quiet their hearts with that, and think
there is no further work to be done; but it is not so; Not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; though we must; will,
and we must run, yet there may be running and striving to enter in, and yet not
enter; this is a very great point, to let us see all of us what need we have of
the free grace of God in pardoning of our sin.

Fourthly, Though God does not tie himself to come in to pardon upon these
preparatory works going before, yet it is worthy of the utmost endeavors of
any soul in the world, that there is a possibility of the obtaining of it;
though God tie not himself to give pardon on those works, yet there is enough
in it to require the utmost endeavors of any one to be laid out, could we do
ten thousand times more than we can, even the very possibility of obtaining
pardon, is worth the calling forth of all our strength; know that the very
possibility of having sin pardoned, is enough to set all your hearts a work to
seek after it, though God do not tie himself to come in then and pardon; it is
not thus, that God would have his creature seek unto him, and then all should
be left unto that seeking; no, for if that were granted, that God did foresee
something that his creature would do, and upon that he would give him pardon,
then all the world would be saved; but all the world do not what they can; if
God had tied himself to come in then when men do what they can, all the world
might be saved; but it is not so: God has left it so that he will have his
creature (do what he can) to rely upon him; and when he does come in, then he
enters into the greatest and strongest bonds that can be to do his creature
good; but I come to enforce the Exhortation for to seek after the pardon of sin.

Quest.
You will say, How must we seek it? and what is to be done?

First, Answ.
In the seeking pardon of your sins set your selves as in the presence of God,
and put this upon your souls; I am now looking after the pardon of sin, but how
do I do it? does my heart work so in it as that I can satisfy my own
Conscience in the work I do? that it is such a work, that may testify my high
respect to God from whom I seek it; is it such a work as manifests that I am
sensible, it is a business of the most infinite concernment that I have in all
the world; and am I sensible of the infinite Power and Majesty of God as one
that is infinitely above me; when you seek after pardon, you must do it so, as
that you may be able to satisfy your Consciences that your seeking is such a
work as does hold forth the glorious greatness of that God that you are seeking
after; many pray slightly, as God be merciful to me, and mumble over a few
words, and have done; does this hold forth that they have such an apprehension
of the greatness of the power of that God they seek after, surely no; that's the
first.

Secondly, If thou will seek after pardon of sin, it must be such a seeking as
may testify that thou do prize thy life here in this world above all things
else in it; because God gives thee time in it to seek after him; Is thy seeking
such that manifests the time of thy life is given the for this very end? if you
were sensible of this, you would seek it in another manner than you do; you
would seek it as a condemned man seeks his pardon; for certainly, every man is
a condemned man, and the time of your life is like a condemned man's time,
between his condemnation and execution: Now does your seeking testify and
witness that you spend your time, and that your hearts are so stirred in seeking
pardon, as that it holds forth you account your lives precious, and use it for
the same end, to get the pardon of your sin, if a condemned man have time to
seek a pardon two or three days; and he follows drinking, playing, and the
like, certainly none would apprehend this man spent his time, as if it were
given him for to get his pardon; look upon the courses and lives of most men;
and are they such that does testify they live to that very end, to seek
pardon? if men were so sensible of it, as they should, they would cry and weep,
and lament unto God for the pardon of their sins, and so carry it as would
testify they prize their lives at a high rate for this end, that they may seek
the pardon of their sins.

Thirdly, It must be done so, as that you may have this testimony in your
Consciences, that you never sought after any thing in the world so as you
sought after this; though it was never so an important occasion, yet there is
nothing after which your endeavors have been so powerful as after this; I
appeal to you in this place; is the work of your souls after pardon so? as
that in your own Consciences you can say, if any business ever took up my
heart, this has, if ever my spirit was up in any thing in the world it is in
this; certainly, unless it be so, you have not done that that God requires of
you.

Fourthly, You must so do it as apprehending God is ready to be gone, and to
turn away from you; you must so seek after him, as apprehending, for ought you
know, that God is just a going away; and if thou have it not now, it is
uncertain whether thou shall ever have it; the soul must cry as a poor
Malefactor does when the Judge is on the Bench, he cries all that while; but
when he is ready to rise, and is going off, then he cries mercy, mercy; when he
thinks, if he let him go, then he shall never see his face more; he cries then
to purpose; so should it be with every soul that understands the danger of
losing of it; you should so seek after it, as looking on your selves standing
before God the Judge of all the World, having the sentence of death out against
you, yet for the present God is looking on you, and admits of you to look on
him; but so as apprehending God ready to turn aside, and you know not whether
ever he will grant you such an opportunity of seeing him any more; O then if a
man would seek after God as ready to turn aside from him, and for ought he
knows, he should never see him more: Certainly, if you know the evil of sin,
and the blessedness of pardon of sin; What a deep impression would such an
apprehension make upon your hearts.

Fifthly, So seek after it as that thou may testify thou would sanctify
the great Name of God in it; I do not say thou can do it, but thou must
endeavor after it, and desire that that which thou do may have some
resemblance to it; there is no work that ever God did from all eternity, that
has so much or more of his Name in it, than this work of the pardon of sin
has; this is a positive work of God, and is for this end to declare his Name;
the works and Counsels of God about this was the greatest thing that ever God
did; you heard much concerning the glory of God in this work, in the opening of
the Doctrine: Now what I put you upon in the use is this, That in seeking
pardon of sin, know you are are so to endeavor after it, as your endeavors
may hold forth the apprehensions your souls have of the great Name of God:
certainly this sanctifies Gods Name when we perform it so, when there is a work
upon our souls suitable in some measure to the excellent and glorious Name of
God that appears in some measure in the work that we are conversant about: as
suppose it be the speaking of any attribute of God, then I sanctify Gods Name,
when there is that reverential respect to God in reference to such an
Attribute; so when I give God praise for a mercy, I sanctify Cods Name when
there is a work upon my heart suitable to that glorious Name of God that
appears in that mercy bestowed on me; so if I seek after God for a blessing,
then I reverence Gods Name, when there is such a disposition in my heart, that
is somewhat suitable to the glorious Name of God that appears in that blessing:
so in endeavoring to sanctify Gods Name in seeking after pardon of sin, thou
do it then, when there is such a frame in thy heart as may hold forth to Men
and Angels, that this work of thine has some kind of suitableness to the
glorious Name of God that appears in it; this is to sanctify the Name of God,
and this is a great work; this is the great thing for which thou wast made; and
this is the great thing for which the counsels of God, yea the deep counsels of
God were set a work from all eternity: Now the dispositions of our spirits must
be such, as may manifest the great end, the wisdom and counsels of God had in
it, and therefore it must be a great work that must manifest that; for
certainly those whom God pardons he makes them understand what pardon means.
Now th^n, if thy seeking be such as that thou know what it is thou seek
after, then it must hold forth also that thou do understand the Name of God
is exceeding glorious in it; and then as thou do apprehend this, so
accordingly thy heart will work after it; and therefore when you are alone, and
you find your hearts working this way, say, What do I do? Do I so call upon
him, and seek after him, as that this work of mine declares to God and my own
Conscience I seek for it so, as that I may manifest the glorious Name of the
great God is in it? certainly if I do not do it thus, I take Gods Name in vain.

Sixthly, Further, you must seek after it as if you were now to answer for all
your sins before the Lord, as you would wish you had done it then, so do it
now; I put it to every one of you; Have you not been on your sick-beds, and in
your apprehension near unto death; has not God wakened your Consciences, and
you have been afraid upon the account of your sins; what kind of temper your
souls have been in then, know it concerns you every day in the whole course of
your lives to have the same apprehensions as you had at that time; do now as
then you would have done: certainly thou do not understand what pardon of sin
means, if thou do not seek it thus.

Seaventhly, Do it as thou think in thy Conscience the damned souls in Hell
would do if God should give them a possibility, What would they do if God
should proclaim unto them a possibility of pardon? what would they do? diverse
things you may conceive they would do; and here it comes up fully to my hand to
put you upon it, ^o say, O! what shall I do? Were we to preach to them in Hell,
do you think that there is any one of them but would mightily cry to the God of
Heaven; it is not like that any one of such an Auditory but would mightily cry
to God, if the great counsels of God concerning pardon of sin were preached to
them; and will not every one of you now mightily cry to God for it? certainly
if they would do it in Hell, Why should not you do it now; that which you think
they would do, not with a few slight vain expressions, do you do now with all
your might.

Eighthly, Do this: so seek after it as to desire if it were possible that you
might bring as much glory unto God, as he would have had of you if he should
have damned you for ever; this is an excellent frame of spirit though you do
not know it, but though you do not, yet you should put your selves upon such a
kind of work and God may come in; you cry out for pardon, but never cry out for
Gods honor, O what shall become of the honor of God that he has lost by me,
and the dishonor I have brought to him, say, O Lord I have dishonored thy
Name, O that I might so honor thy Name as I have dishonored it; O Lord thou
might make up thy honor in my eternal damnation; but O Lord, I would if I
could do any thing that might make up that dishonor that I have brought by my
sin, if I could do any thing that thou might have any honor in, I would do
it: for a close, I shall put this for a consideration to you; whatsoever you
would do upon any supposition, suppose your danger were as great as ever it was
in all your lives, what you would do then do it now; you must do all that can
be done by a creature: Now if you would do more on such a supposition as this,
after all those Sermons you have heard of the evil of sin, and now of the great
blessedness of the pardon of sin, if you do not do what a creature is able to
do, How can you look for pardon of sin in the face of God? and therefore what
you would do on any such supposition, do now, though thou should not get
pardon; suppose such a thing as if thou were now ready to be damned, yet is it
not better to do it, than not to do it? Having spoken of these general things,
I come now more garticularly to the other part of the Question, What is to be
done?

First, This is to be done, be sure thou take off thy heart from all other
imaginary blessedness; certainly there is no man in the world but has somewhat
else his heart was running out after; now thou must get off thy heart from that
thing whatever it be; it may be thy heart was set upon friends, or upon
pleasures of the flesh, and thou thoughtest thy self happy the more thou had
liberty for thy lust, and the like; now thou must be convinced that thou have
fed upon ashes, and have not been able to say there is a lie in my right hand;
but God has now showed me there is a lie, and I have looked for happiness else
where; but now I see it is not there to be found, win thy soul fully to this; O
my soul art thou taken off from all other things, has God convinced thee that
thou may have honors, riches, pleasures, and yet be a Reprobate, woe unto me
for the time that I have lost, I have laid out my time and money for another
blessedness, that is no where to be found but in the grace of God.

Secondly, Let Conscience have free liberty to show thee thy sins, and charge
them upon thee, yea to accuse and condemn thee, and do thou help thy
Conscience; when Conscience accuses and condemns, then do thou condemn thy
self; if thou would be pardoned, then give Conscience scope and liberty;
it is very dangerous when God begins to stir the hearts of men and women, to
make any stop or give any check to Conscience there, the wisest course is to
give Conscience liberty, for it will have liberty one day to accuse and condemn
you; Why will you not now give it liberty? Conscience will one day bring all
thy evil deeds before thee and accuse thee; now let it accuse and condemn thee,
and certainly if thou do so, thou art in a very good way to come to have
absolution of thy sins in thy Conscince now; for at the great day the Books
shall be opened: Now bring as it were a day of Judgment upon thy self, contract
the Throne of God into your own hearts, and call for the Book of Conscience,
and say, Conscience? What say thou against me that I may get it blotted out
now, that it may not be read against me at the day of Judgment?

Thirdly, Be willing to own all thy sins, confess, discover them with all the
heartbreaking circumstances and aggravations thou can possible, the Lord
knows thy sins whether thou confessest them or not; but God will have thee to
come and lay them open, God will have thee to come and charge thy self with
them: it is a very good thing to open Conscience freely before the Lord, not in
a slight way, but in a way of anguish and bitterness of spirit bewailing them,
and crying by way of Prayer and Petition against them.

Fourthly, Be willing to accept of the punishment of sin, say, O Lord, as thus
I do charge and acknowledge, bewail and cry out of my sin; so here I am Lord,
ready and willing to accept of the punishment of my sin, and the soul that is
in this frame is in a comfortable way of pardon of sin.

Fifthly, Resolve to avoid sin whatever come of it, at that very time when thou
art seeking pardon, of sin be sure to resolve never to sin again, for know,
that for ought thou know, the very next sin thou committest may make God
come upon thee for all thy former sins. And then

Sixthly, Cast out whatsoever is gotten by false ways, make restitution, as
Zacheus did, Luke 19.

Seaventhly, Be sure that thou be put off with nothing else but pardon of sin;
never rest keeping thy soul always in a waiting frame, looking up to God for
pardon: To all these things I shall add, that all these must have reference to
the great work of the Son of God, when you cry out, What shall we do? though I
have spoken of diverse things, yet know all is with reference unto Christ the
Son of God, God-Man; look upon him as the head of the second Covenant offering
up himself for our sins, let thine eye be upon him, and as thou give thy
Conscience liberty to charge thy sins upon thy own soul, so charge them upon
Christ the head of the second Covenant; have an eye to him for the discharge of
them; Do thou vomit up thy sin by confession, and cry to God for pardon?
remember that thou cry to him through the mediation of Jesus Christ; look upon
him that must make up the breach, restore thee to favor, and remove the curse:
in every work be sure thou eye Christ, and make use of these rules so, as may
further the venturing of thy soul upon Christ; except thy soul rise to this, to
work thee to Christ, all the other is but a natural work, though as I said
before, that thou should let Conscience condemn thee, and that thou have
anguish of spirit, know all these are but natural works, any further then they
serve in reference unto Christ: And now I have showed you what you are to do,
What is it that you will do? will you set up your resolution, that through the
grace of God in Christ, whatever has been told you, you will set about the
same, then happy are you; but if you do it not, it may be you may wish you had
done it when sin lies heavy on you; then you will cry that God would be
merciful to you, but then God and Conscience will say, I warned you at such a
time, in such a place, and were not you there put in a way to seek after
pardon; What did you do after you went away? the next day you went among your
Companions, and were as drunk and as wicked as ever before; if it be so, then
trouble will be upon you; it may be some poor creature that sat in the same pew
with thee, had a heart to seek pardon, and is absolved before men and Angels,
and at the day of Judgment shall sit at Christ's right hand, and thou that
heardest the same Word, and have neglected it, now come to have thy soul for
ever lie under the weight and burden of thy sins: God forbid that there should
be such a difference made; thou have heard the way, seek after the pardon of
thy sin; let it not be in vain that all these Sermons have been preached unto
you, Act. 10.43. when they preached about pardon of sin, it says to him give
all the Prophets witness; O that you might come in and give witness that this
day remission of sin was preached unto you; O that while you hear this Word,
the Holy Ghost might fall upon you, that you might have your hearts fired with
strong resolutions, to set about this work in the power of the Holy Ghost, and
rest not in any thing on this side of a pardon: Now I come to give you some
encouragements, and they will work two ways, either draw you to Christ, or for
ever stop your mouths, that you shall have nothing to say against him. I shall
name fifteen encouragements unto you.

CHAP. XX. Of Encouragements to seek after Pardon of Sin.
FIrst, The time of your life is given for this very end, to seek the pardon of
your sins; if a man have any great business to do that concerns his life, and
another comes to him, and says, Sir, this is the very nick of time that you
have taken, or else you had been lost for ever, so this is the very nick of
time given you to get pardon of your sins and interest in the blood of Christ.

Secondly, This time is not only afforded for this end, but the means the Lord
has brought you under is a great argument that he intends mercy for you, and
you may conclude there are more of Gods Elect may have pardoning mercy than in
former times; the light of the Gospel breaks forth, and certainly there is more
to be brought in, the Gospel is the fruit of Christ's death, and given for the
Elects sake, Act. 18.9, 10. he bids him go end preach, for he had much people;
he should have opposition, but go, be not afraid, for I have much people in
that place; it is true, the rain will fall upon the tiles as well as on the
tender herbs and grass; but certainly where God sends his Word he has people
to be gathered in; and if you take notice of Gods Providence in this point, it
may much encourage you to come in, certainly there be many in this
Congregation, and in others, where the Word is preached, that he will pardon,
Mar. 10.46. The blind man hearing it was Christ that past by, he cried for
mercy, and many charged him to hold his peace, but he cried the more, and
Christ stood still and called him unto him: Now if thou see thy sin, and
cryest for pardon, Christ will call thee to give pardoning mercy to thee as he
did Bartimeus.

Thirdly, It may be thou art not only under the means of grace and the outward
call, but thou begin'st to feel an inward call, there are some stirrings of
Gods Spirit within thee; thou could say before, thou wonderedst what the
matter was with people to run after Sermons, but now thou begin'st to feel the
effect of it, And the glory of God appears to thee in this place, when thou art
hearing of his Word; thou may hence reason, as Manoa's wife, Judge. 13.23.
That certainly if God had intended to have killed us, he would not have
received a burnt Offering and a meat Offering at our hands; neither would he
have showed us all these things; so say to thy soul, if God had intended to
kill me, he would not have been so willing to have drawn me after him, neither
would he have showed me all these things, and let that be an encouragement unto
thee.

Fourthly, The end why God continues this world in being, is that he might give
pardon to his Elect; certainly this world had been dissolved long ago, if it
were not that he might bring pardon to his Elect, and to those that see their
sins; this must needs be a great encouragement to a soul, viz. to those that
see their sins, to come in; when this pardoning work is done, Christ will
deliver up his Kingdom to his Father; if a malefactor should come to sue out
his pardon, and one should say unto him, it is well Sir you are come, for the
King would not have kept his Court so long here, but that you should come in;
were not this a great encouragement? so say I, were it not that men should come
to get the pardon of their sins, the Court of the world would have been broken
up long before this time,

Fifthly, The principal scope of the Scriptures is for this very end, to reveal
the pardoning grace of God; you have here the heart of God laid open; Christ
wept and mourned that sinners would not come in, that they might be pardoned
and saved. Simile.
I have read a story, that in Athens there was a Temple, and in that there was
a woman weeping, and in one hand she had a bleeding Heart, and with the other
she was writing Pardons; so Christ he stands weeping over you, that you will
not come in, and he has a bleeding heart, bleeding for you in the one hand,
and with the other hand he is ready to write you a pardon, Luke 19.41, 42. nay,
he does not only weep: But the

Sixth encouragement may be, He sends his Ambassadors to woe you to come in,
and tells them they shall not take a denial at your hands, 2 Cor. 5.20. They
entreat and beg as in his Name, nay it is the beseechings and intreatings of
God himself; as if a King should send one of the Attendants on him to a poor
condemned Prisoner, and say, go tell such a one that he must come for his
pardon, and tell him, I beseech him, and take no denial of him, I beseech him
to come in; would not this manifest the great willingness of the King to
pardon; God does so, he sends his Ministers and beseeches you to come in and
take a pardon; it is as certain God speaks thus by his Ministers, as if you
heard God speaking by himself, this should move you to come in, Christ begs and
entreats you to be reconciled, that his blood might not be shed in vain: seeing
it is so, that God begs of thee to come in, why should not thou come in, and
take pardon of thy sin, Why can not thou come in and give up thy self and
all thou have and art to him.

Seventhly, Know it is the great office and work of Christ's mediatorship to
bind up the broken hearts of wounded sinners, Isai. 61.1. The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, and he has anointed me, he has sent me to preach good
tidings to the meek; he has seat me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim
liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound;
this in the New Testament is applied to Christ. Now this being the great work
for which Christ came into the world, to bind up the brokenhearted, see
whether thou can not rely on Christ by an act of faith, this should be a
great encouragement.

Eighthly, Consider that, that God thou have to deal withal, his nature is
mercy in the abstract; and if so, he is free in his mercy; as the Sun shines,
because it is the nature of it to shine; so the mercy of God must needs work
freely, because it is his nature; as the fire burns naturally, Exodus 34. and
Mic. 7.18. God pardons because he delights in mercy; thou say thou art a
poor sinner; well, though it be so, yet thou may say, though God can see
nothing in me, yet seeing that he is a God that delights in mercy, this may
move me to come in: For

1. He has more delight in pardoning any sinner than in all the creatures of
Heaven and Earth; God delights in all the works of his hands; but in this he
delights in more than in all; he delights in them all, but not so much as in
magnifying his grace in Jesus Christ; for in this he magnifies his Son, and
therefore he has more pleasure, and takes more delight in pardoning a poor
humbled sinner, than in all the works of his hands besides.

2. No one can take so much pleasure in the salvation of his own soul, as God
does in pardoning of thy sin; and the reason is, because this is the greatest
design that God has, which is the setting out of his glory in his pardoning
mercy in Christ, and therefore this may be a great encouragement.

3. God is more delighted in the work of thy heart closing with free grace,
than in all the legal works of humiliation; what says Christ? this is the good
will and pleasure of God; and David was called a man after Gods own heart; Why?
because he was a man that would do his will; so that this is a great
encouragement, though many abuse this and pervert it to their own destruction,
yet God will have it taught, that thou might have the comfort of it, and
therefore thou should close with God and come in, and take hold of his
pardoning mercy.

Ninthly, Though God has taken such a way in mercy to pardon sin, yet he
loses nothing in his justice; Christ has taken such order that his glory
shall no way be diminished, his justice shall be satisfied; and therefore thou
need'st not say thus, I have so sinned against God that I know not, that I
cannot tell how to make up his glory; for there is care taken for that already,
and therefore that need not discourage thee.

Tenthly, There are as vile sinners now Triumphing in Heaven as any of you that
are here, be you never so black and vile, and therefore be not discouraged at
the greatness of thy sins; for though they be very great, yet that may not keep
thee out, others as vile as thou art, are now in Heaven.

Eleventhly, Make the utmost of thy sin thou can, yet this need not hinder
thee to come to God for: for ought that either men or Angels know* thou have as
much interest in Christ as any Saint in Heaven over had, and if thou come in
and layest hold on Christ, thy very laying hold on Christ will plainly show
thou have a right unto him, and therefore be not discouraged but come in.

Twelfthly, Upon thy closing with Christ, thou will find such a change as was
never wrought in any creature besides; for though thou were vile and filthy,
more vile and filthy than a child new born by original and actual sins
engendered in thee, yet thou shall be made cleaner than a child, and more pure
in the eyes of God than any child cleansed from his filthiness; would not you
do any thing to be pure in the eyes of God, make use of what I say, and you
shall be clean; when you hear the Ministers utter the threatenings of God you
fall out with the man, and say, he preaches nothing but terror; alas it is our
delight to preach the pardoning grace of God; but we must show the evil of sin,
and it is that you might come in and embrace mercy; for know, we delight to
preach mercy more than any thing else; and know, that if thou desire that all
thy thoughts, ways and actions may be for Gods glory, he will not upbraid thee
for coming in unto him, Joh. 6.37. He that comes to Christ, he will in no wise
cast out; though thou have been never so great a sinner, yet thou may come
in and close with Christ; for he that comes to him, be he what he will, he will
in no wise cast out.

Thirteenthly, Thou will fill Heaven with joy, and there will be more melody in
Heaven than at the coming in of any Prince to his Kingdom; and I may say unto
you, even in this place, if you come in, the Angels will rejoice at it; for
there are many Angels stand about you; therefore take heed of your carriage,
for they come to see your behavior; have a special care your hearts be set
upon the work you come about, for they are here to see how you carry your
selves.

Fourteenthly, In obtaining pardon of sin and closing with Christ by faith,
thou art made heir of the whole world, Romans 4.13. How does many of you
Mariners, and others venture upon dangerous voyages to get great Estates in
this world, and you count them happy that are born to great Estates; Why, by
closing with Jesus Christ by faith for remission of sins, you are made heirs of
the whole world, I mean not of that to come, but of this present world, though
none of you certainly desire more than may carry you to Heaven, yet you are
true and proper heirs of the whole world: All is yours, the Scripture is very
clear in it; but I cannot now stand to enlarge upon it, 1 Cor. 3. latter end.

Fifteenthly, For any thing thou know, thou art one of Gods Elect, and there
is nothing thou art to do, but God has promised to enable thee to do it; for
there is such a transaction between God and Christ, that he that shall be saved
shall not have only savor vouchsaf't unto him, but shall be enabled to do
whatsoever God requires of him, there shall be grace given to every one of the
Elect of God. And now if thou come in and give up thy self, and all that
thou art, have or can do to Christ: How know thou but thou art one of
those that art Elect, and so shall be made for ever happy? But if after all
that has been said, thou go away with slight thoughts of this rich and
transcendent grace of pardoning mercy, and do not set presently upon the work
to obtain it, Be thou for ever ashamed and confounded, but let the pardoning
mercy of God be for ever magnified.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Principal Things contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Text opened, and the main Doctrine propounded, viz. page 1 Doct.
That the blessedness of a man, or of any soul, consists in the free grace of
God forgiving of his sin. 4
CHAP. II. Of the blessedness of the pardon of sin, which appears 6 1.
Negatively in the evil it frees us from. ibid. 2. Positively in the good
bestowed upon us: therein consider 8 1 The Efficient cause of mercy in
forgiveness of sin. ibid. 2 The Final cause of mercy in forgiveness of sin. 9

CHAP. III. Of 11 wonderful Mysteries of Godliness included in in the great
mercy of forgiveness of Sin. 10 1 It is by means of a Mediator. 11 2 It is
through Christ's undertaking the debt upon himself. 12 3 It is by Christ's
sufferings. 13 4 Sin pardoned makes the soul stands righteous before God. 14 5
This righteousness is in another. ibid. 6 A near union is made between Christ
and the Soul 15 7 It is by faith, yet boasting is excluded. 16 8 God is
infinitely just, and yet infinitely merciful. 18 9 When God forgives sin at
present, he forgives all to come 19 10 God pardons a sinner not because he is,
but that he might be changed. 25 11 God himself purchases the Pardon. 27
CHAP. IV. Of Pardon of Sin, not only being a mercy in it self, but the
Foundation of many other Mercies. 28 1 Peace 1 with God. 2 with 1 Conscience. 2
Creatures.

30 32 33
2 The Revelation of Gods secrets to them he pardons. ibid. 3 It makes all
other enjoyments to be mercies which otherwise are not. 38 1 By reason of guilt
of sin. 39 2 Not known whether they be given in love or hatred. ibid.
4 It makes all afflictions easy to be borne. 40 1 The great good of pardon
makes the bitterest evil nothing. 41 2 It assures the soul the evil of
affliction is gone. 42
5 Pardoning mercy brings healing with it into the soul. 43 6 Comfort against
death the effect of pardoning mercy. 45 7 Security against the worlds
reproaches. 46 8 It is the foundation of eternal life. 48 9 It is the bottom of
all true comfort. ibid.
CHAP. V. Of Pardoning Mercy passing through a great many difficulties by
reason of the wrong that man has done to God by Sin. 49 1 God must be made
Man, and yet remain the same God he was before. 50 2 He must die and be made a
curse. ibid. 3 The dead heart of man must be raised to do the gloriousest work
that any creature ever did. 51 Hence 1 it is a great taking the Name of God in
vain, for any man or woman to have slight thoughts of sin. ibid. 2 Men should
be content to endure much difficulty in seeking of Pardon. ibid. 3 The
difficulties pardon of sin passes through, should make us willing to undergo
any hard services God puts us to. 52

CHAP. VI. Of Pardoning Mercy coming from the Fountain of Gods Everlasting
Love. 52 CHAP. VII. Of Pardoning Mercy being a work that all the three Persons
in the Trinity are engaged in. 54 1 God the Father's heart was in it. ibid. 2
Christ the Son's heart was in it. 55 3 The Holy Ghost was much in it. 56
CHAP. VIII. Of Pardoning Mercy being a perfect mercy. 60 Hence 1 Flows out
abundance of comfort. 61 2 Great engagement unto duty. ibid.
CHAP. IX. Of Pardoning Mercy being an Irrevocable Mercy. 62 This appears 1 In
Gods blotting out of sin. 64 2 Casting it behind his back. 65 3 Removing it as
far as the East is from the West. ibid. 4 Casts them in the bottom of the Sea.
ibid. 5 He will remember them no more. ibid. 6 They shall never be mentioned.
ibid. 7 They shall never be found. 67
CHAP. X. Of Pardon of Sin, being a mercy denied to fallen Angels. 69 CHAP. XI.
Of Pardoning Mercy being such that it is given but to a few. 71 1 Because God
would have a proportion between his Justice and Mercy. 72 2 To manifest his
Mercy the more to those that are saved. ibid.
CHAP. XII. Of the possibility of Pardoning Mercy, how it would be prized by
poor Souls now under wrath. 74 CHAP. XIII. Of Pardon of Sin being the special
end of all God's Ordinances. 76 1. Hearing of the Word. ibid. 2. The
Sacraments. 78 3 Discipline. 79 A Transition to the Application of what is to
be said to these things. ibid.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Dishonor done by Men to the Pardoning Grace of God. 81 1 By
careless ones. 82 2 By sinful ones who labor to increase guilt. 84 3 Those
that have slight thoughts of Pardon. 87 4 Such as seek Pardon, but are
insensible of the greatness of the work. 89 5 Those that dally with God, and 92
1 That cry for pardon, and yet continue in love to their sin. ibid. 2 That seek
the pardon of some sins, yet still keep the love of others. 94 3 That look not
after their Prayers. 95 4 That follow not their Prayers with answerable
endeavors. ibid. 5 Those that pray for pardon, and yet are satisfied with
other things. ibid.
6 Those that are quiet upon weak and slight Evidences, dishonor God, 96 1 The
Word. 97 2 The Word put in writing. ibid. 3 Witnesses, and they are six 3 in
Heaven, and 3 on Earth.
ibid. 4 An Oath. ibid. 5 Seals. 98 1 The Broad Seal of the Image of God. ibid.
2 The Privy Seal of the Spirit of God. ibid. 3 Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord. ibid.

7 Those dishonor Gods Mercy that defer the seeking of it to the worst times,
as Sickbed or Deathbed time. 99 1 Because they leave not sin till sin is
leaving them. 100 2 That time is usually the time of Gods wrath. ibid. 3 A man
is then unfit for the greatness of this work. 101 4 God will loose a great part
of his end in pardoning mercy. 102 5 It argues a base spirit to put it off till
then, that all the tag-rag and rabble-rout will come in ibid.
8 They dishonor the pardoning grace of God that seek it any other way then in
and through the Mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ. ibid. 9 Those that venture
on any one sin in hopes they may be pardoned 107 1 It argues an abominable
heart. 111 2 An ingenious gracious spirit would never do it. ibid. 3 Gods
Children reason to the contrary. 112 4 In some respect thou art worse than the
damned in Hell. 113 5 This will be an intolerable burden to thee, that will
endanger the sinking of thy soul in the bottomless gulf of despair. 114
10 They dishonor the Pardoning Grace of God that sin after pardon, as 115 1
That return to the same sin. 116 2 That are negligent in the ways of God. 117 1
They remember not the days of old. 118 2 Are in danger of losing their
Evidences. 120 3 This may provoke God to deal with you as a slave, and not as a
son. 122 4 Hereby thy sin is aggravated above the sins of the wicked. ibid.


CHAP. XV. Of the dishonor done to the Grace of God by not resting on it. 125
1 It argues low thoughts of the pardoning Grace of God. 126 2 Thou hereby
judge of God according to thy own thoughts 127 3 It Is contrary to the main
scope of the Scriptures, which is to magnify the pardoning grace of God 128 1
Against the greatness of sin. ibid. 2 The way thou take it is the ready way to
perish. 129
Object. Would you have us go on to believe and doubt no more? 130 Answ. No.
But 1 Turn your fears of Presuming into fears of Dishonouring the Grace of God.
131 2 Set the greatness of the Pardoning Grace of God before the eye of your
souls. ibid. 3 Keep your spirits in an active frame. 132 4 Renew your
Resolutions of Honoring God whatever God does with you. ibid. 5 Keep thy heart
in a waiting frame. ibid. 6 Catch hold of any beginnings. 133
Of the evil of this sin of dishonouring the pardoning Grace of God. ibid. 1 It
is a sinning against mercy which God accounts his glory. ibid. 2 It aggravates
the sin of such men. 134. 1 Above the sin of the Heathen. ibid. 2 Above the sin
of the Devils. 135
3 The Scripture speaks dreadfully of it. ibid.
CHAP. XVI. Of the several Mistakes of Men about the Pardon of their Sins. 1
Many think their sins are pardoned, because it is but little they are guilty
of. Answ. 140 1 Such understand not the evil that is in the least sin. ibid. 2
Gods mercy is his own to do with it as he pleases. ibid.
2 Others think they are pardoned, because they have not multiplied and
increast them. 142 Answ. One sin is enough to damn thee as well as a million of
transgressions. ibid. 3 Others think they are pardoned, because the guilt of
them does not lie upon their Consciences. Answered. 143 4 Others think they are
pardoned, because they have had prosperity, Answ. 145 5 Others hope they are
pardoned, because 1 They are sorry for them: Answ. 146 2 Leave them: Answ. 151
1 All Reformation satisfies not for sin. 153 2 God accepts of duties not for
themselves, but because of the person that performs them. 154
3 Others say, we trust in the mercy of God, and they are 1 Such as are most
grossly ignorant: Answ. 155 2 Others more knowing: Answ. 157
4 Others say, We rely upon Christ: Answ. 161

CHAP. XVII. Of the true Evidences of Forgiveness of Sin. 162 1 They are such
as are Called Ones. 163 2 They are received into the Covenant with God. 169 3
They are translated into the Kingdom of his Son. 171 4 They have much given
unto them. 173 1 The Spirit to inlighten them. 174 2 God will write his law in
their hearts. ibid. 3 God will give them cleansing mercies. ibid.
5 They have a glory put upon them. 175 6 They are made to know what pardon
means. 177 7 They have melting hearts for sin. ibid. 8 They have a growth in
grace according to the degrees of pardon. 179 9 They have an answerable work in
their souls to the work of Gods grace in pardoning them. 181 10 They have a
merciful frame of heart to forgive others. 182
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Rules how to apply the Evidences of the Pardon of Sin. 1
If you cannot find all, yet if you find any one of them, you may take comfort
because all are there. 185 2 Have recourse to Gods former workings. 187 3 Try
not your selves in times of temptation. 189 4 What of the Word you find on your
side, keep close to that 191 5 Renew your Evidences if you cannot find your old
ones. 193 6 Remember you are to deal with God in a Covenant of Grace 195 7 When
you want the faith of Assurance, put forth the work of faith of Adherence. 199
8 Rest not much upon Evidences. 200 9 When you have lost the use of signs at
present, do not determine all is gone. 201 10 Keep up good thoughts of God when
you are at the lowest. ibid.
CHAP. XIX. Of Exhortation to seek after Pardon of Sin, with Cautions and Rules
how to seek, and what we are to do. 1 Caution, Know, nothing in a natural man
can be acceptable to God. 204 2 What is done before Union with Christ, is not
to be reckoned on as the condition of the Covenant of Grace. 205 3 Rest not on
any Preparatory works. ibid. 4 Yet such works are worthy of our utmost
endeavors. 206
Rules how to seek
1 Set your selves as in the presence of God. 207 2 See it be such a seeking
that may testify thou prisest thy life here in this world for this end. 207 3
It must be done so, as that you never sought any thing in this world so us you
seek this. 208 4 Do it as apprehending that God is a going. ibid. 5 So seek
after it, as that thou may testify thou sanctifiest the Name of God in it.
209 6 So seek as if you were now to answer for all your sins before the Lord.
210 7 Do it as thou think in thy Conscience the damned souls in Hell would
do it, if they had a possibility granted them. ibid. 8 Seek after it with a
desire to bring as much glory to God as if he should damn you. 211
Of what is to be done in seeking
1 Be sure to take the heart from all other imaginary blessedness. ibid. 2 Let
Conscience have free liberty to show thee thy sins. 212 3 Be willing to own all
thy sins. ibid. 4 Be willing to accept of the punishment of sin* 213 5 Resolve
to avoid sin whatever come of it. ibid. 6 Cast out whatsoever is gotten by
false ways. ibid. 7 Be sure thou be put of with nothing else but pardon of
sin. ibid.
CHAP. XX. Of Encouragements to seek after Pardon of Sin. 1 The time of your
life is given you for this end. 215 2 The means you are under, argues that God
intends mercy for you. ibid. 3 From the stirrings of Gods Spirit thou may
argue God intends thee good. ibid. 4 The world is continued for this end, that
God may gather in his Elect. 216 5 The Principal scope of the Scriptures is for
this end, to reveal the pardoning Grace of God. ibid. 6 God sends his
Ambassadors to woe you. 217 7 It is the great work of Christ's Mediatorship to
bind up broken hearts. ibid. 8 God whom thou have to deal withal, his nature is
mercy in the abstract. ibid. 1 He more delights in pardoning any one sinner,
than in all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth. ibid. 2 He takes more pleasure
in saving the^ than thou do thy self. 218 3 God more delights in the work of
the heart closing with (...) grace than in all Legal Humiliations. ibid.
9 Christ has satisfied Gods Justice. ibid. 10 As vile sinners as thou art,
are now in Heaven. ibid. 11 Make the utmost thou can of thy sin, yet this
need not hinder thee to come to God. ibid. 12 On closing with Christ thou will
find such a change as was never in any creature besides. 119 13 Thy coming in,
will fill Heaven and Earth with joy. ibid. 14 Thou art hereby made heir of the
whole world. ibid. 15 For any thing thou know thou art one of Gods Elect,
and so there is nothing that thou art to do, but he has promised to enable
thee to do it. 220

FINIS.

