A Hue and Cry AFTER THE FALSE PROPHETS AND DECEIVERS Of Our Age; AND A
DISCOVERY of them by their Works and Fruits, and who they are in this Age that
follow the same spirit, and act the same things as did the false Prophets in
former Generations.
FOrasmuch as in the World at this day, and through all Christian Nations,
there is a great Cry concerning false Prophets and Deceivers, each one sort and
sect of people accusing and charging the Teachers and Ministers that are of
others, and not of their way, to be Deceivers and false Prophets. Thus the
Papists cry against the Protestant Ministers, and the Protestant Ministers do
the like by the Papists, each one sort of people cries the like against the
Ministers of the others.

And without all controversy, there are in the Christian World (so called) and
in these Kingdoms many false Prophets and Deceivers even at this day, and has
been for many Ages, since the days of the Apostles; And the World, and
Nations, and multitudes have been deceived into the way of Error through the
means of the Deceivers, who have done much hurt in the world by their
Divinations and Antichristian ways that they have walked in; But though it is
acknowledged by all sorts of Christians, That there are and have been many
Deceivers and false Prophets, yet the great Controversy is at this day, who
are the Deceivers and false Prophets? seeing (as I have said) that every sort
of men are accusing others to be such. But now it remains to be sought out [and
that carefully by all] who are the Deceivers and false Prophets; whether Papist
Ministers, or Protestant Ministers, or whether any others; and who such are in
this day.

Now therefore for this very end, that it may be made manifest unto all, who
the Deceivers are, and that they may be turned from, and their ways eschewed
by all people: Thus I try them, and bring them to right and true Judgment, and
shall not charge and Papists, the Protestants, or any others, by their Name, or
because of their Name that therefore they are Deceivers: But seeing that all
sorts of Christians do profess the Scriptures; and that they own them,
Therefore according to the Scriptures, and by the Spirit of God, I shall lay
both Papists and Protestants, and all others, to the Line of Judgment, by the
Rule of Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them; and if* Papists,
Protestants, or whose Ministers soever come under the Judgment of that Rule,
they shall be concluded by the Rule of the Spirit of God and the Scriptures, to
be false Prophets and Deceivers: Therefore come out Papists, Protestants,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and all others, come forth and hear your Trial, and
receive your Judgment.

First of all, it is concluded (and that I hope by all reasonable men) That
whosoever they are at this day through the world, whether Papists of
Protestants (so called) or whoever, that shall be found walking by the same
spirit, and in the same ways, and doing the same things that the false
Prophets of Israel did in the days of old, and that the false Brethren and
false Teachers among the Churches of the Christians in the Apostles days
walked in and followed, such may at this day be adjudged, deemed, and taken to
be false Prophets and false Teachers, Deceivers and Seducers, and this without
respect to any Name or Title whatsoever that they bear in their Religion. And
this is the Rule of Trial and Judgment, in which I may justly and righteously
proceed.

1. They were false Prophets and Deceivers in the days of the true Prophets,
Isa. 56. 11. That were greedy dumb Dogs, which could never have enough; and
that sought every one of them for their gain from their quarter; and that
preached for Hire, and divined for Money, Mic. 3. 11. The Priests that taught
for Hire, and the Prophets that divined for Money, against such as these Isaiah
and Micah cried, and that by the Spirit of the Lord, being commanded of Him so
to do.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants of any sort, Independents,
Presbyterians, Quakers, or any other, that have a Quarter from which they seek
their Gain for Preaching, and teach for Hire, and have Hire for Teaching, (
viz.) Tithes or Sums of Money, and divines for Money; such, whatsoever they be,
without respect of their Names or Professions, walk by the same spirit, and in
the same way, and do the same things as the false Prophets did, and are false
Prophets and Deceivers: And therefore all People, it is left to the Witness of
God in your Consciences, and that you may give witness in this Case, who are
they now, and where they are that can never have enough, but are greedy after
gain and covetous, and that seek for Gain from their Quarters, or Portions of a
Country or City, And where are they now? and who is it that preach for Hire,
and divine for Money, that take so much Money or Gifts by the Year or Month for
Preaching? Who is it, or, who are they now that walk in these ways? S^^^^,
whoever they be, whether Papists, Protestants, Sectaries (so called) are false
Prophets and Deceivers.

2. They were false Prophets and Deceivers, that stood not in the Counsel of
the Lord, and that did not turn People from their Iniquities and evil ways,
but spoke a Vision of their own hearts, and not from the mouth of the Lord; And
that cried Peace to them that walked wickedly, and prophesied lies, and used
their tongues, and said, the Lord says it, when as the Lord had not spoken to
them; and that seduced the people by crying Peace, when there was no Peace; and
saw Vanity, and spoke Vanity and Lies in the days of the true Prophets: I say,
such were false Prophets and Deceivers.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or any others that do not stand
in the Counsel of God, and that do not turn People from their Iniquities and
their evil ways; but speak a Vision of their own hearts, and not from the
mouth of the Lord; and that cry Peace to them that walk wickedly, that
prophecy lies and use their tongues, when the Lord has not spoken to them;
And that seduce People by crying Peace, when there is no Peace; and that builds
the wall, and daubs it with untempered mortar, and that do not profit the
People at all, but cause them to err; Such are false Prophets and Deceivers at
this day, wheresoever and whosoever (without respect of Name or Title in their
Profession) Such now walk by the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the
way of the Deceivers, which the Lord sent true Prophets to cry against.

And now to all People, of what Name soever, it is left to the Witness of God
in you all to give witness, who they are now, and where they are that are
guilty hereof. Who is it now that stand not in the Counsel of God, and that do
not turn People form their Iniquities, that do not convert them to God by their
preaching, But speak what they have studied for, even a Divination of their own
Brain, and not what they have received from God; and that use their tongues,
and take other men's words, the words of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles; when
as they have not the same Spirit of Christ and his Apostles; Nor have they
heard the Voice of God speaking to them, But take Chapter and Verse* and say,
Hear the Word of the Lord, when the Lord never spoke to them, nor sent them.
Who is it now, and where are they that are guilty hereof? and that cry Peace to
the Wicked, when the Lord speaks no Peace to them; and that are light vain
persons, and covetous and greedy persons, and that see Vanity and daub with
untempered mortar; that cry Peace unto people, and say they shall have Peace by
Christ, while yet they kill Christ, and are not changed by Him. Where are there
such now, by whom people are not converted to God, although they preach time
after time? Let all people bring in their Witness; For whosoever are such at
this day, whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers (so
called) or whosoever, Such (I say) are led by the spirit of the false Prophets,
and are in their way and practices, and all such are to be judged, deemed and
taken for Antichrists Ministers, false Prophets and Deceivers, without respect
of Persons or Titles of Religion.

3. They were false Brethren and false Teachers, that taught for filthy lucre;
that professed they knew God in words, and in works denied him; being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; Who had a Form of
Godliness, but denied the Power; and were heady and high-minded men, and lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God; that were ever teaching, and never able
to bring people to the knowledge of the Truth. And such were false Prophets and
false Teachers, that through Covetousness and feigned words, did make
merchandise of people; that beguiled unstable souls, and that had hearts
exercised with covetous practices; being out of the right way, and following
the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. These, and such as
these, were Deceivers and false Teachers in the Apostles days, Tit. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 5, 7. 2 Pet. 2. chap.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or of what sect soever they be
that do these things, that teach for filthy lucre; that profess God in words,
but in works deny him; and that live wickedly, and are disobedient to God; and
have the form of Godliness, but want the power; and are heady and high-minded
men, and love pleasures; under whom people are ever learning, but not able to
come to the knowledge of the Truth; and that through Covetousness and feigned
words make merchandise of people; that are unstable men, and do exercise
themselves in covetous practices; and are not in the right way, but do follow
the way of Balaam, who loved unrighteous wages. Whosoever are such, whether
they be Papists or Protestants, or Quakers, or whomsoever they be, they follow
the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the way of the false Teachers, and
are Ministers of Antichrist, even false Prophets and Deceivers.

And now to all people whatsoever I appeal for Evidence to the Witness of God
in your Consciences, that you may judge in this case; Where are they now, and
who is it? Are there not some such present amongst you this day in your Cities
and Towns, and Countries, even such as teach for filthy lucre; that will preach
were they can get gain for preaching, but not otherwise; and that profess God
and Christ with their lips, and show much love, but deny God in works; who live
unholy lives, and in evil ways, and give bad Examples to people, and that are
reprobate to good works; and that have the form of Godliness, but not the
power; and that are heady and high-minded, and ambitious persons; and that are
teaching many years together, and people cannot come to the knowledge of the
Truth by them, but are always ignorant and wicked. And do not your Teachers
exercise covetous practices among you, and go in the way of Balaam for Gifts
and Rewards ( viz.) so much for a Sermon, and for a years Preaching: Such who
are made Ministers by man, and not by the Lord, and who do not profit the
people at all: Whosoever they are that are such [now in this Age] are false
Prophets and Deceivers, and follow the spirit, and walk in the steps of the
Deceivers of old; and whosoever they are, whether Papists, Protestants, or any
others, they may lawfully be taken, judged and deemed to be false Prophets,
Ministers of Antichrist, and Deceivers.

4. The false Prophets and Deceivers in the days of old, were feigning and
flattering men, and cried Peace to the wicked, and cried Peace, peace, to every
one that put into their mouths; but prepared War against every one that did
not, Mica. 3. 5. And they respected men's persons, and held men's persons in
Admiration because of Advantage, Jude 16.

Now whosoever, whether Papist or Protestant, or any else, that are feigners
and flatterers, and that cry peace to the wicked, and cry peace to them that
put into their mouths; but are bitter and angry and perverse against such as
will not, or cannot give them Hire and Money for preaching; and that respect
men's persons, and turn every way from one kind of Worship to another; and have
men's persons in admiration for their own gain and advantage. Whoever are such
now in this Age, are false Prophets and Deceivers.

And therefore all people, bring in your Evidence; who are such now? and where
are they that are flattering men* that cry Peace to all that will give them
means and put into their mouths, and that admire the persons of great men, and
respect the persons of great men for advantage; If there be any such now
amongst you, whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers (so
called) you may justly take such, and let such be deemed, judged and reputed
false Prophets, Seducers and Ministers of Antichrist.

And now all people upon Earth, try, learn and examine your Teachers and
Ministers, lay them to the Line of Judgment: For if they are such as are here
described, if they bear these Marks and Fruits declared, and if they follow the
same spirit, and do as the false Prophets of old did, according as it is
declared in the Scriptures* then may you justly judge them to be Deceivers and
false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist: For whosoever they be that are
amongst you, as preach for hire, and that have a Quarter from whence they seek
their Gain, and divine for Money, and go a preaching for Gifts and Rewards, and
that teach for filthy lucre; and that are covetous persons, heady and
high-minded persons, and ambitious men, that do not profit the people at all,
nor turn them from sin by their preaching; and that prophecy lies, and that
are flatterers and changeable persons, and will turn from one way to another,
and have men's persons in admiration because of advantage. Whosoever he be that
is one of these above described, who has these marks and signs upon him, of
this Physiognomy, of this Nature and Feature as before described; wheresoever
such a one shall be found, or whenever you see him, or meet with him; or if
such a one be amongst you, or pass by you, let him be suspected, taken, deemed
and judged for a false Prophet and Deceiver, without respect of his Name and
Title in his Profession of Religion.

Again, Christ Jesus prophesied and said, That Deceivers and false Prophets
should come, who should have the sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravening
wolves: And John said, the false Prophets were already come into the world [ in
his dayes] even the false Prophets and Antichrist; whom Christ said should
come; And the false Prophets and Deceivers that Christ said should come, John
saw were come into the world in his days.

Now, who is it, and where are they that are wolves in sheeps clothing, that
are those Antichrists that Christ said should come; and John said were come?
Even such are they that have the Outside (viz.) Christ's words, and the
Apostles words, and the Saints practices; they have the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are the wolves in the evil nature; and their evil nature is covered
with the Saints words and practices; and such are the wolves in sheeps
clothing, that have the outside of the sheep, but want the Nature of Christ,
and are in the contrary nature.

And to all people that are upon the Earth I do appeal, and ask, where are they
that are such now? and, who are they? whether they be Papists or Protestants,
or whomsoever else that are such, that have the outside, the sheeps clothing,
but inwardly are wolves of a devouring nature; such are they that Christ said
should come, and John saw was come; And such are Ministers of Antichrist,
whosoever they are, and such are in the world, and have overspread it since the
Apostles days: and whole Christendom has been deceived by such Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, even by such as have got the Outside, the Saints words and
practices, but wanted the Life, and have been in the Evil Nature, and not in
the Nature of CHRIST JESUS: And such now in this Age, are to be taken, judged
and deemed false Prophets and Deceivers, Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and
Ministers of Antichrist.

E. B.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.


