THE CASE Of the PEOPLE Called QUAKERS (ONCE MORE) Stated, and Published to the
World: WITH THE Accusations Charged upon them; and their Answers

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson.

The Case of the People (called Quakers once more) Stated, and Published to the
World, etc.
WE are an Afflicted and Suffering People in these Kingdoms at this Day.
Mocked, Reproached, haled before Magistrates, violently Abused, and Imprisoned,
and much Hard dealing exercised upon us: This is apparently visible to all
People, and needs no further proof.

But, whether these Afflictions, and Sufferings, Imprisonments, and Hard
Dealing, be Just, or Unjust, according to our Deserts, or out of the malice and
enmity of our Adversaries, This is the Question to be enquired into; Unjust,
and Unrighteous, and out of Malice and Enmity, and not of due Desert (say We)
are these Sufferings imposed on Us: But Justly, and according to Desert, and
the Laws of the Land (say our Adversaries.) Who shall be Judge in the Case
between Us? Even, the Law of God, the Gospel of Christ, the Scriptures of
Truth, the Example of Primitive Christians, our Neighbors, and the Witness in
every Man's Conscience. And to the Judgment of all These we Appeal, and shall
abide their Sentence.

First, We are Accused of an Heinous Crime, and as if We deserved the Greatest
punishments, Because we are Discenting, and Differing from the Church of
England, and cannot Conform to all Her Worships, and Ceremonies, therefore are
We said to be Heretics; Because holding, and practicing Differing things from
Her, etc.

Plea. The Scriptures of Truth (which are according to both Law and Gospel) do
Say, and Judge, That they who sometimes did Descent, and Differ from some of
the Church of Christ, in some Principles, and Practices, and could not practice
in all things, what some others did, as in Romans 14. where it is signified, That
some of the Church of Christ believed they might eat All things; some others of
the Church did eat Herbs, some esteemed One day above Another, others esteemed
Every day Alike; this kind of discenting, and diference, about Meats, and Days,
and Ceremonies, were amongst the Members of the True Church; but What is the
Judgment of Scripture in this case of Difference amongst them? Not that the
Discenters one from another should be Punished, and Imprisoned, and Banished,
but ver. 5. Let every man be persuaded in his own mind. And One was not so much
as to Judge Another in this case of Difference, and Discenting; much less to
Imprison one another for that Cause. And in Phil. 3. 15. it is there signified,
That if any persons were discenting, and different in Judgment, or in the
growth in Grace, from the rest of the Church, every one was to walk in that
measure of Truth, as he had attained to; And if any were otherwise-minded,
(viz. Different in the Growth in the Grace of God) then God should reveal the
same unto them; And notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, whether in
cases Substantial, or Ceremonial, yet, they were still to be in Love and Unity,
and walk in their measures, to which they had attained, and they were not to be
imprisoned and persecuted, as we are at this day: Hence, observe, That the
Judgment of Scriptures, which the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ are
according to, is clear for us, and against them that hate us, that imprison us,
and afflict us, for discenting and differing in some Doctrines, and Practices,
from the Church of England. But

Secondly, If we were indeed Heretics, and Erroneous people; suppose so, which
never yet was truly proved, of us, nor can be; What Judgment do the Scriptures
(which are according to the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ) give in that
case? Not that we should be thus imprisoned, and afflicted, with corporal
punishments; but according to Titus, Tit. 3. 10, 11. we should first be
Admonished in love, and Exhorted once and again; and then, if we gainsay, and
will not hear Reproof, to be Rejected, cast Out, and Denied of the Assembly of
Saints; But not imprisoned, and banished: and according to 1 Cor. 5. where it
is signified, That some, in the denomination of the Church, did Offend against
Christ and the Church, and were Heretics, and Discenters, because of their
Evil deeds, from the True Church; yet, these were not to be imprisoned, and
persecuted in their persons; but delivered unto Satan for the destruction of
the Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord; they were to
be Spiritually dealt withal; and they were to be cast out into the Wicked
world, among the Ungodly, to have their portion from God, with the Wicked, to
be delivered to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that it might be
destroyed, and the Spirit saved in the Day of the Lord. So, if we were indeed
such, as these were, Discenters, and in difference from the True Church,
because of some Wickedness, yet the Judgment of Scriptures is against our
Enemies in this Case, who persecute, and imprison us; for thus it ought not to
be done unto us, if the Church of England were the very True Church of Christ,
and We in difference from Her, by False principles, or Evil conversation, or
*any thing else. Thus you see the Judgment of the Scriptures, and of the Law
of God, and Gospel of Christ, is against our persecutors.

Thirdly, But suppose We doubt, That the Church of England, and its Ordinances,
Discipline, its Worships and Ceremonies, be not according to the Scriptures of
Truth, but are rather in the form of Godliness, without the power: suppose we,
in Conscience believe this, and think we can prove it, which is the very truth
of the Case, and therefore do deny Conformity to Her, lest we should sin
against God, and wrong our own Consciences, at least, as we believe. What
Judgment does the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, give, in this Case? We are
exhorted, and commanded in Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. From covetous men, and proud
men, lovers of themselves, false accusers, despisers of them that are good,
high-minded men, and lovers of pleasures, they that have the Form of Godliness,
but not the Power, from all such we are to turn away. And therefore we believe
we are Justified by the Scriptures, in turning away for these diverse Years
past, (and till we be otherwise persuaded by sound Doctrine) from the Ministry
and Churches that are in England, or lately have been, (and found Reason has
not been yet showed us, to the contrary, by you) because they are such, as the
Scriptures Exhorts us to turn away from; and because we have judged, that they
have had the form of godliness, but not the power; so we are not to be
imprisoned, and persecuted, though we differ, and disent, and turn away from
all them that are Coveteous, Proud, Boasters, lovers of themselves, despisers
of them that are good, high-minded men, and such as have a form of godliness,
but not the power. But we are Judged Just, and our Case not condemned by the
Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, and by the holy Scriptures, but rather such
as inflict Sufferings upon us: And for any of our Principles and Doctrines that
we hold, we deserve no punishment nor Persecution, because hereof; for we
testify before God, Angels and Men, That we hold and maintain, no Principles of
Religion, nor Practice of Worship, nor Doctrines of Gospel, but what are
according to Scriptures of Truth. And we are ready to be tried, and proved in
that case, and to bring the matter to Issue, in fair proceedings with any man,
that shall object the contrary; And thus the Judgment of Scriptures are for us,
as we suppose (at least), and if we are in Error, either by denying any thing
on the one hand, or affirming any thing on the other, we have not been
hitherto, well proceeded against, in order to our Conviction.

Secondly, We are accused as for a great Crime, and Imprisoned, because we meet
together, in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, to wait upon him, and to
worship him in Spirit and Truth; in Prayer to God, and Exhortations one to
another, to Righteousness and Holiness: But, what Judgment does the Law and
Gospel, and holy Scriptures give, and our Neighbors also, between Us in this
Case? Lets come all to their Bar, and receive just Sentence.

Plea. First, The Judgment of God's Law, Christ's Gospel and holy Scriptures,
are not against our meeting together, but on the contrary, do command us, and
exhort us, with promises of blessings, to meet together in the worship of God,
and to wait upon him; And it was the practice of the primitive Christians, to
assemble themselves together, in that form and manner as we do ^t this day, (to
wit) in a private manner, and separate from the multitude, and all the Jews
Synagogues, as in Acts 1. 17. The Saints and Disciples, both Men and Women, to
the number of one hundred and twenty, (which were far more than five) went into
an upper Chamber, being a private place, and no public Synagogue, and there
waited upon the Lord in Prayer and Supplication, according as we do at this
day: Thus the Scriptures justify the way and manner of our Meetings, and
condemns them not. Again, in Acts 20. 8. the Saints and Disciples were gathered
together in an upper Chamber, and Paul Preached unto them until midnight.
Here was a private Meeting, far above the number of five, and out of any
public Synagogues; and Christ Jesus said, Where two or three are met together
in my Name, there I am, in the midst of them. And He and his Disciples, often
met together in private places, apart from the Jews public Worships, sometimes
in a Ship, and sometimes in Deserts, and on the Mountains, and in particular
Houses, and Preached, and Prayed; this the Scriptures prove. And also, in Heb.
10. 25. we are expressly commanded, not to neglect the Assembling of our selves
together, but to exhort one another, and so much the more as the day approahed.
By all which Scriptures, with many more that might be quoted, it is Evident to
all the world, That our meeting together for the worship of God, in that form
and manner as practiced by us, is according to the Law of God, the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, and the holy Scriptures: And all these, give Just Judgment for
us, and Justify us, and therefore consequently condemn such as do violence to
us, for this practice of meeting together, for the worship of God.

And thus, though we are Accused and Imprisoned as Evil d^^rs; yet, such our
practice of meeting is manifestly according to the Law of God, Gospel of
Christ, Scriptures, Example of Saints, and President of primitive Christians;
all which give Judgment for us.

Secondly, What Judgment do our Neighbors give in this Case? they say,
concerning our Meetings, That they have known us to meet together in such
manner, for diverse years, in their Towns and Villages, and never knew, nor
understood of any ^^^m or danger herein, nor ever were any way prejudiced,
either in their Persons or Estates, by our Meetings. The very witness of God in
all our Neighbors, does Testify, and give Judgment, that our Meetings have
always been peaceable and quiet, and that we came together in peace and good
order, and parted in the same, and no person has been harmed by such our
Meetings; enquire of the Neighborhood, and they will tell you, they believe in
their Consciences, our Meetings are for good, and have good effects, and are
not evil, nor brings forth any evil to any.

And as for the manner of our Meeting and sitting together, it is orderly and
decently, and of good report among men; and for any Doctrine that ever was
there held, or heard by any, none can truly accuse it, to be either Error, or
Heresy, or Sedition; but on the contrary, they know it witnesses against all
Sin and Iniquity, and tends to the turning of people from Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness, to Truth and Holiness: And many can tell, this is effected, by
our Doctrine Preached in our Meetings; and our Neighbors can witness, that we
part again in peace, and good order, and in convenient time; and they can show
you, they are not terrified, nor the Peace of the Land disturbed (on our part)
by our Meetings, which are in God's fear, and to the Glory of his Name, which
all sober men know, are according to the Law of God, and Gospel, and primitive
Christians Example. And thus our Neighbors give Judgment for us, and in their
Consciences, do not Justify them that Imprison us; For this matter of meeting
together, which Gods Law, Gospel, Scriptures, and our Neighbors, do thus
clearly Justify.

Thirdly. We are accused, as guilty of a heinous Crime, and Imprisoned, because
we refuse to swear at all, or take any Oath in any case.

Plea. First, The Judgment of the Law of the New Testament of God, and Gospel
of Christ, and Scriptures in this cases is clear on our behalf. As in the
express command of Christ, in his Law and Scriptures Recorded, Mat. 5. where he
says, Swear not at all, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by the
Head; but, let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is more
comes of Evil. And again, Iam. 5. the Apostle commands the Saints in these
words, Above all (...), Swear not, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor any (...). And
many holy Martyrs since the Apostles days, (...) all Swearing. Thus you see,
the Judgment of Christ (...) and of the Gospel, and of the Apostle, and of
Scriptures, (...) far from Condemning of us to Imprisonment and Banishment,
(...) our refusing to Swear, that we are Commanded and Ex^^^^d by them, not to
Swear at all; and therefore consequently, justify us in our refusing to Swear;
and thus, give not Judgment for such, as do Imprison and Persecute us for not
Swearing. Come to the Judgment of Christ, his Gospel, and holy Scriptures; Let
you and us appear together before their Judgment Seat, whether they give
Judgment against us, that deny all Swearing, or against you, that Imprison us
for that Cause: And let the Lord God, Angels and just Men, give their Judgment
in this Case; we a poor afflicted people, do appeal to you, for just Sentence
of Judgment, between us and our opponents.

Secondly, Let our Neighbors give their Judgment, though we do refuse to take
any Oath, because of the Commands of Christ and his Gospel, as aforesaid; yet,
what harm has this ever yet been to any of our Neighbors, let them speak; or
what detriment ought this to be to any of them, they will tell you: Though we
cannot formally take an Oath, yet we are ready at all times to do the Truth,
and to speak it on all good occasions, as ^uch as if we did swear upon a Book;
and they can trust us upon our words, as much, if not more, than they can do
any that swear upon their Oaths; and therefore they shall give judgment, that
according to their best knowledge, we ought not to be Imprisoned and Banished;
though we cannot swear formally upon a Book* being the Truth is not suppressed,
nor yet the administration of Justice ought to be obstructed for our refusing
to swear. Thus the Neighborhood bears witness for us, and against such as deal
hardly by us, and Persecute us because hereof.

Fourthly, We are accused as heinous Offenders, and Imprisoned because it is
supposed, we do not submit to obey the known Laws of the Land, but break them,
and will not conform to the Church, pay Tithes, take Oaths, leave meeting
together (...) though we know the Laws of the Land command these things.

Plea, First, as to the submitting to all known Laws of the Land; This is known
to God and our Neighbors, that our Principle and Practice is, and ever has
been, to submit to every Government, and to all Laws of men, either by (...)
or by suffering; as at this day, we resist not the greatest of afflictions and
Tribulations that can be imposed on us; and this is well known to our
Neighbors and all people, that we are submissive to all Laws of men, by
patient suffering without resistance, even when any Law requires any thing of
us, which we cannot perform for Conscience sake, that Law we fulfill by patient
suffering, resisting no man, nor rendering evil for evil to any. And the
Judgment of the Scriptures, which are according to both Law and Gospel, and the
presidents of Saints justify us in this Case, in choosing patiently to suffer
the greatest penalties of the Law, rather than to obey by doing any such Law,
as requires things contrary to our pure Consciences; as in the Example of the
three children, Dan. 3. who were commanded to fall down and worship the Golden
Image, at what time soever they heard the sound of the Music, upon the penalty
of being cast into the midst of the burning fiery Furnace; which commandment
they could not obey, nor could Truth fall down to worship the Image. But rather
choosed to suffer the penalty of being cast into the midst of the burning fiery
Furnace, which accordingly was done unto them; again, in the case of Daniel,
chap. 6. who was commanded to make no Petition to any God or man for thirty
days, save to King Darius, upon the penalty and affliction of being cast into
the Lions Den; But Daniel did rather choose to suffer the penalty, to be cast
into the Den of Lions, than to obey the Commandment, and was cast into the
Lions Den* By these examples of holy men, with many more that might be given,
out of the Scriptures it is evident, that righteous (...) will rather choose to
suffer, than to obey any law of men contrary to their Consciences. So, the Law
of God, and Example of Saint and holy Scriptures, give Judgment for us in this
case, of rather choosing to Suffer, than to obey Laws contrary to our
consciences; and consequently must needs condemn such that Persecute and
Imprison us, because they require obedience of us, in things against our
Consciences.

Secondly, Though we do disobey Laws, and cannot actively obey every Law of
man, when it requires and commands things contrary to a good Conscience; yet
herein also we are Justified, by the Law of God, Example of Saints and holy
Scriptures, and they give Judgment for us, and consequently against our enemies
in this case; and in particular in the two examples beforementioned in Daniel,
the three children were expressly commanded to fall down and worship the golden
Image; and Daniel was also required by the Kings decree, not to pray to any God
or man, save to King Darius; yet all these holy men of God, did absolutely
disobey the Law and Decree, so requiring of them, and did contrary to the
commandment: for the three children did not bow, nor Daniel cease to pray to
his God, but prayed as at other times, and yet were Justified of God in so
doing. Also, the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 18. were commanded
to preach no more in the name of Jesus, but the Apostles did disobey their
commandment, and went on and Preached in the Spirit and Power of Christ,
contrary to the commandment of the Rulers, and appealed to them, whether it
were not better to obey God than man? Many Examples we might collect out of the
Scriptures, that the servants of God did disobey the commands of Kings and
Rulers, and could not obey (by doing) any command contrary to God, but rather
choosed to suffer afflictions, and death it self, than to obey such Laws and
Decrees, as required any thing contrary to a pure Conscience; and this is our
case at this day, we cannot obey (by doing) any thing against our Consciences,
but must break the Laws of men, and disobey their commandments, rather than
break the Law of God, and sin against our own Consciences, whatsoever we suffer
because hereof; and yet the examples of Saints, and Scriptures, Justify us in
this behalf.

And let all our enemies cease to cry out Rebellion and Disobedience to Laws
and Government; for we are not such as do wilfully and obstinately disobey any
Laws of men, but for Conscience sake, and that we may not sin against God, nor
offend his Witness in us; Therefore we cannot obey Laws contrary to our
Consciences whatsoever we suffer; which ^^^sist not, nor rebel against any in
this case: So that our ^^^^ciples and Practices, are to obey every Law and
Gover^^^^* either by doing or suffering. And though we disobey such Laws as
are not according to the Law of God, and rather do choose to Suffer; yet, herein
we are justified by the Law of God, and the holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, And as for our Conversations among men, in respect of our daily
walking and converse with them in our dealing, in respect of honesty, and
faithfulness, and truth, and justness in works and words; our Neighbors shall
give witness for us: We will not justify our selves, it is God that justifies us,
and the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Scriptures, Examples of holy men, our
Neighbors, and the witness of God in all men's Consciences, shall bear witness
to us. And all these do give judgment for us in these cases, to whom we do
appeal for Judgment. And, O Lord God Everlasting, do thou Judge our Cause, do
thou make it manifest in thy due Season to all the world, that we are thy
people, that we love Thee above all, that we fear thy Name more than all, that
we love Righteousness and hate Iniquity; and that we now suffer for thy holy
Name, and Truth, and for thy Honor and Justice, and for thy Truth and
Holiness. O Lord, thou know we are resolved to perish, rather than to loose
one grain hereof. Amen, Amen.

Our Accusations and Answers, truly compared, and weighed in the balance of
Justice, and truth in every man's Conscience, Let all the world Judge of the
Case, Do we deserve to be Ruined, Destroyed, Imprisoned, and Banished, and that
to be devoured of Wild Beasts, as our enemy threatens us he will do? Is it so,
Are we Heretics? are we Seditious? are we Drunkards? are we double dealers?
are we such as the Law of God condemns? what evil have we done in the Land? do
we hurt any body? are we not Innocent before the Lord and Men? we appeal to the
just witness of God in all; let it be answered, and though no man will hear and
consider our cause this day, yet the Lord will plead our Cause in his time and
season, and make the world to know we are his people; in the mean time, we are
willing to suffer the Reproaches of ungodly men, till the Lord work deliverance
in the earth.

But now it may be Objected by the Magistrates and Rulers, That we have now a
Law against you, and you must Suffer; for we cannot but put the Law in
Execution, according to our Oaths and Offices; and it is not we that Persecute
you, but it is the Law of the Land by which you now suffer, and we cannot be
blamed for your suffering, we only execute the Law. And after this manner is
the Reasoning of some at this day, etc.

Answ. To all which I do Answer: It is true, there is a Law now Enacted against
us, which is pretendedly made the ground of our suffering; but whether that Law
be in it self Just, or Unjust, I shall not now demonstrate, but shall leave it
to the Judgment of all Christian men that know us, our Principles, Doctrines,
Ways, and Conversations, and let them judge whether we deserve the Penalties
and Punishments therein described, for any Principle, or Practice held and
maintained by us. And though there be A Law against us, yet the Magistrates
that are Executors thereof, may execute the same with Moderation, or with
Uiolence; with Discretion, or too much rigor; and it will be well for them to
use moderation and discretion in this case: Hereby may they save themselves
from that weight of Anger, and Indignation of the Lord God, that will come upon
all Uiolent Doers, who seek to destroy the Innocent, and rejoice in the
occasion Administered. And though This Law be Enacted against our Meetings; not
ours, I may say, but such Meetings as are Dangerous to the Public Peace, and
to the Terror of the People: But our Meetings are not such, and therefore This
Law may not Justly extend in its Execution to the Breaking of our Meetings, nor
to Banish us because of our Meeting together, which is for the Worship of God,
and are Peaceable, and of Good Report among all good men; and are not for
Disturbance of the Peace, nor Terror of the People, and therefore justly free
from this Law as aforesaid.

And though This Law is pretended against us for to Banish us, and to ridd the
Land of us, as some vainly suppose. Yet must it needs be Executed to the height
of it, without Limitation, or Restriction? Must this Law be Executed to its
height, more than some other Laws, that are as truly Enacted, and as fully in
force as this Act can be: Yet some such Laws there are, which better deserves
Execution than this, yet they lie Dormant, as is visibly apparent at this day,
as in 4 Iac. cap. 5. in these words: Be it Enacted, etc. That all, and every
person or persons, which after Forty days next following the end of this
present Session of Parliament, Shall be Drunk, and of the same Offense of
Drunkeness, shall be lawfully Convicted; shall for every such offense, Forfeit,
and loose five Shillings, etc. to be paid to the hands of the Churchwardens of
that Parish where the Offense shall be committed, who shall be accountable
therefore to the use of the Poor of the same Parish. And if the said person, or
persons so Convicted, shall refuse, or neglect to pay the said Forfeiture, then
the same shall be levied of the Goods of every such person, or persons, by
Warrant of Precept from the Court, Judge, or Justices, before whom the same
Conviction shall be: And if the Offender be not able to pay the sum of Five
Shillings, then he shall be committed to the Stocks for the space of Six Hours.
I pray you read the Statute at large, it is worth a sober man's pains to read
over, and then Judge whether that Law be duly Executed at this day; and also,
whether it deserves not more strict Execution than the present Act against us.
Also the 1 Iac. cap. 7. in these words: That all persons calling themselves
Scholars, going about Begging; All Idle persons going about in any Country,
either Begging, or using any Subtle Craft, or unlawful Games, or Plays; or
feigning themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, or pretending that they
can tell Fortunes, or such other like fantastical Imaginations; All Fencers,
Bear-wards, Common-players of Interludes, and Minstrels, wandering abroad, Shall
be taken, adjudged, and deemed as Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and
shall suffer such pains and punishments as is expressed, 39 Eliz. cap. 4. (
viz.) That every such person shall be stripped Naked from the middle Upwards,
and shall be openly Whipped, until his, or her Body be bloody, etc. and shall
be forthwith sent from parish to parish, etc. And read the Statute at large,
and then consider how duly it is Executed now, and whether it deserves not
Execution, as much as the late Act against us, though in some places, the one
is more Executed than the other; where many of our friends, being honest sober
persons, and of good Conversation, and yet are haled out of their Meetings,
where they are met only to worship God, and for no other end, and sent to
Prison, and persecuted to the very height of the said Act; when as idle
persons, following unlawful Games, and Plays, and Bearwards, common players of
Interludes, and Minstrells of diverse kinds, do wander up and down City and
Country, and having their Play Houses public, where their wickedness is acted;
such persons, and such things, though appearing publicly, yet are permitted,
and little or no notice taken of them by some of the Magistrates, so as to
punish them for breach of the Laws, for the preventing of these Evils; but
such wickedness is too much suffered, though there be diverse Acts of
Parliaments against such persons and such actions, as well as there is one
against our Meetings, yet, the Act against us, is more put in Execution in some
places for the breaking of our Meetings, which are for the Worship of God, than
the good Laws for suppressing wickedness, though there is better Law for the
one, than for the other; diverse other Laws and Statutes made for good ends,
for the suppressing of wickedness in the Land there are, which are but* easily
Executed at this day; but here is one Act against peaceable meeting together
for the worship of God, which is violently Prosecuted and Executed upon
Innocent men: and let all just men judge of these things, though there be a Law
Enacted against our Meetings, so there is against Drunkards and drunkenness,
and unseasonable tippling in Taverns and Alehouses, and against Minstrells,
Fiddlers, Pipers and Players, Common-Players and Stage Players, that go up and
down the Countries, and have their Play Houses in public Cities, which
Statutes ought to be rather Executed, though they are not: but these things we
shall leave to all sober people to judge of.

And seeing that The Law against Us is more put in Execution, than these other
Laws, it does appear that there is more envy against us, and our peaceable
Religious Meetings, than there is against Profaneness and Wickedness,
Drunkenness, and Stage-Playing, and such like; and such Magistrates,
wheresoever they are, are not excusable in the sight of God; though there is a
Law against us, while they Prosecute it against us, and not these other good
Laws against proph^^ ungodly persons and practices; and therefore seeing we d^
fer, we must say, It is not only because there is a Law (...) us, but it is
also, or rather because, there is enmity, and (...) and wickedness in the
hearts of men against us, which (...) main cause of our Sufferings at this day;
and let the (...) strates compare this Law made against us, with that Sa^ in
Doctor and Student, cap. 2. speaking concerning the written in the Heart,
teaching every man what is to be (...) and what is to be fled: And (says he)
Because it is (...) in the heart, therefore it may not be put away, nor is it
changeable by any diversity of place, or time; And therefore (...) this Law,
Prescription, Statute, nor Custom may not prevail* if any be brought in against
it, they be not Prescriptions, tutes, nor Customs, but things void, and
against Justice, a^^ other Laws; as well the Laws of God, as the Acts of Men,
(...) to be grounded upon the Law written in the Heart. And in (...) of the
same it said; Every man's Law must be consonant wit^ Law of God, and therefore
the Laws of Princes, the Comm^^^ments of Prelates, the Statutes of
Commonalties, nor yet the dinances of the Church are not Righteous, nor
Obligatory, (...) it is consonant to the Law of God. And we are sure the (...)
God and holy Scriptures do justify our Meeting together, as (...) is expessed.
Also in the Statute 28 Hen. 8. chap 7. it is in these words, That no man, of
what Estate, Degree, or C^^^^tion soever he be, has power to dispense with
Gods Laws, as (...) Clergy of this Realm, and the most part of all the
Un^^^^sities of Christendom. And we also Affirm, and think (...) things truly
compared one with another, We leave the the Judgment of the Law of God, Gospel
of Christ* Scriptures, and our Neighbors; and let Truth determ^^^ So be it.

By E. (...)

The End.

