A just and Lawful TRIAL OF THE Teachers and professed Ministers Of this age
and GENERATION. BY A perfect proceeding against them. And hereby they are
righteously examined, and justly weighed, and truly measured, and condemned out
of their own mouths, and judged by their own professed Rule, viz. the
Scriptures, and thereby are proved to disagree, and be contrary to all the
Ministers of Christ in former ages; and to agree and concur with all the false
Prophets and deceivers in their call, in their maintenance, and in their
doctrines, and conversation, and practice. And being brought to the Bar of
Justice, these things are truly charged against them, and legally proved upon
them, and their own professed Rule (the Scripture) have judged them guilty.
Whereunto is added, A short Description of the true Ministry of Christ; and of
his lawful and just maintenance, according to the Apostles examples, and now
again justified, by the people of God called Quakers, in England.

By a friend to England's Common wealth, for whose sake this is written and
sent abroad. Edward Borough.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1660

A just and lawful TRIAL.
THE time of trial is come, wherein the Lord is trying the hearts of all men;
and now it is manifest what lodges in the hearts of all man kind, and by the
fruit every tree shall be judged. The Lord has beheld the wickedness of this
generation, and it is very great, and comes not short, but rather abounds all
other generations that have gone before: Wickedness is grown high among
Teachers and people, and the measure of iniquity is fulfilling daily. Come let
us reason together; What think you? was there ever such a generation of
Teachers as this is? Have they any example that ever went before for their
wickedness? to whom may they be compared? or with whom shall we parallel them?
And because they say the Scripture is their Rule, therefore will we try them by
it, and their own mouths shall condemn them; and such they shall be concluded
to be, whose example they do follow, be it Ministers of Christ, or be it
deceivers; unto the Apostles and Ministers of Christ they are compared, but are
found quite contrary in many things, and their practice fitly suits and agrees
with all the false Prophets and deceivers: and thus I shall prove them
according to Scripture, wherein these men that are Teachers do disagree to the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ which he sent forth in former generations; and
wherein they do agree with the deceivers, and Antichrists and false Prophets,
that have run, and not been sent.

1. And first of all, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ were made Ministers
Act. 1. 8. 4. 31. Mat 10. 8. 1 John 1. 1.
of Christ by the gift of the Holy Ghost, and by power from on high only, and
what they Ministered unto others, they had freely received from Christ, and had
handled, felt and tasted of the word of life: But the Teachers of this
generation does not agree with them in this, for they are made Ministers by
natural learning and education, and the knowledge of Arts, and by the
ordination of men, and by powers of this world, (and not by the gift of the
Holy Ghost) and they spoke that which they have heard out of books, and studied
for by Arts, and which they have received from man, and not that which they
have received only from the Lord.

2 The Ministers of Christ they were approved of God, and called by his spirit
Gal. ^. 1.
into the work of the Ministry, and were not of man; neither by man, But many
of these are approved of man, and not of God, and called by man, and maintained
by men in their Ministry; and herein they do differ and disagree; for (as I
said) the Ministers of Christ were made Minister* by the Holy Ghost, and not by
natural learning, but these are made Ministers by natural learning, or
otherwise, and not by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

3. Again, herein do they disagree, The Ministers of Jesus Christ went Acts 16.
4. 7. 11. 12. Acts 17. 17. 1 Cor. 4 11
up and down through the World, declaring the word of the Lord freely at any
time, in the Marketplaces, and in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, and went
from Country to Country, and were strangers upon earth, not having any
certain dwelling place, or any great Parsonages. But these settle themselves in
a certain place, for so much money by the year, and spend their time in ease
and pleasure, and lust of the flesh, selling to the people for money what they
preach, and herein they disagree; the Ministers of Christ preached freely as
they had received freely; but the Ministers of this age sells for money what
they preach to the people: and thus they differ in their call to the Ministry,
and in their practice in the ministry, and in their maintenance also, as is
made manifest to many.

4. Again, the Ministers of Christ preached to bring people into fellowship 1.
Joh. 1. 31.
with God by preaching of the Gospel through converting sinners unto the
knowledge of the truth, and by no other way did they make Christians, nor
counted any so but such as had repented and were changed by the spirit. But the
Teachers of this age do make Christians, by sprinkling them while they are
Infants, before they preach the Gospel to them, or before they repent of their
sins; and they bring them into fellowship, by traditions and a vain show of
baptism, and not by the spirit of God; and herein also they disagree, the one
counted none Christians but such as were converted by the spirit of God, and
knew the operation of Gods spirit; and the other counts all Christians that are
sprinkled when they are Infants, while they are without the operation of the
spirit of God, and converts them not unto God by their preaching, but tells
them they are Christians before they preach to them.

5, Again, they differ in Doctrine; for the Ministers of Christ preached John.
1. 9* Acts. 26. 18.
Christ the light of the World, and said, he lighted every man that comes into
the World: But the Teachers of this age contend against that, and says every
man is not enlightened by him, but some have no light from Christ: and the
Ministers of Christ they turned people to the light, from the darkness, and
from Satan's power to the Power of God; But the Teachers of this age does 2 Cor.
13.
not turn people to the light of Christ within, but to the Saints words
without, or to some other thing, and are divided among themselves, and so in
effect cries, Lo here, and lo there is Christ in this from, or that form; but
the Ministers of Christ said, he was within people, or else they were
Reprobates.

6. Again, the Ministers of Christ said, Christ was the word, and the Rev. 19.
13. Luke 1. 1.
Scripture was a Declaration of what they believed. But the Teachers of this
age says, the Letter and the Scripture is the Word, and says it is the
Instrument whereby God saves souls, and says it is both the writings and the
things signified; and says it is the foundation of foundations, but thus the
Ministers of Christ never spoke of the Letter: and thus herein they differ and
disagree, the one preaches Christ to be the Word, The other preaches the
Letter and the Scripture to be the Word. The Ministers of Christ said, Christ
was Ephesians 2 20.
the foundation; but these say the Scripture is the foundation, and herein they
are contrary, and shows by their Doctrine another spirit then was in the
Apostles.

7. Again, the Ministers of Christ said they spoke wisdom among them that were
perfect, and said. As many of us as are perfect be thus minded; and 1 Cor. 2.
6. Phil. 3. Col. 1 28.
said, that the end of their Ministry was to present every man perfect in
Christ. But the Teachers of this age denies persection, and say, None must be
perfect in this life; and if any preach up perfection, that it is to be
attained, they say it is Error, and damnable Doctrine: Nay, they say none shall
ever be free from sin, or ever have victory over their sin, nor overcome the
body of sin while he be upon Earth: But the Ministers of Christ witnessed they
were more then conquerers, and that they had put off the body of death, and
were free from sin, and were the servants of Righteousness. And Romans 8, 37.
Rom, 6. 22.
herein also they differ, and are not of one spirit; and we know that the
Ministers of Christ were guided by the spirit of God, which held forth these
Doctines; and we know the Teachers of this age, that their spirit must needs be
of the Devil, because it holds forth and Practices what the Ministers of
Christ did not, but the contrary.

8. Again, the Ministers of Christ were persecuted and suffered cruel and
grievous things for righteousness sake, as you may read in the Acts, and did
not render evil for evil to any man, for they suffered patiently. But the
Teachers of this age are not persecuted, but are Persecutor^ and causes men to
be put into prison, and to be banished out of Towns; and sues people at the
Law, and seeks occasions against the people of God; and herein they 1 Thessalonians. 5.
15.
disagree, and are not of the same spirit as they were which were Ministers of
Christ, but shows a spirit contrary.

9. Again, the Ministers and Apostles of Christ were not chargeable to any, but
made the Gospel without charge, and free, and labored with their own hands,
and did not live idely, but were often in cold, bunger, and nakedness, and
perils, and trials: but the Teachers of this age live in pride, and
covetousness, and fullness, and does not work with their own hands, but makes
the Gospel of Christ chargeable, for many hundred thousand pounds in a 2 Thessalonians.
3. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 26. 22.
year does but maintain them, which they have out of poor men's labors; and so
these differ and disagree from the Ministers of Christ, and shows they are not
of that spirit that they were guided by, but are guided by a contrary spirit,
because they are contrary in their call, and in their doctrine, and practice,
and maintenance.

10. Again, the Ministers of Christ preached by the splrit, according as the
spirit gave them utterance, and sometime continued preaching till midnight: But
the Teachers of this age are limited by a glass, and preaches by a glass, and
when the hour is out, their time of peaching is ended, and that Acts 2. 4. Acts
20, 7.
which they have studied for beforehand, that they preach, and not that which
they have received immediately from the spirit of God: And herein do they
disagree, and in many things more, which after may be declared.

11. Again, the Ministers of Christ said, Ye may all prophecy one by one, 1
Cor. 14. 31. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Acts 21. 9.
that all might be edified; and as every one had received the gift of Christ,
so they might minister to others, and desired that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and Sons and Daughters did prophecy: But the teachers of this age
will not suffer all to prophecy one by one, neither will allow any to preach
as they have received from Christ, without such qualifications, and learned
Arts, and ordinations of men, and they will not allow a woman to prophecy or
speak among them, and all might speak the word of the Lord faithfully that had
it, and all might minister as they had received it; this was order in the
Apostles days among them, but this is now counted confusion Ier. 23. 28.
by the Teachers of this age; and if any speak to them or any among them, many
such are made to suffer cruelty, or imprisonment, or such like, by their means;
and herein they disagree, and show that they are guided by another spirit than
the Ministers of Christ were guided by, and so are not his Ministers, but
Deceivers.

12 Again, the Ministers of Christ declared what they had heard, and 1 John 1.
1. 2 Cor. 10. 16. 2. Cor. 4, 2.
seen and felt, and tasted of the word of life; and none of them did boast in
another man's line, but what they all had received of the Lord, that they
declared, and not their own inventions, and commended themselves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God; and they did not provide themselves Studies
full of books to gather out of in a weeks time what to preach on the first
days, as the Teachers of this age do, who by vain study, and humane learning,
frames up, and notes it in a Book, an hour, or two hours discourse to the
people. And herein they disagree, and sh^ws that they are guided by a spirit
contrary to the Ministers of Christ.

13. Again, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ were called from Mat. 4. 19.
20. 21 Mat. 9. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 14.
their Herds, and from Nets, from their receipt of Custom^, and from their
Callings; and by receiving the Holy Ghost were made Ministers of Christ, and
did not seek peoples money to themselves, but sought the people to God, and
went through aruel sufferings and persecutions many times, that they might hold
forth the way of life and truth to all people. But the Teachers of this age,
they are trained up from their childhood in Arts and Sciences, rising by
degrees from one vanity to another, till at last they arrive to the function of
a Minister of Christ, as they call it and few or none of them has been called
from their ordinary calling to preach the Gospel, for such a one is hardly
allowed of to preach among people; and they seek peoples money to themselves,
and not the people to God. And herein they disagree, and shows another spirit
then was in the Apostles.

14. Again, the Ministers of Christ were led and guided by the spirit of
Christ, and did not fulfill their own wills, nor the wills of men; and Romans 8.
14. 1 John 2.
they brought people to the feeling of the spirit of Christ in them to teach
them, and after they had begotten people to God, they said they needed no man
to teach them, but as the anointing within them taught them. But the teachers
of these age follows their own spirits, and are subject to the wills of men; if
men admits them to teach, they do; but if men deny them, Acts 4. 17. 18. 19.
then they do not preach; but the Apostles did not thus, for when men forbid
them to teach, they did not cease to preach, but went on boldly, declaring the
Name of the Lord: And these teachers do not bring people to know the spirit of
Christ in them, neither can any through their preaching receive the anointing
to dwell in them, that so they do not need any man to reach them; but people
are ever learning as long as they live, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, and people are not profited at all; and in this thing they
disagree, and shows another spirit then the Apostles were guided by, even the
spirit of Antichrist.

15. Again, the Ministers of Christ were low, poor, meek, sober, humble Heb.
11, 37. 38.
men, such as did not exalt themselves, nor maintain themselves in pride, and
fullness, by receiving of poor peoples labors. But the Teachers of this age are
proud, and heady, high-minded, selfe-willed, and exalted spirits, living in
idleness, pride and fullness, and receives of the labors of poor people; and
herein they disagree; for the Apostles were often in cold, and hunger, and
great sufferings and perplexities; but these are as fed horses, the proudest of
all people, and the most covetous of any men, and all men must bow to them, and
call them Masters, which is quite contrary to Christ's command. And thus they
show another spirit then what the Ministers of Christ were guided by; and if
another spirit, it must needs be the spirit of the devil; for either the spirit
of Christ leads men, or the spirit of the devil.

And now seeing that the Teachers of this age brings forth fruits contrary to
the Ministers of Christ, it shows that they are not guided by the spirit of
Christ, because in their calling, in their Ministry, in their maintenance, in
their life and conversation, and in their doctrine they are not the same, but
quite contrary to the Apostles and Ministers of Christ; what can we conclude of
them? we have concluded already that such are deceivers, whose works are of
another nature, and who are guided by another spirit than the Ministers of
Christ were, for Christ says, Every tree is known by its fruits; And this is
sufficient what I have said, and if need require it may further be made to
appear in the sight of the whole world and sufficiently proved, that they
differ in all these things mentioned, and in many more, and are not one with
the Apostles, neither in call, nor practice, nor maintenance, nor in doctrine,
nor in conversation, nor in any other thing, but does disagree, and is quite
contrary; so as it is concluded these are not the Ministers of Christ, though
they profess themselves to be so, because they bring forth fruits quite
contrary to the spirit of Jesus, which the spirit of Jesus did and does
reprove: and seeing they are not guided by the spirit of JESUS, because their
fruits are contrary to it, then must they needs be guided by the spirit of
Antichrist, and so are the Ministers of Antichrist, and does his works by his
spirit; And further, I shall show wherein they do agree with the false prophets
and false Apostles, and wherein they are like unto them in their Ministry and
practice and doctrine, and conversation; and if the marks of deceivers fall
upon them in the sight of all people, why should they not hear it? And if the
same works be proved to be acted by them, which, the false Prophets and
deceivers acted, then why should it be thought a thing incredible among men
that these are deceivers?

1. First, the false Prophets ^un and were not sent; and they did not profit
the people at all, for they stood not in the counsel of God, and so they turned
not any from their iniquity, but rather strengthened the hands of the
evil-deer, so Ier 23, Chap.
that none could turn from their wickedness; and they spoke a vision of their
own heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord; and they said still to the
wicked. The Lord has said, ye shall have peace; and to every one that walked
after the imaginations of their own heart, they cried, No evil shall come upon
him, and the Priests and the Prophets were profane, as you may read Ier. 23.
And this is a fit parallel for the Teachers of this generation, they can show
no call from God, nor by his spirit, neither is people profited by them, as
exp^rience does show and teach through this Nation; and they do cry peace to
the wicked, and count all Christians and Followers of Christ that are but
sprinkled when they are infants, though they live in wickedness; and from them,
as from the Prophets of Israel, is profaneness gone forth into many Nations, and
a wicked example of evil these give to all Nations, neither do these speak from
the mouth of the Lord, but a vision of their own heart, and what old Authors
say, and at the best but what the Saints of the Lord said before them, and this
is no more, as done by them, then stealing the Prophets words, or the word from
their neighbor; Again, you may read how the false Prophets used their tongues,
and said, the Lord says it, when God had never spoken to them, but only what
they had stole from others, who were the Prophets of the Lord; and this is a
fit example to the Teachers of this age, and a true parallel between them; for
these dare not own that ever they heard the voice of the Lord imediately, nor
that they spoke from the month of the Lord immediately, but uses their
tongues, and says the Lord said so by such a Prophet, when as themselves have
not received the word from the Lord; and the Lord was against such who
prophesied lies, as did the false Prophets of Israel, as the Teachers of this
age do, as it is manifest, and the Lord is against them; and herein do they
agree, and concur with the false Prophets in their call, and are in concord
with the deceivers of old.

2. Again, the false Prophets, and blind watchmen of Israel, they were
ignorant, and they were greedy dumb dogs that never cold have enough, and they
look to their own way, and every one sought for his gain from their quarters,
and they were drinkers of wine, and strong drink, and boasted that to morrow
should be as this day, Isay 56. And this is a fit parallel with the Teachers of
this age, for they are blind watchmen, and does not discover to people the
wickedness of their ways, and no less can be said of them, than that they are
greedy dumb dogs, for they all look to their own way, and every one of them
has a quarter (a Town or a Parish) from which they seek their gain, and some
of them are lovers of wine, and strong drink, as daily experiences witness; and
herein the Teachers of this generation are proved to succeed the false Prophets
in the same works, and shows they are guided by the same spirit, because they
so fitly agree and concur in their works, and this is plain to all men that are
but reasonable, much more to men that are spiritual.

3. Again the deceivers such as were false Prophets, Preached for hire, and
Divined for money, and yet leaned upon the Lord, and said, is not the Lord among
us? and the teachers of this age they have hire for preaching, and great sums
of money, and they say they lean upon the Lord; of these things Mic. 3. Chap.
their needs no proof, they are so plain, in every Town, and Country where the
Priests preaches for hire, and the Prophets divine for money; and herein they
fitly agree, and concur with the deceivers of old, and follows them as an
example, showing that they walk by the very same spirit.

4. Again the false shepherds of Israel were like Foxes in the desert, for they
followed their own spirits, and had seen nothing but lying Divinations, saying
Ezekiel. 13.
the Lord said, when the Lord had not sent them; and they seduced the people,
saying peace, when there was no peace to them from God, and one builded a wall,
and aother daubed it with untempred mortar, and with lies; the heart of the
righteous they made sad, whom the LORD had not made sad, and strengthened the
hands of the wicked that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising
him life; And this is a fit parallel to the Teachers of this age, for they
follow their own spirits, because they do things contrary to the spirit of
Jesus; and they have seen nothing but lying vanities, and divinations, whereby
they do seduce the people, by telling them they are Christians, and that they
are baptized into the says of Christ, and that they have the Seal of the
remission of sins, by being sprinkled with water when they were Infants; and
these are lying divinations by which they seduce people, and says they shall
have peace while they still continue in sin; and thus they build a wall, and
daubs it with untempered mortar, and makes a Christian of their own, and feeds
him with false hopes, and with such lies as these, and many other which they
declare for doctrine; the heart of the righteous is made sad at this day, and
the hands of the wicked are strengthened, that he cannot turn from his wicked
way, for life is promised to him, though he be wicked and ungodly, living in
all unrighteousness, for they tell him that Christ is his righteousness to
justify him, and then he thinks he need not turn from his sin, and so their
hands are strengthened that they cannot turn from their sins; and herein the
teachers of this age, and the false prophets do fully agree, and are so like
the one to the other, as children of one father, and their works are so like as
crafts-men of one science; and thus they are one in union, and follows the same
spirit.

5. Again the shepherds of Is^del, idle Pastors, and Deceivers, they eat the
fat, and they cloth themselves with the wool, and they killed them that Ezekiel.
33: Chap.
were fed, but they feed not the flock, the diseased they did not strengthen,
neither healed they the sick, neither bound they up the broken, neither brought
they again that which was driven away, neither did they seek again that which
was lost, but with force, and cruelty, they ruled the flock, and was scattered,
and become meat to all the beasts of the field, and the sheep wandered
throughout all the Mountains; and the flock was scattered, and none of the
Shepherds did search or seek after them; and they eat and drank up the good of
the Pasture, and trod down the residue with their feet; and they thrust with
side and with shoulder, and they pushed all the diseased with their horn, till
they scattered them abooad; Now this is a fit comparison with the practice of
the teachers of this age; for they eat the fat, and lives in pleasures, and
fuln^ss most of any, and they cloth with the wool, for they claim the tenth
part of every man's wool; and if any be fed by the true shepherd, they seek to
kill them, and to devour their lives by causing them to be imprisoned, and
cruelty done unto them; and they feed not the flock, neither do they strengthen
the diseased, nor heals the sick, neither bind they up the broken; for if any
be wounded and cries out because of the burden of sin, and be sick, and
broken, and trembles at the word of the Lord; such they cry out is deceived and
mocketh at them; and the Image of God which has been driven away and lost,
they have not sought in people, but with cruelty have they ruled among people,
by running to Magistrates, and causing such to be put into prison that would
not help to maintain them, and thus with cruelty do they rule among people, as
it is witnessed by many testimonies in England; and the people are scattered,
and wandered into many sects, and false judgments, and false opinions, and
they are not sought after by the Teachers of this age to regain them to the
truth by sound doctrine, but they persecute them; and the shepherds feed
themselves, and feeds not the flock, and even eats up the good pasture, and
treads down the residue; and drinks of the deep waters, and fouls the residue
with their feet, so that none that follows them can drink of the pure waters,
nor eat of the bread of life; and they thrust with side, and with shoulder, and
push all the diseased which are wounded, because of their sin, who is ready to
die for want of the Bread of life, which denies, and are weary of their
abominations; these they push at with their horns, and causes to be
persecuted: and thus they fitly agree with the false shepherds of Israel, and
are no whit wanting in any thing wherein they were guilty, but rather
abounding; which shows that they follow the same spirit, and are of the same
stock, and seed, and the Lord is against these, as he was against them in old
time, and no more are these Ministers of Christ that acts these things, then
they were which acted the same things by the same spirit; and this is plain to
all that shuts not their eye and stops not their ear.

6. Again, the false Prophets and deceivers, they made the people err, and did
bite with their teeth, and cried peace, but they that put not into their
mouths, they prepared War against them, as you may read Micha 3. Now the
teachers of this age brings forth the very same; for they cry peace unto all
that puts into their mouths, though people be never so ungodly, if they will
maintain them, they cry peace to them, but if people put not into their mouths,
they prepare war against them, by suing them at the Law, and casting them into
prison if any deny to pay them tithes, or money, though they have no due to it
by the Law of Christ, such do prepare open war against them by distraining
their goods, and taking treble damages, and casting their bodies into bonds;
and herein the teachers of this age agrees with the false Prophets of Israel,
can any man be so blind that does not see it? does any man stop their ear, so
as that they cannot hear this to be true? they show themselves in all things to
be one with the false Prophets of Israel, when justly they are tried by their
own rule, as they say, and so let them bear this judgment, which their own
professed rule judges with.

7. Again the Priests, and false Prophets of Israel, thus it is said of them
that as troops of Robbers waits for a man, so the company of Priests murders in
the way with consent, for they commit lewdness, Hos. 6. 9. and what less may
be spoken of the teachers of this age, spiritual men shall judge; for if any
man do but cease from their abominable worship, their deceitful worship and
Idolatry, and come to the knowledge of God, they even seek to murder in the
way, and cries out against them for being deluded, and deceived, and such like;
so that like as troops of Robbers wait for a man, so it may be said of the
teachers of this age; for they take away the key of knowledge, and will not
enter in themselves to the knowledge of the truth, nor suffer them that would;
and indeed whatsoever abomination the Teachers and Prophets of Israel were
found guilty of, the Teachers of this age does not come short but rather abound
(let search be made thr^ugh the Scriptures, and see whether there was any evil
committed by them) I mean the false Prophets of Israel, that is not committed
by the Teachers of this age; what were they guilty of, that these can free
themselves from? If any man has a word to say, let us hear it, and come out
with your Arguments you wise men, and let us hear your plea; and they doing the
same works which the false Prophets of Israel did, must needs be concluded to
be followers of the same spirit, and that they are no less than they were whose
examples they follow, which are followers of the false Prophets, and not of the
Ministers of Christ.

8. Again Christ in his warning, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, who
gives the description what they were, and what their practices were, and he
says, they, (meaning the Pharisees) did bind heavy burdens, grievous to be
born, and they laid them on men's shoulders, but themselves would not move them
with one of their fingers; and their works they do to be seen of men, and loves
the uppermost rooms at feasts, and their chiefest seats in Synagogues, and
greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Masters: Now the Teachers of
this generation are like unto these, they do succeed the Pharisees in bringing
sorth the same fruits; for do not these buid heavy burdens grievous to be born,
and laying them often men's shoulders, making them suffer grievous things through
their cruelty, as imprisonment, and spoiling their goods, these are grievous
burdens which they lay upon men, but they will not touch them with one of their
fingers, and their works are done to be seen of men, for they think to be heard
for their much babbling, and we know they love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and has it often, and the chief place of the Synagogue, they love that and
have it; and to be called of men master, which Christ forbids his Ministers to
be, they love that, and they have it; and herein they do agree with the
Pharisees, and in other things, if we should duly examine the Scriptures,
showing that they are of the same spirit which the Pharisees were of which
crucified Christ.

9. Again, the Pharisees and deceivers were persecutors, such as complained to
the Magistrates, as you may read through all the new Testament and the book of
the Acts, and elsewhere; How the Chief Priests caused the Saints to be
persecuted by lying informations, and grievous complaints Act 24. 1, 2, 4 6.
to the Elders and Rulers; they sought to take Christ by subtilty, and kill
him, and they persecuted the Apostles to prison, and some to death, and others
to bonds, and cruel sufferings; And this was done chiefly by or through Mat.
26. 3. 4.
the complaint of the Priests; it was Amaziah the Kings Priest that complained
to Jeroboam, and informed against the poor Prophet Amos; and it was Shimshia
the Scribe that complained to the King against the building Amos 7. 10. Jer.
20. 19.
of the City of God; And it was the Son of the Priest that persecuted
Jeremiah; and herein also the teachers of this generation does agree and
concord with the Chief Priests, with, and in persecuting the innocent, showing
that they are of the same spirit, for now they complain and inform against the
people of God, and through their information evil is done against them; and it
is they through their lying and false accusation to the Magistrates by whom the
Saints do suffer, and in all these things they do fully agree, and concur with
the deceivers of old.

10. Again, the false Apostles, they were such as went for filthy lucre, Tit 1.
11. 2 Pet. 2. Chap.
and through covetousness, with seigned words, made merchandise of souls, and
denied the Lord that bought them, and brought in damnable heresies, and they
walked after the flesh, in the lusts and uncleanness, and despised government,
and were presumptuous and self willed, and sported themselves with their own
deceiving, and they could not cease from sin, but beguiled unstable souls, and
an heart they had exercised in covetous practices, and they went astray, loving
the way of Balaam, loving the wages of unrighteousness, and they were wells
without water, and were clouds that are carried with a Tempest; they spoke
great swelling words of vanity, and allured through the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantonness those who were escaped from them, who lived in error,
and they promised others liberty, and themselves were the servants of
corruption. Now the Teachers of this age are sound guilty of, and in all these
things they agree, which the false Apostles were guilty of; for they through
covetousness, with seigned words, do make merchandise of the people, if any
will give them more money at the next Town, they will sell the people where they
are, and go where there is more money, and seeing they are out of the doctrine
of Christ, it is no less then denying the Lord that bought them.

And that they hold damnable errors, this I can prove, for one (...)
of them said in my hearing, That the Scripture was the Foundation of
Foundations. And At Ware.
another said, That the Scripture was both the writings and the thing
signified, and these are as damnable errors as ever the false Apostles brought
in. And these they walk after the lust of the flesh, in pride and fullness
thereof, and despise the government of Christ and are presumptuous,
self-willed, lofty, high-spirited men; and as the false Apostles did, so do
these speak evil of things they know not, of things they understand not; and no
less can be said of these, but that they spo^t themselves with their own
deceivings, and they cannot cease from sin themselves; for it is a principal
doctrine among them, That none must be free from sin while they be upon Earth,
and they deceive unstable Souls, who thinks them to be Ministers of Christ,
when as they were never sent of Christ, and it is evident that their hearts are
exercised with coverous practices, who sues poor people at Law, some for 12
pence; which they are more able to give to, then they whom they sue to receive
from; and they follow the error of Balaam, and run after him greedily who went
for gifts and rewards, as does these, and has unrighteous wages, causes
people to pay them money, for whom they do not work, and this is unrighteous
wages; these are wells without water, and clouds without rain: they make a show
of godliness and righreousnesse, whenas they are profane and unrighteous. and
they speak great swelling words of vanity, prosessing themselves to be Orthodox
Divines, and such like, which are no more but words of vanity, without truth,
and they seek to allure all people to follow them in their way of
Idol-worships, and so they are deceived and deceiving: And while they promise
liberty to others by Christ from sin when they are dead, themselves are the
servants of corruption, and live in sin to this day, and in all things which
the false Apostles were guilty of, these comes not behind, but these does show
by their works, that they are guided by the same spirit which was in the
deceivers of old, and so they agree and concur one with another in
unrighteousness.

Again, the false Prophets and deceivers, which were come and coming in the
days of John, they were of the world, and they spoke of the world, and the
world heard them: and they were them which Christ prophesied 1 John 4. 5. Mat.
24, Acts 20. 29. 1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
of should come into the world, which should deceive many, and such were they
which the Apostle saw coming in, 2 Timothy 3. and he said, after his days
grievous Wolves should come in, which should not spare the slock such which
were departed from the faith, and spoke lies in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared with a hot iron; and such were they, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers fos those things
which were good, traitors, heady, high-minded, l^vers o pleasures more then
lovers of God: They have the form of godliness but dney the power thereof: and
people by them were ever learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of
the Truth: Of this sort the Apo^^le saw was coming, and would come more fully,
and such are the Teachers of this age, for they are of the world, living in
pride and the wickedness of i^; and the world hears them, such as themselves,
proud and wicked people; for they that fears God, and walks in his ways, are
departed from many of them, and they show that they have no says, but are
departed from it; for faith keeps from evil, from the ways of sin and death,
which they live in, and lies in; abundance they speak, and in hypocrisy; and
their consciences are seared, that is plain, else they could not do as many of
them does, who causes innocent people to be put in prison, and makes havoc of
their goods, who will not pay them Tithes, or maintain them; and they are the
proudest of men, and as covetous as any, and unthankful and unholy they show
themselves to be, and they are false accusers and truce breakers, for they
hardly make any conscience of belying the people of God in the pulpits, or to
the Magistrates: and they are heady and high-minded, and if some of them be not
treacherous, judge ye, who has turned diverse ways in their judgments,
according to the times; and they have a form of godliness, but not the power;
prays and sing^ in a form, and preaches in a form and method, and people are
ever learnning by them, sixty years, or more or less, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth, but dies in ignorance and blindness, without
knowledge under them: And herein do they agree also with the false Propher and
Antichrist which John saw to be come in, and such as the Apostle saw, which
were then coming in; and they show the very same spirit by the same works, and
the same fruits which appears from them; men of understanding may compare them,
in all these things they do agree, and appears to be of that very stock and
generation which the Apostle prophesied of, for they were grievous wolves which
should not spare the Flock, which the Apostle saw; and these do not spare the
Flock, but even devours them, and no less then grievous wolves can they be said
to be, for if a poor woman have but ten eggs in all the world, they will have
one, in many parts of this Nation, or but ten chickens they will have one, or
but a fire in their house, they will have a penny for the smoke, and such like
wolvish destroying ways; and if these be not grievous wolves, let all the
world judge. And here is their treachery made manifest, while they say they
preach the Gospel in love to souls, yet its manifest they preach for love of
money, for few or none of them preaches where there is no money; and people are
absolute blind that do not see them, for in all things they agree with the
deceivers and false prophets of old, and shows that they be of the very same
spirit; and thus you see their own rule condemns them, and because they say the
Scripture is their Rule, therefore I have thought good to lay them to it, and
measure them by their own line, and all people may see wherein they are quite
contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and wherein they wholly agree with the
deceivers. Let them hide themselves from this ^low if they can, and let them
bring their arguments against this sentence, and let all their Friends appear
for them, and see if they can reverse this judgment which their own line has
judged them by, let them bring in'their plea and defend themselves for this, if
it be possible, for in those things which I have named, and many other, it is
manifest, that they fully agree with the Deceivers, and disagree with the
Minister o Christ, and by their fruits they are perfectly made manifest.

Again, Christ spoke in his days, and the Apostles in their days, that false
prophets and deceivers should come into the world, and after them, and they
gave discriptions what such they should be, and what fruit they should bring
forth, as I have before mentioned in that 1 John 2. and it is plain that these
deceivers and false prophets did come in, according as was prophesied; for John
said, By this we know it is the last times, for now are they come, which was
many hundred years ago: I say, the deceiver and false Prophets which Christ
prophesied of to come, Mat. 24. came into the world many hundred years ago, as
you may read, 1 John 2. And with this I shall conclude this particular, the
teachers of this age by their fruits are proved already to be of that stock,
and succeeders in the same works, by the same spirit of them which Christ said
should come, and which the Apostle saw was then come, and so they did deceive
many, as these do deceive many in the same way as them that went before them;
And so let it not be a thing incredible to the people of these Nations, that
many of these teachers which are called Ministers, are deceivers generally; but
if there be any one that fears God among them, or loves truth and sincerity, it
will be made manifest, and such I spare, and they shall be spared in the day of
the Lord; But it I say, generally, and the main part of them, even they that
bring forth these fruits before mentioned, which the false prophets brought
forth, are not the Ministers of Christ, but deceivers, the Scripture, their own
professed Rule does prove them so; for it must needs be that they must be the
same men that they were, whose spirit they walk by, and whose fruits they bring
forth; and this cannot be avoided, they are the same trees that bring forth the
same fruits; and let no man blame me for saying such are deceivers, that
preaches for hire, and divines for money, and goes for gifts and reward; and
that are called of men Master, and have the chief place in the assemblies, and
are covetous, and high-minded, and seeks for their gain from their quarter,
with those things which I have mentioned, which are the same things which the
false Prophets acted in ages past; I say, I am not now to be blamed for saying
these are deceivers, who are acting such things now in this age, as they acted
then that were deceivers; but if you blame any, begin with Isaiah, and Micah,
and Ezekiel, and Christ and his Apostles, and the rest of the Holy men of God,
for they are my examples in this, who did declare against them that brought
forth such works as these do that I have declared against, and I have done the
teachers of this age no wrong for judging them by their own line, and laying
them to their own professed rule; therefore do not rage at me, nor do not be
offended at this; for I have but compared them with the Ministers of Christ,
and with the Ministers of Antichrist, and showed wherein they do agree to the
one, and disagree to the other; and all people may see, and the light in all
conciences may judge of what I have said, so that as I said at the first, I may
again say, what think you? was there ever such a generation of teachers? I now
answer, yea; there was in the days of the true Prophets; and in the days of the
Apostles there were such as these are, which were deceivers; and is the times
of Christ, there were such a generation as these are, who acted the same things
by the same spirit, as these do at this day; let them teply to this that will,
my question is sober, and my answer is just and right, and I have dealt
faithfully; and you may read the Scriptures that I have quoted for your own
satisfaction; for though they falsely say, the Scripture is their rule, and
accuses us falsely that we deny the Scripture, yet the Scripture shall be judge
between us in this matter; and what I have done is not in envy to any man's
person, neither in upbraiding them i^ their wickedness, but I do it rather to
show them all their iniquities tha^ they may repent, and this I have done in
perfect love to all people, for the day is come that has brought hidden things
to light, and deceit and hypocrisy which has layen hid, is now fully made
manifest as a^ Noon day.

But again secondly I answer, in some respects I do believe there were never
such a generation of teachers as these are, for we do not read in a^l the
Scriptures concerning the false Prophets, that they were so extremely covetous
and greedy of gain as these are, or that ever they took such desperate, wicked
unlawful courses to get their maintenance, and compel people to pay them, as
these teachers do, a very shame to rehearse it, and to their shame I do
rehearse it, many a poor man in this Nation has been sued by them at the Law,
and put in prison by their means, and had their goods spoiled in a woeful
manner, for to maintain them, and to uphold them; yea some hundreds of poor
people in this Nation, has been dealt cruelly by, and unjustly with, because
for conscience sake they have denied to maintain them, to pay them tithes, or
such like, this may be proved, that for five shillings unjustly claimed by
them, they have taken goods by distraint to the value of five times so much, as
Cumberland and Westmorland can witness, and many at this very day lies in
holes and prisons by the means of the Priests, who teareth the people as Wolves
does the sheep; it is even woeful to be considered, what havoc is made of some
men's persons, and some men's goods, and all to maintain the Teachers; the like
never was in any generation, as is brought forth in this generation in this
particular; and again their exceeding covetousness and greediness of lucre
does appear in that they claim wages of people, and do compel people to pay
them wages after this manner as I have said, for which people they do no work,
neither do these people receive any work done by them with whom they thus deal;
what thing can be more unjust under Heaven, that they should compel people by a
Law to pay them, and thus punishes them if they will not, who set them not on
work, and for whom they do no work; neither does the people like their work or
love it, but knows it to be deceitful, and yet are compelled by a Law to pay
them; they have such a way to get money, that no tradesman besides themselves
like it, for they cause people, and compel people to buy their wares, and they
compel people to pay for their commodity, which has none of it, nor loves it;
and this is more unjust then may be spoken, are they like Ministers of Christ?
Or do they follow their example in these practices? What do you judge? All
people bring in your verdict: or are they not like deceivers herein, even
exceeding all that everwent before; it is true they which preach the Gospel
should live on the Gospel; this argument we do own, but let these men be tried,
and see if by their preaching their Gospel they have gained so much love in
people as to maintain them without the Law, and without compelling of
maintenance and livelihood from them by a Law; let but the Law cease to compel
Tithes, and other things, from people to maintain them, and see whether their
Gospel will maintain them or not, let but the Magistrates hold their hands from
causing people to pay them Tithes by their orders and writs, and i will
undertake, as I do believe they must either beg, or work, or a worse thing for
a livelihood, or else perish, so little love is there in their own people
toward them, so little love have they gained in the hearts of many people
toward them these many years that they have preached; and herein again I do
believe that they do exceed all the false prophets: and all the deceivers that
ever went before them in this respect, none ever had the Magistrates to act for
them as these have, and as it appears, the Rulers some of them are at the wills
of the teachers, to do for them what they desire, either to take peoples goods,
or to send them to prison; showing that these Teachers have not a spiritual
weapon to defend themselves, but that the Magistrates with their Law are their
chiefest Armor, for if they can but get favor of a Magistrate, they have
allowance to preach at such a place, and if they can get the favor of the
Magistrate they can do well enough to be maintained, by causing such to be sent
to prison, or taking treble damages upon their goods if they will not help to
maintain them: and if they have the favor of the Magistrate, if any do reprove
them for these things, and for other of their wickedness, and if any do but
tell them of it, they can have such sent to prison, as in revenge, for speaking
and reproving them for their wickedness, has some hundreds of innocent people
suffered cruel imprisonments, and other cruel things in these Nations, so that
iniquity is upheld as it were by force and power: so that it is not their
Gospel that maintains them and gets them favor with the people, nor does it
defend them, but it is the command and warrant of the Magistrate which does all
this: so when the Magistrates cease to approve them, to maintain them, and
defend them, they must utterly fall into misery, and can neither be approved,
maintained or defended any other way* for because of this their wickedness,
God has left them, and all honest true hearted people has left them,
therefore what a condition are the teachers in, who deserves not the love of
men because they are so cruel-hearted toward them, and they deserve not the
love of God, because they are so wicked against him; and I might yet more fully
describe and declare, wherein they do exceed the deceivers and false Prophets
of old; but of this according as the Lord moves and leads: and this may
suffice to show what they are by their works, and by the spirit that leads
them, which appears not to be the spirit of God, but the spirit of Antichrist.

Furthermore and besides all this that I have said, herein they do exceed the
deceivers that are gone before; for upon account the sum of their maintenance
yearly in these Nations being reckoned maybe about One million and five hundred
thousand pounds per annum.
fifteen hundred thousand pounds a year: Oh wonderful! is not this almost
incredible, that the teachers should put the nation to such a charge as this,
and yet people receives nothing answerable to it? but all this money is spent
for that which is not bread, and their labor wasted, and they have no profit
thereby: this money might be made better use of, then to give it for deceiving
the people: and if any doubt of this account, and shall think this is not like
to be true, upon an even reckoning it may be proved and made appear considering
how many parishes there is, and reckon what belongs to every Priests parish,
with what is given to the Priests in Ireland, which is abundance: these things
are a shame to the Ministry of Christ, though the impudent teachers of these
Nations are void of shame herein.

A Reply to the Priests Plea, and an Answer to their Objections.
Whereas many of the priests of England, to hide themselves from the charge of
being hirelings, they allege these scriptures, The laborer is worthy of his
hire, and the workman is worthy of his meat: but these Scriptures will not
serve to cover their shame in what is charged against them; for this hire which
Christ allows to the laborers, is but to remain in the same house in which
they enter, eating and drinking such things as they give them; with such who
were worthy they were to remain, and to eat that Luke 10. 7, 8.
which was set before them, and they labored truly, and traveled up and down,
and were truly worthy of meat for their work, and of this hire for their labor;
but this makes nothing for the lawfulness of so many pounds a year at a certain
place, this is more then eating at a house which is worthy, to bargain with
people for so much a year, and compelling people to pay by a Law that do deny;
Christ never instituted such a practice, neither can it be truly said that
these called Ministers do labor as the Ministers of Christ did; and so this
scripture is but wrested by them, when they bring it for proof of their
practice for their hundred pounds a year, compelling some of it from the
people, does exceed eating and drinking to suffice nature, with such who are
worthy; so this Scripture makes not for their turn, nor does it justify their
practices.

Again, they object against and charge the words of Paul, who said, He that
preaches the Gospel shall live on the Gospel, and that it was a small matter
to reap carnal things from them unto whom they sowed spiritual things; but this
Scripture makes not for them; for as I have said, its not the preaching of the
Gospel that, maintains them, but the Magistrates with their Law that compels
maintenance from the people, and this is not to live on the Gospel, for we
allow as Paul did, that they which preach the Gospel should live on the Gospel;
therefore let the Magistrates cease with their power to cause people to pay
them, and let all the world see if their gospel will maintain them, and let
them reap their carnal things from them where they sow spiritual; but they must
reap as a free gift too, and not by compulsion, for so the Apostle signifies,
it is a small matter for any to reap carnal things where they sow spiritual
things; yet what is this to prove the lawfulness of bargaining with people for
so much by the year, as these teachers of England do many of them, and will not
preach except they have so much promised them before; for it is right to reap
after sowing, but it is a transgression to bargain to reap before they sow; and
these scriptures will not hide them nor defend them in their practice; for if
the Magistrates did not compel from people maintenance by a Law, the Priests of
this age would reap but little from anything that they sow, for there is little
love in the hearts of people toward them. Also they object, He that plants a
Vineyard, may eat of the fruit thereof, and he that keeps a flock, may eat of
the milk of the flock, this Paul said though he would not make use of his power
herein, but wrought with his hands, that the Gospel might not be chargeable;
but what vineyards have the teachers. of England planted? or what flocks do
they keep? their vinyards proves not tender grapes, but wild sour grapes, wild
vines, and not vines to bring forth acceptable fruits; and their flocks proves
not flocks of sheep, but wild rude people who are in the nature of wolves, and
Lions, and if the Magistrates Law were not, their vineyard nor the flock would
hardly yield them any maintenance; the Apostles planted first a vineyard, and
gathered the sheep, before they reaped or eat any of the fruits, but the
teachers of England differ from them in this, for they know what they must have
before they plant, or before they seed their flock, and differs from the
Apostles practice who first planted a vineyard, and gathered a flock before
they could receive any crop; and they would not then use their power, but kept
the Gospel of Christ without charge; so that this scripture will not prove the
Priests actions lawful, in preaching for sums of money: and some other
Scriptures they bring to prove the lawfulness of their preaching for hire,
which may all be answered as these are, and whatsoever they can ob^ect will not
justify them for their reaping carnal things, and their hire, and their eating
of the milk of the flock, is quite of another nature, as is proved, then the
Apostles practices were; and were the people wise they would see and understand
these things, and not be deluded through perverting of Scriptures, and through
wresting of them to other ends the^ wherefore they were given forth; and this
is written to answer some of their objections, whereby they would defend
themselves; for what though Paul took of other Churches to supply his
necessities, as sometimes he did, yet this will not prove the lawfulness of
their hundreds of pounds by the year, most of which they spend in pride and
idleness; so that still this Judgment is true upon them which I have given,
all objections being answered, and all defenses being made void; and hereof
they are guilty as I have charged them, and proved it out of the Scripture;
They disagree to the Ministers of Christ, and agrees with the deceivers, and in
some particulars exceeds them; for I believe all the false prophets in Israel
did not destroy any whit near a Million and a half of money in a year,
considering all things it must come to little less, their funeral sermons,
their great Tithes, and small Tithes, and marriages, and sprinkling of Infants,
and Churching of women, with other such penuries claimed by the Priests of
England, with what is given to them out of the Nations treasure, which is many
hundred pounds a year; also considering how much in a year is spent and
consumed at two or three Colleges in this Nation, in r^lation to the Ministry;
as in bringing some up to the attainment of the Ministry (as they call it) and
upon the educators of such, with a very great abundance of such like charges;
consumed out of the Nations treasure, which is wasted, as in relation to this
Ministry spoken of: I do not speak against good education and learning, which
is in its place a virtue, (as for travelers and many others) neither do I
account such money vainly wasted and spent; But only as to the Ministry of
Christ, natural learning is not there admitted to make Ministers, or to enable
them thereunto; but that money which is thereupon spent, is wasted and
consumed; and how much is spent in this way, and for such an end only, I leave
wise men to judge, which will make up a large sum in the whole: considering all
things I say, their yearly maintenance may amount to fifteen hundred thousand
pounds a year, which is a thousand thousands, and half a thousand thousand
pound; Men of weak understandings can hardly reach, to know how much it is, and
that makes me thus plainly expound it.

A description of the true Ministers of Christ, and its maintenance.
THe day has appeared that makes all things manifest, and the light is arisen,
that gives to discern between truth and error, between the true and every false
way, and between the worship of God, which is spiritual and every false worship
of the world, which is Idolatry; and the true Ministry of Christ is known from
the false Ministry, by their several fruits and signs for hidden things are
brought to light, and secret things are revealed, but now the people of the
world, both the wise and the foolish thus they object, and say, Seeing that you
do so much condemn our Ministry and Ministers in their ca^l, in their
practices, in their conversation, and in their maintenance; what ministry do
you own? and what Ministers do you allow of? and whether would you have any
Ministry at all, seeing you throw down and declares against such as the Law of
the Land sets up, and such as we have looked upon to be able Ministers? and
after this manner the people of this generation begun to reason among
themselves, saying, what would the people do if they had power? what Ministers
would they approve of? and what maintenance would they allow them?

To all this I do answer and say, The true Ministers and Ministry of Christ we
do allow of, and we would have set up and established, and we wait patiently
till it be brought to pass, even such as are ordained by power from on high,
and who have received the gift of the Holy Ghost; who are called of God into
the work of the Ministry, such we do approve of to be Ministers of Christ, in
whom he is revealed, and who have received him, and are changed by him from
death to life, and out of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of God, and who
are born of the spirit, and are led and guided by it into all truth, and are
called by it to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goe^h, and who are taught by
it in all their practices of Religion, and in the whole worship of God, such we
own as have felt the operation of the spirit in themselves, and who have
tasted, handled, seen, and felt of the word of life, which abides for ever, and
such who goes in the name of the Lord to Minister and declare freely what they
have freely received of God by his Spirit, and who preaches Christ freely, as
the only way and means of life and salvation unto all people, even such as
ministers him the way, the truth, and the life, the only justifier and
sanctifier, and deliverer of them that believe, and the condemner of them that
believe not; and such as ministers Christ only the teacher and leader of his
people, and nothing else besides him; and such we allow as only seeks and
laboreth in the wisdom of God to bring people out of the ways of sin and
death, unto the knowledge of God, and to the things that belong unto their
peace; such who have no respect to large places, or great benefits, to seek
after that, who will not have hire for preaching, nor be hired by great sums of
money from one Country to another; such as makes the Gospel of Christ free, and
without charge, who will not be burdensome to any, but walks in all wisdom, as
examples of righteousness to all people; whose conversati^ns are in heaven,
and holds forth in life and practice, unto all men, what they profess in
words, and by doctrine and conversation holding forth the light of the glorious
Gospel, which they have received from God, being patterns of all holiness, of
peace and long-suffering, of meekness and patience unto their flocks; even
such who walks in Christ, and shows ^o^^h good works, and the fruits of his
spirit, causing his light to shine forth among men, in humility, and
soberness, and in all the fruits of peace and truth, and such are approved of
God, and of the saints, even they that preach Christ freely to all people, and
holds forth the light of the world, which lights every one in the world, the
free gift of God to all mankind, that all may believe and come to the knowledge
of the truth, and be saved; and (...) Ministers respects not the persons of any
man for advantage, neither respects days, nor places, nor things, but worships
God in spirit and in truth, and teaches that worship unto all people, and they
gather people into the new covenant, where Christ is the high Priest, and our
bodies the Temples of God, and the circumcision in the heart, and in the
spirit, for such are Ministers of the spirit and not of the letter, and they
divided the Word of God a right; they feed the hungry, and the rich are sent
empty away, they cry not peace to the wicked, neither does justify the
unconverted; neither do they condemn the righteous, nor such as are of an
upright heart; but Christ they preach, to justify all that do believe, and are
obedient to him, and to condemn all that believe not, but are disobedient; and
such Ministers has the word of reconciliation, and their Ministry is made
effectual, to accomplish the work of God; sinners are converted and brought to
God thereby, and to be taught of him alone, and the Saints through that
Ministry, may obtain to the Holy Ghost, and to need no man to teach them, but
as the anointing within teaches them, which they receive through the
Ministry, whose labor is, and the end of it, to present every man perfect in
Christ; and this Ministry, and such Ministers we approve of, and they are
approved of Christ, and we would have them established, and who are such will
not take care for an outward maintenance, neither what to eat, or what to put
on; neither will they Petition to Magistrates for tithes and augmentations, but
are without care, as for a livelihood in this world, they will not remove from
one Town to another, for a better Parsonage or place; for such as do so, are
not the lawful called Ministers of Christ, but have run, and were never sent;
for Christ's Ministers takes no thought for any outward maintenance, but
approves themselves in patience in all conditions, and sometimes are in want,
and cold, and hunger, and nakedness, and in persecutions, and trials, and
afflictions, and suffers all things for the Name of Christ, and yet we do
believe and know, that such have power to eat, and to drink, and may receive
carnal things where they sow spiritual things, but as a free gift, and not by
compulsion or force; we do allow that the Ministers of Christ may eat of the
milk of the stock, which they keep and feed, and they may eat of the fruit of
the vineyard which they have planted, and which they labor in, and they may
supply their necessities from them whom they have begotten in the faith, and
whom they labor among in life and doctrine, who are sheep of the fold, and
plants of the vineyard of Christ Jesus; but I say as a free gift may they
receive the fruits of their labors, and not as a debt, or any title claimed
thereto by the Law of the Nation; neither may they receive it by force or
compulsion; but who are the truly called Ministers of Christ are so far from
this, or forcing maintenance from any, that they will not make use of their
power, in taking what may be freely given them, for they will not make the
Gospel burdensome by any means, and this is the maintenance we do allow the
Ministers of Christ; they may eat such things as are set before them in any
house which they enter into, which is worthy; and they may supply their
necessities in food and raiment, as a free gift from them whom the Ministers
are made stewards, to watch over them and to exhort them, to instruct them, and
to edify them; but not from the World who continues in unbelief and
disobedience to the Gospel, may they receive any outward maintenance by
compulsion, or by a free gift, neither may they receive great sums of money by
the year, or Tithes, or other offerings to maintain themselves and their
families in pride and idleness, and lust and excess, and superfluity in meats
and apparel; such a maintenance is by free gift, much less by force that is
not allowed by Christ and his Saints, but is the maintenance of Antichristian
Teachers, which never were sent of Christ, and such cannot be content with his
allowance and wages, but lives in pride and pleasures of this world, and in
vanity; and maintained they say they must be, and if they be so, they care not
from whence it come, nor by what means; and that is the reason wherefore so
many hundreds of honest people are so spoiled in their persons and estates, the
bodies of some being cast into prison and many others having their goods taken
from them by force and distraint; and all this is to maintain Antichrists
Ministers, who neither cares how they have it, nor from whom, or to what evil
use they improve it; and this plainly appears in this Nation, by many
evidences, but the Ministers of Christ does deny such a maintenance, and such
practices, and are come to that life which judges all these things.

And as concerning compelling of maintenance, and forcing of it from people,
this is utterly against the Law of Christ, and condemned by him and denied by
the Saints; for it is unreasonable and no equality in it, that people should be
compelled to maintain a Ministry, especially such a one as they know is not the
Ministry of Christ, neither is profitable to them, and which they receive no
fruits from, for the Ministers of Christ does not desire maintenance from the
people of the world, neither can receive any from them, neither in justice and
equity should the Ministers of the world receive or compel maintenance from the
Saints by force and cruelty: but this we would, and this is reason and equity,
let all ministers be maintained by such as approves them, and hears them, and
partakes of their labors, and so the Saints will maintain their Ministers, and
the world may maintain theirs, and every sort of people may maintain such
Ministers as labors for them, and none to be forced to maintain such as they
do not approve of, nor none hindered from maintaining of such, as they do
approve of, be they true, or false Ministers; and this is reason and a good
conscience, that every man be left free in such cases, to maintain whom he
will, and to give as he will, and what he will; and this is reason and equity,
that no man be compelled to give, or hindered from giving to whom he pleases,
and what he pleases, and so let people make choice of their Ministers, whom
they will approve and whom they will hear, and of whose labors they will
receive, and then let them maintain them, and if any be compelled, let them be
compelled to pay their own servants, who ministers to them and not another,
for whom the^ do no work; and this is just and right both for Ministers and
people, that every Minister be paid by them to whom he does minister, and who
receives him as a Minister, and for whom he does work; and this great injustice
and oppression in England will cease, if this Law of equity and righteousness
were established, and all people left free to hear and approve of whom they
will, and then to pay them and maintain them; and this would try the Ministers,
and who converted the most to God, and gained the love of most people, and if
they wrought well they may receive a maintenance accordingly, by the free gift
of the people; and the Ministers that are not content with this Law, are out of
pure reason and equity, and shows that they dare not trust the Lord, nor the
fruits of their labors, but would be maintained in idleness, by unlawful means,
by compelling maintenance from them to whom they do no work; and such shows
great covetousness, who desires more then the milk of their own flock, and the
fruits of their own vineyard; but in equity and justice let every Minister be
maintained by the fruits of his own labor, from the people for whom he does
labor, and this will content most part of the people; and till this be
established in the earth, truth, justice and judgment will be wanting in this
particular; and this is according to truth, and to a righteous Law; and by this
all people may understand what Ministers and Ministry we do allow and approved,
and how Ministers ought to be maintained; and if any go forth to a place and
country, and among the people that are not converted, then the Church ought to
take care to maintain such in their work, till they may reap of their own
labor, and eat of the fruit of their own Vineyard, b^^ all this ought to be
without compelling or forcing by the Minister; for every Minister of Christ
does chiefly take care of the work unto which he i^ called, and is without care
for outward maintenance.

THE END.

