A Message Proclaimed.

BY DIVINE AUTHORITY, From the chosen Assembly of the redeemed people in
England, To the Pope (chief Bishop) of Rome, and to his Cardinals, Jesuits, and
Priests, and all other the Officers of the Romish Church, where it shall meet
with them through the world: That they may appear, and come forth to trial,
and show if they have the same Faith, Power, Spirit, and Authority, and
Government, as had the Apostles and true Churches, before the Apostacy: And
this is a full Invitation and Challenge to the whole Church of Rome, and the
beginning of controversy with her, for the perfect manifestation of the long
hidden Truth; betwixt them that are in the Truth it self, and such as have the
form, but not the power; that all things may be brought to light and true
judgment.

Written by an Ambassador for the true and living God, E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate.

This to be delivered to the Chief Bishop of Rome, or to his Secretary.

From the Elect and gathered Assembly of the chosen people in the Nation of
England, called in derision, and known amongst all false Sects by the name of
QUAKERS; and by a Servant of the great God of Heaven and Earth, and a Member of
that people, this is written.
To the Pope (Chief Bishop) and his Cardidals at Rome, and to his Bishops,
Jesuits, and Priests there, and elsewhere, thorough the Dominions of the
Romish Church, scattered abread in the Nations.
WHereas we a poor, despised, and rejected people, among the Nations of the
earth, yet dreadful and mighty, because the Majesty and Presence of the Lord
God is with us, who has called us, and chosen us, and gathered us, and
redeemed us from among men, out of kindreds, and multitudes, and peoples, into
one body, and one spirit, out of all the Sects upon the earth; and we are of
one mind, and one soul, having fellowship with the Son, and with the Father,
being come through great tribulations, and many fiery trials, and are refined,
and purified, and made clean and white in the blood of the Lamb, being fully
recovered out of the great deluge of darkness, and Apostacy, which has
overflown and drowned the whole world, and all nations, since the days of the
true Churches, and holy Apostles: And know ye, that we are none of all the many
Sects, nor of the diverse ways, and formal worshippers, that are but in the
imitations fained, of what the Saints of old spoke and performed, in the Power
and Spirit of God, which has been spoken and practiced by all the diverse Sects
and false Churches, without the Spirit, Power, and Life, that was in the
Apostles; so that all Religion has been, and the profession and practice
thereof, for many Ages, but as the floating of a broken vessel upon the waters,
driven with the several winds, wanting Anchor, and skilful Mariners, which has
not carried to perfect Rest, the hope of Eternal life: But know ye, that now at
last, through our long and wearied travels, and after all our tedious seekings,
and our zealous practices and profession in Christianity performed by us,
while darkness covered us, and the earth; has the Lord set us safe upon the
Rock Christ Jesus, upon whom the Church of Christ firmly stands, and the
gates of hell cannot prevail against; and he has made our habitation sure upon
the Mountain of his house, which is established upon the top of all mountains,
whereunto we now are gathered, and rest in a certain hope and tried confidence,
and does view the whole world, and the state of all mankind, and measures the
times and seasons thoroughout Generations; and the state of the Church we
perfectly know, by the inspiration of the Almighty, her estate before the
Apostles days, and in the Apostles days, and since the Apostles days, and
her increase, and decrease, and estate, since the beginning of the world till
now, and at this present time, to us is certainly known, by the Spirit of
Jesus, and the light of the Lamb, which now is risen upon our Mountain, and
shines in our habitations: And first we certify you, as for the many false
Sects and Churches (so called) and many of the diverse worshippers, and
separated forms of Churches, risen up since the Apostles days, from the least
of them to the greatest, we have searched and examined, and are not fully
satisfied (but rather the contrary) that they are perfectly sound in the
Faith, but rather degenerated, from the Power, Spirit, and Life that was in the
Apostles, and among the true Churches before the Apostacy; and we have sought
out their first original and root, and we find they fall short of the true
Church and the Apostles; first in respect of time, many Generations; and also
in respect of life, and power, and purity, and they want the spirit, and
dominion, and government, that the true Churches and Apostles possessed; and we
certainly believe, they are many of them come up, and risen in a dark night,
long since the days of the Apostles, while the Sun was yet unrisen, and while
the mountains of ignorance, blindness, and wickedness covered the face of the
earth, and the clouds of darkness remained upon the face of the whole heavens:
and while yet the man-child remains in God, being caught up to him, and the
woman lodged in the desolate wilderness, being thither fled because of the
great red Dragon: And we believe not, that any of them are the Lambs Wife,
lawfully joined to him, neither are they the Virgin, in which there is no spot;
nor the Spouse, truly in election to Christ the Bridegroom; for we have had
controversy with them this diverse years, and weighed them, and measured them
in the balance of equity, and they appear to us, not to be of a true descent
from that Vine, into which the true Church was planted; but their original may
be of a latter race: And to say no more of them, we certainly know they are
foully spotted, and has not the favor, nor parts, nor garments of a Virgin;
and Christ the Bridegroom they have deeply wronged, for many false Sects have
risen out of the great Whore, the mother of Harlots, who has been in open and
secret fornication, every since the days of the Apostles, and such are her
offspring, and not of the true Seed, elect, which is heir by right, of the
inheritance of life eternal, the Kingdom which has no end.

And for as much as the Church of Rome has openly pleaded, as we have heard,
and some of your Members also to our faces, that she is indeed the true Church,
and she alone, and none besides, and that you can fetch your original by line
truly from the Apostles, and Church of the Saints, and are not degenerated in
any particular of Faith, Doctrine, nor Practice, from the Life, and Power, and
Government, and Spirit which was among the true Church, and in the Apostles:
These things, with others the like, have we heard of you, and concerning you,
by many: And now, because the Lord has put it into our hearts, to have
controversy with you, and to seek out perfectly your original, and to justify
you, or condemn you accordingly; and having the certain infallible Spirit of
the Lord God to try all things, we are purposed in the Lord to visit you, and
to examine to the foundation your rise; and first beginning from whence you
come by descent, and what you truly are in your present estate, and whether you
be indeed the true Church, and have the true Spirit, or whether you are
otherwise, that all the world may be satisfied, and more perfectly know the
full truth concerning the Church of Rome; and your seed and root we will
examine, and your birth and original we will search out, and your faith, and
worship, and whole Religion we will lay to the line of true judgment, to
justify you, or condemn you eternally; for the Saints shall judge the world,
and your garments shall be stripped off, and your secrets discovered, and your
whole body and members made fully manifest, that the very truth of all things
may appear, and be embraced, and the whoredoms of all the earth may be laid
open, that the Just and the Innocent, that has long laid groaning in great
captivity, may be delivered from under all bonds of oppressions, whoredoms, and
iniquities; and this will the eternal God by us speedily bring to passse
amongst you.

Wherefore thou Pope, greatly admired, and highly exalted, and to all thy
Cardinals, Friars, Jesuits, and Priests, and all other Officers under thee, I
am moved of the Lord God of heaven and earth, (who is the only Holiness, and
highest of all) by this Message to visit you, requiring you, and charging you,
in the Name and Authority of the Dreadful and Mighty God, before whom all men
and Nations are as nothing in comparison, but may be turned at his pleasure,
and dashed to pieces by his mighty hand, and unto whom all the sons of Adam in
all the world, must render an account; and as you will answer it to him in his
dreadful day of judgment and vengeance, and as you love and will obey your God
and Christ, whom you profess and serve; and as you would honor your God, and
bring people to your way, and worship, and religion, upon these engagements,
and by the authority of the Almighty, I lay it upon you to answer, and to
return your knowledge and opinions to the particulars following, which I am
moved to querie and demand of you, that your doctrines, practices, and
worships, and whole religion, in every part thereof, may be veiwed, and
examined, and measured, according to the Saints and Apostles writings, and may
thereby be cleared, or otherwise reproved and condemned: And if your profession
and practices in religion be sprung from the true grounds, and true Spirit and
your Church be indeed the true Church, that can prove her pedigree truly
descended from the Church of Christ, before the Apostacy, and clear her felf
from all degeneration in every degree, and that she is perfect in the faith,
and worship, and practices of the holy Church and Apostles of old; then shall
all that love God, and fear him, and hopes for life eternal, separate
themselves from all Sects, and Apostates, separated from you, and come in, and
return again to you, as to a faithful Mother, and join with you in all things;
and add themselves to your church only, and renounce and deny all the
contrary, that is not of you; and so shall your names and honor be increased
through all the earth. But and if after lawful trial, and just examination, and
searching out the matter, it be proved against you, that our are degenerated
from what the true Church and Apostles were, and are not builded upon Christ
the true Rock and foundation, but diverted from the Power, Life, and Spirit,
and true Religion which the Apostles were in; and that your church is not the
true church, but a false Sect, and your original cannot be fetched from the
Apostles, but is of a latter and more corrupted race; then shall you deny all
your religion, and church, and renounce your profession and practices, and come
to them, and join with them, that can prove their church to be the true Church,
and can fetch their original from the Spirit of the Apostles, and that is
builded upon Christ the everlasting foundation (whoever this shall be proved to
be) wherefore appear and come forth to trial, upon this condition, join issue
with us, and answer these things in plainness, and let us know your
Judgments, that a return you may receive.

First, Whether you are indeed the only true Church of Christ, his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, called, and gathered, and united by the eternal Spirit
of Jesus, perfect in the Faith of Christ, perfect in Doctrine, and perfect in
Worship, as were the Churches of Christ in the days of the Apostles? and
whether the eternal Spirit dwell in every particular member of your church, and
do lead each one of you into all truth, insomuch that you need now no man to
teach any one of you, but as that same spirit that dwells in you? answer me
plainly, yea, or nay.

2. Whether are you not in any particular of your faith, doctrines, practices,
and worships, in any degree degenerated, nor deviated from what the faith,
doctrine, practice and worship were that the true Church were in in the days
of the Apostles? and whether will you admit of trial in all things you profess
and practice, by the Scriptures, the writings of the Saints, yea, or nay?

3. Whether your church of Rome do receive the pouring down of the Spirit upon
sons and daughters immediately, and every member receive the holy Ghost, and is
filled therewith, and baptized therewith, as in the true church? Acts 2. and
whether you have received the holy Ghost, and everlasting Comforter
immediately, as did the true church in the days of the Apostles? Answer me
these things in the truth of your hearts, that you may be owned or denied.

4. Whether the faith you profess have perfectly purified your hearts from all
sin, and has given you victory over the world, that now the body of sin is
put off, and you are free from sin, and does not commit sin? but are every
member of you without spot, and wrinkle, and cleansed from all unrighteousness,
being the servants of righteousness, and not of sin? and whether you believe
this condition to be attainable in this life upon earth, and to be enjoyed and
waited for, yea or nay?

5. What is your ground of sprinkling Infants with water, and whether he that
first instituted it had the gift of the eternal Spirit, and was led thereby?
for we know it was first ordained at Rome in your church, and all the
Protestants received it from you, who are not able to give us a sufficient
reason thereof; but we are not satisfied therein, therefore tell us, whether
are people thereby made members of the body of Christ, and baptized into his
true Church? and is it a perfect seal and sign of the new birth, and
regeneration, as is professed? and does that give all children that are
sprinkled a right to the Kingdom of God, and to be members of the Church of
Christ? and satisfy us plainly, is the sprinkling of an Infant (never having
heard of Gospel, but while unconverted and unchanged in nature) the true
baptism into the true Faith of Christ, as it is professed? Answer me plainly,
yea or nay.

6. Whether the body and blood of Christ, that is meat indeed, and drink
indeed, be carnal and visible things, to be seen, felt, and known visiblie and
carnally? and whether bread and wine, (that is mortal, and will corrupt,) be
the very body and the very blood of Christ Jesus? and whether Christ has any
other body and blood, to be known in any other way or manner then what is
professed to be visiblie and carnally known by you? and is that bread after
consecration the very express Image of the Father, and was with the Father
before the world began? else it is not the body of Christ, answer me plainly.

7. Again, we are not satisfied concerning your burning, and torturing, and
imprisoning, in cruel Iquisitions, and Goals, such as dissenteth from you, and
cannot believe in your church, which ye call heretics; whether is not this
done by your church, or any member thereof? and do you justisie the doing of it
by the authority of your church? and we demand of you to give us example for
such practices in Scripture, ever practiced by the Apostles or true Church, or
any member thereof, to burn, or kill, or imprison such as would not own them,
and were heretics? otherwise we must condemn it, and judge you eternally for
it; and whether such practices done at Rome and in her dominions, be not
murder, and cruelty, and tyranny, and shedding of innocent blood, and of the
devil the wicked one? answer me plainly, and satisfy us herein, that we may
know how to deal with you in controversy.

8. Again, we are not satisfied concerning the abundance of Images of the
Saints, set up, and bowed to among you, and your praying before them, and to
the Saints, and by beads, and in set forms, such things you practice; and also
your keeping and setting apart the Saints days, and your holy days, and
eating with respect to days, denying of flesh such and such days, and
observing of days, and meats, and drinks, and fasting in your own wills, and
your Nunneries, and keeping men and women one from another in secret houses;
whether are these things commanded and required of the Lord from you? and we
charge you to give us some example, that ever the true Church practiced such
things? otherwise if you do not, nor cannot prove these your practices from the
Scriptures, and example of the Apostles before you, we must deny you, and
condemn your practices for ever, and cannot believe, that your church is the
true church, nor you lawful successors of the holy Apostles.

9. What you believe concerning the reign and government of Christ and his
coming? is he, his reign and government visible, and of this world, or
invisible, and from heaven? and whether liars, whoremongers, adulterers,
drunkards, man-slayers, and contentious men, or any that lives in any sin or
transgression, in the first nature, be of the kingdom and government of Jesus,
or has any part or portion therein in time to come for ever? and how may such
ever have part therein, and give us your knowledge in these things; and also
what you hold and profess concerning Election and Reprobation, that we may know
whether your knowledge and faith be sound and perfect in these things, and to
be embraced, or condemned and denied.

10. What is the Man-child that has been caught up to God? and what is the
reason of his being caught up? and what is the Woman that fled into the
wilderness? and what is the cause of her so flying? and when is the the time
(is it come, or to come, that the Man-child has been caught up, and the woman
fled, and that the man-child shall come down again, and the Woman again return?
and what is that Beast the first and the second, and is his kingdom come, or
yet to come, who reigned over the Kings of the earth, and caused all both small
and great to worship him, and killed the Saints, and overcome them, that would
not worship him, and made war against the Lamb, and persecuted the Woman's seed?
and when is it that the world wondered after the Beast, is it come, or to come?
answer these things in plainness, we demand of you.

11. What and who is that great Whore that sits upon many waters, with whom the
Kings of the earth commits fornications, and who has made Nations drunk with
the wine of her fornications, and who has reigned over the Kings and dominions
of the earth? and is that Whore come, or yet to come? and whether is your
church every whit free from the fornications of that Whore? and will you admit
of lawful trial by your fruits and works, and suffer judgment accordingly?
and whether the whole church of Rome, or any part of her dominions, be the
multitudes, peoples, and nations, and tongues, the waters, or which the Whore
sits? and whether your church be wholly free from that Woman, which have drunk
the blood of Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus? and show us plainly who that
Whore is, if you can, and what is her flesh, and the fire that must burn it?

12. Whether are the false prophets and deceivers come, or to come, which
Christ said should come? if you say, they are come, when did they come? and who
are they? and how may they be known? and what was their first original? and out
of what does all false prophets and false prophecies come? is the church of
Rome clear of all the false prophets? and whether is your ministry in the
very same power, spirit, and authority which the Apostles were in? is its
call and ordination the very same? is its maintenance and practice the very
same? and its fruits, effects, and end the very same, or some other? let us
know from you, that we may lay you to the line of true judgment, for all
people and nations to behold.

And come friends, let us reason a little with you further; we are not
satisfied, that the Bishop of Rome is true and lawful successor of the Apostle
Peter; had Peter a triple crown, and did Kings bow and kneel to him? and had
Peter such large revenues and money out of the Nations as the Pope Has? did
Peter sell pardons for money, or did any buy religion of him? and did Peter at
all rule over men's consciences? and was Peter named holiness? we demand of you
to prove rightly and truly, that the Pope does succeed Peter in the same
Spirit, in the same power, and in the same conversation: and that his call to
oversee the church be justly the same as Peter's was, and that he execute it
perfectly as Peter did: Also answer us plainly, what is the seed of the
Woman, and what is the head of the Serpent? and is his head bruised yea or nay?
and what is the Devil, and what is his beginning, and what is the kingdom that
he is Ruler of? and how is his kingdom to be destroyed? and what is the flesh
of Christ, and his blood, which was before Abraham? and how is Christ made
under the Law? answer me these things: And what is the death that has reigned
over all? and what is the power thereof and what is the fruits of that death?
and when must that death be destroyed? and is it destroyed among you? and what
was man in his creation of the dust of the ground? and what was he that was the
very Image of God male and female, before Adam was formed of the dust of the
ground, or Eve taken out of him? declare these things plainly if you can and
what is the first transgression and the curse? and whether any can be made free
from the curse upon the earth, yea or nay? and what is the Kingdom of heaven
that is like a little leaven, and that is like a net cast into the sea? and
what is that which must be leavened? and what is that good fish that must be
gathered into vessels, and that bad that must be cast away? and how does the
Kingdom of heaven bring the bad out of the waters to the shore? and why is it,
and wherefore, and what is the reason, that none can enter the Kingdom of God,
nor see it, but such as are born again? and how is a man born again? and what
is that mothers womb, that Job and all mankind came out of naked, and that must
return thither again naked? and what are the the fig leaves that has covered
in transgression? and what is the covering of the Spirit? and what must be
covered, and what not? and why is it, and how comes it to pass, that one and
the same thing is sin, and wickedness acted by one and the same thing, good and
just acted by another? These things answer to us plainly, and also prove all
your practices and profession by plain Scripture, and give us example from
Peter and the true Churches, that he and they practiced the same things which
the Pope and you do, if you would have any to own you, otherwise if you do not,
or cannot satisfy all people in these particulars by the Scriptures, then
forsake your Religion, and renounce your Church, and confess your selves to be
deceivers of the world, and to be deceived, for God will tear your garments,
and mar your beauty, and stain your crowns, and uncover your nakedness, and
subdue your power, and slay your strength, and pull down your strong holds, and
the dread of the Almighty will come over you.

And come friends, answer me, is the light by which you walk everlasting? and
is the day dawned, and the Sun risen, that never goes down? and have you seen
the signs of the coming of the Son of man and what are the signs of his coming?
and what is that Sun that must be turned into darkness? and what is that Moon
that must be turned into blood? and what are the keepers of the house that must
tremble; and do you own quaking and trembling at the Word of the Lord? and did
you ever quake and tremble, or is there such a thing in your church? and what
is that part in man that must tremble? is it not that part in man that the
devil enters into? answer these things: and what is that mother of harlots? and
where is she that has been drunk with the blood of the Saints? and what is the
mystery of her, declare it if you can? and what is her garments? and who are
her children? and of what nature are they? and how may they be known? and come
friends answer us, have you seen God face to face, as did Jacob and Abraham?
and have you seen his Shape perfectly? give us a description of him if you
have: and does not all those that be of the seed of Abraham hear Gods voice,
and see his shape? and are any of Abraham, but who are come out of the world,
and have denied it, and bares the daily cross of Christ, which mortifies to
the world? and does your wooden crosses, and stone crosses, in your towns, and
highwaies, and in your houses, and crucifixes in your breasts, crucify you to
the world, and mortify you? or are you not such as have the form of a cross
of Christ, but wants the power? and what is the difference between all your
Images and the Images the Prophets declared against? and what life is there in
the Image of Christ or Mary, painted or graven in wood or stone? are your
souls refreshed thereby? and is not that all the unity you have with Christ?
and is that unity and fellowship you have with Christ, the same that they had;
that had unity and fellowship with the Father, and with the Son? and have you
unity with the Son, and with the Father, as the true Church had? tell us
plainly; and what is Antichrist? and where is his reigning at this day? and
what is his marks and signs? and what is the marks of the Beast, that every one
received in their foreheads, and in their hands? and what is his power, by
which he causes every one to worship him? and is the church of Rome wholly
free from that, from causing and compelling people to be of your Religion, and
come to your worship by your fire and faggots, and inquisitions? make it us
plain that this is not the beasts power, for we have a jealousy, at least, it
is not the power of God, that was among the Apostles; and why do you kill
creatures? did Christ or the Apostles kill creatures that were not of their
Religion? does not this show that you want the Power and Spirit of God among
you, and the spiritual weapon that beats down the strong holds? we cannot
believe that you have the spiritual weapons, which the Apostles had, except you
make it appear to us; and can any be converted to the true Church, but by the
immediate work and Spirit of God? and they that have that, need not be ashamed;
but then why are some of your ministers creeping up and down the Nations in
holes, and dare not be seen, but lies many years together undiscovered, not
daring to preach their Gospel, and discover their minds? did ever the Apostles
thus? and is not this a sign that they have not the power of God to carry them
through, but runs into holes and corners for fear of their lives? is this the
way of the true Ministers of Christ? and what is the Lambs Wife? and what is
her adorning, and her beauty? and are you the Lambs Wife, and are married to
him for ever? has every member of your church the witness thereof? and answer
us, does natural learning make a Minister of Christ, or was the Apostles made
Ministers thereby? and can a man learn the Ministry naturally, as he learns a
trade? and is the preaching of the Gospel a trade? or is it not the gift of
God? and can it be bought and sold? and what is eternal life? and how is it
received? and has any that hope but them whose hearts are purified? and must
not every ones heart be purified before they see God, who is pure? and how
comes man to be a Reprobate? and how comes man to be a Son of God again? and
what is the way and means of life eternal? is it carnal and visible things,
and Ordinances? is it the doing and performing of something by the creature, or
by the revelation of something in the creature? and must not Christ be revealed
in every particular? and is not that the true bread of life? and is there any
other bread that is eternal, but Christ, which the mortal eye cannot see? and
we are very doubtful, that bread and wine after consecration, is not the very
body and blood of Christ; and except you can prove to us by plain Scripture,
and give us sound reasons to demonstrate things, we must judge you, and show
your folly to the whole world: and why do you pray for the dead, is that
available? shall not they receive according to their works that they have done?
give us example, that ever the Apostles did so, or else we will say, you are
blind and in the dark: and tell us plainly, what error is, and what schism is?
and what is the eye that the god of the world has blinded? and what is the eye
that sees God, is it mortal or eternal? Answer us these things in plainness,
that we may know how to return in controversy with you, for the Lord God is
risen, that will break in pieces and confound all the world.

And come friends, give us your answer, are you of Abraham's seed, that was the
friend of God, that had not a foot of ground, but forsook his place and
kindred? are you of that birth that has no father upon earth? and are you
heirs of Gods promise? and have you made your calling and election sure? and is
the seed come out of Egypts bonds? and is all Egypts bonds broken yet? and what
is the bondage of Egypt? and was not transgression the reason of it? and what
is Pharaoh, out of what root did he spring, and whose seed is he? and is not
the hard heart of Pharaoh killers and murderers? are not such of Pharaoh? and
tell us plainly, are you redeemed from Pharaoh? or you are such as oppresses
the seed as Pharaoh did? and tell us, who was the inventer of all your Images,
and who was the former of all your graven Images? are not they all invented and
come up since the Apostles days, which ye have set up? and what is Purgatory?
and from what had it its rise and original? and what ground have you out of
Scripture for such a doctrine? and what is the rule of faith? and what is
faith? and what does it give victory over? and what does it overcome? and what
is the vail that has been spread over all Nations? and what is the Mountain of
the house of God? and what are those mountains the wicked shall seek to cover
themselves under? and what are those mountains that people expect salvation
from in vain? and did not John come to throw down the mountains? and what are
the mountains that he came to throw down? and what is the valley he came to
raise up? answer us, and what is the sword of the Spirit? and whether have ye
the sword of the Spirit, and the spiritual Armor? and what, is your church
defended and upheld by spiritual weapons, or carnal? is not your goals carnal
weapons, and your inquisitions, and your killing people about Religion, are not
all these carnal weapons? and had ever the Church of Christ such weapons?
answer me plainly; and do you not expect the Lord will suddenly plead with
you? and are not ye them that put off the day of the Lord, and causes the seat
of violence to come near? and are not ye them that have eyes but see not, ears
and hear not, hearts and understand not? and is not your eye blind, that should
see Gods presence, and your ears stopped that should hear his voice? and have
you heard his voice, and seen his shape? if you have, what is he like? answer
us; and what is his Word, and where does it dwell in your hearts, or is it
without you? and can any thing without you purify you, and take away sin out
of your hearts? and must not Christ be within? and what is the fruits, and
signs, and marks of a Saint? and why do you go pilgrims to visit dead bones,
what is the reason of it, and who was the first that instituted it? and what is
the meaning of your holy water? give us Scripture for all these practices, or
else the power of the Lord will tear you to pieces, and lay open your
foundation, and none that love God can join unto you; and can any of you pardon
sin truly, that it shall never more be remembered? and is not your sins
remembered with the light in your consciences some time? and is there not a
light in your consciences that does convince you? tell me plainly; and whether
do you own that Christ has lightened every one that comes into the world? and
what is the light? and do you know Christ as he was before Abraham? and have
you seen his day as Abraham did? and what is the day of Christ, does the carnal
eye see it? give us your knowledge and your judgment in all these things, and
lay down your principles at full, and prove by the Scriptures what you hold and
profess, if you would have any to turn to your Religion, otherwise renounce
your church, and come out of Babylon: what is Babylon, and the Mother of
Harlots? and what is spiritual Egypt and Sodom where Christ is crucified? and
what is the Whore? and what is her flesh, that has stained the earth? and what
is the fire that must consume her flesh? many are jealous concerning you, that
you are not the true Church, but that you have drunken of the Whores cup, who
has made all Nations drunk: and if that time be come, that she have made all
Nations drunk, then how can you clear your selves, being nations and multitudes
of people? To all these things I expect your speedy answer: and what is the
death that has reigned over all? and how is man recovered out of it, and when?
and what is the gates of hell? and what is the Rock that they cannot prevail
against? and whether your church may never be prevailed against? and whether it
be not your inquisitions, stakes, and faggots, and killing people, that does
principally defend your church? and if you should cease your inquisitions, and
killing those you call Heriticks, whether would not you be prevailed against by
many other Sects? lay away your persecution of people that you call Heriticks,
and do not deal with them after the manner which you have done, by inquisitions
and such like, and only by sound arguments, and the power of the Spirit,
defend your religion. And dare you suffer a certain number of us to come among
you and preach what we hold, and a certain number of you shall freely come
among us, and freely preach what you hold, without persecution or any
violence, as we would expect and have the same from you, engage man for man
with us, and do no otherwise deal with ours, then we deal with yours; and take
the free liberty to deal with our men as we deal with your men, but no
otherwise, and let each of the messengers preach and hold forth what they would
have, and what they reallie hold and believe, and convert the most either of
them can to their own Religion, and then let all the world see which has the
Power and Spirit of God with them, and whether your Ministers or our Ministers
do turn the more people from you to us, or from us to you; and send your
answer, whether you will agree to the premises: and if you do, send your
Messengers when you please, and we will engage in the Lord, their persons shall
not be harmed; but if they were, then take man for man, life for life, of our
men sent to you, and let that God be the true God, that appears in most power
and authority; and let him be worshipped for ever, whose power converts the
most to the knowledge of him out of wickedness, and let that Church be the true
Church, which cannot be overcome; and as you are willing to be made manifest,
join issue with us in this business, and propound your own time when the men
shall return, whether the continuance of the matter be for days, months, or
years, and let each of the men return without harm of person; and this will be
a way truly to try and make manifest all things, to all the world, and
whether you or we be in the right way, and of the right Church; and use you no
weapon against us, but the soundest arguments you can, by words according to
the Scriptures, and the same weapons we will use against you, and no other, but
the authority of the Spirit of God, and arguments thereby, which shall be
according to the Scriptures, the Apostles writings, and the testimony of the
true Church; and hereby in the sight of the whole world, let your church, and
faith, and principles, and practices, and worships be tried, and our church,
faith, doctrines, and worships, and practices, and whether it be yours or ours
that do overcome, or are overcome, let that deside the controversy; and
whether it be you or we that are soonest overcome, and that prevail the one
against the other in this trial, and in these proceedings; and that which is
overcome and prevailed against, is not the true Church, against which nothing
can prevail, no not the gates of hell; and whether your Church or ours cannot
be prevailed against by the other, let that be the true Church, for that which
is prevailed against is not the true Church, and whether it be your or we that
are elected, and of the election, which cannot be deceived; if we be not
elected, and you deceivers, then it is possible you may deceive us, but if we
prove that we be in the election, then you cannot deceive us; and if we be in
the truth, and of the true Church, then it will be happiness for you to be
converted and turned to us; come to the trial as soon as you will, and if you
be in the election you need not be afraid to be deceived by any, for the elect
cannot be deceived, whoever that be, whether your Church or our Church be the
true Church, and in the election; and if your Ministers among us do preach the
same things, and by the same spirit, and hold forth the very same faith,
principles, worship, and practices, which we do, and are of, and it be proved
they are of the same spirit and principles we are of, agreeing in all things,
then we will own them to be Christ's Ministers; and if our Ministers among you
do hold forth that true faith, and principles, and practices, and worship, and
by the same spirit as Christ and his Apostles did, and prove what they say by
the Scriptures, then shall you receive them as the Ministers of Christ, and
renounce all that you hold and profess, contrary to what they hold and preach
among you, and hereby things may come to a fair trial, and the naked truth may
be made manifest, whether your Church or our Church be the true Church of
Christ, truly descended from the Church of the Saints of old, and whether your
Ministers or our Ministers, be the lawful successors of the Apostles; and we
would willingly come to deal with you upon these terms, that it may be
manifest who it is that are of the true seed, and who it is that are of the
election that cannot be deceived; and we have many more things to write unto
you, and to querie of you, and to demand, when we receive your answer, and if
you give us ground to accuse you in your return, we will thresh you, and lay it
to your charge, by the authority and spirit of the Lord, and if you answer us
plainly, we shall more perfectly know what to do.

To the Pope.
THou mountain, hear the Word of the Lord God; thus says the Lord God unto
thee, I will lay thee low, I will break thee down, I will stain the glory of
all flesh, my sword shall enter into the heart of my enemies, I will slay the
wicked, and I will crush the head of the ungodlie, and I will grind the hard
hearts unto pieces, I will come in a day unexpected, I am at the door, behold
me, and I will take vengeance without pity upon all my enemies, my hand shall
not spare, my eye shall not pity, but I will tear and rend, and give unto
thee, and unto all mankind, the fruit of your own doings: Innocent blood cries
unto me, that has been unjustlie shed, and the righteous soul groans under the
Altar unto me, and now I am risen, and I am begun to work in the earth, and I
will go through nations, and tread them down, under my power; I have raised a
seed which shall thresh the mountains, and my word is gone forth out of my
mouth, which shall beat them to dust; and my power shall knock at thy gates,
and break down thy strength, and it shall prevail against thee: Oh thou
mountain, whose seat is high, and whose power is great, and who has been able
to make war with thee? thou have swallowed up the poor and needy, and thou
have eaten up the innocent as the exe eats up grass, thou have continued for
ages, and thou accounts thy self the most ancient, and thou has been without
fear of any man, and thou have not regarded the honor of my name, but exalted
thy self altogether: But now, says the Lord, the dread of the Almighty shall
come upon thee, and the Majesty of the Lord of hosts shall appear terrible
unto thee, and thou shall know there is a God that can do whatsoever he will,
and he will wound the mighty men, and none shall heal them; and he will vex
all his enemies in his displeasure, and he will break them, and none shall bind
them up; thy glory, and the glory of the whole earth, is as grass before the
mower, and as the flower of the field that is soon withered; and thy treasure,
and the treasure of all Nations, is of no respect unto him, and strength of the
whole earth is weakness before him, and the crowns of Princes he accounts as
the dust, he treads over it all, and his everlasting arm reaches beyond it
all, and he is awakened, that will strike thorough kingdoms, and that will
stain the glory of the whole earth; and thou must know his power, and the cup
of his wrath is full, of which all nations shall drink, and none shall escape
it; prepare thy self, for the anger of the Lord is gone forth, and the
Almighty is greived because of the abominations of the earth, and he will cast
into the fire, and purge, and purify, and new mold, and correct, Rulers,
Kings, and Peoples, for he has long been greived, and born the miquitie of the
Nations, but his long suffering is well-nigh finished, for the nations have
provoked him to anger, and turned his long-suffering into fury, and he has
put on the garment of vengeance, and the time is at hand, that sorrow shall
take hold upon the stout-hearted, when he appears, who has been pierced; and
anguish and pain shall come upon thee, and the world, and the day of trouble,
and great distress, ye shall not escape: the rod of his wrath shall smite you,
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: And although thou art exalted as a God,
yet thou shall be a man and not a God in his hand, that shall slay thee, and
although thy seat has been high* yet it shall be laid low as the ground, and
thy honor shall be laid in the dust, for thou art dust and ashes before the
Lord, and thou shall be no more admired, when destruction shall come upon thee;
the Lord has viewed thy way and path, and they have not been upright before
him; he has entered into the secrets of thine heart, and thine intent has not
been hid from him, and that which has been done in secret shall now be laid
open, and all secret things shall now be brought to light, and all the Churches
shall know that he searches the heart, and tries the reins, who is a God
great and mighty, and gives unto all creatures life and breath, and he will
change at his pleasure all the children of men, and bring them to an account
before his Judgment Seat; wherefore let all flesh tremble before him, and let
all the earth bow before his presence, who changes, and subdueth, and
over-turneth at his pleasure, and brings men to destruction, who has rebelled
against him: Wherefore thou Pope, chief Bishop at Rome, this is unto thee from
the mouth of the Lord; come down, come down, lay down thy crown, subject thy
self, and tremble before the Lord God of vengeance, least he come upon thee and
crush thee to pieces, and thou shall know that this has the Lord spoken, in
the day when the fiery flaming sword, which is already drawn, enters into thy
bosom, and smites thy honor and renown: Behold, I have heard the voice of
howling and bitter lamentation; I have heard the voice of war and not of peace;
I have seen, I have seen, the strong become weak, and the mighty become
miserable, and the proud and honorable brought into contempt; yea, I have seen
her that has sat as a Queen, that has said, she shall never see sorrow; I
have seen the loss of children, and widdowhood come upon her, even in one day;
I have seen her beauty turned into bitterness; I have seen her honor brought
into contempt; I have seen the Whore that has made all Nations drunk with her
fornications, that has had the golden cup in her hand; I have seen the cup of
indignation prepared for her to drink; I have seen her cast upon the bed of
never ceasing torments; I have seen the City that was full of people, that was
the glory of Kingdoms, that made all Nations rich with her traffic and
merchandise; I have seen that City laid desolate, and disinhabited, and made
the sorrow of the whole earth; and I have seen the smoke of her burning ascend
for ever; and this is, and must shortly come to pass; and if thou have an ear
to hear thou may hear; and these things are true, and faithful, and they
shall not fail, but the wicked shall know the Majesty, Dread, and Terror, the
Vengeance and indignation of the Almighty.

This is assented to by many, and written and subscribed by one that has a
Name not seen nor known of the world, but known among men by name of EDWARD
BOROUGH.
Return your answer to me, or any of the People called Quakers, for me, in
London from whence this is sent, being written the four and twentieth day of
the eighth month, 1658.



THE END.

