TRUMPET Of the LORD sounded out of SION: Which gives a certain sound to the
ears of all Nations, and is a true noise of a fearful Earthquake at hand,
which shall shake the whole fabric of the Earth, and the pillars of its
standing shall fall, and never more he set up again.

Fearful voices of terrrible Thunders, uttered forth from the Throne, to the
astonishment of the Heathen (...) all Quarters of the earth who are not sealed
in the forehead.

And is an Alarm, and preparation for War against all Nations where Gog and
Magog resideth.

And shows the wounding Sword of the mighty God, from whose blow, the Kings,
nor the Captains, nor the mighty men, cannot fly to escape

Declared and written by a Son of Thunder, as a warning to all the Inhabitants
of the Earth, where the great Image is standing, or any part of it worshipped,
speedily to meet the Lord by Repentance, that in the day of his fierce wrath
they may be hid.

WITH A Salutation to the Seed who are gathered into the ^old and with the
^hildren of the King; The tongue that was dumb sings a joyful Song of Sion, in
an unknown Language, which none can understand, save the redeemed of the Lord.

By one whose name is truly known by the children of the same birth, but
unknown to the World, though by it called EDWARD BOROUGH.

LONDON: Printed for Giles-Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

BY Order, and Authority, given unto me, by the Spirt of the Living God, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the 31 day of the 10 month, in the year of the
worlds account 1655, about the 4 hour in the morning, when my Meditations was
of my God, upon my Bed in Kilkenny City, in the Nation of Ireland, at that time
the Word of the Lord came unto me (from the righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth, who was, and is, and is to come, who sits on the throne of righteous
Judgment Judging Nations, and Kindreds and Tongues, and peoples equally)
saying, Write my Controversy with all the Inhabitants of the Earth, unto all
sorts of people as I will show thee; By this same Authority and Commission
declared, this I send unto you, the Tribes of the Earth, and this upon your
heads shall stand for ever, to be witnessed by the Light of Christ Jesus, in
all your consciences, in the dreadful day of Vengeance, which upon you O
Inhabitants of the Earth is coming. Prepare, prepare to meet the Lord, O
Nations, Tongues, and people unto you all, hereby a Warning is come, and a
Visitation from the presence of the living God, which you are straightly
required to put in practice, as at the terrible day of dreadful Vengeance, you
will answer the contrary.

Given under my hand, and sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God who lives
for Ever. Through a Servant of the Lord.

E. B.

A TRUMPET OF THE LORD Sounded out of SION.
O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, and awake, awake, awake, all
ye inhabitants thereof, and give ear, give ear, unto the controversy which
the Lord has with you, Noble and Ignoble, listen unto the word of the Lord,
Men of high degree, and Men of low degree, be not stouthearted, nor stop not
your Ears, for the Lord has spoken, People of all sorts and men of all
conditions, the word of the Lord is toward you, even from the Princes and
Nobles that sits upon the Throne, unto the Slaves and Bondmen that are made a
prey, The Lords Controversy is against you, and the mighty terrible day of the
Lord is coming upon you wherein He will plead with you, because of your
Transgressions which cannot be numbered, but does exceed theirs in former
Generations, who was cut off by his outstretched arm. Therefore thus says the
Lord, now also will I arise, as a mighty man of War, and will appear in my
Majesty, to gather the Nations, and to fan them, and to try them, in the wind
of my wrath, and to purge them, and to refine them in the furnace of my fire,
of indignation, and jealousy. And this from my mouth is a warning to you, and
a sound in your ears, by Authority from my Spirit.

To thee Oliver Cromwell called Protector.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against thee because thou have not
been faithful to the end, in my work, but have taken thy Rest and Ease, and
pleasure, upon thy high and lofty Mountain of Pride, and vain Glory, and have
set up thy self to be worshipped, exalting thy own horn, and have not fully
given Glory and Honor to me, of that which I have done by thee, but in thy
Heart boasts thy self against me, who has hewed with thee, and made thee an
Instrument in my hand to do my will upon my Enemies, and now thou performest
not thy Vows made to Me in the day of thy distress, but thou have broken
truce with me, and now thou suffer grievous and heinous Oppression and Cruelty,
and Tyranny to be acted in thy name upon my people, whom I have chosen, and
elected to exalt my name by, by unjust imprisonments, and grievous persecution
do they suffer in thy name, which the cruel hearted makes a cloak of for
their cruelty, and even such who have been thy Enemies, thy name is a cloak
unto, to hide their cruel intents, and wicked purposes against my People, whom
they tread upon, and this is not unknown to thee, and therefore the less
excusable art then in my sight, and the greater will my judgments be upon thy
Head, which suddenly I will bring upon thee, except thou repent and return to
thy first integrity, which if thou do, I will honor thee next unto my chosen,
and give thee the Necks of Princes to tread upon, and their Dominion for thy
Inheritance, otherwise thus shall it be done unto thee if thou will not hear,
and obey my voice, says the Lord.

To all ye his Counsel.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, because you are one with
him, and every whit fully guilty of his transgressions, and feeds him and your
selves in the valleys of vain glories, with vain shows and hopes, and your
endeavor is more to secure your selves from misciefe, and plots, and wicked
intentions, which remain in the hearts of the Rebellious against you, then to
defend and preserve the innocent, for your neglect to take off Oppression and
to ease the oppressed, but makes your fingers as heavy as your fathers loins,
who were cast out before you, and the same Laws stand still in force, by which
tyranny and Oppression is acted, and the same false Prophets you establish by a
Law, which deceives the Nations, and flatters you by subtle speeches, and
there is no pure Reformation wrought in the Earth, but you with your power
joins with the first Beast, who was wounded by a grievous blow of fury, to
make war against the Lamb, and his followers, and you seek to set up that which
I am about to throw down, and you are not ignorant of the grievous Cry of the
Poor, under the Burden of Oppression, laid upon them by your Laws, by which
they unjustly suffer, the imprisonment of their bodies, and the spoiling of
their Goods, and you suffer this wickedness to be done, and shuts up your
compassion, and the hands of Evil doers hereby is strengthened, through your
forbearance they are hardened in their cruelty, and because you profess more of
the name of the Lord, then some that have gone before you, and performs as
little, the greater is your abomination, and the deeper is your hypocrisy, and
the greater will my judgments be upon your heads, except you speedily repent,
and walk in my counsel, which if you do, honorable in counsel will I make
you, and your renown, shall generations to come exalt, otherwise if you refuse
my word to hear, I will make you a Reproach, and a curse to ages for ever.

To all ye Judges, and Lawyers, and your train, and to all that handle the Law.
THus says the Lord, My controversy is against you, because of your
abominations, for you are the very actors of the allowed oppressions, and in
judging for Gifts and Rewards, and Bribery, some of you have exceeded all that
ever went before you, and many just causes of the poor has been neglected for
want of a large Gift, and many unjust actions of the rich men have you pleaded,
against equity for advantage to your selves, your counsel have respected
persons, and in Bribery and Gifts, have you delighted, and thereby have made
your selves as Lords in the Earth, and have set your selves upon high hills,
and you have followed the counsel of your own hearts and your humane wit and
learning in seeking out the justness of a cause and in judging thereof, and my
righteous Law of justice, have you not regarded to be your Rule, but through
the policy and craft, have you hidden the simplicity of the Law from the
ignorant in unknown languages and obscure sentences, and your wills many times
has been your Law, and true judgment have you turned backward, and made a
fence against equity that it could not enter. Some of you are guilty in a high
degree of that cruelty and tyranny which of late years has been acted upon the
innocent, yea, you have grinded the face of the poor, Imprisonned the
harmless, and laid heavy burdens and oppressive bonds upon the guiltless, who
have not transgressed any Law, much less the Law of righteousness, you have
made my freeborn children your slaves, and have highly attempted to sit Lords
in my Throne, of conscience and some of them have suffered, by some of you for
the exercise of their pure Conscience, because they could not swear, or worship
and respect your persons, nor pay Tithes (that grievous oppression) nor bow to
your wills and lusts, in things of the like nature of Cruelty: And you are
guilty in a gross sum, of upholding the false Prophet, which prophesies lies,
and falsely, with flattering words of guil, and he covers himself under your
shadow, and under your unjust Law, which is his staff and strength, and he
rides upon the Beast, till you be both taken alive, and cast into the Lake of
everlasting indignation. The cup of my vengeance will awaken you, and my Law
will for ever condemn you, and my counsel of Equity shall plead against you in
the Court of Justice, and my eternal Judgment from my Throne of Righteousness
shall proceed in sentence of wrath, and my faithful evidence, the light in your
Conscience, which has been eye witness of your vilany against me, shall
testify against you, and shall accuse you guilty of everlasting torment except
you repent.

To all Astrologers Magitians, Southsayers, and Wisemen.
THus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, because of your
Witchcrafts and Enchantments, you have dug deep as the pit of hell, to hide
your counsel from the Lord, and have discovered your selves, in finding out
secrets to another, then me, in your natural Arts and knowledge you are
corrupted the ground being cursed in which you stand. You have in policy and
witchcraft sold your selves into the Power of darkness, and your Original of
Science and Languages, is the Serpent, whose image and mark you bear; your
wisdom is divelish, gained by the strength of corrupted reason, which is the
habitation of the Serpent, whom you have chosen to be your Instructor, and
exalted for your God: There is a secret sealed from you, and a Star whose
course you do not know, and a Sun eclipsed, of which you make no mention, and a
circuit of heaven, of which you know not the Compass, and you cannot find out
the secret by Divination; but the discovery of it will be the discovering of
your sorceries, and the making bare of your Enchantments; your knowledge is in
time; and leads not into the understanding of things everlasting, which are
without beginning; my flaming sword is against you, and does divide you from
the Tree of eternal life, of which you cannot touch and live; My wrath shall
sweep you out of the land of Peace, and my eye which sees you, shall be the
Star of Condemnation, and Darkness unto you, to the confounding of your Sun and
Moon for ever.

To all you Generals, Colonels, and Commanders, and Officers and Soldiers, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland.
THus says the Lord, my controversy is against you, for some of you are
woefully fallen from that Uprightness and Integrity which once was in you, and
you are abundantly waxed fat and exalted through victories and deliverances,
and now you kick against the Lord, that has handled you as Instruments in his
hand to do his will, and many of you who has been raised out of the dust, are
set down in your high nest of liberty, in the lust and pride, and filthiness of
the flesh, and vain glory, and fleshly exaltation abounds, and with greediness
you divide the spoil, and some of you takes more by your cruelty and hard
heartedness, then justly was given you in victory, and now you being at ease,
have forgotten many former straits and dangers delivered from, and in your
hearts you say, our hands have gotten the victory, and does not exalt the Lord
herein, who sometime eminently has appeared for you. your enemies themselves
being Judges, and now you ^read under foot by your might and beastly power,
many of my innocent and harmless people, some of which have served you in many
trials, and now they being redeemed from that nature of strife; you hate them,
and does and suffers violence to be done unto them, and regards it not, but
sets it at naught, and though you have said you have labored for liberty of
Conscience in your long Travel of War, yet in the Birth you have turned your
victory into carnal and fleshly liberty to your selves, and into bondage to
your Brethren, and many promises have you vowed, which you neglect to perform,
and the same Oppression and kingly power of cruelty stands in dominion under
another appearance and member of the great Image, the Head being but one, and
you have only slain the name, and lives in the nature, and while some of you
have been zealous to break down the Idols and Images without, and herein have
served the Lord* you are now become worshippers of Idols within, and of Images
set up in your hearts, to the greater dishonor of the Lord, who are turned in
spiritual Idolatry, and more subtle hypocrisy, and secret whoredom, and
herein also lives in the nature of that which you have cut down in the name
and the founder of Images is not yet confounded, and you are not the least of
all that are guilty (for it is not unknown to you) of that grievous Oppression,
and Tyranny, and Cruelty, acted upon my servants, who in times past have born
a part of the burden with you in the heat of the day, and though some of you
see these iniquities abounding, and the neglect of fulfilling your own vows,
and are already ashamed of the Oaks which you have designed and of the Gardens
which you have chosen, and now is accused guilty in your own Conscience for
pulling lown and setting up, one thing in the nature, though different in the
name, yet you are greedy of your prey and spoil, and does not confess truth
against oppression being branches of the same root, lodging amongst the boughs*
and thus are you fallen from your first integrity into pits and snares, and are
become one with the harlot, and partakers of the Adulterer, murdering and
crucifying the just, loving to be blinded by the God of the world, for love to
his Treasure: Mine Army terrible shall come against you, and my force shall
compass you about, and my sword shall cut you off, and with a mortal blow I
will wound you, and deliverance to my chosen will I bring another way, and
though I have reproved Princes by you, yet you will I reprove, and though I
have chastned the mighty and the rebellious by you, yet you will I correct, and
all your might and power will I take away, and your weakness shall appear, and
dispersed shall you be, before the Arrows of my wrath, my Alarm will I beat
against you, in defiance of your power, and through you, by my weapon of war,
will I charge to your overthrow and defeat everlasting, except you repent*
says the Lord, in this the day of your visitation* wherein you have a time
given to make your peace, and to return to your first Integrity out of your
rebellion against me, that my hand may be toward you, for my great work is yet
to do* which I have thought to bring to pass, and this overturning was but a
making way for it, and yet again will I overturn, even you and all that opposes
me herein: That my Son may reign in his Kingdom for ever, whose bondmen and
slaves ye shall be, if you submit not, before you be conquered, And this to you
is a Message for Reconciliation, sent from me, and sealed with my Spirit says
the Lord.

To all you who are, and have been always, enemies to the very appearance of
Righteousness, who are called Delinquents and Cavaliers.
THus says the Lord, my controversy is against you, even my hand in judgment
is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all your hatchings and
endeavors, and from time to time my hand has been against you in Battle, and
you have been, and are given up to be a prey to your enemies, for the purpose
and intents of your hearts have been known always to be against the form of
Truth, and much more against my powerful truth it self and because you
attempted to take my throne (Consci^nce) therefore I rose in fury against you,
and will have war with all your followers herein for ever, and though my hand
has been evidently against you, yet to this day you remain in rebellion in
your minds in hat^hing murder and cruelty in your wicked hearts, and though
your Kings, and Princes, and Nobles have been cut off in wrath, and your cruel
desperate Inventions, and plots of wickedness (conceived in your cursed womb)
have been broken, and you cut short in your desires, yet you repent not, nor
will not see how you are given to be a curse, and a desolation, and a prey, in
houses, and lands, and persons, to them whom I raised against you and gave
power over you, yet you are hardened, and your cruelty in the persecution of my
servants cannot be measured, where you have any power, you smite with the fi^t
of wickedness, and count it your glory to despise my name, in the Valleys of
vain hopes you feed, and on the mountains of foolish expectation, and conceive
in your cruel womb of Tyranny, the overthrow of the Nations, but in the
bringing forth, your selves are overthrown, and it is not for well doing that
you suffer, but my hand is against you, and my judgments are upon you, and
except you repent, shall continue upon Earth with you, and follow you, and
pursue you to the lake of destructior, where there is no repentance, and you
and your King, and lordly power, (by which you have thought to exercise
Lordship over my heritage) shall be enslaved by the Devil in the Pit of
darkness, in everlasting bondage, where he shall reign your King and Lord for
evermore.

To all the Priests, and Prophets, and Teachers of the people.
THus says the Lord, my controversy is against you, above all other, and my
judgments shall be upon you to the uttermost; for you in hypocrisy, and
deceit, and abominations, has exceeded all other that ever went before you,
and are less excusable then they, and more vile in my sight then they that have
been made an ut^er desolation, abominable, and loathsome, and heinous, is your
filthiness in preaching for hyre, and for gifts, and rewards, and in making a
prey upon the people, through divining for money, even feeding your selves with
the fat, and killing them that are fed, and have woefully wasted the heritage,
and scattered the flock upon the barren mountains, where you treoherously have
devoured them, and made merchandise of their souls, and have cried Peace,
Peace, unto the wicked, one of you building a wall, and another daubing it with
untempered mortar, you have not stood in my counsel, but have erred from my
way, and have not known my judgments, but through covetousness have dealt most
wickedly, and profaness is gone forth from you into all corners of the Earth,
so that none could turn from his evil way, nor learn the way of righteousness
and salvation, how shall it be declared and laid open, your transgressions has
much more abounded then in former generations, ye have shut the kingdom of
heaven against men, to the destruction of thousands, and ten thousands who have
perished under your ministry, whom you have caused to err, and led them out of
the way, and the blind hypocrites have led the blind, till ye both fall into
the ditch of perdition; It was your generation of the same seed that put the
Apostles to death, and now you make merchandise of their words, and exceeds in
hypocrisy and double-heartedness, and have turned every way according to the
changing of the power of the Beast; Some of you were Teachers for the King and
Bishops, and were ordained by their Law, and your Prayers have been to your
Idol God, for all sorts from whom you could receive a reward, or be advantaged:
and you are now divided in many Sects, and judgments, and false Opinions, and
have divided the people into diverse ways of Idol-worship, throwing down one
part of the Image, and setting up, and exalting another, and your Offerings,
and Oblations, and Prayer, and Praises, has been a burden and weariness to my
soul, says the Lord, and you now are at war in your minds one with another,
diverse in your Language (though but one Original) which is the womb of
Witchcraft, and your Kingdom is darkness, and a heap of confusion; under the
dominion of death reigning, but you are at concord in war against me, and
against my servant whom I have chosen from among you, to bear witness against
you, and you are the most of all guilty of that great persecution and unjust
suffering and Imprisonment through Tyranny laid upon them, for you stir up, and
intercede the Power of the Beast thereunto, upon which you sit, till you both
be cast into the Lake, you are risen in all your power to manage War against my
Kingdom, which is appearing to make yours a desolation for ever; The Beast is
risen in defense of you already, and you pray to your dead gods, and preaches
to your ignorant people, against my Heritage, deceiving thousands. whose blood
will be of you required, who are ever learning of you, but never able to come
to the knowledge of the Truth by you, being kept in infidelity and blindness
under you, whose blood you are absolutely guilty of, your Rebellion is the
crime of Witchcraft, who cannot cease to do evil, for you have bound your
selves in the Covenant with hell, and are at agreement with death while you are
upon earth, and would bind the people with you in the same Faith (or rather
Unbelief) that none can be perfectly saved from sin while they live upon earth;
but you are the filthy dreamers, which does defile the flesh, and when you
awake, you will be found empty of all righteousness, your cup is full of
fornication, and of the wine of Whoredoms and Idolatry, my patience will be
turned into fury against you, and my cup of indignation is the assured portion
of your lot, and blood shall you have to drink as your gift and reward from me,
and your present pleasure shall be turned into howling everlasting, and your
songs shall be changed into Woe worth the day, my plagues shall remain with you
upon Earth, and follow you to the lake, and your staff and strength in which
you trust, even the power of the Beast shall be broken with you, and be buried
in the grave of everlasting contempt to arise in reproach unto my heritage for
ever, and my fire of Indignation is already kindling upon you, which will burn
for evermore, and not be quenched.

To all you called Papists, to your whole Body and Head at Rome, the Word of
the Lord reaches.
THus, assuredly, says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, and my
vengeance, and wrath, and fury shall for ever world without end be upon you,
though you pardon one another, yet will not I pardon any one of you, for your
grievous Adulteries and Abominations has surpassed all other generations, in
the womb of whoredoms your children are conceived, begotten by the seed of
adulteries in the very strength of the man of sin, and at the Breasts of
murder and cruelty, you are nourished, in sucking heinous and cruel Tyranny,
you are seated upon the highest mountain of Oppression and Idolatry: Peter was
not your Predecessor, but the Devil himself you succeed, in blood, and envy,
and cruelty, and he is your Rock, with whom you shall fall in everlasting
perdition; being upon him builded, in your whole Body, and he is the Father of
your Faith, received from him by succession, t^aditionally, and your Religion
is of Cain's antiquity, who was the Ancient in your profession of offering
sacrifice, and killing the just, your sword has been made fat in the blood of
the innocent you have sought to slay, even the very likeness of Righteousness,
and has stood armed with cruelty against the upright, waiting for the blood of
the guiltless to assuage your thirst, and your Seat at Rome which once had the
Faith of Jesus Christ in purity, where members of his Body inhabited, you have
turned into the habitation of Devils, and it is become the open Mother of
profess Whoredoms, which brings forth cursed children of witch cra^t, and is
the abiding place of members of an abominable harlot, and the profession of
Jesus have you turned into a cruelty against Jesus, and into the murder of
him; Some of you are made a curse already, and with vengeance and indignation
shall the rest be pursued, till your Body be rooted from off the Earth, you
have been strong in your Seat of darkness upon your seven mountains of perfect
abomination, and none was able to encounter you in your strength of Infidelity,
but it shall be turned into weakness, and your whoredoms shall appear, and your
present honor shall be turned into contempt everlasting, for while you say,
you have wrought to merit life eternal, your unbelief will bring death
everlasting, and your Works merits my fire of eternal judgment and
condemnation, and while you have said you eat and drink the Flesh and Blood
really, you have crucified his life totally, and your consecrating of things
unto you^ Idol god, has been your defilement and pollution in the sight of the
true God, to Images and Pictures have you bowed, and have worshipped the Saints
Days and Names, and bowed to their likeness of man's inventions, but have slain
their life, and trodden under foot their nature and glory and buried their
righteousness and knowledge in the grave of your wickedness and ignorance, and
in imaginations have you rested, and in vain superstitions have you hoped,
honoring the name of Christ, and killing his life, the womb of darkness are
you shut up in upon earth, and it will be your bed for ever in hell and death,
and your Purgatory will deceive you, and your clensing will never come;
Defiled, defiled, and loathsome are you in the pure eye of light, which the
secret of your deceit searches, and your darkness feels, and shall judge you
for ever. Rome, Italy, France, and Spain and your Dominions to all your Kings,
Princes, Bishops, Priests, Je^^its, Prel^tes, and Fr^^rs, and Nuns, and whole
Train of Idolaters; The Cup of my vengeance is toward you, and the dregs
thereof shall you drink and my overflowing whirlwind of wrath as an
irresistible flood is against your banks, and thy fire of eternal fury shall b^
through your stubble, and my everlasting light shall make search and
Inquisition for the blood of my Elect, which is found in thy skirts. Thou
abominable harlot of loathsome adultry. Tremble, tremble, tremble at my dreadful
living presence, ye worshippers of dead Images, the day of repentance is well
nigh past, your long Idolatry, will my long patience turn into everlasting
misery and judgment, and Nations shall see your shame, and in the sight of
your Lovers shall you be tormented. And this from Authority by my Spirit of
Glory is sent you a warning, and is the voice of a Trumpet, which gives a
certain sound against the mighty dreadful day of the Lord, which upon you is
coming, to make you an desolation for ever and ever, and the eternal Decree is
sealing against you, never to be altered.

To all you called Protestants of the Eldest sort.
THus says the Lord, my controversy is against you, and my hand will be upon
you, you have a strong taste of the Bottle, wherein the wine of Fornication is,
and your scent is leavened with the first vessel of abomination, you are seated
in darkness, pitched upon six of the first mountains under another branch of
the first Tree (Ignorance) and are children of the first womb, begotten in
another appearance of the Whores Beauty, and are more comely in stature then
your eldest Brethren, and little is your difference to be discerned from the
first Beast in your appearance, and nothing at all in the ground; you say you
believe for eternal life, but your unbelief will bring upon you everlasting
death: your talking of Christ, and his righteousness imputed (which you
profess) will not cover your infidelity and filthiness, for you are in the
enmity against his life, the working (of the first) for life, and your
believing for life, springs both out of one ground; and while you say you eat
and drink the Body and Blood of Christ in the figure, you kill and crucify him
in the substance, and art partakers of thy Sisters sins, in whoredom and
Idolatry, and must partake of her plagues. Woe, woe will be your Inheritance in
the Pit of Earth for ever, instead of a heavenly glory (which you dream of)
above the sky, I have armed my Armies to do my work herein, which has in part,
and will fulfill it, to break you to pieces, the intents of your hearts has
been known, to be always against my people, neither could you bear any
appearance of me, but blasphemes my name and truth in every discovery; you have
loved darkness upon earth; and in its chains shall you be bound in the Lake for
evermore.

To all you that are called Presbyterians and Independents.
THe Lords controversy is against you, for you are a higher Branch of the
first Tree, deeper rooted in the cursed ground of fleshly and sensual wisdom,
and the womb of your conception is the first Whores daughter, more comely
decked, and your Cistern holes the wine of fornication, at which you drink in a
measure her abomination, and where you say, you believes for justification, and
applies the promises for salvation, your works of wickedness and hypocrisy
will bring damnation, and gains the promise of condemnation, who are in pride,
and highmindedness, and double-heartedness, which is the condition of that
promise, and you are found wanting every whit, the conditions of the promise of
eternal life, you have reformed the outward man into obedience unto another
likeness of the truth without the life, and are as vise in the inward in
hypocrisy, and self exalting, and has covered y^^r selves with the Saints
words, and said up more in store, of the report of their riches, then your
forefathers, and now you are become worshippers of the form and words of the
Saints, and are grown in the knowledge, more then some of your father's
children, but in extolling the Saints words, you limit their Spirit, and keeps
in death their life, which was not of the world, neither in appearance nor
ground; and while you say you eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ, in
secret and separate, you put him to death openly, and among the multitudes,
your hearts are full of bitterness against my remnant, whom I have called, and
aloud you cry Heresy, and Error, and Blasphemes my Name, and loathes the
honeycomb, in your full Stomachs, you worship the same God, as your
forefathers did, only in another appearance, more refined through stronger
wisdom, and appears in the reformed old man, thinking him to be the new man,
and deceives your souls hereby, and are zealous in your blindness, in your
Will-worships, and fained humility, which is without the knowledge of God, and
you depend upon your Imaginations, thinking to have life in the Scripture, as
they did which put Christ to death, and will not come to Christ that you may
have life, you are in the knowledge gathered from without you, which is
natural, and in it you are corrupted, and some of you are brutish in your
knowledge, and are thereby puffed up into pride and vainglory; your separation
from the world is sensual and self separation, and differs but a little in your
appearance and nothing in the ground, for the cursed ground stands within
untilled and unbroken, and you worship God ignorantly at a distance, and feeds
upon the report of a thing done many hundred of years ago, and your faith does
not give you victory over the world, for it is set in your hearts, and the
vanities of it without is followed, pride, and oppression, and fullness: Some of
you are hot and furious in your blind zeal, and cannot endure sound Doctrine,
your fruits will wither, and all your knowledge will perish, and all your hopes
and expectations will fail, and all your praise^ and prayers, and all your good
works brought forth in your own wills, in that nature in which the enmity
lodges, is a lame and a blind sacrifice, and of Cains nature: which God
accepts not; you are in the liberty of the flesh, and the daily Cross of
Christ you do not know, but lives daily to the world, and dies not in it, and
your knowledge of Christ is without you; by what such a Prophet, and such an
Apostle spoke of him; and the witness of the operation of his Spirit and Power
you have not in you, nor his Sufferings you do not know in your life, but by
your life makes him to suffer in his life; the horrible filthy thing is
committed amongst you; and your Teachers are perfect in the false Prophets
steps, and some of you are as brute beasts in their knowledge, gathered in by
vain study and humane learning, through Philosophy and vain deceit, and has
large quarters from which they seel; their gain, and through covetousness, with
feigned words makes merchandise of souls, and are complete in B^la^m^ way of
Idolatry, following his Error, loving the wages of unrighteousness, teaching
for filthy lucre, devouring souls for dishonest gain, by trading with the
Scriptures, and selling their imaginations upon them for money, gaining many
thousand of pounds a year thereby, having stolen the Saints words into their
unclean hearts, uttered forth by them for advantage to themselves, when the
Lord has not sent them, nor spoken unto them, nor ordained them for his
service, but their Call and Ordination has been by man, and their work and
testimony of themselves, and has not profited you at all, and yet you have
loved to have it so, but what will you do in the end thereof? even you* that
has been helped, and they that have helped shall both fall together in the day
of the Lords recompense, which will fall grievously upon you; and none shall be
able for to deliver you, but miserable comforters, and Physicians of no^value
shall all be unto you, and your long applied Promises shall suddenly fly away:
No peace from God is to the wicked; neither do I sow pillows under your elbows,
but to the light in your consciences I speak, which Christ has lightened every
one of you withal; which shines in darkness, and you cannot it comprehend, nor
in it believe, But it it stumbles, and by it shall be broken; which if it you
loved, it would teach you in the Spirit the living God to worship, and would
condemn all your set form of Worship in the Imaginations, the light is given
you from Christ Jesus, unto life eternal, or unto condemnation everlasting;
when the hand of the Lord in judgment is upon you, Remember you had warning;
and when you are in the Lake, and in the Pit, Remember you had a day of
Visitation upon Earth; The light in all your Consciences shall witness Gods
judgments to be just, and your mouths shall be stopped.

To all you that are called Anabaptists.
With you also is the controversy of the Lord, for you are children of the
same seed, more purged in the fire of blind zeal, and begotten in the
transforming of the Serpent, into more secret hypocrisy, and deeper subtilty,
your covering being larger, the greater deceit and abomination lodges under,
Death reigns among you, and your Kingdom is situate in the mountains of
exaltation, and you feed abundantly in the Valleys of Pride and Vainglory, and
are nourished with the bread of prosperity, you are grown high and great in
your number, and have joined your selves for advantage, and glories in your
strength, having through Policy and Craft, and bowing to the Beastly power,
highly exalted your own Horn, and and by Flattery have gained much of your
Dominion, which you hold in possession by the Law of guil, many simple ones
has by your curious color, and bed of fair pretenses been deceived to commit
Adultery with your Image brought forth in the likeness of the Saints God: By
Imagination from the Saints words you worship the practice and exercise of the
Saints, with the same mind that the Papists do worship their Names and Days;
You allow not Idols without, nor a vain conversation in the world, but you are
strict in observation in your outward conformity, in your self-righteousness,
which is your greatest sin; you are clothed with the Saints words and
practices, which you have climed up in your own wills to obtain, not having
entered in by the door, and while you say you eat and drink the Flesh and Blood
of Christ in the Saints manner, showing forth his death till he come to
salvation, you kill him as the Heathens do, till he appear unto condemnation,
and you show forth daily that you crucify him in the world, eating and
drinking to your selves condemnation; you say Christ died only for you as
elect, but your works makes manifest, that he dies by you as Reprobate; you
take up a command from the Letter, and imitates the Apostles (some of you in a
lower, and some of you in a higher degree) in that mind and nature which in the
Apostles was crucified; and you say Christ commands it, when the Letter does
but declare it. and you are not led with the same light, which gave forth the
commands declared to observe them, but says in such a verse of such a chapter
such a command is, not having received the command by the same Spitit. Here you
are proved to be them which use your Tongue, and says, he says it, when God
has not spoken unto you, but as you read it without you, as the false Prophets
might do the words of the true Prophets; and thus you are in the Witchcraft as
they were, Gal. 3. who takes on things in your own wills, and observe commands
without from the Letter, thereby drawing from the teachings of God within by
the Spirit, you are zealous as they were for the Traditions and Figures, and
cannot see him, which is the end of all that which perishes with the using, so
you are not dead with Christ from the world, who are yet subject to Ordinances
which is of the world; They that obeyed Christ and followed him, was led by the
Spirit, and not by the Letter; for they were not Ministers of the Letter, but
of the Spirit; and such were judged to be in error; and this is your
condition, who says such are breakers of Christ's commands and makers vold of
the Scripture, and destroyers of the Ordinances, who witnesses Christ the
substance, and him to be King, and Judge, and Lawgiver, and in whom, and upon
whom the Scripture is fulfilled, and so it established, and the commands of
Christ kept, which are in Spirit, and his Law daily walked in, which
condemns sin. And this is not contrary to the Scripture, but a fulfilling of
it in Principles, in Doctrines, and in Practice and Conversation: The Apostles
was sent to preach the Gospel to every creature, and they were all led by the
same Spirit, and did not go before it in their own wills* as you do, neither
did one go from the command which had been given to another, using another
words, and exercising themselves in another practices, when the Lord had not
commanded; But such they bare witness against which did use their Tongue and
transform themselves into the likeness of true Prophets, and Apostles, as you
have done, and are in the love of the world, and only separated in the
appearance, and not in the ground: You stumble at the light, and therefore
knows not the door of entrance, nor where the commands of Christ is to be
received, and the Will of God to you is to be known; and so your obedience is
the conformity in your own wills, to that which was the Will of God to another:
This Sacrifice is also lame and blind, and God says to you, Who has required
this at your hand? For (...) you have observed and done all those things which
the Declaration of the Law and Gospel does require, you are unprofitable
servants; and yet one thing do you lack, the Dying with Christ, and the
Sufferings and Cross of Christ is not known, but in the liberty of the flesh
you are, and not in the condition of the Promise to Life eternal. Friends, You
have run into the Form of Godliness without the Power; into a Church which is
not in God, but of the World; into a Baptism which does not wash away sin; for
you live in sin, and pleads for it, while you live upon Earth; into a Communion
which is not with God, which no unclean can enter into: for the Proud and
Covetous partakes with you, and while some of you have said that they that
preached for hire, have been Antichristian, you your selves are fallen into the
same abomination, taking gifts and rewards, and large sums of money, and
upholding such who does it; Here you are unjust to your own Principle, and are
for condemnation with the light in your Conscience. Let shame cover your heads,
ye Hypocrites; your covering will not hide you, nor your high talking of Christ
without you, so long professed by you, will not justify you, while you are
found disobeying this Light in your Consciences; which light is one with God,
with Christ, and with the Spirit in its measure, and it does convince you of
sin, and is a command to you, and would lead you (if you walked in it) from all
Iniquity, which is the will of God to you; and to that mind which is carnal,
which rules in you, the commands of Christ which are spiritual, is nor given,
nor can be received; bye says. Lo here, and lo there Christ is to be found
(...) the Light you are comprehended, which if the least measure of it you did
own, it would lead you to the Baptism inward of the heart, and to the Church
which is in God, whereof Christ is Head in every (...) and into the Communion
with God* and to follow the Lamb of God wheresoever he goes, and out of your
imitations, and likenesses, and strife, and contention about the words given
forth from the Spirit, who are in your own Unity, in Division, and several
meanings, and diverse constructions, and Judgments, and several ways of
Obedience, and Worships, and Belief, which by your Imaginations you draw from
the Scripture, which is the Declaration but of one God, and one Truth, of one
Obedience, and of one Faith, and thus you exalt the great Image of many
mixtures: your selves being a chief member of his Body: You say the Scripture
is your Rule, but are divided into Opinions and Conceits, contrary to the
Scripture, every one worshipping that which you Imagine from the Scripture, not
being in the unity of the Spirit, which gave forth the Scripture, which is one,
and not divided in Obedience, Worship, or Faith; and while you say the
Scripture is your Rule, your lives are squared by the Spirit of the Devil, and
hewn out into Pride and Hypocrisy, and love of the world:

And to you who are called Freewillers, who say Christ died for All.
HErein you affirm, that whereof you are ignorant, which may be true in Christ:
but a lie unto you; for you are not dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the
world, but are alive against him in the world; they for whom he died, are dead;
and they who yet lives, puts him to death. Freewill unto the ways and fashions
and vanities of the world stands in you, and you know not the daily cross of
Christ, which is unto man's will; nor what it is to follow Christ, and obey
him, which is contrary to man's will, You say, He that is condemned it is
because he will not believe: This is true in Christ, but not in your carnal
apprehensions of the natural man, in whom there is no power to believe. He that
has an Ear, let him hear. There is some true desires among you, but your minds
are not truly informed, to the fulfilling of your desires, and your minds are
outward, and applies peace to that which is for condemnation. Your Reason and
Wisdom is corrupted, and cannot receive Truth, but calls it Error, and this is
your sin: Death over you has passed, and reigns over you, as over all men, and
your knowledge is in time, and you cannot hear of things which was before the
world was; your wisdom is sensual, and your comprehension is strong, and ^he
little simplicity in you is betrayed by the subtlety which has dominion in
your Governor; your Crown must be laid down, and fools must you become, before
you be truly wise, or can be crowned with the Lamb, and among the rest;
Remember you had warning, and a day of Visitation before you were destroyed;
And this shall be by you witnessed in the day of the Lord.

To all you who say you wait, and believe for the Coming of Christ to Reign in
Person upon Earth.
HEar you the Lords Controversy which he has against you. The way of his
coming is not prepared, but Rocks and Mountains are standing, and Valleys are
not filled up, and rough and crooked is your present way, your Hopes and
Expectations in that ground wherein they spring will wither and fade away as
the grass, for your hope of his coming has no whit purified you, as he is
pure; for you are in the flesh, and in the liberty of it, which is Rebellion to
his Reign, and Christ is kept in Prison, in exile with that mind, and the
Devil is yet at liberty working in your earthly members, and leads you captive
into his Covenant in his Government, in seeking your selves, and to strengthen
your selves in the Kingdom of the world, and murmures that any should be above
you, and that is he, which put Christ to death, and will not have him to reign
in his power over the earth; and to you, what purpose is it for to desire the
day of his coming? For with wrath will he come, and with vengeance will he
reign, and will break your Kingdom like a Potters vessel, and suddenly will he
come, but your expectations will be prevented, for his Reign and Kingdom is
not of this world. Your high nature stands, and Satan is not bound, not one of
the days of the thousand years of his limit is not yet come; your minds are
outward in your own thoughts, which are vain, and you know not of what Spirit
you are; the sufferings of Christ must you know, before you can see him Reign,
and through his War must you strive, before you can obtain his victory, and him
must you own, in his convincing you of sin, before you can witness his Reign
in glory upon Earth over sin.

To all you that are called Ranters.
THe Controversy of the Lord God is against you, your Seat is in the mystery
of Iniquity, and Satan transformed into an Angel of light is your God and King,
and the Kingdom of the second Beast is your Dominion; your deadly wound is
falsely healed, and Satan thereby has enlarged his Government; you continued
not to the end, but the Prince of darkness is more strongly entered, and your
latter end is worse then your beginning, and your last end will be the worst of
all; while you have scorned self-righteousness, your selves have been
impudently poluted with the spiritual wine of whoredom; and though you have
cried against and abhorred the form of Religion, your selves has been in the
highest power of Iniquity, sold to do wickedly, and given up to commit sin with
greediness, glorying in your shame, and are become vain in your Imaginations,
your foolish hearts being darkened, because when ye knew God, you glorified him
not as God; The womb of your corruption is the well-favoured Harlot, begotten
by the false Prophet; Plead with your Mother, for she is an Adulteress, and
has abundantly gone after other lovers, loving their Bed of Adultery where
ever she saw it; Naked shall she be stripped, and set as in the day that she
was born, and no Mercy shall be to you, her children: you had a convincement
under the Law, and was brought under condemnation some of you, but as the
viperous generation, you have fled the wrath, and now are become enemies to the
Cross of Christ, and turns the grace of God into wantonness (which largely to
you appeared) which would wholly have sanctified you, if in it you had walked;
but having slain the witness of God, you now are in the cursed peace, following
drunkenness, and cursed speaking and swearing, and beastly lusts, and beggarly
vanities, sporting your selves as in the day time, and you are the crucifiers
of Christ afresh, and putters of him to open shame in the sight of the Heathen;
and while you speak swelling words of vanity, your selves are the servants of
corruption, and of sin in the highest degree, and free from righteousness in
the least measure, doing despite unto the Spirit of grace, and being bound in
the chains of darkness, and your professed freedom is divellish, stolen by you,
and is not the freedom of the Son of God, purchased through death; you never
came through the Law, but by your Oaths, and Drunkenness, and prof^ness, have
cast it behind your backs; you that are in wantonness kills the just, and you
that are in pleasures are dead while you live* and you that live in fleshly
^^sts, are in the war against your own souls; Jezabel is your prophetess, and
the Dog that is turned to the Vomit again, is your example, and seven unclean
Spirits worse then the first, is entered upon you, that is your Parable, and your
House is become the Den of Robbers, which was once the House of Prayer; the
hand of the Lord is against you, and his breath will kindle the torment of
T^phet upon you, and everlastingly shall it burn upon you, and shall not be
quenched, and your professed love shall be turned into my wrath and fury, and
sin shall you find in its vengeance, though you have seen none in the action:
and my Witness which you have slain, to gain peace shall arise to your
everlasting trouble, faith the Lord, and your m^th shall be turned into
everlating sorrow, and your communion in unrighteousness shall become your
unity in the just indignation of wrath; and your liberty enjoyed in the world,
shall be turned into your bondage, in the lake of fire, and your Wisdom and
Knowledge shall rot in the pit, and your righteousness and uprightness which
once was in you, shall never be mentioned to you, for your own iniquities shall
you bear in the day of the Lord; with the eternal light you are comprehended;
your beginning which was in judgment, and your time which is in false peace,
and false liberty, and love, and fleshly joy, and your end, which will he
everlastingly miserable, and though you speak of the light, and what it once
wrought, yet being from it turned into darkness, bringing forth fruits of
darkness and unrighteousness, the light is your eternal condemnation; and
because you are the highest stone in the building of mystery Iniquity, the
greater will be your (...) into the Ditch of deeper perdition: you have been
the greatest dishonourers of the true God, and in the way of the upright are
you a stumbling unto this day: your state is read, and your Portion is
fo^^told, and this Proph^^^e shall not fail, but upon your ^e^ds shall be
fulfilled.

(...) you that are called (...) (...) and Waite^^
THe Lord (...) ^^ny ^ou, and (...) troversi (...) with (...) ^st in (...)
Image of ma(...) y(...) (...) (...) pitched in the Plains of f(...) goodly
biulding stands upon ^d and beautified by the scattered st(...) ^nes of the
former Cities of confu(...) and a c^^m sp^^t, (...) to vessel, and ^r, neither
is your ^ct (...) of Ini^uity, as by appearing (...) Ser^^nt, you s^^k (...)
(...) ^e ^t no^ at th^gates of (...) y(...) before ^^fe ^a^ you (...) f(...)
you ^he (...) at the fo^^dation, and (...) ^d, and light(...) ^ver^ ^n
t(...)meth ^rld; you cannot believe, ^u are ^ery (...) Wo^ds and knowledge, and
^ks (...) that w(...) ^ugh de^^h you never obtained (...) know ^gh ^ut it
arises out of the c(...), (...)ed in you, Forms outw(...) deny, (...) (...)
(...) inward, and your chiefe^^ (...) in your (...), and while you say you Eat
and (...) the (...) Blood of Christ* (...) subst^^ce y(...)st measure, and your
Wills prop^fies a (...) which will be turned into true trouble; and ^hen (...),
the man's head is covered, and the woman's head is uncovered, and this is a
shame, that the (...) (...) not power on her head^ your Seeking and Waitin^ of
your (...) and in your own tim^ (...) the L(...) all, and in all among (...)
^or y^^r Mother is not the (...) ^arried (...) a (...), and your Seed (...)
^^^^ng ^dren. A Prop^^t (...) your (...) Who^^ brought you forth, and your
Pro(...) wither as time (...) and your ^^v^^ing (...) (...) and (...) (...)
regarded then (...); for (...) (...), as of sin; (...) ^our and Depth is (...)
Warning, for a ^tion (...) put away your other Lovers.

(...) the, World (...) ^ey whose ^en in the Lambs (...) He^^s, ^s.
ANd (...) Image (...) Earth worshipped by (...)d Pe(...) many mixtures, and it
(...) the (...), which strikes at the ^o^^ome; (...) sev(...), and diverse
appearances out(...) and diff(...) ^dgements and Opinions, will stand (...)
dr^^^ful day of the Lord which u(...), (...) glory, Woe, woe (...) ^ll ^ession,
when Christ comes in (...) (...) way, ^trary to ^ll your divided expectations,
and groun(...) hopes; He was before the world ^as; and sha^^ and does reign
for ever, when it is (...); ^^d in this ^ay will the Lord God setup (...)
everlasting Kin(...) of whose (...) (...) D^minion (...) shall be no end, b^t
(...) (...) (...), ^ded Kingdom of the ^ea^^ly (...) and (...) ^e da(...) to
pieces, never (...) to be ^d your Mountains shall be burned, (...) your (...)
and your (...) the Pit of everlasting wr(...) t(...)al j(...), from him th(...)
upon ^f infini(...) an^ Glory, (...) (...) i^ a day, and y(...)h(...) (...) at
^oonday, and all your (...) thrown down, and shall bec(...) of Dragons: I have
viewed you all (...) you are weighed in the Balance of (...) stumbles at (...)
and Christ I(...) light, by whi(...) e(...) ^omes i^to ti^e world, o^ (...) and
therefore shu^ up ^a(...) gro^^g as ^lind me(...) pl(...) i^ ^he ^arren ^ed
^o(...)gh you are divided (...)nd (...) selves in on^ ^^^y, (...) a(...) the
(...) ^^s Followers, who c(...) ^ow to you^ ^age, and you are li^^ed in
t(...)(...) of Gog (...), (...) whom the Lamb is (...) his ^ome ^^rth, having
the Bow (...)d, (...) to conquer, and will (...) ^r e(...); All your Sacrifice
is corru(...) the Lo^d G^d of Heaven and Earth is wear(...)ith (...)O(...)
Offerings, your (...) are f(...)m ^are full of blood, a^^ the jus(...) (...) of
your streets, and ^he Earth cov(...)e bl(...) (...) inno^ent, and the slain
cries, how long Lord, how long (...) But he has heard in an acceptable time,
(...) will come forth in his might, and will slay, and (...) shall (...) spare,
^^d will wound, (...) his eye (...) not pi^y. Awake, awake, ^less and s^othful,
that has laid at (...) the dar(...)f slumber, and come out, Com^ (...)
upright^^ ^arted, and separate ^our sell(...) no un(...) thing, nor no longer
^artake of (...) latries and (...) The Lord is no^ ^ng ^ogather his ow(...) of
the despis(...)is An(...) fo^th to ^he ear^h, to ^ng in and the ^in bundles,
for the f(...)ll be thro^^ down, and the (...) (...)ewarded, which sits upon
the Natio^^, and people, and the dregs of the cup of ^ng out unto her, ^d the
K(...) Si^ shall utterly (...) be ^tterly driven (...) and all your S(...)
a(...)d Forms, and Woe(...)me he(...) C(...)sion for ever. And (...) thou^ you,
so long and ^ely (...) nor justify you ^nemies and ^t in ^world, which is ^ch
you all ^ble, and by wh(...)ll be ^^oken, ^ch sha^^ grind you to powder (...)
(...) your eternal ^on, in this worl^, and (...) wh(...)nes ^n your darkness
(...) c(...) ev(...) (...)ou of your sin: w(...), ^way to peace with God
eternal, (...) will le(...)o one Truth, to be of one hea(...) one (...), and to
serve one God with one (...) wi(...)l the ^e^rt, and your Neig(...) and (...)
i^ sa(...) of the living God only acce[t^^. And ^o you all sor^s of people, my
Conscience do I (...)r, to the light in all your Consc(...) which i^ but One)
without respect to your persons, whether you ^^ar or forbear: And this to you
all is a W^rning, and ^mpet founded out of Sion your many (...) and Idols to
forsake, ^^d yo(...) with(...) ^^wer to turn away from, and all (...)ven
Ima^our hearts to cast away: (...)is is the (...) the Lord ^you all, which upon
(...) all shall ^fulfilled, and by y^^ wi(...), ^en the Book of your
cons(...)ne ^nal i^^gement rewarded (...) Jud(...)pon (...)ne of tr^e (...)t,
iu(...)ple ri(...)y.

To ^ll (...) light of Eternal Life, whi(...)ld, who (...) born from ^th live
for e(...)the ma^^ Opi(...), soul, and spirit, worship(...) with whom there is
n^ c(...) turning, who are (...) it scornfull^ calle^ ^lso remember (...) ever
^e lov^ ^f (...) B(...)ng and ^e, and whose (...)th ^measure ^not be found
(...); ^th ^ll the Families of t(...)ong, and to establish ^ng ^ant (...), of
Righteousness and ^r ever (...) Redemption and Salvation ^ou is ^t and Mercy in
(...) is (...) Ri(...) (...)eace in you has em^raced each other* ^n (...) of
^rnal Love undefiled, was yo^^ Conception begotten by the Word of immortal
life, (...) the Inheritance incorrupti^le, whereof you (...) Heirs of th^^
faithful promise, (...) free by the Son, through the (...) of the ^upon his
Cross, whereby (...) rished ^o immortality, to (...) over (...) Death, and the
(...) (...) ^ore: Wi^^ (...) of e^^rnal Lov^ (...) (...) in the ^ok (...) ^al
(...)rit, (...) of t(...) (...) (...) Mot(...) is (...) Virg^^ (...) (...)
Jerusalem, come d(...) (...), and full of pleasur^^^ you(...) (...) is no need
of a c(...) ^ht thereof, (...) ^mage, nor (...) ^eat ^^^age you (...) ^ver you,
(...) ^^ur Covenans, and the I a(...) ^ur God, and ^e (...) s^r^ De(...) (...)
(...) Walls and (...) ^v^rlasting (...) re^p, and ^g shall (...) everlas(...)
and your pre(...) your Waters sha(...) ^ver fail, your fu(...)ll (...), (...)
^^^ll be enlarg^d never (...) th(...) but your little Seed shall ^on (...) the
(...) earth shall^e re(...) (...), (...) ^our (...)ed Gover^^ent (...) o(...)
^ingdoms, and ^^ur Laws shall all ^e (...) the earth become su^^ect un(...) Ye
are (...) part of (...) ^age of Idolatry, but ^^ur Be(...)g is th(...) ^one cut
out without a hand (...) the Ear^h, and (...) (...) moun(...) upon (...) Fowls
of Heaven (...) be re(...) ^ing (...) ^^esh of (...) and ^^ptains: ^ou (...)
fait(...) ^s, and the glory of ^^e (...) ^rts (...)not (...) (...) a (...):
Sa(...) (...) you (...)terly dis(...)r (...) and your (...) (...) es(...) and
Ren^wn: Your (...) ^s Government and Domi(...) (...) (...)most parts (...)
(...) (...); (...) his L(...)s Eq(...) (...) ^stice ^^d Judgement^ (...) Hosts,
(...)r G(...)en found (...) (...) death f^^ his N(...), (...) ha(...) ^d (...)
^own y(...), ^u might (...) Therefore you (...) (...) ^ish your Kingdom (...)
^p in Ju(...) and ^ondem^^d, (...) (...) all your adve(...) (...) (...) o(...)
^our everlasti(...) (...) and Judgment (...) Ea(...) y(...) (...) in e^^ity,
and (...) born the (...) storm with (...) and have end^red (...) joy (...)
(...)en of ^pressor; You have (...) (...) to the ^me, (...) ^ave ^een fo^nd
innoce^^ and without guil, before (...) of (...) your light (...) and ^fe ^lory
is (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^ed ^ur is purchase(...) (...)lon is n^ wh(...)
(...) ^d (...) compared (...) (...) shall I (...) (...) of (...) (...) the
w(...) forth children (...) co^ly (...) u(...) (...) (...) (...) and (...)
the(...) ^d (...) hono(...) ^ast in the (...) ^ravity shall be (...) ^he L(...)
(...) Cr(...) (...) inf(...) (...) thee^ b(...) (...) un(...) (...) w(...) ^ou
(...) ^d signed (...) Spi(...) (...) before t(...) All (...) ^ssed, and of your
(...) sh(...) par(...) is like un^^ y(...) (...) saved by the Lord, elect, and
chosen, and redeemed out of ^inreds, Tongues, and People, and has a name
better then of Sons and Daughters. I raise ye the Lord, and glorify him for
evermore, young men and maidens, old men and children, and all that breath,
praise you the Lord; for hereunto are you called, and for this cause are you
brought forth* Clap your hands and sing for joy of heart, your Redeemer is the
holy One, and your Maker is your Husband; I know you, and to you am I known,
and I read you within the vail, and does behold you, the Train of the most High
filling his Temple* follow him for ever, and (...) his name be ^sted of
throughout the Earth: Make war in righteousness, and prepare your selves to do
his service, Let not your hands be slack, neither be you slothf^l in our Lords
Design, but wound the Head of your enemies, and manage war against Gog and
Ma^og, throughout all ginerations, Ride on and prosper; and tread down the
^enced Cities, and enlarge your Dominion, and let the children of strangers, of
the seed of Esa^, be you^ slaves and Bondmen, an^ ^^ll the earth with your
precious seed, and sow it in the morning, and in the evening withold not your
hand, though you are despised of men, yet the Lord has made you truly
honorable* in his glory you appear* and his righteousness is your clothing,
which will never wither, and though some of you for a moment suffer Bonds for
his Names sake, yet you are free ever lasting, and are not ashamed of your
testimony before the Princes and Nobles of the Earth. O Sion t(...) art
desirable, because of thy Beauty, and thy dwelling place is situate in a very
fruitful hill, and thou feedest in the valleys of fat Pastures of eternal
pleasures, where nothing that defiles can enter, nor no devourer treads on
thy mountain, nor no Lions whelp treads in thy path; It is the way of the
ransomed of the Lord, who has blotted out thy transgressions never more to
remember thy sins, thou Seed of Jacob. The Lord is your God for ever, while you
be his people, therefore walk before him in righteousness, and let his own
works praise him, and give him of his own, and glorify him with it eternally.
Be low in thy heart, and be not exalted because of thy Beauty and Riches, and
glory not but only in the Lord: Be diligent in thy mind, and watch against all
thy enemies, and be not of a careless heart; Eat not of the Vine of Sodom, nor
drink not of the Cup of whoredoms; Give not thy strength to strange women, nor
let not thy desirable Beauty be over come of Harlots, but keep thy self
undefiled, and mingle not thy seed with strangers: but be fruitful in thy
pleasant land upon thy beautiful mountain, and bring forth abundantly unto thy
God, who has turned thy wilderness into a fruitful field and taken away thy
reproach of barrenness, in conversation upright and blameless do thou daily
appear* in praises, and honor, and fear, do thou abound, and let thy God be
thy Teacher in his light and truth for evermore, that thy enemies may see and
be confounded, and may behold, and be ashamed before thee, unto whom thy Rock
of defense is a stumbling stone of offense, wherewith the Kingdoms of the earth
shall be dashed to pieces, and broken as a Potters vessel before thee.

Come forth in thy Beauty, and appear in thy glory unto the Nations; Arise,
arise, why should thou sit as alone, as in obscurity and darkness undiscovered,
let the Princes of the earth see thy excellency, and appear before the Nobles
in thy Robes of perfect Honor wherewith thou art decked and trimmed, as a
Bride pleasant unto thy Husband; Do thou judge among the Judges, and give thy
counsel among the prudent, and appear in thy authority before Kings and
Princes; All the Dominions of the world is not equal in Treasure and Wisdom
unto thee, but all the children of whoredoms shall see their shame, and be laid
naked when thou appears in thy purity; The Nations longs for thee to be
partakers of thy virtue, therefore show thy self and appear, that the rest of
thy Flock which yet remains upon the barren mountains may come in unto thy
Pold, to rest under thy Shepherds power. O Sion, thou art prepared of thy God
to beat the mountains to dust, thou art fitted for his service, to thresh the
bills; Make no carrying, but come away, spread thy self into every corner of
the earth, for the upright their steth for thee abundantly; who lays under the
oppression in the land of darkness, which may be felt, from whence thou art
freed into the everlasting light, and why should thou O Sion lay at rest, while
thy own seed, the children of thy womb are oppressed, groaning in the captivity
under the uncircumcised, who has driven away thy remnant, and scattered it
from thee? Put on strength O Arm of the Lord, for thy (...) age, has no other
Helper, nor none that pittyeth her; and shine forth tho^ Seed of Jacob, and
bring in the Kingdoms of the G^^tiles, to partake with thee of thy everlasting
substance, and lay out thy self to gain in thy holy seed out of the power of
Egypts king, O think upon and remember thy own former Bondage, while thou was
thy self captive in a strange land, and let thy Bowels be filled with
compassion toward thy own mothers children, and be not straightened in thy help
and deliverance; for thy God has given thee an instrument with ^^^th, to beat
the Rocks to powder; He is not wa^^ing unto thee in power and wisdom thou
chiefest Son of his l^^^e. Give up, give up to obey his voice, and love not thy
life unto death, till the seed of thy Inheritance, and the blood of thy chosen
be avenged upon the ^ead of Jez^^^l, who has slain thy Elect in all
genera^ion^, and nourished her self with the blood of thy Innocent. Call upon
thy God and awake him to vengeance, to s^ite and to slay thy adversaries, and
to consum^ their habitations from off the earth, who have been too strong for
the^; why should^st thou not come forth in the power of thy judgment, to judge
the earth in righteousness, and to exalt thy Name in the glory, which all men
has despised, and seen no excellency in? And thou O Sions King has been (...)
(...) stranger, and unknown in the earth, and thy Treasure has been masted
amongst the Harlots, and empty to this day have thou returned, from gathering
fruit off thy Vineyard; for slothful and abundantly (...) ha^h the Laborers
been in the Harvest, and it is time for thee ^o arise and work, for thy Law
has been made void, and thy Statutes and Judgments has been neglected, and
all the Princes of the earth contemns thy laws, and counts the sons of thy
chosen heritage as slaves and bondmen, and decrees unrighteous decrees, and
seals them in the pit of their unbelief upon the mountains of their rebellion
against thee. How long Lord? how long? When will thou appear to lay their
honor in the dust of confusion? Is it not the fullness of thy time which thou
have promised? How long shall the remnant of Sion sit as a Widow, bemoaning her
children? Thy Host and Chosen waits for Commission from thee to do thy Will;
That thou art our God and our King, our Judge, and our Lawgiver, who our souls
has chosen, may for ever be exalted in thy Majesty and Throne of Justice and
Judgment, and thy Camp waits to see the honor of Kings and Princes
overthrown by thee, and thy Dominion set to rule over their heads; that all
Nations and Kingdoms may become subject unto thee, and the kingdoms of this
world way become the Kingdom of thy Son for ever, and evermore; and says my
Soul, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.

