General Epistle, AND Greeting of the Fathers Love, TO ALL THE SAINTS, Called
and chosen to faithfulness in Christ Jesus the light of the World, in which
they believing, and their faith standing in his power, many suffers for his
names sake. And this is to all such as are found worthy to suffer, and is an
Exhortation to the strengthening of their faith, whereby they may continue
boldly witnessing to the end. And this is a true testimony of the Father and of
the Son; Witnessed by us who are called of God, in whom his power is made
manifest.

London; Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1657.

To the Reader.
FOrasmuch as many who are partakers of the Fathers Love, manifested in his Son
in measure, in whom these Epistles has found greeting; With the same Love in
the upright hearted, to which it is a sure Testimony of love from Life it self,
to the quickening, strengthening, confirm^ng, and arming of all such as have in
the Love, Life and Power heard, and received, and believed the Truth as it has
been declared, and is in Jesus, in whom our Faith is standing; which Faith
works by the Love shed abroad in our hearts, wherein we are reaching after
each other in the sameness of Love, which is the bond of our unity, wherein we
are called together to be joined in the purity, power and life of one Faith and
Love, therein to bear Testimony (as we have in our measures recieved) to, and
of the everlasting Truth, wherein finding these Epistles of such manifold
service to the whole Body, both for instruction, exhortation, strengthening,
and forewarning, whereby there is or may be a safe arming against all decee^t
and decivable spirits; hence it is from the earnest love and desire stirred up
in many here among us that are faithful, whereby this they put in print, that
thereby the service may reach unto all who are worthy thereof in these Nations,
for to them is it sent, who are called of God; therefore in the fear of the
Lord let every one of us to whom this comes walk worthy of the Fathers love,
grace, mercy and peace, whereinto we are called in one body, of which Christ is
Head.

Sent from London the 2. of the 3. month, 1657. A.D.

AN EPISTLE To all the SAINTS whom God has called.
TO all the Children of Light every where, who fears and loves the Lord, who
are begotten of God, and unto whom he is known in the spirit and in the truth;
this is a testimony of the Fathers love unto you, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from
him that lives for ever, the God of Light and Life be multiplied in you all,
that you may daily be renewed in strength, and girded with truth, and armed
with the whole Armor of God, and may be kept by his Power until the day of
Salvation, to walk in the Government and subjection to Jesus Christ, witnessing
the power and presence of God in you, and amongst you, giving you power to
fulfill his will in all things, and that in all righteousness, and out of all
evil you may be led, and preserved unto the end, and in the end, to show forth
the praises of God in this generation, as a people called of him, and redeemed
by him for his glories sake; even so Amen, and Amen. Dearly beloved, be not
ignorant, but this know, This is the Message which came unto you, which is true
and faithful, and everlasting, That the true God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all; and this is the Message of Peace and Reconciliation, and of
glad tidings unto all that have sought the Lord, which we received of him, and
you have heard, and there is not another to be declared; and all that have
received it, are gathered up to God, and are in Covenant with him, and one with
another, and are in that which reconcileth and joyneth unto Christ Jesus (the
Husband) and second Adam, who is the Lord from Heaven, the Prince of Peace, the
Savior and the deliverer, who is made manifest in Power, and condemns the
Transgressor, and slays the Enmity, and raises the life out of death; and
this is he who kills and makes alive, even the God who is light, who brings
down one, and sets up another; who makes war against the mighty, and gives
Peace to the poor; and besides him there is none; he searches man's heart, and
tries the reins, and knows the thoughts, and every creature is manifest in his
sight, who gives to every one according to his doings; and this is he who
stands in the Congregation of the righteous, even in the midst of us, and
sits Judge among the gods, unto him must all the gods of the earth bow, and
the Inhabitants of the earth must tremble before him, and unto him every Tongue
shall confess, and the light in every man shall answer when he arises to
judgment, who is a swift witness to condemn or justify all the children of
men upon the face of the earth.

This is the God of truth whom we worship, and who will be worshipped in spirit
and in truth, who is the God of Abraham and his seed for ever; and with him
there is no change, nor shadow of turning; and he has made known his Name, and
his Power, and his wonderful works in this his day, and has caused his voice
to be heard in the earth, and the dead has heard and now lives.

And his Name is exalted on high amongst all that fear him and obey his voice;
and he has given his Son a Covenant of Light, who lights every man that
comes into the world with the true Light of Life, or Condemnation, that all
who receive him may come to the knowledge of the Father, whom to know is life
eternal.

And this is the Christ, the Savior, in which we have believed, and which we
preach, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, the Foundation of God which
cannot be moved, the Word of God is his Name, and there is no other Name given
for salvation. This is he that was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore;
and there is no other to be looked for; if any preach any other, let him be
accursed; and if any bring any other Message, let them not be received.

And all you who have believed in this Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the
world, and who have received the knowledge of this God, who is light himself,
and that searches your hearts, I exhort you, and warn you all in his presence
that lives for ever, to wait upon him, and to fear before him, and to walk with
him for ever in uprightness of heart, which is of great price in his sight, and
forget not his righteous Judgments which he has made known, least you wax fat
through mercies, and rebel against him, and become disobedient and gainsaying,
and so be destroyed from being a people; but be stayed upon the Lord, and let
your hearts be established with grace, and be not tossed nor shaken with any
wind of Doctrines of men, which is not from the life of God, nor reaches to the
life in you, but begets into Idolatry, to worship other Gods then he who is
light; and be not troubled at temptations, nor at sufferings, nor at
reproaches, nor any other thing, but stand in the Counsel of God, and in his
long-suffering, and wait patiently upon him in your own measure of the grace of
God received, which is sufficient for you to preserve you, that victory over
death and over him that has the power over it, you may receive, to trample
upon all that which is contrary to the life of God within you, and without you;
neither be you troubled nor offended in Christ if any among you deny the Lord,
and backslide from his pure way through an evil heart of unbelief, and so
become disobedient children, and vex the righteous soul; such shall bear their
own burden and condemnation in the day of the Lord; and know, that truth
changes not, but is the same for ever, though the deceitful hearted, through
unbelief, depart from it, and choose their own ways, and despise the Counsel
of the Lord to their own destruction; but be ye more watchful, and faithful,
and valiant for the truth upon earth unto the end, that you may be found
faithful witnesses unto the Name of the Lord in this crooked Generation, and
may receive the fulfilling of the Promise of God, and may witness God with you,
the Emanuel, the Savior, God with us; and this is the whole salvation, and
there is no other to be expected or witnessed then this, That God dwells in us,
and walks in us, according to his Promise; and all that know this, needs not go
forth to the right hand or to the left; but salvation is come unto us, he that
takes away sin, and saves from it, and from condemation; and who witnesses
this, are begotten by the Word of God, and born of the immortal Seed, and are
new creatures; and there is now no condemnation, but the reward of
righteousness and peace to us, who are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and
here we witness the Lord is our God, and we are his people, and he sees no sin
in us who are born of him, nor remembers iniquity; but his Covenant is with us,
and the Kingdom is become the Lords, and his Dominion is set up, where God is
all in all, where the Prince of Darkness is cast out; and this is the end and
substance of all Ministrations, which we bare witness of, and I do exhort all
you that are called of God every where, patiently to wait in the way of the
Lord, and in his Judgments to receive this, and to possess it within you, that
you may be worshippers of God, and doers of his will, and may have the witness
that you are accepted of him, and may know your calling and election sure,
where nothing that defiles can enter, but that may be taken away and removed,
and him you may feel and witness, which Satan has nothing in, who is the
second Adam, and cannot be overcome, but is greater then the first Adam who was
overcome (though innocent) and is lost from the presence of God; but he in whom
there is no sin, and who cannot transgress, comes to seek and to save that
which was lost in sin, and to bring back that which was driven away by sin; and
he is greater then innocence, and overcomes the Devil, and is called the Son
of God; and to him that overcomes, who is the Light of the world, is all Power
given of the Father: And know him in you all to be the greatest, who is not of
the world, nor cannot bow to the Devil, to give you dominion and authority over
all the world, and the powers of Hell and Death, even he who seals up the old
Dragon in Perdition never more to deceive: And who witnesses this, knows the
Election which it is not possible to deceive, or be deceived; and as every one
of you has received him who is the Lord from Heaven, so let your faith stand
in him, and walk in him; and let all your conversations be ordered by him, in
all pure and blameless walking in the sight of your Enemies, that it may be
manifest that you are branches in him, and that you have received power to
become the sons of God, and that you are heirs of the Inheritance which shall
not fade away. And all you that witness this, your eye is opened to see God,
and you are cleansed from sin by the Word of God, and you have received the
peace with God, and glad tidings from him in your own souls; and this is
salvation by the second Adam; herein be established and settled, and look not
for another; for there is not any besides this Savior and this salvation, but
if any preach another, believe them not; and if any cry, Lo here, and lo there
is Christ without you, go not after them, nor follow them, but know him within
you, which is greater then all; yea, If we our selves, or an Angel from heaven,
preach any other Jesus then he which lights every man that comes into the
world, or any other salvation then God with us, let us be accursed; for this is
the Gospel of our salvation, Christ Jesus within us the hope of glory, the
Power and Wisdom of God to rule and reign in us, by which we are changed from
death to life, and translated from the power of darkness into the kingdom of
his dear Son.

And now all Friends and Elect of God, who are called and faithful, you that
have received this Testimony which God has given of the Son, and which the Son
has given of the Father, which in faithfulness has been testified in this
generation, I exhort you all in the fear and counsel of the Lord, take heed to
that which you have believed, and heard, and learned of the Father, which is
the truth as it is in Jesus, and shall abide for ever; and be not removed from
your hope, nor given to change, but mind the life of God in you all, which is
immortal, and is but one, and it answers to the Lord in Judgments, and in
mercies one to another in that which is righteous and just, and witnesses
against all the works of the world, which are evil, and not wrought in God.

Ye that know this which is of the Father in you, dwell in it, and walk in it,
and be not shaken out of it, nor removed from it, for it is the way of peace
unto everlasting rest, where there is no sorrow but righteousness, peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost, and every one in particular have salt in your selves to
savor withal, that you may resist the wicked one in all his temptations, and
may not join to any thing which is out of union, and contrary to the life of
God, and to the truth which you have received, that you may never be betrayed
of your hope, nor of the simplicity which is in Christ Jesus, in which the
Father is well pleased; and let the Light of the world guide you in all things,
that your works may be wrought in God, never to be condemned, nor you to suffer
loss, knowing this first, That none are justified by him but them that are led
and guided by him; and to whom he is a Savior, he is also a Teacher, and he is
given to teach in all the ways of Truth.

And now let your fellowship be in the power and life of God, and know not one
another in words only, and in shows, and in outward appearance, but witness
one another in the spirit and in the truth, and have communion there in
breaking the bread of life, that Christ Jesus may be seen to be the head in
you, and you Members to serve him and one another, all receiving wisdom from
the head and virtue, and virtue from the Vine (Christ Jesus) that you may
abound in love, mercy, and peace, and all the fruits of righteousness unto the
Father, and dwell in the fear and counsel of God, and be subject to his will,
not despising the cross which is the power of God, which slayes the birth that
is born of the flesh, which is not heir of the Promise; but walk in the Cross
daily, that your understanding may be kept open to try and discern all spirits,
whether they be of God, and believe not every spirit, for lying spirits may
arise among your selves, and go forth from the light, who is not in the truth,
but in the feignedness and hypocrisy, with false visions, and lying
imaginations, handling the word of God deceitfully, and corrupting and
perverting the pure way of God, having the form, but not the power, having left
the power, and gone from the light, and such utters the words of truth without
the life, and is but as the chaff to the wheat, and they are to be denied and
resisted, and not joined to, least innocence and simplicity be betrayed, and
your faith made void, and so you be destroyed from the life of God, and death
surprise you, and darkness enter into your dwellings, and so unbelief, and
doubtings, and murmurings, and lustings after evil arise in you, and you be
perverted from the Worship of the true God, and grieve his righteous spirit by
bowing to Idols, and following of other Lovers, and so the true God, which has
brought you out of Egypt, and made manifest his power in you; be forgotten, and
the faith of his Son made shipwreck of and your later end be worse then the
beginning, and the Name of the Lord be dishonored by you; and then woe unto
you, his wrath shall suddenly break out against you; wherefore hear, and fear,
and hearken unto the Word of the Lo^d, he has caused his Light to shine forth,
and his voice to be heard; he has proclaimed his Name amongst you, and has
caused his marvelous light to approach when you set in darness in the Land of
the shadow of death, when you were lost he sought you, and when you were driven
away and scattered, he found you, and brought you home; when you were in your
blood, and no eye pittyed you, he had mercy upon you, and bound you up, and
healed you; when you were dead, he said unto you, Live, and it was so; when you
were led captive by the devil, under the power of death, he break the chains,
and set you free; and when there was none to help and to save, his own arm
brought deliverance and salvation, and the way of life and peace he set before
you.

And now all this has his own Arm accomplished, that you should be a praise
unto him for evermore; now if you walk in the way which he has set before you,
and keep his Covenant which he has made with you, and fulfill his will, and
walk in righteousness, in love and unity, in meekness, lowliness, humbleness,
and in soberness, and watchfulness, and in fear of his Name; then shall his
presence never forsake you, nor his outstretched arm cease to defend and
preserve you, but he shall go before you, and be your reward; and he shall be
your God, and you shall he his people; and you shall dwell in him, and he shall
be your hiding place; and he will be to you a Father, and you shall be his
children, and his blessing and peace shall remain in your habitations for ever
and ever; but if any of you turn aside for a thing of naught after vanity, and
deny the way of righteousness, and forget the Lord, and kick against him, and
follow the way and counsels of your own hearts, and worship other Gods, and
join your selves to strangers, and commit adultery with other Lovers, and make
the cross of Christ of non-effect, and turn from the Light of Christ within
you, and fulfill your own wills, and the desire of your own minds, and go out of
the fear of the Lord into the liberty of the flesh (which is not the liberty in
Christ Jesus) and so seek your selves, and strive for mastery to be one above
another, and so surmize evil one against another, and the bond of Peace be
broken, and vain contention and strife appear; then shall the Rod of God smite
you, and his wrath be suddenly kindled against you, and you shall not prosper,
but his countenance shall be hid, and the terrors of the Lord, and lamentations
shall possess you, and peace shall flee far from you; and such shall be cast
out of the Camp of the Lord, and shall have no part in the Inheritance, but the
blessing shall depart, and the curse shall enter till utter destruction; yea,
and if any of you deny the Lord unto whom his way is made manifest, he will
deny you, and you shall have no part in him, but vengeance in flames of fire
will he render upon the disobedient, manifold more then if his love and way of
peace had not been made manifest to you, and the Light of the world is your
condemnation for evermore if you turn from it.

And in the presence of the living God I warn you all, Believe not that Spirit,
neither follow it which brings any other Message then what has been declared
from the beginning; believe not him which cries, Lo here, or lo there is Christ
without you, or that draws from the measure of Christ within you, to hearken
to, or to be taught by any other thing, for that Spirit is not of the Father
which preaches any other Christ then he that is the Light of the world, and
lights every man that comes into the world, and which brings any other
Message then that God is light in himself, and has given his Son a light into
the world; and this is the true Testimony of the Father and of the Son, and he
that testifies any other Message, is to be judged and denied; he is not a
worshipper of the true God, but out of the truth, and in the error, and a
deceiver, and being deceived.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which Ministers to others
that which it has not learned of the Father, but has the words without the
Power, and lives not in the Power of what it Ministers forth in words, nor is
not what it declares, but is in the outward shows, in the hypocrisy and
feignedness, and reaches not the life of God, but vails and covers it, and
that spirit is not of the Father, but is to be denied and judged, and not
received nor believed.

Again, believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is at liberty in the
flesh, and makes the offense of the cross to cease, which is exalted out of the
fear of the Lord in the liberty of the earthly, which crucifies the life, and
darkens the eye; and that spirit will boast of joy, and peace, and experience,
and knowledge, and speak high words in the airy mind, and that would lead you
out of your conditions to glory above the cross, till you be past feeling of
the life; and that spirit begets into feignedness and hypocrisy, and into the
love of the world which passes away; and beware of that spirit, for it is not
of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is hasty, and
forward, and rash, for that goes out of Gods counsel, and betrays the Just,
and strives to be greatest, and to be above the weak, and despises him, and
would be Master, and not a servant, and would rule, and not be ruled in the
meek and lowly government of Christ, and that spirit will judge out of thoughts
rashly and unfavourily, and condemn another in secret in what it self is guilty
of; beware of that spirit, for it is not of God, but to be judged with the life
of God.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which seeks it self to have
praise of men, and to be accounted, and would beget into divisions, and would
have parties to it self, and respects persons, and glories in gifts, and
knowledge, and parts, more then in the Giver, and admires men more then he that
gives the increase, and feeds of the knowledge in that nature which is to be
famished, and glories in what has been done by it as though it had not
received power from the Lord, and is exalted as though it bare the root, not
knowing that it is born of the root; and that spirit spends its Treasure which
it received in the Fathers house, amongst Harlots, and despises the poor, and
seeks occasion to glory over the weak, that it may be renowned; beware of that
spirit I charge you all, for it is not of the Father, nor to be followed, but
to be condemned, and resisted unto death.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which preaches not from the
measure of God received, and to be manifest to it in you, and approved by it
only, but speaks above the measure, and reaches not to the measure of the grace
of God; that spirit leads after words and outward shows, and cries peace to the
rich, and judgment to the poor; and the word of God is not divided aright, but
heals up falsely, and daubs with untempered mortar, and cries peace where Gods
speaks war; and cries war where God speaks peace; and that spirit is a deceiver
and a betrayer, and feeds but the ear, and not the life, and darkens the
counsel of God by words without knowledge, and is not of the Father, but of the
world, and to be denied and condemned.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is not subject to
rule and order, and is not meek, and diligent, and long suffering, but heady,
and high, and untoward, seeking occasions against the Just, and watches for
evil; that spirit will not bear reproof, but is idle, sloathful, and careless,
and surmising evil, and backbiting, and conforms in appearance, making a fair
show, but is not unto God, as appearing unto man; and that would go, and is not
called; and will not go when it is called; and seeks for the praise of men more
then God, and that is fruitless ground, and brings forth briars and thorns in
secret, which choaks the seed of God; beware of that spirit, it is a lover of
this world; have no fellowship with it, for it is not of the Father, but a
deceiver, and is to be denied.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is tossed and
unsettled, and is given to change, and is not established with grace, that is an
Adulterer, and hunts for the precious life, and seeks by flattery to beguile
the innocent; that spirit is zealous for a moment, but is soon overcome, and is
stony ground, and brings not forth fruit to perfection, but withers, and its
later end is worse then the beginning. That spirit is exalted into presumption,
and in peace, and cast into desparation and trouble, and the double mind
lodges in it, and it is unstable in all its ways, and is a ground for the
seed of Satan, and to it there is no peace from God; and beware of that spirit,
for it is not of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is more zealous then
knowing, whose zeal is without true knowledge, and stands in that which is
corrupted, that flourishes for a moment; but cannot endure for ever; it has
no root in it self, but is furious and passionate, and not long-suffering, that
spirit knows not it self, but would devour its adversary with bitterness, and
not gained by long suffering; that is not the Spirit of the Father, but must be
denied in all.

Again, Believe not that spirit which draws back into the world, into its
lusts, and liberty, and fashions which passes away; that spirit forgets God,
and draws back, for his soul has no pleasure in it, but is vexed with it,
where the cross is made of non-effect, and the false Liberty is walked in,
which murders the life; that spirit is of the Devil, and is to be condemned.

And now all friends of God every where, who knows him, and are known of him
whom he has gathered out of this untoward generation; be diligent in your
Callings, and keep your meetings in faithfulness, waiting upon the Lord, that
you all may receive of his fullness to be filled with it, and may be nourished
up unto himself, as Trees of righteousness, the planting of his own right hand,
to spread forth his name and glory, as a people saved by him, and to whom there
is none like besides. And this know and understand, that spirit is not of the
Father which confesses not the Son to be come in the flesh, who destroys the
works of the Devil, and takes away sin; and that spirit it believe and follow
which condemns sin, and destroys it, and takes it away, and so gives peace with
God in your own consciences, and leads you into all truth, and keeps you from
all evil; and you that witness this, the Son you know, and the Father you know
to dwell with you, and in you; and this is the first and the last; believe in
him, and follow him, and look not for any other; and in this the Father of Life
and Glory, whose Dominion is without beginning and end, establish you, and
preserve you, Amen, and Amen.

I a beloved Brother, and a Companion unto all the Saints in suffering, and in
rejoicing, who have received this Testimony from the Father, does with it in
this Epistle salute the whole Church in the love of the Father, as moved of him
by his Eternal Spirit, who bears witness to me that we are of God, and the
whole world lies in wickedness, and that all that are of God hears us. And
this Testimony I give of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Truth, and of
the Salvation of which I am made a witness, and against all that ever shall
deny it, or turn from it: And this is thus far the words of my Testimony by the
Spirit of the Father, not knowing when the time comes it may be finished, and
the night may come when no man can work.

EDWARD BOROUGH:

To all that suffer for the Testimony of JESUS, and for his Names sake.
THE glorious God of truth has appeared and made known his way and truth
perfectly in this our day, and has chosen unto himself faithful Witnesses, to
testify of his Name, and of his Truth before Rulers and people, and has
brought forth a seed which is not of this world, which cannot bow to the Devil,
but is heir of Gods Inheritance, though a sufferer in this world under the
powers thereof, and many in this generation, who are called, and faithful, and
chosen, bears witness unto the Name of the Lord in sufferings and tribulations,
whom he will honor because they honor him, who is exalting his Truth and his
people through sufferings.

And now all Friends who are called to suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, and
for the exercise of a pure conscience which you hold, be valiant for the truth
upon earth and faint not, but finish your Testimony with joy for the Lord, and
against all your enemies, and look not forth at afflictions and sufferings, but
look beyond them to the recompense of reward; neither be offended in Christ,
though ye are called to suffer for him, and for his Names sake; but dwell in
the peace with God, which is a sufficient reward; and take heed to your life
which is Immortal, that it you may feel and enjoy, and account that the present
sufferings is not worthy to be reckoned with the glory that is to be revealed,
and of which you have the earnest, even present peace with God; and look beyond
your sufferings, and before the rage of man was, and feel the life of God in
you fresh and lively, which is more then all things, to carry you above all the
world, and all its envy, which is against the seed of God.

And take heed of temptations, for the power of Satan will work, and is near to
tempt you in sufferings, to gain dominion over you, and to touch your life, and
to cast you down: Therefore mind the life of God in you to have dominion, which
Satan has nothing in, which is not given him to touch; and that is more then
all, yea all that a man has will he give for his life to enjoy it when he is
tried; (this I witness) and you are tried by sufferings and tribulations, and
your faith and patience is proved; therefore approve your selves faithful unto
the Lord by long-sufferings and patience, that Satan overcome you not, though
he may touch you, and have power to cast some of you into prison, and otherways
to win now you, and to try you for your life; but be faithful unto death, and
you shall receive the Crown of life eternal; and keep the Word of his patience,
that you may be delivered, and Satan may bow under your foot.

And all you that suffer for well doing, who holds fast the Testimony which you
have received of God; now when your hearts are searched, blessed from the Lord
you are, your reward you shall possess, which no man can take away, even the
life, and liberty, and treasure which Satan cannot touch nor spoil you of.

Ye that suffer because you cannot fulfill wickedness, nor the will of man, but
are of the seed which cannot please man, nor bow to the Devil; ye suffer for
Christ, and for righteousness sake; who cannot walk contrary to the light of
Christ within you, but rather chooses to suffer under corrupt men and laws,
then to transgress Gods righteous Law written in your hearts; you are chosen to
fulfill the will of God by sufferings, and are not of the world, and therefore
the world hates you.

And all you that suffer imprisonment of body, or spoiling of Goods, or
travels, or any other thing, because you cannot pay tithes, this is the word of
the Lord God unto you, You suffer for righteousness sake, and for the Name of
Christ, and unjustly, by the oppression of men for well-doing, and not for
evil; and the Lord will be your exceeding great reward; look beyond your
outward Liberty, and know the liberty in spirit, in the Father, and in the Son*
where is everlasting peace and freedom, which none can bring into bondage; and
look beyond all outward Treasure and Riches, and see Gods Treasure, and possess
it, which never waxes old, which none can spoil you of, as Witnesses for the
Lord, and for his truth and Covenant; you suffer, and it is for a Testimony
against all your Enemies, and against oppression, and oppressors; for the cry
of that oppression the Land groans under, and for ages has done; but the Lord
is now risen against it, for its cry reaches to Heaven against the unrighteous
Exactors, whose cruel hands has heavily oppressed the just and the poor in
this particular; and herein your suffering is for a testimony against your
cruel Adversaries, (whether Priests or others) and against the unjust Judges
and Lawyers, and their whole train of Oppressors; for this end are you called
to suffer, and to you it shall be made easy if you abide in the counsel of
God, till vengeance overcome your adversaries; therefore lift up your heads,
and fulfill the will of your Father in patience and in faithfulness, till the
Lord appear for you, who hearkeneth to the cry of the poor, and regards the
unjust sufferer, and will recompense the oppressors into their bosoms, and will
break every yoke, and be a terror to all the cruel hearted.

And all you that suffer, who are moved by the power of the Lord to bear
witness against the false Worships, and against the false Teachers and
Idol-Temples, of which the Land is full, and who are moved to testify against
sin in Rulers, Priests, or People: Whether your suffering be imprisonment, or
beating, and stoning, or other abuses or cruelties whatsoever, which the Devil
has power to lay upon you; you suffer for righteousness sake, and for the Name
of Christ, and for well doing, if in the wisdom of God you be guided, and the
Lord will be your reward and peace for ever; lift up your head, and rejoice in
him, and abide in his counsel, ye that suffer herein for him, and for his Names
sake; for your suffering is for a Testimony against all this Generation,
against the Idol Worships and ways, which Gods soul loathes, and which he will
confound; and against the Idol Teachers, and false Prophets and Priests, who
preach for hire, and make merchandise of souls, against whom Gods wrath is
kindled, and upon whom his indignation will be poured, and it is a testimony
against the sins of Rulers and people, which abounds in this generation, till
the measure of it be fulfilled through persecuting of you, who warn them of the
evil, and bears witness against their evil deeds, that God may be justified
when he condemns them; and he is risen against the Worships, and Ways, and
Teachers, and people, whose abominable iniquities has overgrown the world, and
profaneness has gone forth from them, through Nations; Rulers, and Teachers
and people are all out of the way, and given to vanity, to covetousnes, and
Idolatry; and the breath of the Lord shall consume you together (all who does
oppress the Just*)

Therefore Friends, be patient and content under all tribulations and
sufferings, and feel Gods living presence near you, to overshadow you, and to
be your hiding place; and know the life which the wickedness and cruelty of man
cannot touch nor reach unto; and dwell in the Power of the Lord, which moves to
bear witness for him, and against all those abominations; and that will keep
you above all the afflictions which can be cast upon you, and you will be on
the top of your enemies, and the Seed of the Serpent shall hardly bruise your
heel.

Woe unto the Idol Worships, and Temples, and Teachers, to all the Hirelings and
Deceivers, who feeds themselves and not the Flock, which abounds in the world,
and in this Nation, they must down into Perdition; the Lord is risen against
them all, to pluck up the root, that the branches may wither; and his arm shall
watch over them to overthrow them all, and to make them desolate, that the just
may be delivered.

And all you that suffer any where imprisonment, or finings, or reproaches, or
any other thing, because you cannot swear for conscience sake, nor respect
persons, according to the vain customs of the Heathen, but are redeemed out of
the customs and superstitions of men which are of the world, and are evil, and
not of God, nor justified by him; you suffer for righteousness sake, and for
Christ's sake, and are witnesses for God herein against the superstitions, and
wickedness, and pride, and high-mindedness of men; and the Lord is with you if
you be ruled in his wisdom, and are faithful to him; and he will lift up your
head till his and your adversaries be confounded. And I charge you all in the
presence of the Lord, who suffers for righteousness sake in these things or in
any other, who are moved of the Lord to bear witness of the truth, and against
the deceits of the world, be not exalted in the flesh in your sufferings least
you forget God: Nor be not cast down into sorrow, least ye be overcome of the
Devil; but dwell in the measure of the power and life of God, which is above
all, and more then all, and feel Gods living arm to stay your hearts to watch
to his own in you, to refresh you continually. And resist the Devil on every
hand with the Armor of Light and Truth, that your life may be preserved in
Dominion over all things; even the life which is not of this world in you, may
not be veiled nor overcome, for to enjoy the life of God with you is enough, if
you pass through the fire and through the water, it keeps you, and carries you
above all, [this I witness] and it is more then all outward freedom, or
liberty, or riches and treasure of this world; and walk herein in boldness, and
faithfulness, and patience, as you have us for an example in Christ Jesus, who
are in Jeopardy every hour, often in trials, and sufferings, and dangers, and
loves not our lives unto death for the Testimony of Jesus which we hold, and
that his Name and Truth may be exalted in the earth; but as the Lord moves are
carried through Nations, among Lions and devourers, such as seeks our life for
their prey, and yet the Lord is with us, our Defense, and Arm, and Preserver
above all. Therefore look you at the Lord in all afflictions and distress, and
know his reward with you, that your burden and yoke may be easy, and not hard;
for his presence makes all things joyful; and know, that it is for the Name of
the Lord, and for his honor, and for his Kingdom which God will set up through
suff^ring; for this cause are ye called to suffer, and your life, nor liberty,
nor any other thing is not to be measured nor compared herewith.

So unto every one of you I am moved to write, and to warn you all (...) the
fear of God, be content, and long suffering, and patient, and finish your
Testimony with rejoicing, if ye seal it with your blood, and dwell with the
Lord in his holy habitation of Peace, out of respect to time or places, or
things, and give up your selves, that his will in you may be fulfilled. And
think it not strange though you have fiery trials; neither be moved at any
suffering without you, or troubled in spirit; neither let it break your peace
nor fellowship with God by any impatiency or murmurings, or temptations, for
then will your sufferings be grievous to you, and the Enemy within and without
will have ground against you to overthrow you, and know, it is that which ever
was in all ages, and no new thing the Seed of God suffered by the seed of evil
doers; and the wicked always strengthened their hands in cruelty against the
righteous, and laid heavy burdens upon the just, and caused the innocent to
groan under them for a time, till iniquity was fulfilled, that they might be
broken, and the oppressed delivered, and always the Lord exalted his Name by
the suffering of his people, as we have a cloud of Witnesses of our Forefathers
that went before, who did bear witness to the Name of the Lord through
faithful suffering; so it is no strange thing has happened unto you, but that
which is common to all the Saints, who enters the Kingdom through tribulation;
blessed are you if you be faithful unto the end, that you may leap the reward
of your works of your sufferings and patience; even the Crown of Life that
never fades away; so the Lord God of Life preserve you.

And all Friends every where, I am moved to warn you, Dwell in love, and unity,
and fellowship one with another in the Light, and in the Spirit of the Father,
and fulfill the Law of Christ, and bear one another burden, and suffer with one
another, that none be oppressed among you in any thing whilst others are free;
but that the burden of all things, and the care of all things in relation to
the truth, be equal among you according to every ones freedom, and as every one
is moved of the Lord, so to administer to one another necessities, as members
of of one body, to the honoring of the Head; and spreading of the truth, that
there be no complaining, but equality and justness, and the Government of
Christ ruling among you, and his wisdom in all things; feed no excess, nor the
lustful devouring mind in any; neither suffer the distressed to perish for
want, but reach one to another in love and like mindedness, suffering for one
another, and all caring for the truth above all things, that God may dwell
among you, and be known that he is in you of a truth. And in this the wisdom of
God guide you all, Amen.

This is diligently to be sent among Friends to be read among them, and to be
sent from one to another as they are moved; by a Companion in tribulation to
all the Saints every where,

Edward Borough.

The End.

