GOSPEL-Conversation: Wherein is showed, I. How the Conversation of Believers
must be above what could be by the Light of Nature.

II. Beyond those that lived under the Law.

III. And suitable to what Truths the Gospel holds forth.

By Jeremiah Buroughs, Preacher of the Gospel to Stepney and Criplegate,
London.

Being the Third Book published by Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach
Simpson, Philip Nigh, William Bridge, John Yates, William Adderly.


LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1650.

To the Reader.
THe order and method which we propounded to our selves, and still pursue in
publishing this blessed man's Labors committed to us, is the same with his own
in Preaching them; and in his Preaching style also we present them, that so
both for matter and miner they might be every way his own. We need not set him
up any other Pillar or Monument then what himself erected by his own worth; and
yet we may as truly say of him, as Nazianzen of Athanasius, (...), He was high
in worth, but humble in heart: He dyed in the strength of his Parts and Graces,
and did not wear with rust, but use: (Amplissimum vitae spatium usque ad
sapientiam vivere) He did the work of him that sent him, whilst it was day,
because he feared (as he would often say) a night was coming upon the Kingdom,
wherein he could not work; and so he lived long in a little time.

It grieved his Soul to see how among Professors of Religion, Holiness of Life,
and circumspect walking, is not attended to in this dissolute and dissolved Age
we live in: What Truths therefore served most to revive and renew that Spirit
and vigor of Practical Holiness, which was breathing in them before these
Times; these he most insisted on, and pressed upon the Consciences of
Believers: And he that is conversant in his Writings, will readily discern,
that he judged the power of Godliness not to consist in
high-towring-speculation (though himself was of excellent-raised-parts) but in
an holy Conversation, which is peculiarly the subject of this Treatise; therein
following the direction of Paul to Titus, exhorting Believers in God, to
maintain good Works, (...), to go before others in good works, or to set before
others good works, as the words imply, Tit. 3. 8.

Which yet whilst a Christian pursues with all zealous fervency and intention,
he must withal be acquainted with the Root from whence all his Holiness must
spring. Good Works are dangerous, if they be made the Foundation in the great
point of Justification by Faith; but if they be used in the superstruction,
then they are very useful. We cannot have children from Christ, except we be
first married to Christ: No works of Sanctification, before Union with Christ.
Many cry out for Obedience and good Works, yet are profane, because they go not
to Christ for these; You will not come to me, that you might have life, says
our Savior: Except we do all for and from Christ, our Lusts will not be
mortified, our Duties not accepted, our Consciences not purified; we shall not
be strengthened against crosses, neither shall we go on cheerfully, nor
persevere: The foolish proud heart of man is loath to be so much beholding to
Jesus Christ, as to receive Salvation from him altogether, but something it
will do, and something Christ must do; yet it leans much, if not most upon it
self, only it will take in Christ to make more sure work. There is a sturdy
stoutness and unyieldingness of Spirit in men, against the blessed Truths of
the Gospel made known unto them; they must have Peace, Comfort, Assurance,
their own way, or else reject all; they would find a principle of life and
power within themselves, and not go to Christ for it; they would bring
something to Christ, and not fetch all from Christ; not knowing that the way
which all true Believers have gone (after much wearying of themselves to find
something in themselves) has been at the last to roll themselves wholly upon
the Free Grace of God through Jesus Christ, seeing nothing in themselves, yet
giving glory to God by believing; and if they could bring their hearts so
disposed and qualified, yet they see the danger of resting in what they are,
have and do. And if want of such and such conditions and qualifications had
ground enough to keep from Christ, it might have hindered any that ever did cast
themselves upon the Free Grace of God, because they would still have been at a
loss, finding a defect in them.

These things we judge not unseasonable to premise, in the reading of this and
all other Treatises of this nature, that Christians may (when they abound in
much-doing and well-doing) be still as much afraid of resting in doing well, as
of committing ill, and be content to have all flowers withered that refresh
them without Christ; And when after Humiliation and casting down for sin, they
begin to stand upright, as they think, upon the legs of their Prayers,
Performances, Inherent Graces and Qualifications, and Righteousness and
Holiness expressed in their Lives and Conversations, they may yet
notwithstanding all this, be brought, not to glory in themselves, but in Jesus
Christ, and willingly come down from the Throne of their own Conceits,
Sufficiences, Abilities, and be at the Footstool and Threshold of Jesus Christ;
that seeing they know nothing, are nothing, have nothing, do nothing, they may
be nothing in their own eyes, that Christ might be all, do all their work in
them and for them, that so they may wholly live upon Christ, and to Christ,
still drawing virtue from him, seeing a need of Christ, and of nothing else,
and finding a fullness and help in him, and in nothing else.

This word of direction being given the Reader in his perusing this Treatise
about Gospel-Conversation, the publishing of which in these perilous Times, we
conceive exceeding suitable and useful, wherein so many are led away after
those Doctrines that are not after godliness, as the Apostle speaks. This holy
man would often much bewail that he did not see that holy frame and temper of
Spirit in the Professors of our days, which was in those God was pleased to
take out of this world to himself in the days immediately foregoing these
Troubles: He would often say, We seem to have more light now, but we have lost
our heat and first love. We pray the Lord awaken us, that we may do our first
works before he come against us quickly, and remove the Candlestick out of its
place. Amen.

Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh, William Bridge,
John Yates. William Adderly.


THE CONTENTS
SERMON I.
THE Words opened. Page 2 Doct. 1 Those that profess the Gospel, must have a
great care of their Conversations 6 1 That God may be honored 7 1 Because the
Saints are Gods witnesses 8 2 They hold forth Gods renewed Image 9 3 They
further Gods designs Ibid 4 They make up the great dishonor He hatb from the
world ibid 2. In respect of wicked men 10 1 That you may convince them ibid 2
To stop their mouths 11 3 To convert them ibid 4 To condemn them 12 3 In
respect of the Saints ibid 1 They rejoice in it ibid 2 They bless God for it
ibid 3 They have boldness before men ibid 4. They are established by it. 13 5
They are edified by it ib. 4 In respect of your selves ibid 1 It evidenceth the
truth to your souls. ibid 2 It continues and increases what is in you 14 3 It
gets honor in the consciences of men ibid 4 It is an instrument of public good
ibid 5 it furthers a joyful account at the great day ibid 6 It keeps up the
honor of Religion from one generation to another ibid Application 1 To reprove
careless professors. 16 2 To exhort to be careful of your Conversations 19 Arg.
1 It is a mercy you have conversation among men 20 2 Wicked men are able to
pass judgment on your lives, but not on your principles 21 3 Sometimes you
must displease wicked men ibid 4 Your lives are but short 22 5 The eyes of all
are upon you 23 6 God promises salvation to them that order their Conversation
aright 24
SERMON II.
Rule 1 Have a special regard to the duties of your relation 25 2 Take heed of
the sins you are most inclined to 26 3 Take heed of the temptations of your
callings 27 4 Take heed of the sins of the times 28 5 Take heed of secret sins.
ibid 6 Look not upon those that are below, but upon those that are above you in
profession 29 7 Be constant to the end 30 Doct. 2 The Conversation of
Profesfessors must be suitable to the Gospel of Christ. 1. It must be higher
than the light of Nature will raise it 32 Viz. 1 That we are to knew God 33 2.
That we must do as we would be done to ibid 3 We must make conscience of secret
sins ibid What Conversation becomes the Gospel, that is above the light of
Nature 1 To worship God as a father 35 2 To love our enemies 36 3 To do to
others as God has don to us 37 4 To labor for the mortification of the body of
sin within us. 39 5 To love the Commandment you obey 40 Secondly, It must go
beyond such as lived under the Law
SERMON III
Consider first as a Covenant of works for life, as it was at first made to
Adam 42 1 Obedience to God merely as Creator 43 2 Had only promise of natural
things ibid 3 He must work by his own strength ibid 4 He was in hazard of
miscarrying in his eternal estate ib. 1 The Saints are in a better condition. 1
They serve God as a father 44 2 Upon better promises ibid 3 Our strength is not
put into own hands to keep 54 4 Are delivered from the hazard of eternal
miscarrying ibid 2. As the Law was in the ministration of it by Moses 47 1
Given under low promises. ibid 2 Their Ordinances mean 48 3 Their burden great
ibid 4 The administration terrible ibid 5 Their spirits servile ibid But under
the Gospel 1 Our Covenant is better 48 2 Our Worship more spiritual 49 3 Our
yoke more easy 50 4 We have access with boldness to the throne of grace ibid 5
We have the spirit of Adoption ibid 3. It must be suitable to what the Gospel
holds forth 53 Herein consider 1 What the Gospel holds forth 2 How to suit our
Conversations according.
1 The Gospel holds forth, 1. The infinite love of God to mankind 53 2 Love in
us becomes this love of God 54

SERMON IV.
2. The willingness of God to to be at peace with man 63 1 When we were enemies
to Him 64 2 We were under his power. ibid 3 He had no need of us ibid 4 He
begins the work of reconciliation ibid 5 It costs Him very dear ibid 6 He will
never be at enmity with us again 65 This calls us to love peace, ib. 3 The
infinite mercy of God to miserable creatures 69 It should work mercy in us. 70
4 He is merciful in such a way that justice is not wronged 74 It should warn us
first, not to turn the grace of God into wantonness 75 To be just in our
Conversations 77 5 What a high price he sets upon the Law. 78
SERMON V
6 Gods infinite hatred of sin 80 It should move us to hate it. 82 7 The great
price of souls 85 It should teach us, 1 To set a high price upon our souls 86 2
Not to pollute them with sin 88 8 The great honor God has put upon human
Nature above Angels 89 1. In the personal union of man's Nature with the
Godhead ibid 2 The body is the temple of the holy Ghost 90 3 The Personal
Union of our Natures with the second Person in Trinity 91 4 The great example
of Self-denial 93
SERMON VI.
9 Our Conversations should be suitable to spiritual worship 96 10 Our spiritual
union with God 100 1 God is a Father, Believers are Children ibid 2 We are one
Spirit with God and Christ 102 3 The union of the Saints one with another 104 4
Their hapines in heaven 110
SERMON VII.
What Conversation becomes the Gospel 114 1 Denying ungodliness ibid 2
Sequestered from this world. 118 3 A change of estate 120 1 From what there was
before the Gospel came ibid 2 Between one man and another 122 4 Becoming the
Ordinances of the Gospel 123 5 Suitable to the power of the Gospel ibid 6 Seeing
the glory of the Gospel, have a glory in our Conversations 125 Application 1 To
reprove those whose Conversations becomes not the Gospel 126 2 Exhortation to
walk worthy of the Gospel 129 Five Motives to it
JOHN, 18. 36 SERMON I.
TEXT Opened 139 Doct. 1. Christ has a Kingdom ibid 1 Providential 136 2
Mediatory ibid Doct. 2 Christ's Kingdom is not of this world 137 Difference
between worldly Kingdoms and Christ's Kingdom ib. 1 In regard of pomp and glory
ibid 2 In regard of his subjects 138 3 In regard of his rule 139 4 His Laws are
spiritual ibid 5 His homage spiritual 141 6 The Officers by Divine institution
143 7 His weapons spiritual 144 8 In regard of privileges 147 9 In regard of
penalties 147
SERMON II.
Privileges of the Saints 1 All their businesses are in the Court if Christ
152 2 They are all free men 153 3 They have free trade to heaven ib. 4 They
have right to all the Ordinances of Christ ib. 5 They have his protection 154 6
They shall have certain victory over their enemies ib. 7 They are all Kings ib.
8 They have peace and joy in the holy Ghost 155 9 They have right to the gifts
and graces of all the Saints 156 10 They are coheirs with Christ 157 Why
Christ's Kingdom is not of this world. 1 Because he would confound the wisdom of
the world 157 2 Because he delights to exercise the graces of his Saints ib. 3
That his power and wisdom may appear the more glorious 158 Application Use 1
There is a happiness beyond the things of this world 159 Their world called 1
An evil world 160 2 The Devil is called the god of it ibid 3 The pomp of it is
not of the Father ibid 4 Its glory is but darkness ibid 5 It knows not God 161
6 It lies in wickedness ibid
PSALM, 17. 14.
TEXT Opened 295 Doctrine There are men to whom God gives some outward good for
a while, and this is all they are like to have 298 Arguments of Gods love to
Saul 1 He was chosen by God Himself etc. 300 Explication 1 Why God deals out
something to wicked men 304 1 They are His Creatures ib 2 Their time of life is
Gods patience ibid 3 It is their day 305 4 They do something for God here ibid
5 To show them what little good is in this world 306 6 He has time enough to
manifest his justice upon them hereafter 307 7 He shows what great things He
has reserved for His Children 308 8 God fetches glory from hence ibid 1 To
harden their heart 309 2 To chasten his own people ibid 9 Because he would have
no argument of love or hatred drawn from outward things ibid 2 Here is all they
are like to have 310 1 Because their names are not in the book of life ibid 2
They are vile in the eyes of God ibid 3 Because they choose it themselves 311 4
They are suitable to them. 313 5 They abuse the portion they have 314 6 They
have no interest in Jesus Christ ibid 7 They are no sons 316 8 The
manifestation of Gods patience is ended ibid 9 They must have imediately to
deal with God 317 3 Corrollaries flowing from hence 1. This is the reason why
worldly men are so cunning in things of this world 318 2 This is the reason why
so many great ones regard Religion so little 319 3 This is the reason of the
stir that is in the world to maintain this their Portion 328 4 What kind of
Portion this is that the men of the world have 1 What poor things they are 329
1 They are but imaginary ibid 2 Of a low nature 330 3 But a poor pittance 331 4
It will vanish 332 5 It will stand with the hatred of God 333 2 The tenure by
which thou boldest them 335 Opened in 4. things. ibid 3 There is a great deal
of mixture in what you have 336 1 Of trouble ibid 2 Of curse ibid 4 What
Portion thou losest by it 337 1 It is fit for the Spouse of Christ ibid 2
Suitable to an Heir of Heaven ibid 3 It is the height of happiness 338 4 It is
Gods great design in making Heaven and Earth ibid 5 It requires the infinite
power of God to support a creature in it ibid 6 It remains to eternity ib 5
What is like to be thy end ib 1 Perplexity of spirit when death comes 339 2
You Will be called to account for all 340 3 A dreadful Portion at the day of
Judgment ib. 5 Who the man is that has his Portion in this world 1 God gives
him nothing but what belongs to this life 341 2 By the working of your hearts
about your Portion 342 1 Whether your hearts terminate in what you enjoy ibid 2
Whether they go out in full strength to them 343 3 How the loss of them take
thy heart ibid 4 Whether they only be suitable to thy heart 344 5 What thou
accountest thy cheifest good ibid 6 What you strive to make most sure 346 7
What thou most admirest men for ibid 8 What thou art careful to lay up for thy
children ib. 9 Examine thy services in 3 Particulars 1 Are they slight? 347 2
Hypocritical? 3 Forced? 10 Do thou draw back in Religion? ibid 11 Does God
for the present curse thy portion? ibid 12 Does God convince thee of what stops
the current of his mercy ibid 13. He spends his days without fear of being put
off with the things of this world 348 6 Exhortation 1 To those that have
evidences of a better portion 349 1 Bless God for it 349 2 Be content with it
ibid 3 Envy not wicked men ib. 4 Mind higher and better things 350 2 To all to
put on for another Portion 351 Motive 1 Ye are capable of it 352 2 Ye are in a
fair way for it ib Means 1 Be stirred with the fear of God 353 2 Take off your
hearts from outward comforts ibid 3 Set the glory of Heaven and Eternity before
your eyes 354 4 Honor God with your substance here ibid 5 Let your services be
choice services 356 6 Be willing to cast away what you have sinfully got ibid 7
Be willing to join with those that suffer for God 358 Conclusion ibid
READER, Thou have here the Names of the Books that are lately published of Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs: As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are grounded.
VIZ. 1. An Exposition with Practical Observations on the 4, 5, 6, and 7.
Chapters of HOSEA. 2. A Treatise of EARTHLY MINDEDNES: Wherein is showed: 1.
What Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The great evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the
19. verse. Also to the same Book is joined a Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness,
and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. And on Phil. 3. 20. 3. The rare JEWEL of
Christian CONTENTMENT, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed: 1. What Contentment
is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies of it, 4. The evil
of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Agravations of it. 4. GOSPEL WORSHIP,
on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed: 1. The right manner of the Worship of God
in general: 2. And particularly, in Hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords
Supper, And Prayer. 5. GOSPEL-CONVERSATION, on Philip. 1. 27. Wherein is
showed: 1. That the Conversation of Believers must be above what could be by
the light of Nature, 2. Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable
to what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those
Men that have their Portion in this Life only; on Psalm. 17. 14.


All which are published by Thomas Goodwin, Sydrach Simpson, William Greenhil,
William Bridge, John Yates, William Adderly.


All printed by Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, at the Royal
Exchange, in LONDON.

GOSPEL Conversation.
PHILIPPIANS, 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. March 2. 1645.

THE Apostle (in the 23. verse of this Chapter) we find to be in a straight
what to do, whether to be willing to live, or to die; for his own inclination
or desire it was rather to die, because then he should be with Christ, which
was best of all: A notable Scripture to prove the Immortallity of the soul. For
if so be the soul did die with the body, it could not have bin better for Paul
to have been dead than to live, it were better that Paul had lived even to the
day of Judgment than to have died, and so to be nothing and turned into dust;
but he says, that when he died, he should be with Christ, which was better for
him; but that which swayed him on the other side, why he should be willing to
live, it was this, That he might be useful to the Churches, Nevertheless, it is
better for you that I should abide in the flesh.

Service to the Churches is the great cause that makes one who has made his
peace with God, to be willing to live, it is not that he may live in ease, and
enjoy pleasures to the flesh, but that he may live and do service for God, that
makes him willing to live. And then he tells them, he is confident he shall
continue with them a while for the furtherance of their faith, and that by his
coming to them their rejoicing should be more abundant; but in the mean time,
whether I do come, or come not, Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. As if he should say, I shall the more willingly live, my life
will be the more comfortable to me; it will something recompense my absence from
Heaven, my staying from the joys of it; if your Conversation be as becomes
the Gospel of Jesus Christ: If I may hear from you being absent, or when I come
to you, I may see that your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. This is the dependancy of the words.

For the opening of the words.

Only] Only let your Conversation. That is as if he should say, be not
solicitous about me and my sufferings, and what shall become of me, and whether
I shall come to you or not, be not so careful about that; only let your care be
taken up about this great business, That your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ: for says he, this should be the main thing that I should aim
at if I should come to you; this is that I should put you upon and give you
directions about, That your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ: And if I be absent there is not any thing I desire more to hear of than
this, That you that have received the Gospel of Christ from my hands (as it
were) through my Ministry, that your Conversations be as becomes the Gospel of
Jesus Christ* Brethren, if we had Paul here present with us, or preaching among
us; or if he were alive and could write an Epistle to this Congregation, or any
other Congregation, the main drift of his preaching or writing would be, to
those that had heretofore received the Gospel, That they would make it their
great care that their Conversations be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Only let your Conversation] The word here, is a word taken from the ordering
of a City, or a Commonwealth, wherein every one acts in their own sphere, and
is serviceable each unto other, to the public good; so says he, the Church of
God, it is as a City, as a Commonwealth wherein every Christian is to act in
his own sphere, and every one laboring for the good each of other in a comely
order, that so there may not only be peace in the Churches, but edification of
all, and the Gospel may thrive and prosper, that is the meaning of this word
translated here, Let your Conversation; As if he should say, Do not think it
enough that you have some enlightenings, that you have some stirrings, some
affections are moved by the Ministry of the Gospel, rest not there, but look to
your Conversation.

It is not enough for Christians to have knowledge, and to be able to speak of
the Gospel, and have some stirrings of affection, but they must look to their
Conversations, Let your Conversation be,

As it becomes the Gospel of Christ] For the opening of these words there are
these two things considerable:

First, What is this Gospel of Christ that here is spoken of?

And secondly, What is it so to live as becomes the Gospel of Christ? Let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

The Gospel of Christ in general is this: It is the good Tidings that God has
revealed concerning Christ, This has come unto your ears, the good Tidings
concerning Christ, for so the word [Gospel] the Greek word signifies nothing
else but the good Tidings; (...)
the good Tidings that comes from Heaven unto you concerning Jesus Christ,
that is the Gospel of Christ.

More largely it is this, As all Mankind were lost in Adam, and become the
children of wrath, put under the sentence of death, God though he left his
fallen Angels, and has reserved them in the chains of eternal darkness, yet he
has thought upon the children of men, he has provided a way of atonement to
reconcile them to himself again. Namely, the second Person in Trinity takes
man's nature upon him, and becomes the Head of a second Covenant, standing
charged with man's sin, and to answer for it in a way of suffering what the Law
and Divine Justice required, and for making satisfaction, and keeping the Law
perfectly, which satisfaction and righteousness he tenders up unto the Father
as a sweet savor of Rest for the souls of those that are given to him; and now,
this mediation of Christ is by the appointment of the Father preached to the
children of men, of what Nation or rank soever, freely offering this unto
sinners for atonement for them, requiring them to believe in him, and upon
believing, promising not only a discharge of all their former sins, but that
they shall never enter into condemnation, that none of their sins or
unworthiness shall ever hinder the peace of God with them, but that they shall
through him be received into the number of Sons, that they shall have the Image
of God again to be renewed in them, and that they shall be kept by the Power of
God through faith and salvation, that these souls and bodies shall be raised to
the height of glory that such creatures are capable of, that they shall live
for ever enjoying the presence of God, and Christ, in the fullness of al good;
this is the Gospel of Christ; this is the sum of the Gospel that is preached
unto sinners: when you hear speaking of the Gospel your thoughts may be about
this, this glad Tidings that is come into the world for salvation of sinful
creatures through Jesus Christ, and all the good things that Jesus Christ by
his blood has purchased for sinners. When Ministers are called the Ministers of
the Gospel, the meaning is, they are appointed by God Ministers to declare and
to preach this glad Tidings to the world: Oh it is glad Tidings indeed to the
world; could there be such glad tidings preached at Hell gates, that there were
any such way of reconciliation of them to God, we could not but conceive there
would be joy there, they would account it acceptable news indeed.

Now then, Those that do believe this Gospel, or do profess it, that they have
entertained this Gospel, this glad Tidings, they must be careful to walk in
their Conversation so as it becomes this Gospel, as becomes such glorious glad
Tidings as are sent unto them from Heaven.

As becomes] The word signifies, (...)
Worthy of the Gospel, that that is translated in your books become, it
signifies, worthy of the Gospel. But this cannot be meant as if so be that our
Conversation should be such as deserves all the good that there is in the
Gospel, No, but Worthy, that is, as much as Beseeming the Gospel, as meet for
the Gospel, or as it is translated in your books, Becoming the Gospel; as he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation; Can one eat
and drink so as to be worthy of the Body and Blood of Christ? No, but he that
eats and drinks so, carries himself so in that Ordinance of the Sacrament as is
unbeseeming the Body and Blood of Christ that he comes to receive; and on the
other side, those that do eat and drink so, as to sanctify Gods Name in that
Ordinance (as you have heard) they do it worthily, for so the same word is
here, Worthy of the Gospel of Christ. And so bring forth fruit worthy of
repentance, says John to those that came to him, that is meet, sit for
repentance, such fruit as may manifest your repentance, as is suitable unto such
men or women that do profess their repentance for their sins. Further, I find
that the word that is here translated Becoming, in another place is translated
Convenient and meet, and can be understood in no other sense; as in 1 Cor. 16.
4. If it be meet that I shall go also, the word that is translated there,
[meet] it is in the Greek [worthy] the same word that we have here translated
Becoming, (...)
if it be a comely thing or a meet or convenient thing then I Will go: so then
it is clear that this word that we have here is, meet, convenient, suitable, or,
becoming the Gospel, Let your Conversation be such, as it meet for, or becoming
the Gospel.

You will say, What Conversation is that which is meet for, or becoming the
Gospel?

To that I answer, First, a Conversation raised to a higher degree than the
light of Nature, or than the Law can raise one to, it must be that certainly,
it is not a Conversation becoming the Gospel, except it be a Conversation
raised higher than the light of Nature, or than the Law can raise one to, it
becomes not the Gospel else.

Secondly, A Conversation suitable and answerable to those many blessed and
glorious truths that are revealed in the Gospel, there is much of the mind of
God revealed in the Gospel, glorious truths are there presented to us, that is
a Conversation becoming the Gospel that is suitable and answerable unto these
blessed and glorious truths that are revealed in the Gospel.

Thirdly, A Conversation manifesting the power of the Gospel.

Fourthly, A Conversation that is suitable unto all the Ordinances of the Gospel,
agreeable unto whatsoever there is in any Ordinance of the Gospel.

And then fifthly, A Conversation holding forth the beauty, excellency, and
glory of the Gospel before those with whom we do converse, here is a
Conversation becoming the Gospel; when those that are Christians professing
that the Lord has revealed the Gospel unto them, and that in some measure they
have been brought to believe in the Gospel, when as now their Conversation is
beyond that which any man can attain unto by the light of Nature, when it is
beyond that that any man by the Law can be raised unto, when it is answerable to
the many blessed and glorious truths that are revealed in the Gospel, when it
manifests a power of the Gospel in him, when it is answerable unto the blessed
Ordinances that he does enjoy in the Gospel, and when his Life and Conversation
holds forth the beauty, excellency, and glory of the Gospel before the world,
here is a Conversation becoming the Gospel; and this is that which the Apostle
here exhorts unto, Only let your Conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Thus you have had the words opened.

Now for the Doctrinal Points in the words, only these two, the first is but to
make way to the second.

1. Doct. The first is this, That those that profess the Gospel, must have a
great care of their Conversations.

2. Secondly, This Conversation of theirs must be such, as becomes, as beseems
the Gospel. These are the two main Points in the Text. I shall this morning but
make way to the second Point which is the great Point in the Text.

First, That Christians that do profess the Gospel, must have a great care of
their Conversations, to look to them. They must not satisfy themselves with
what is inward in their minds, or in their affections, but look to their
Conversations; You think, or hope at least, that through the Gospel there has
been conversion wrought in you: After the Lord has wrought conversion, he does
expect that you be careful of your Conversations before men: you have
knowledge, you can speak well, you have some stirrings of heart that you have
felt in hearing of the Word, preaching of the Gospel, but now look to your
Conversations, and know, there is a bond laid upon you more than ever was, to
look to your Conversations: in James, 3. see the exhortation of the Apostle
there, at the 13. verse, Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among
yeu, mark, let him show out of a good Conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom. It is a very sweet and excellent Scripture, Who is a wise man and
endued with knowledge among you: What should he do? Let him show out of a good
Conversation his works with meekness of wisdom: here is wise, and knowledge,
and wisdom again. If you would manifest that God has wrought any true saving
knowledge, any wisdom in you to save your souls, why know that God requires
that you should show your good Conversation and that with meekness and wisdom,
your Conversations, you must have a care of them, both in respect of men, and
in respect of God.

In respect of men, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your Conversation honest among the
Gentiles: And (the latter part we shall speak to by and by) so that Christians
they must look to their Conversations in respect of men.

And then in respect of God: In 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as be who has called you is
Holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation; There you have Honest
Conversation; and in this scripture, holy in all manner of conversation: so
that you are to have regard to your Conversations, both in respect of men, and
in respect of God: and upon these grounds.

First, in general.

First, in regard of God more generally, that God may be honored by your
Conversations. Oh! you that have ever heard from God the glorious glad tidings
of Salvation in the Gospel, Is it not in your hearts to do what you can to
honor him? now let your Conversation be such; have a care of your Conversations
that God may be honored; the Name of God will be blasphemed, except you have a
care of your Conversations, in Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. As if Christ should say, What, has God brought the light of the Gospel
to you? has it shined into your hearts? and has He revealed unto you those
glorious Mysteries of Salvation in Him? O then, let this light break forth and
shine in your Conversations before men, that others seeing your good works may
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Some men and women are ready to say,
what do they care what others observe in them so that God knows their hearts? I
but that is not enough, if it could be so that you could have good hearts unto
God without good Conversations; but we shall see that there cannot be any such
thing, and it is required of you, your works should shine forth before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
It Is one thing to do a good work that may be seen, and another thing to do a
good work that it may be seen; to do a good work that may be seen that is
lawful, though we should not do them principally aiming that they may be seen,
but our works should be such, that of their own nature they may be seen, but
not to make that to be our main end, that they may be seen; so, as aiming not
so much that they may may be seen, but that being seen, men may glorify our
Father which is in Heaven, that God may be honored. Now God is honored by the
Conversations of His Saints many ways, and therefore they should be very
careful of their Conversations.

As in the first place, The people of God, Saints, Believers, they are the
great Witnesses that God has in the world, to witness for Him against the
corruptions of the world; If so be that you are not careful of your
Conversations, God will lose witnesses to His Truth: Now a witness is not a
thing that is kept within, a man cannot be a witness by keeping things within
his own thoughts and heart, he must manifest something to witness. The Lord
makes use of the lives of His Saints to be His Witnesses in the world, to stand
and witness for His Truth; whereas others they will think when the Gospel is
preached that it is but a mere notion, or imagination, and that there is no
reallity in what is preached: No says God, look here upon the Conversations of
these that have believed the Gospel, do you not see they witness, that there
it a reallity in those things of the Gospel? look what a change my Gospel has
made upon them in their lives and conversations, those that were before proud,
how humble they are; that were before froward, how meek they are, and the like;
these are my witnesses. Many Scriptures might be given, especially that in
Revel. 11. 3. where the Saints in general are called witnesses: And that is the
first thing. You are to look to your Conversations, that you may be Gods
witnesses.

Secondly: That you may hold forth the Image of God in the world; that Image
that God made man in at first, by the sin of man was lost; but now through the
Gospel it comes to be renewed, and God delights to have His Image held forth in
the world, that men may behold somewhat of the glory of His Image: But how can
the world see the Image of God? They cannot see it in your hearts, but now God
would have it conspicuous, therefore have you a care of your Conversations,
that in your Conversations you may hold forth the Image of God in the world.
It Is much to the glory of God to have His Image held forth in the world. As men
that would honor their parents, and other dear friends, if they have a curious
Picture of them, when their image is drawn, they will not see it abused and
sullyed, but they will keep it fair; a man that has the image of his father or
dear friend, will not hang it in a smokey hole behind a chimney, or door, but
in some conspicuous place; so we should hold forth the Image of God
conspicuously, it should appear in our lives and Conversations.

Thirdly, By your Conversations God may be honored, for you will further the
great designs that God has in the world: the holy and gracious lives of the
Saints serve to further the great designs that God has in the world to do.

And lastly, They may serve to make up the great dishonor that God has from
others; the Lord has abundance of dishonor from most in the world; but now
there are some that God calls out of the world, and He gives his Grace unto them
to the end that He might have some of the great dishonor that He has in the
world from others made up; now such as are careful of their Conversations, as
walk exactly and closely with God (I say) they are made use of by God for the
making up in some part of the great dishonor that God has in the world. What
honor should God have in the world were it not for the holy and gracious
Conversations of some of His Saints? and therefore you who profess the Gospel,
look to your Conversations that God may be honored by you.

Secondly, Have a care of your Conversations, look to them in respect of wicked
men among whom you live.

As first, That you may convince evil and ungodly men among whom you live in
the world. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles,
that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. This likewise
does confirm what was said before, for the glory of God, and the conviction of
wicked men; That they beholding, may glorify God in the day of visitation.
There are many interpretations upon this place, In the day of visitation, the
day wherein God shall visit them. Though now they rail against you, yet when
God shall visit them, either in His stroke upon them by sickness, then they
will acknowledge you to be righteous, and holy men, and wish that their
conditions were like yours; or in the day of visitation, if God shall visit
their spirits to turn them, or in the day of visitatio^ (as some think) in the
day of Jesus Christ: But I find others looking narrowly into the words, In the
day of Over seeing, the word (...) from whence the word Bishop comes, it is an
Over-seer, now this word visitation, signifies nothing else but an Overseeing;
as if God should say thus, walk ye honestly, and holily before the world,
perhaps they will vail your glory, and one will say this, and the other that,
but go ye on in a constant way and course, there will be a time that all things
shall be over-seen, all things shall be examined, and narrowly searched into,
and when that day comes, the wicked men shall be convinced, and shall be forced
to give glory to God, and shall say, that whatsoever aspersions there were cast
upon you, yet certainly you were the servants of the living God, in the day of
inspection, of overseeing; therefore be ye careful of your Conversations in
respect of wicked men, to convince them.

Secondly, In respect of wicked men, to stop their mouths, their malice,
violence, and rage, 1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the Will of God, that with well
doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. (...).
The word there translated Put to silence, it is to put (as it were) a bridle
into their mouths, or to stop their mouths, you may even stop their mouths
by your holy Conversation; Oh Christians look to your Conversations, that by
them you may stop the mouths of wicked and ungodly men, that they may not be
able to say any thing against your holy Conversations; so in 1 Pet. 3. 16.
Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers,
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ.

Thirdly, Yea, you may by your good Conversation be a means to convert other
men, to bring wicked men into the love of the ways of God: 1 Pet. 3. 1. 2. the
exhortation there is directed to wives that had wicked husbands. Likewise ye
wives be in subjection to your own husbands, that if they obey not the word,
they also may without the word be won by the Conversation of the wives, while
they behold your chaste Conversation coupled with fear. Mark, how the Apostle
urges upon wives to look to their Conversations to the end that they may be a
means to gain their husbands. I am verily persuaded that there are many
gracious women that would give (if they had it) a thousand worlds to gain their
husbands to those ways of godliness that they have found so much sweetness in,
but perhaps they cannot get them to come and hear the Word, and if they do,
their hearts rise against it, or it may be they little regard it; but you by
your Conversations may do that which the world will not do, you may be
converters of them; and in this sense indeed; there may be women preachers,
that is, preaching in their lives and Conversations, and that is all the
preaching that the holy Ghost allows women, let them preach that way, in their
lives and Conversations in their families, and preach every day a Sermon, and
neither God nor man will find fault with any such thing, and this is the way
for them to do great service for God; and so likewise should husbands do to
convert their wives, you complain one of another, but do you labor to convince
and convert one another by your holy Conversations? I am confident that there
are many that are able to say by experience, this; That the Lord struck upon my
heart and conscience by seeing the holy Conversation of my wife, since she went
to hear the Word, by seeing the wisdom, humility, obedience and carriage of my
wife, it struck upon my heart. There is many have given glory to God and
acknowledged this, both wives by their husbands, and husbands by their wives;
and sometimes the parent in seeing it in the child, or the child in the parent,
or brother in brother, or one servant in another, it has been a means to turn
them unto God.

In the last place, If they be not turned to God, then your conversation shall
serve to condemn them, to aggravate their sin, and their condemnation in the
day of Jesus Christ. As it is said of Noah, in Heb. 11. 7. that Noah prepared
an ark, by the which he condemned the world. He condemned the world by that
course of his, in believing in God, and in making the Ark, every nail that he
smote into the Ark, was (as it were) a condemnation of the world: and so the
Saints by walking in their holy conversation, shall be the Judges and Condemners
of the world. Therefore you are to be careful of your Conversations, in respect
of wicked men.

Also, In respect of the Saints, we must be very careful of our Conversations.

1. For by your Conversation you will rejoice the hearts of the Saints. Oh
those that are godly, when they see others that profess godliness to walk in a
strict and holy conversation, how does it rejoice their hearts? it is the
comfort of their lives.

2. Besides, they bless God for it; they not only rejoice in it, but bless God
for it; when they get alone in secret they are blessing God for the gracious,
and holy, and convincing Conversations of such and such kind of men that they
converse with.

3. And by that means the Saints they have a boldness before men, they can lift
up their heads wheresoever they go, when they know that all such who make
profession of Religion in the places where they live, they walk unblamably:
upon that godly men can hold up their heads with boldness, whereas otherwise it
makes such as are professors of Religion ashamed, when they see and hear of
such and such that make profession of Religion to walk scandalously, and
loosly: but of them we shall speak presently.

4. Then further, Your holy Conversation it will establish the hearts of the
Saints, it will settle young beginners; there are many that are giving up their
names to Christ, when they see the holy and gracious Conversations of these
that are Ancient professors, Oh how are they stablished in the ways of
godliness.

5. And it will edify the Saints, they will edify and grow up in holiness, they
will imitate you, and will find the graces of God not only strengthened, but
increased in them by your Conversations, Oh the abundance of good that you may
do; and therefore Christians have a care of your Conversations.

6. Then, You in respect of your selves, by this means you will have an evidence
to your souls of the truth of grace in your hearts, which you cannot have if
your Conversations be not right. In 1 John, 1. 6. mark what the Apostle speaks
there, If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie
and do not know the truth. And again, you have a notable Scripture in the 3.
chap. 7. verse. Little children, let no man deceive you; He that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as He is righteous. As if he should say,
there are a company of deceivers in the world, and they think it enough to talk
of righteousness, they say they believe in Jesus Christ, and it is Faith that is
only required of them; and as for the other, that is but a mere legal thing, for
men to make conscience of duties, and of their lives, this is but legal, but
let them trust in Jesus Christ, Christ has done all, what can we be saved by
our lives? has not Christ done all? Is there not righteousness in Him? Let no
man deceive you (says the Apostle) If there be not a doing righteousness,
there is no righteousness in you, He that does righteousness is righteous: You
have nothing to do with the righteousness of Christ as your own applied yet
unto you, except you do righteousness; therefore have a care of your
Conversations, that you may have evidence to your souls of the truth that there
is in your hearts.

Secondly, Have a care of your Conversations that you may continue and increase
that which is within you; certainly those that make profession of Religion and
have not a care of their conversations, they will never continue in their
profession, mark that, they may be a Comets a while, blasing-stars, but they
will vanish, and within a little while you shall find that their profession
will wear away; where there is not a godly life together with profession,
profession will vanish and come to nothing, their very common graces will be
taken away from them if they have not a care of their lives, but if they have a
care of their lives they will continue in the ways of godliness and grow up and
increase more and more.

Thirdly, Have a care of your Conversations, that you may get honor in the very
consciences of men.

Quest. Some will say, Should we have a care of our Conversations that we may
get honor?

Ans. Yes truly, a man may desire to have the testimony of the consciences of
those that he lives withal, it is no matter for their talking this or that, but
that you may get into their consciences, God gives you liberty for that.

Fourthly, You by this means will be Instruments of a great deal of public
good, if you live according to your profession, otherwise no body will regard
you, you are reffuse, no man will employ you, you will be contemned and
slighted, but when they see men's Conversations according to their profession,
every body loves to make use of these men, they know they shall find them
faithful in whatsoever they are employed, and so they come to the Instruments
of much public good.

Fifthly, You will further a joyful account against the great day; for you must
be called to account, not only for your thoughts, and the inward workings of
your hearts, but for whatever you have done in the flesh, we must appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ to answer whatsoever is done in the flesh: Oh be
careful of your Conversations that so you may be able to give a comfortable
account.

Sixthly and lastly, Be careful of your Conversations in respect of your
profession: This should be the care of those that make profession, that we may
keep up the succession of the honor nor of Religion from one generation to
another: Heretofore there were some godly people that lived, and they kept up
(in their generation) the honor of the profession of Religion, Wel-now, we are
upon the stage of the world; and God looks upon us that we should in our
generations keep up the succession of the honor of the profession of Religion:
and so afterward in another generation, as men come upon the stage of the world
and live here: God expects succeeding ages should keep up the honor of the
profession of Religion in their times. And this one consideration might go to
the very heart of ungodly men (if they would mind it) that it may be thou art
the man or woman among others that keeps up in a continual succession enmity
against God in the world; do but consider of the difference between these two,
one man's Conversation is wicked, and another is holy and gracious, thou that
live wickedly this evil is charged upon thee, that thou art the man that
joynest in this work to keep up a continued succession of enmity against God in
the world, ever since Cains time there was an enmity against God, and Cains
posterity kept up the succession of it; and so from one generation to another
there has been wicked men keeping up the succession of enmity against God, and
thou in thy generation art come to it, and this (it seems) is thy work: but now
on the other side, ever since Adams and Abels time, there has bin godly men in
the world, and in every generation some have kept up the honor of profession:
and now, has God been pleased to reveal his glorious Gospel to thy soul? why
now, thou being careful of thy life and Conversation, God imploys thee in this
work to keep up the succession of the honor of profession in the world. And
this is a comfortable life indeed.

And thus we have done with the explication or the Point.

Now I shall only give you some passages for the Application of it.

Application.
Only (says the Apostle) let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Have a care of this above all things, Oh you would fain get more
knowledge, and be accounted somebody in the place where you live, and be an
eminent professor where you live; Well, whatsoever you would fain be accounted
of, let it be your only care, that your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel
of Christ. Oh! this point speaks bitter things, and sharply rebukes the
carelessness of the professors of the Gospel in point of their Conversation.

Oh Lord, how have we cause to bewail the loosnesse of the professors of the
Gospel at this day! and I fear, that some may be present whose consciences may
tell them that they are very loose in the point of their Conversations. Thou
professest thou know Jesus Christ, that the Lord has made known the
glorious Mysteries of the Gospel to thee; What is thy life? Can thou say as
in the presence of God, that thy Conversation is answerable? I beseech you as
in the presence of God, examine but this, see whether thou art able to say,
Lord, thou know according to what light thou have given me in the Gospel, it
has been my care to look to my Conversation, Oh that I might live to thy
honor, and be a witness to thy truth; that I might hold forth thy image and
further thy designs, and make up the dishonor that thou have from others in the
world; and that I might convince wicked men, and stop the mouths of those that
are opposite; and that I might be a means to convert those that I live with, or
otherwise to judge them; Oh that I might rejoice the hearts of the Saints, that
they might lift up their heads with boldness because of me, that they may, and
so I might be stablished and edified! Go along in the rest of the heads. Can
thy conscience tell thee that thou have done so? No, but its quite contrary in
some. The Lord speaks now to the consciences of those that this point concerns,
that have been negligent in the point of their Conversation, thou art the man
or woman that God has as great dishonor from as from most in the world, yea
certainly, there is no men upon the face of the earth that darkens the glory of
the blessed God so much, as professors of Religion who live loosly, all the
profane ones, all your drunkards that reel up and down in the streets, and
your blasphemers, yea name what sinners you will, there is non that do darken
the glory of God so much as thou do, who art loose in thy Conversation, and
yet a professor of the Gospel, thou castest dirt upon the blessed Image of God,
thou do as much hinder the design that God has in the world as any men
whatsoever, thou stand against the great works that God has to do in the
world, Oh wretch that thou art, what is this a time to be loose and wicked in?
There was never a time that the Conversations of the professors of Religion
were so pried into as now, and never a time since Christian Religion was
professed upon the earth that the loose Conversation of Professors have done
more hurt; and I verily believe never a time wherein there were more loose
Professors. If so be that our forefathers that were godly and holy, and kept
strict with God were now alive again, they would spit in the faces of many
that would think themselves eminent Professors of Religion, because of the
looseness of their Conversations: And this is the worst, that they can all put
it upon Christ, and the Doctrine of Christ: but of that we shall speak more
when we come to show how our Conversation must be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ: Certainly it is that that is quite opposite to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. The Lord rebuke thee this day, and let this point be as a dart in thy
liver, thou art the man that live in this generation as if thou were born to
do mischief; no men live so as if they were born to do mischief as the
Professors of the Gospel that live looslie in their Conversations: If I should
give a mark of a man that were born on purpose to do mischief, it is that man
that lives in these times and walks looslie. What, do thou convince wicked
men, and stop the mouths of wicked men? Oh no, thou hardenest them, and
openest their mouths, nay, all the scorns of Religion thou art charged with,
and shall be brought to an account for it; I say such as live looslie in their
Conversations they shall be one day charged for all the scorn that is cast upon
the profession of Religion, and for all the opposition of it, and for all the
persecution of it, and for all the dishonor of it; it is because of you, you
harden the hearts of wicked men, that they think they do God good service in
following and persecuting such and such men so forward in Religion, for they
think they are all like to you, what care they for men's talking and profession
when they see your Conversation loose and wicked, therefore they be hardened by
you; and the Saints they fare the worse for you, they are ashamed of it, when
they go in the streets and meet with some of their acquaintance, Oh say they,
Do you not know such a one, what he did such a week in his house, how false he
was, and how he played the knave? What! one that would go in a morning to hear,
and rise early in the winter time, and take so much pains, and yet do such and
such things! it casts a mighty scorn upon all professors of Religion, and upon
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the ways of the Gospel, all (I say) is
scorned and contemned and men be hardened against it, merely for thy
Conversation; and it may be some that were coming on, and began to think that
the profession of Religion was the way to Heaven, and for them to be more
strict than they were, and to enquire after the ways of God more than before,
and to attend upon the Ministry of the Word; but since they heard of such a
miscarriage, such looseness in such a ones Conversation, their hearts rise
against it, and they bless themselves from such a way, God bless me (say
they) from such ways! If this be the fruit of their profession, and of their
talking of Religion, to do thus and thus! So that thou provest to be a
stumbling block that others stumble at and perish by, and do thou think that
(they stumbling and perishing at thy sins) that thou shall go scot-free? Can
thou think that thou that art a means to send so many to Hell, that thou shall
not go thither thy self? Certainly there is no men in the world that are the
causes of sending so many to Hell, as such as live loosly in their
Conversations, when they make profession of Religion. Can thou have any
evidence to thy soul that there is any work of grace in thee, and yet live
looslie? Oh! Christ and His Gospel will scorn such as thou art, such wicked
loose ones, thou art a dishonor to Jesus Christ, a dishonor to the Gospel, and
I may say of thee that do so, as it was said of Judas, It had been happy if
thou had never been born: especially to be born in these times. But we shall
meet with these again, when we come to the point in the particulars, how we
should walk as becomes the Gospel; this is but only in the general for such as
are loose in their Conversations; for certainly this must be granted as an
everlasting rule, That that man or woman which makes not conscience of every
thing in their Conversations, makes conscience of nothing, if there be any
that upon deliberation, and knowing this or that to be sin beforehand, and yet
for by and base ends, will sin to get money, or the like, and so think to gain
or free themselves from some trouble, by going against their light, and that
upon deliberation, let that man or woman know that they can have no evidence
that they ever made conscience of any one thing: He that breaks one
Commandment breaks all; and there is such a bond in the Commandments, and
conscience does knit the bond so uniformlie, that where there is one bond thus
broken, the truth is, all is broken: Know thou not (says Saint James) Oh
vain man, what do thou talk of faith if there be no works? thou art a vain
man and thou do deceive thy self. Certainly those men that are loose in
their Conversations, if God does not humble them, and bring down their hearts,
they will grow in time not only to lose their profession (as I said) but to be
enemies to those that are stricter than themselves; that is, when men have
corrupt hearts, and cannot get up to that height of strictness that others do,
they fall to persecute that way which is above them.

First, They begin to envy others that live better than themselves, and after
having envied them, then they will begin to have their hearts rise against
them, and to hate them, and after hating to speak against them, and after
speaking against them, to persecute them, and thus by degrees men that have
been forward professors, now they grow as bitter persecutors as others, Oh
therefore look to your Conversations.

And that should have been the exhortation, Christians be careful of your
Conversations in your families, be careful there. Psalm. 101. 1. you have an
excellent Scripture of David's professing his care of his Conversation in his
family, how he would walk, I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: when
will thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. Oh I
beseech you look to this Scripture; I will behave my self wisely in a perfect
way; mark, I Will look that my way may be perfect, every way right and square to
the world, and when it is so, I will labor to behave my self wisely, I will
not carry my self foolishlie in those ways that are good: and then, Oh when
will thou come unto me? Mark, it was a time that God was absent from him, and
yet then he professes that he will behave himself wisely in a perfect way; and
I will walk in my house with a perfect heart: There are some that make
profession of Religion indeed, and if you come to them before other company,
then their conversations seem to be very fair and square; but if you do but
follow them to their families, and see what they do there, Oh those that live
with them in their families, after they have been abroad in company shall see
in what guiz they come home. Shall they see their conversations to be holy as
becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ? But thus it was with David, says David,
Let those that live with me in my house mark me as narrowly as they can; I
will walk in my house with a perfect heart; what I am in the Congregation or
among those that are godly, or any company; I will be in my family, that those
in my family shall see my Conversation to be thus and thus. Oh that professors
of Religion would look to this, not only to live before others in the parish or
the town where they live, but to walk in their family with a perfect heart, so
as all in their family may even bless them and say, Oh how does my Master or
Mistress walk! how graciously in their whole course from morning to night!
observe them in all their ways and you shall not be able almost to see any
miscarriage in them: Oh that is excellent, when a man shall have a better
testimony even from those in his family than from those that are strangers; it
may be they think though thou make profession of Religion, yet all things are
not answerable; but those that see it every day can testify all things are
answerable; thus it should be with every Christian that professes the Gospel, to
walk with a perfect heart in the midst of his family, and so to converse in the
world. Diverse Arguments I shall give you, to stir you up to look to your
Conversations.

1. Arg. First, It is the mercy of God that you have your Conversations among
men to this day, that you have not your Conversations among Devils and
Reprobates, it might have been your portion that your Conversation might have
been among Devils and Reprobates, God might have sent you down to your own
place to have conversed with them. Let this be an Argument for you to look to
your Conversations.

2. Arg. Secondly consider this, Wicked and carnal men (among whom you live)
have no skill in the principles that you walk by, but they have skill in your
lives and Conversations, they are able to pass judgment upon your lives and
Conversations, but not of your principles. Godly people are acted by such and
such principles that are mysteries to carnal men; but when it comes to their
lives they can understand them; they cannot search into their principles,
whether such a Doctrine be true or no, or such a thing be according to such a
Scripture, whether there be a right interpretation of such a Scripture that
carries them on in such a way, they take no pains to look after this, but they
look to your lives, there they have skill to discern how you walk, and whether
you walk to the rule or not in your lives and Conversations, and therefore let
it be your great care to look to your Conversations.

3. Arg. A third motive is this, There are some things that you cannot but do,
that will displease wicked men, if you will act according to your Principles.
Well, but this should make thee so much the more careful of thy Conversation in
all other things, that so wicked men may be convinced, that if such men do some
things that I do not understand, yet surely it is for some thing that God has
made known to them more than to me, for I find this, that in all things that I
do understand there they walk exactly, therefore though there be some things
that they do that I cannot understand, why should I be enraged against them? As
now in point of institution of Worship, which does not depend upon the light of
Nature at all, but merely upon Scripture, and such and such interpretations of
Scripture; and such principles wicked men have no skill in: Now the professors
of Religion they are tied up by institution, and by the words of Scripture thus
interpreted, which they think in their consciences is the truth, they having
compared all things together think this is the mind of Christ rather than the
other, and so long as they think thus they must follow it: Now there is many of
these things that carnal men understand not, (for they take no pains to search
into them) and therefore they will be angry with you for them; and indeed they
will have cause to be angry with you for those things they understand not, if
they see you make no conscience of those things that they understand; but if in
other things that they do understand you walk circumspectly, and that it appear
to them that in those things they understand they walk conscionably, then they
will believe that it was mere conscience that made you differ from them in
those things which they understood not, or had no skill in; this will make them
ready to stand for you, yea to speak and plead for you (no such way to get true
liberty of conscience as this is) if you be careful to walk blameleslie in all
those things that they understand with whom you converse; they will be
convinced in their consciences that if these men differ from us, it is
conscience that makes them differ, for (say they) we find that in all those
things we understand these men walk conscionablie. Certainly a holy
Conversation will make many men (even carnal men themselves) plead for
liberty of conscience (so far as things be not destructive to godliness or the
Kingdom) for such men, they will say, were they all such men as these men are
they might very well be born withal, for they differ in nothing but that
conscience puts them upon, (say they) for we find them in all their ways
square and just, they walk conscionablie. Therefore be careful of your
Conversations, because in some things you cannot but do that which will
displease wicked men.

4. Arg. Fourthlie, Consider that your lives are but short, within a while you
must have your Conversations either among Devils or Angels, one of the two; and
how soon it may be, only God knows. Now then I would appeal and put this to
your consciences, Are your Conversations now, such as can give you comfort? Oh
I hope within a while I shall have my Conversation among Angels; I desire now
that the will of God may be done in earth as it is in heaven, and that my
family and life were as it were a heaven, I would fain have my Conversation in
heaven now, and this gives me some good hope that my Conversation shall be with
Angels within a while.

But on the other side, Will not men's consciences mis-give them, if you would
make a judgment of what your Conversation shall be within a while by that they
are now? are not the Conversations of many of you in your families, and when
you come in some company more like to those that are appointed to have their
Conversation among Devils?

Why? what is done among Devils? there is hatred Religion, and of God, and of his
Saints, there is railing and blaspheming, the Devils they accuse the Brethren,
and blaspheme the Name of God; And what is your Conversation otherwise than
theirs? Know, that your Conversation is such as is an evident forerunner, that
if you continue as now you are, that within a while your Conversation will be
among Devils; for that is the most suitable to you.

And my Brethren consider further, The eyes of the world, yea the eyes of God,
and of Christ, and the Angels are upon you, to see how grace acts in your
Conversations; the eyes of the world are upon you watching for your halting,
and rejoicing: remember but this; that your Conversations are not only before
men, but the eyes of God, and Christ, and His holy Angels, they look upon you
where ever you are; when you are in your family, there God, Christ, and His
holy Angels stand looking upon you to see what your Conversation is with your
wife, husband, children, servants; when you come into company, there the Lord
God, and Jesus Christ, and Angels stand looking upon you: and therefore look to
your Conversations.

And besides, The eyes of wicked men are upon you, they watch for your
haulting, and they would rejoice to see any thing that they might have against
you. That place that we had before, in 1 Pet. 2. 12. where the Holy Ghost
says, That whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good
works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. The word
is thus: that is, Beholding with a narrow circumspection; it is not only
seeing, but with a narrow circumspection: Oh! it is an excellent thing, that
when wicked men bend their eyes and look narrowly upon the Saints, and would
be glad and rejoice if they could find them halting, yet that they are able to
find nothing. As it was said of Christ, the Pharisees sent to watch Him, but
they could find nothing amiss in Him. And so though others should be sent on
purpose to watch your lives, yet your lives should be so exact that they might
find nothing amiss in you.

And I conclude all with that excellent promise that we have to such as are
careful of their Conversations. In Psalm. 50. 23. These times you all cry out
of, as dangerous times: Mark, that one Scripture will help you that are careful
of your Conversations, against the danger of the times wherein we live: Who se
offers praise, glorifieth me; and to him that orders his Conversation
aright, will I show the Salvation of God. These are times that you are called
upon for praises and thanksgiving for mercies, we are bound to do that: but
mark, Do not put off God with a verbal praise: it is true, he that offers
praise, honoreth me; but yet together there must be an ordering of our
Conversations; and to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I shesh
the Salvation of God: This is that which is required of Christians, to order
their Conversations aright: Oh! it is an excellent thing to see the
Conversations of Christians in due order, all guided with Spiritual wisdom and
holiness; Oh that man or woman that is careful to order their Conversations
aright, here is a promise to them: That the Lord will show them his Salvation:
What ever times thou live in, though never so dangerous, though God apear
never so dreadful in the times wherein thou live, yet if thou can have but
this testimony of thy conscience, Lord, thou know it is the care of my
soul, not only to make profession of Religion, but to order my Conversation
aright, therefore Lord, save me in evil times, Lord show me thy salvation: thou
may take this promise and lay it to thy heart, and comfort thy heart with
it, thou may plead it with God in prayer, Oh make it to be a matter of thy
prayer to God In these evil times, that the Lord would show His Salvation to
thee, because He has put it into thy heart through His Grace to order thy
Conversation aright.

SERMON II.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
WE concluded the last day with an exhortation to Christians. Do you hope that
God has wrought the work of Convertion? Be you careful of your Conversation.
And many motives there were to stir up Christians to be careful of their
Conversations. I shall not look back, but proceed; only give unto you some few
Rules that I desire to add unto the Motives, and then we shall come unto the
Second point.

Look to your Conversations, and especially observe these Rules.

1. Rule. First, If you be convinced that it ought to be your care to look to
your Conversation, then have a special regard to the duties of your Relations.
The work of Grace in men's Conversations does appear much in the duties of their
Relations; as children toward their parents, parents toward their children;
servants toward their masters, masters toward their servants; husbands
toward wives, wives toward husbands; the younger toward the elder, the elder
toward the younger: if you stand in a private, or public place, Majestrates,
or Subjects; if you profess godliness, manifest in your Conversations in
performing the duties of your relations: what soever men may talk of godliness,
except it appear in their relations, except a servant be a diligent obedient
and a faithful servant, all his, her or their talk of Religion is to no
purpose; except a child be an obedient and loving child, a wise an obedient and
loving wife, all profession of Religion is to no purpose; and so on the
otherside, except masters, and husbands, and parents be careful in their places
to perform the duties of their relation, all their Religion will come to
nothing; look to your Conversations in the duties of your relations.

2. Rule. Secondly, Look to your selves in those things that especially you are
most in danger to offend in, take heed of that special sin that you are most
inclined to, that that do not break forth in your Conversations. It may be in
your Conversation you will have a care that you do not offend in such and such
things that you see other men offend in, but there is some special haunt of
evil, there is some other sin that your natures are most inclined unto, and you
(it may be) give liberty to your selves in that; this spoils your
Conversations, this darkens your Conversations, whatsoever good you do
otherwise this spoils it all: If you give but liberty to your selves in that
corruption that your natures are most prone unto, nay if you be not more
watchful against that corruption than against any, your Conversation will have
no beauty at all in it, God will have no glory by it, you will but dishonor
your profession; therefore if you would make conscience to have your
Conversation to be rightly ordered, be very watchful over your selves in that
special sin that your nature is most inclined unto; Are you one that find your
self very hasty by nature? it may be you are not guilty of other sins so much,
I but that will spoil the beauty of your Conversation; a man or woman that is a
froward peevish and passionate Professor, there is no beauty in their
Conversation: And so if you find into foolish lusts, foolish base sordid
extremes, unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ; as we shall hear more when we come
to speak of what Conversation we should have as becomes the Gospel of Christ;
take heed of your special sins if you would be careful of your Conversations.

3. Rule. A third Rule is this, Take heed of temptations that you are liable to
without, by reason of your calling, by reason of your places wherein you are,
or through any providence of God that may be; these temptations that do most
attend your condition, take heed of them. Every one should consider this; what
temptation am I most liable to? some men's callings are liable to some
temptations, other men's to others, some men by reason of their businesses and
occasions in the world are liable to such and such temptations as others are
not, and sometimes a man is liable to some temptations that he is not liable to
at another time; when you are at Sea you have your temptations there in
foreign parts, and when you come home you have other temptations, yea many
times when a man is at home among his neighbors there he dares not take that
liberty that he does when he is gotten abroad in a journey, then he thinks he
is free when no body knows of it, there is his temptation; and so you that come
from Sea, when you were there you were kept short of many comforts and of much
company; now when you come home, the company comes about you, now there is a
temptation comes that was not heretofore; now if you would make conscience of
your Conversations, you should look to your temptations, and consider, what
temptations am I liable to now, that I was not before, and let me be careful of
them. This you pray to God, that you may not be led into temptations, but
delivered from evil; if you would not dally with God in your prayers then be
careful of your selves when a temptation comes to such and such evils: this is
a vain plea for men and women to say, Oh the temptation was a strong
temptation: God expected therefore (if you have the Spirit of Christ and
wisdom) that you should foresee temptations, and especially that you should
be careful when temptations come, you should watch against all temptations:
What a vain plea were it for a Soldier that keeps a Town, to say, Oh but they
came against such a weak part of the Town with a great strengh; That Is no
argument to excuse him; for if you knew that that was the weakest part, you
could not but know that if the enemy knew of it he would come against that with
his greatest strength, and therefore you should have manned that part rather
than any other part of the Town; so let not us say, O the temptation came
strongly upon me in such a thing: we should watch the more against that that
the temptation comes strongest upon us in, for the Devil knows wherein we are
the weakest. And that is the third Rule for the helping of us in our
Coversations.

Fourthly observe this, Take heed of defiling your selves with the sins of the
times wherein you live. That the Lord does expect from every Christian that he
should look to himself in regard of the present times wherein he lives, and
consider what is the special sin of the Time, Age, or of the Place; co^monlie as
there are some truths that are more eminentlie revealed in one Age than
another, so there are some sins that more prevail in one Age than another, and
in one Place than another, every Country almost have their sins that are most
predominate; you should consider (I say) what are the sins of the Times, of the
Places where you live; many they think to excuse themselves because that which
they do it is but what others do, it is the common sin of the Time and Place
where they live, thou should be so much the more careful to avoid it, that
thou may keep thy self undefiled in thy way; and that is a fourth Rule for
the helping of us in our Conversations.

A fifth Rule for the helping of our Conversations is, To live so that your
lives shall be convincing lives. Then take heed of any secret sin, take heed
of keeping any sin at all within thy heart, for it will break out, take heed
of entertaining sin so much as in thy thoughts or affections; what is the reason
that some that have been Professors of Religion a great while and seemed to be
very glorious in their profession, and yet at length break out into some vile
scandalous sin? Surely the reason is, they have kept hid some corruption
within, and they have thought it were a very horrible thing that this
corruption in my heart and thought should break out, Oh God forbid (says he) I
hope I shall never live to that time to be so left of God as to commit this
sin! well, thou think verily that thou shall not commit it, I but if thou
take liberty to dally and play with this sin secretly in thy thoughts, and
affections, it is just with God to leave thee to thy self to shame thy self, to
leave thee to the commission of that sin thou have for a long time kept
dandling in thy thoughts and affections within, although it be with resolution
not to commit it; that man that shall please himself in any kind of secret sin
(I say) it were just with God to lead him forth with the worker of iniquity, so
as to lay his shame open and naked before all that he lives with: therefore you
that are Professors of Religion be careful of secret sins, if you would never
dishonor your profession in your Conversations.

A sixth Rule is this, If you would be careful of your Conversations, do not so
much look at those that are beneath you and in the lower form; as let your eye
be upon those that are most eminent in their Conversations, look upon them
rather as your mark and aim. Many Christians live, and their Conuersations
are very dark and no beauty at all in them; Why? Because they think they live
as others do, they look upon such are beneath them, and they think their lives
are rather better than some others that have made profession, and this makes
them go on in a dull and sluggish way; but now, if you would have your
Conversation indeed as it ought, so as to be convincing, set before you the
examples of the most eminent of those whose Conversation does most glister, not
a mere glistering show, I do not mean them, But that glistering that comes from
Diamonds and Gold and Pearls, that have the excellency of Grace shining in
their very Faces and Conversations, set them before you, and labor to imitate
them, and so this will help you in your Conversations. We have in Heb. 13. 7. a
Scripture for this, Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversations. It Is supposed that they should be most eminent, Such as have the
rule over them, that are their Guids; but mark, he speaks of those that had
spoken unto them the Word of God, for he does not speak of the Rulers in Civil
States, but of the Ministers that were their Guids, for so the word is: now
though there be a work of Ruling besides Teaching, we find in Scripture; yet we
find no Rule of any Minister but over those that they speak the Word of God
unto, what Ruling any Minister has (I say) it is over such people as he speaks
the Word of God to: If any Minister shall come to rule over a people, that
people may well ask them, Have you spoken the Word of God to us? Do you teach
us the Word of God? Do you challenge Rule over us and have not spoken the Word
of God to us? Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversations. They were it seems eminent in holiness of life, and eminent so
as they continued in that way of eminency, and the Apostle would have all
Christians to look at them; it is a notable Scripture to show that the Ministers
of the Word should be eminent in their Conversations every way, and that all
those that they speak the Word of God to, should see in their Conversations the
Beauty and the Excellency of the Word of God that they speak to them; for
people look at the lives of Ministers as well as at their Word, it is not
enough only to be a good man in the Pulpit, except it be in the constant way
of their Conversations.

The seventh and last Rule, you have it here in this Scripture Heb. 13. 7.
Whose faith follow, Considering the end of there Conversation. That is, be not
only careful of your Conversations at first, when you begin to be professors of
Religion, then to be exact, but be constant to the very end. Mark, Considering
the end of their Conversations: he does not mean the end only, the reward that
comes upon their Conversations, that they shall have a glorious reward, but
considering the end, as if he should say thus, look at these that have spoken
the Word of God to you, they come not only at the very first to you and speak
great things, and seem as if they were Saints or Angels come among you, but
they go on in a constant way, whatsoever discouragements they have they go on
in a constant way to the very dying day; observe not only what they were when
they came first among you, but what they are in the end of their Conversations,
and follow them: this is a notable Scripture to show how careful Christians
ought to be, not only to be holy in their Conversations when their hearts are
first stirred by the Ministry of the Word as it is with many, many there are
that when the Word of God comes first to them, when they are first enlightened,
and first converted, Oh how strict are they! Oh how careful are they! then they
walk exactly, and they are afraid of the least sin, and examine every thing by
the Word, Oh how curious are they in every thing then! and-their consciences
are very tender, and are afraid that this is sin, and that the other thing is
sin, and there is a mighty change in the family, their Masters, or Parents
they see them so afraid of every thing, and careful of their very words, on
the Lords Day careful in seeking of God, and attending upon Ordinances, and in
their particular calling at the first very strict: But now, within a little
time you shall find many of these that by degrees they grow more loose, and
especially in these times, because in these times there is a way that the
Devil has to get men to be loose in their Conversations, that has not been
known in England; indeed in Germany it was known, and there it was ordinarily
in the beginning of Luthers Reformation; that it is weakness in men to make
conscience of duty, to be troubled for their sin and be humbled. Paul and
Peter and David, it was their weakness when they were troubled so much for
their sin: Oh this is a most horrid and abominable wickedness that does
dishonor the Gospel of Christ, and will make it rediculous to the world! (I
say) such carriages of people, to think that they may take liberty to walk in
a loose way because of the Gospel. But that we shall come more fully to, when
we speak how our Conversations should be becoming the Gospel of Christ. But I
speak this in this point as a preparation to that, and especially to young
Professors that have been wrought upon by the Word within these few years,
since there has bin more freedom of preaching the Gospel; and I verily believe
that diverse of you in this Congregation do know many young ones and others,
that have been wrought upon by the Ministry of the Word, that for the first
year were very exact, and very careful of their lives, and very punctual in
every thing, but you now see them begin to grow loose and wanton, and vain in
their Conversations: Oh this is a sad and an evil thing! If you would be
careful of your Conversations observe this seventh Rule; Be not only careful
at the first work of God upon you when you begin to be enlightened, but in the
constant course of your lives; Oh give me a professor of Religion, that was
wrought upon when he was a Youth, or a young Maid, and yet continues till they
be old disciples in a constant way of holiness and strictness, Oh! They are the
most beautiful objects that are in the world to behold! the Sun in the
firmament is not so glorious, as an ancient professor of Religion that has
continued constant in the ways of godliness from his youth, that can say as
good Obadiah once said, 1 King. 18. 12. I have feared the Lord from my youth,
and my conscience, though it tell me of many failings and weaknesses, yet my
conscience excuses me in this, that I have endeavored with a good conscience
to walk with God, and without offense to man, and not given way to my self in
any way of looseness since God made known Himself to me; Oh such may have an
abundance entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, and die with abundance of
comfort. But thus much for this first point: That Christians ought to be
careful of their Conversations.

We come now to the second, and that is the main point in the Text.

Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

2. Doct. Every kind of Conversation of professors is not enough; it must rise
to that height as must be suitable to the Gospel of Christ, meet for the Gospel
that they do profess. That Is our point.

Now we shall come to the Particulars, what Conversation it is that is meet for
the Gospel of Christ. I gave you the Heads in the opening of it: But now I
shall speak to them.

First, That Conversation that is meet and becomes the Gospel of Christ, must
be a Conversation raised to a higher degree than the light of Nature will raise
it. That Conversation that is no higher than possibly may be raised by the
light of Nature, certainly that is not a Conversation becoming the Gospel of
Christ, that is beneath not fit for the Gospel of Christ. As thus,

Suppose a man in his Boat here in the Thames rows, very exactly, I but this is
not a work suitable to show the skill of a Navigator, of one that professes the
art of Navigation, it is beneath that. Why so; To live exactly according to the
light of Nature it is beneath the Conversation that becomes the Gospel of
Christ: if so be that a man should make his boast that he has great skill in
the art of Navigation; And how will he show this skill? he will go into a Boat
and there he will row over the Thames, and by that you may see what a mighty
Navigator he is; this would be ridiculous to any man. And so if one that
professes the Gospel of Christ, would manifest that he is a good Christian,
What does he do? the life that he lives it is no other than a man by the light
of Nature may be enabled to, this is even as ridiculous as the other.

1. As now for instance; The light of Nature that will teach this: That we are
to worship God: the Heathens have worshipped God in their way.

2. Yea, the light of Nature will teach, That we must live justly among men,
yea, and that we must do as we would be done to: This the light of Nature will
teach. Many of the Heathens have had that principle, to be just with men, to do
as we would be done by. The light of Nature condemns gross sins, of
Drunkenness, Adultery, Swearing etc. I could give you many instances in the
Laws of Heathens, punishing those sins very severely, and some of them with
death.

3. Yea the light of Nature will rise thus high, That a man should be
conscientious, should make conscience of secret sins, of sins that none in the
world could know of, or are ever like to know of. As I remember sometimes I
have told you of one of the Heathens that did but owe for a pair of shoos to a
Shoo maker, and no body knew it but only the Shoo-maker himself; the
Shoo-maker dies, no body could challenge this of him, yet his conscience would
never let him be at quiet, until he ran and threw the money into the shop, and
said, Though he be dead to others, yet he is not dead to me: whereas he had a
temptation to have kept it because no body could challeng it; he knew it was
not his, he knew it was either the Childrens, or Executors, and so he restortd
it. Many particulars might be named to show how far we might go by the light of
Nature; but now I only bring it in to this end, to show that if we would have
our Conversations such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, we must go beyond what
ever any have done by the light of Nature: and yet Oh Lord how short do many
Professors of Religion come of this! How many that will profess they hope to
be saved by Christ! I suppose there is not any one in this Congregation, or if
I should go to every ones house that belongs to the Parish, they would say
they hope to be saved by Jesus Christ; and yet what worship of God is there?
And what justice is there among men to do as they would be done by? Nay, this
is a Rule that will examine many professors of Religion, and their consciences
would tell them that in such and such things they would be loath to be dealt
with as they deal with others: And for gross sins, many Professors of Religion
break out into them also, for all are a kind of Professors of the Gospel at
large, Drunkards, and Adulterers, and Blasphemers, and yet they will come and
make profession of Religion, and think it very much if they should be denied
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, Why, are they not Christians?
and their children Christians? and yet must they not be Baptized? And yet they
are beneath Heathens, Heathens will rise in Judgment against them. And for
conscienciousness in secret, I appeal to every one of your consciences, are
there no sins that you live in that your consciences condemns you for? A
Heathen would not do it, a Heathen would not wilfully live in a sin that his
conscience tells him is a sin, many of the Heathens came to that: And what way
have you made in profession? Perhaps you have seemed to be in the School of
Christ many years, and others take you for a forward Professor, and yet your
conscience tells you that you live in some sins that are known sins to you, but
because they are secret and none knows them but your self, therefore you have
continued in them, and ventured upon them hoping of Gods pardon, being perhaps
but one and no great one, (I say) in this you are beneath the light of Nature,
and therefore you are far from having your Conversations such as becomes the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. This Conversation of yours is not such as becomes the
light of Nature; diverse Heathens would abhor such Conversations in Christians,
yea, if it were among themselves, and they would hardly company with you;
there are many that make profession of Religion, that (I say) if they lived
among Heathens, Heathens would not keep company with a great part of this
Kingdom, yea and of most Congregations, and therefore they should not think
much though they may not be admitted into such a near communion as the Lords
supper.

Q. You will say then, But what is that Conversation becoming the Gospel, that
is beyond the light of Nature?

First, The light of Nature teaches to worship a God: That many of you do, you
worship God: But this is that that becomes the Gospel of Christ, To worship and
honor God as a Father, and as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; this goes
beyond the light of Nature in that particular; not only I am convinced that
there is a God, that He is the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and my Creator, and
therefore I Will worship Him; but I do not do that that becomes the Gospel of
Christ, til I get my self to this, That I am able through the grace of the
Gospel to worship God as a Father reconciled to me in Christ, and as the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so do I come and present all my services unto
God: This few of our Civil men do; yet your Civil men will make a profession of
the Gospel too, and your Civil men they worship God, but it is in a mere
natural way. The God of Heaven and Earth, that made them, is to be worshipped:
they can say their old Catechism.

Q. Who made you?

A. God.

Q. Wherefore did he make you?

A. He made me to serve Him etc. I but do thou (when thou come to serve
and worship the Lord) look upon God as a Father reconciled in Christ, and as
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ? and so do thou tender up all thy
services to God? Thou art not raised to that that becomes the Gospel of Christ,
except thou do thus worship God in this way; that is that which becomes the
Gospel of Christ; and know that all other worship that thou tenderest up to
God, merely as God is Creator, God that made thee, and therefore thou must serve
him: I say all that worship (if thou go no further) God rejects it; indeed we
are to worship God as a Creator, God would have that; I but, if He has not
that and the other too, and if He have not both, he will not accept of one, for
the first is included in the second, but the second is not included in the
first. A man that worships God as a Father, and as the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he does worship God as a Cretor too; but a man may worship God as a
Creator and not at all be acquainted with Him as a Father, and as the Father of
our Lord Jesus, and therefore till the Lord in the Ministry of the Gospel has
been pleased to shine in upon thy soul as a Father, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou come to worship God thus, or at least this is the
endeavor of thy soul that thou may worship God in this way, thou art not
satisfied in worshipping God after the other way, because he made thee, and thy
heart works after this, indeed I have not got this full assurance that he is my
Father, but this is that my heart is unsatisfied until I have got it, and I
cannot be quiet in any other kind of worshipping God, till I find some ability
to tender up all to him as a Father, and as the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (I say) till thou come to this, thou do not in that particular
worship God as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

And so in the point of Justice, thou do give every one his own. I but this
is beneath that that is required in thy dealing with men according to the
Gospel of Christ. If you read the 5. of Mat. there you shall find when Christ
comes to preach what he requires, he raises the point of Justice beyond doing
as we would be dealt with: says Christ there, You have heard that it has been
said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you,
love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despightfully use you, and persecut you; this is higher
than merely to be just, and for one man not to wrong another; you shall have
many men say, Who is able to say black is mine eye? I live and no body can
say I wrong them; you think this is an excellent Conversation, it is true, it is
good in its kind and it were good if all Professors of Religion could say they
live so that no body can charge them for unjust dealings, I but this does not
rise to that height to be the Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ; you
must come to this height, to love your enemies, and to bless them that curse
you, you must do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despightfully use you and persecute you; Can you find this: this is somewhat
like the Gospel of Christ, this is somewhat more than to do no wrong to others.

And to do as we would be done to, we must go higher, we must not only set
this as a pattern, I Will do as I would be done by. No, But I Will labor to do to
another as God has done to me. This is higher; that is thus, has God showed
Himself gracious unto me? I Will labor to do that good to others as much as I am
able even as God hach done to me: You have for that those two Scriptures,
Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking be put away from you with all malice, and be ye kind one toward
another, tender hearted, forgiving one another. The light of Nature now will
justify all this: But mark the conclusion, Even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you: Set the example of God before you, what God has done for you for
Christ's sake, and let that be the great motive; Do not only argue thus, well, I
would be forgiven if I had offended; and I would not have another to bear anger
and malice against me, and therefore I will not be angry with them nor malign
them; this is a low principle: but if I find that this is revealed in the
Gospel, that the Lord for Christ's sake has forgiven me, and it is this that
quiets my passion, when I feel my corruption rising and stirring against any
that has offended me, when I do but think of Gods mercy in forgiving me for
Christ's sake, this quiets me. I this is somewhat like as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, when we walk upon such principles as these are. And so you have it in
Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another: If any man have
a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgive you, so also do ye. It is very
unbeseeming such as profess the Gospel of Christ to be quarrelsome with their
neighbors: Now you shall have some that are of very meek and quiet
dispositions naturally, I love to live quiet (say some men;) thus far thou
may come by the light of Nature not to love to quarrel: But now when any
does cause any quarrel, do thou labor to quiet the quarrel upon this ground:
Evn as Christ forgave me: O I have found the Lord Jesus Christ, notwithstanding
my wretchedness against Him, and all the wrong I have done Him, He has
forgiven me, and therefore seeing Christ will not take advantage against me as
He might, I will not take advantage against another: Is it upon this ground?
And do thou raise thy Conversation with thy Neighbor in keeping from
quarrelsomness, and contentiousness, do thou naise it to this height, upon
this ground, so to forgive as Christ has forgiven you? I will not forgive only
in this particular, or in this less offense, But as Christ has forgiven me.
We shall still have further occasion to mention these things, in opening the
sutableness of our Conversations to the Gospel; that is, for the point of
Justice, it must rise higher than that of doing as we would be done by.

And then for gross sins, thou keep from them, thou thankest God, thou art
no Swearer, no Drunkard, no Whoremonger, such kind of notorious sins thou art
not guilty of: but what art thou in respect of inward sins? what art thou in
respect of secret sins? Mark that Scripture in Matthew. 5. 10. says Christ
there, I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. We shall likewise speak further of this, when we open that
of the Law, that our Conversations must rise higher than the Conversations of
those did that lived under the Law, or else it does not become the Gospel of
Christ. You shall find further in the Chapter, how Christ would raise them
higher than merely not to commit adultery, or to be openly profane: Verse.
17. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery. But I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart. And if thy right
eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for
thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should
be cast into Hell. And then, If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off. And so
in the point of Anger, in the 21, and 22. verses, Ye have heard, that it was
said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall
be in danger of the Judgment. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with
his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever
shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council: but
wosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire: That is, liable
to the same judgment that you think murder is. Now is your conversations as
becomes the Gospel? Here Christ is a great Preacher of the Gospel; and shows
that there is more strictness in the Gospel than there is by the light of
Nature, or by the Law, or by that that they understand by the Law: This the
light of Nature does dictate, that men should not Kill, nor commit Adultrie,
but now, If thy Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, then thou must make
conscience of Anger, and tremble at that as a natural man would tremble at
Murder, for that becomes the Gospel; (I say) one that is a professor of the
Gospel, he should tremble at sinful anger as a natural man would tremble at
murder; for observe it here, look what (they said) murder did make a man liable
to; the same thing (Christ says) Anger would make a man liable to; therefore
one that would walk as becomes the Gospel, must tremble at the inward sin of
Anger, as a natural man would tremble at the outward sin of Murder.

And so for Adultry, Thou art no Whoremonger. But one that professes the
Gospel, must look at the lusting of the eye, and of the heart, as a natural man
that has but the light of Nature would look upon the commission of Adultrie,
for Christlaies that upon the lust of the heart that they lay upon the
commission of Adultrie. This is as becomes the Gospel.

Further, By the light of Nature a man may be conscientious. That is, make
conscience of several sins.

Q. But now you will say, Wherein should a man go beyond this as becomes the
Gospel? What can any man that professes the Gospel go beyond this, of making
conscience of a secret sin, that though he knew that no body in the world did
know his sin? nay, suppose he knew certainly that it should never be known,
yet he dares not do it, how can a man go beyond that?

Ans. Yes, You must labor for the mortification of the body of sin that is
within you; not only to make conscience to keep from the act of secret sins,
but thy work must be to labor for the mortification of the body of sin and
death that is in thee, that is that that is revealed by the Gospel, that no man
by the light of Nature ever knew; you shall never read among all the
Philosophers of the point of Original sin, nor of mortification of the body of
sin and death, this the light of Nature never tells. So that now, when a man
come to his height, that is, first my conscience being enlightened by the Word
so that I dare not commit any secret sin for the world, though there be none
but God and my conscience together, but besides that, Oh I carry about with me
a body of sin and death, a root of bitterness, that original corruption, and
this makes me cry out, Oh wretched man, Oh wretched woman! who shall deliver me
from this body of death? and Oh that I could find this mortified in me, this is
that that is the strength and endeavor of my soul, to get this body of sin to
be mortified, I, this is as becomes the Gospel, so to live in your
Conversations as it may appear that you are not content merely to keep from
actual sins, though in secret, but it is your great care and endeavor to
mortify this very body of death that is within you; and by this a great
many of your Civil men, and mere moral men will or at least may be convinced
that their Conversations comes short of that that becomes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, for they are not acquainted with this.

Lastly, If you would have your Conversations such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, you must not only think to make conscience of secret sins, but that
which you do, you must manifest that it does proceed out of Love, not only that
you do obey, but that you love the Commandment that you do obey. Now this,
neither any hypocrit or mere moral man does, if you take it universallie one
Commandment as well as another.

Obj. You will say, Love is a secret thing?

Ans. But as you may know in your family the difference between your childrens
obedience to you and your servants, so there may appear a difference between
the obedience of one that is merely moral, or does it out of conscience, and
the other that does it out of love; therefore you must know that you do not
rise beyond the light of Nature, except that you do love the Command as well as
obey the Command, and so carry things in your Conversations as you may make it
appear that all those way of God that you make conscience of, that you
likewise have a love unto them, and do them out of a principle of love, and
thus you come beyond the light of Nature, and in some measure it is as becomes
the Gospel of Christ. And that is the first thing how we should walk in our
Conversations as becomes the Gospel of Christ. But now this is the lowest of
all.

The second is, That our Conversations must be such as is beyond such as live
under the Law, for the Law of God goes higher than the light of Nature, for
there is more revealed there than in the light of Nature. It Is true, that that
you call the moral Law, the light of Nature, if it be clear it is suitable to
it, to the most part of it, only there is some part that is positive, but most
part is but suitable to the principles of Nature if they were clear and pure;
but now because, since the fall of Man, the light of Nature is darkened, and the
principles of Nature are much corrupted, therefore God has given His Law, that
is as it were a glass of His Will, that is, the clear glass of what was written
in the heart of man in Innocence, that is the Law: Only there is that of the
limitation of the seventh Day particularly from the Creation that has somewhat
positive in it, but take all the other and (I say) it is nothing but as a glass
of what was written in the heart of man in the time of Innocence: There was
written in man's heart to keep some solemn time for the worship of God, only the
specification was by revelation, but the substance of all those ten
Commandments (I say) is the glass of what was written in the heart of man in
Innocence: And because God saw that this writing was so much blotted out,
almost all obliterated, therefore God wrote it in Tables of stone, whereas it
was written in the Table of man's heart at first; But now when He comes to bring
men to the Gospel there He writes over that Law again in the Tables of their
hearts: At first it was written in the heart of Adam, but he falling, does blot
it out in a great measure, then God writes it over fair again, but how? He
writes it over in a fair Copy, but it is in Tables of stone: but when God
receives any soul in the Gospel He writes it over again in the Tables of their
hearts; Now this gives you a little hint of the difference between the Law and
the Gospel, between the Conversations of men that were merely Legal, and the
Conversation that is Evangelical: but the opening of it to show the difference
between the Law and the Gospel in reference to this, and to show how low the
Conversation was that was merely Legal, and how high raised the Conversation of
a Christian ought to be if he would make it Evangelical, such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, would ask more time, and therefore we must defer that to the
next day.

SERMON III.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
A Conversation becoming the Gospel of Christ, March, 15. 1645
it must be beyond what the Law can enable one to attain to, or else it does
not become the Gospel.

I have showed you already what the Gospel of Christ is. But now we are upon
the point of Conversation, That it must be higher than can be by the Law, those
that live under the Gospel must live in a higher way of holiness than those
that lived under the Law. Now for this, we are to consider of the Law under
these two considerations.

First, As it is a Covenant of works for life, so it was made at first to Adam:
It was a Covenant of works for eternal life to Adam, and so to man kind in him.

Secondly, We are to consider the Law as in the Ministration of it by Moses:
Take it either of these two ways. Those that live under the Gospel, and
profess the Gospel, must live in a more holy Conversation, or aim, or endeavor
at least after a more holy Conversation than that Conversation could be that
was under the Law: As now, I say thus, the Law as the Covenant of life to Adam,
But what was his Conversation?

First, It was obedience to God merely as Creator, no further; Adam in
innocence he looked upon God as Creator of al things, as the First being of all,
and so Adam tendered up his service to God merely as the Creator and
First-being. That was his obedience.

Secondly, The Law to Adam had promise only of natural things, of a natural
life to be continued: We do not read of Gods promising Adam to live in Heaven
if he had obeyed; but, Do this and live; that was the Tenor of the Covenant
with him: that is, he should have continued in Paradise and so have lived a
natural life, but yet continued eternally, God would have upheld that natural
life of his, that is all we read of that ever God promised to Adam if he had
stood by virtue of that Covenant of the Law: That Is the second thing
considerable in him. so that his obedience was tendered up to God to that end,
that he might obtain the continuance of a natural life here in this world, only
in order unto that, for we find no more revealed. The first man Adam he was
Natural, the second Spiritual, the first of the Earth earthly, the second, the
Lord from Heaven. The Apostle. 1 Cor. 15. speaks of Adam in innocence as the
common head of al mankind, he was of the Earth earthly, and in way of
distinction the second Adam was the Lord from Heaven; He brings all heavenly
glory. Though Adam had stood, yet we never read of any heavenly glory that
ever he or his posterity should have had; but the second Adam he is the Lord
from Heaven that brings Heavenly glory with him. That Is the second thing
considerable in the Law as a Covenant with Adam.

The third thing in the Law as a Covenant with Adam was this, That Adam under
the Law he must have wrought by his own strength that he had received. God at
first gave man strength for obedience, and he puts his stock into his own hand,
and so he must have wrought and continued by the power of the strength that God
did at first give him, he had not that fountain to go to for that continual
supply of strength as we have, which you shall see presently.

Fourthly, Adam, he was in such a condition, as he was in hazard of his
miscarrying for his eternal estate; He was indeed in a way of obedience to the
Law that God gave him, but still so as he was in hazard of eternal miscarrying;
this was the condition of Adam under the Law.

Obj. You will say, He was holy, and had no sin.

Ans. But considering his condition under the Law; That it was Obedience to God
as a Creator, he did work for natural good; and he wrought by the strength he
had received, and he was in hazard of miscarrying eternally. Now compare his
condition with the condition of the Saints in the time of the Gospel, and you
will find the condition of the Saints having the fruit of the Gospel, to be in
a great deal better condition, even now; not only shall be in Heaven, but are
in a better condition now than Adam was in paradise.

1. Adam he obeyed God, and tendered up his service to God as a Creator. But
now the people of God under the Gospel, those that are brought home to God by
the Gospel, they look upon God under another relation, not merely as Creator,
but all their services that they tender up to God, it is as unto the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and their Father in Him; I go to my Father, and I go to
your Father (says Christ) John, 20. 17. It Is true, still we look upon God as
the First-being of all things, as Creator; but we look upon Him in a higher
relation than merely our Creator, we look upon Him as the Father of Jesus
Christ, and so in Jesus Christ as our Father, and so we tender up obedience to
Him in that way, and surely such obedience tendered up to God as under such a
relation; should be a higher kind of obedience, a higher kind of holiness than
was in Adam.

Although it is true, in respect of our condition here, we are not so free from
corruption as Adam was in Innocence, yet the obedience that we tender up to
God, though it be not so free (I say) from mixture, yet it is of a higher
nature than Adams was, it is to God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. We have better promises than ever Adam had, we have promises of Heavenly
Glory that he had not: God does not say, Do and live to us only, live hear in
the world in a natural life, and I will free you from outward troubles, and
from the death of the body: But we know that the Gospel brings immortallity and
glory to light, it tells us of the glory of Heaven, and of the Mansions that
Jesus Christ is gone before to prepare, of the glorious Communion that the
Saints shall have with God in the highest heavens, which is another manner of
motive to obedience than ever Adam had: And therefore our obedience to God
should be raised in a higher way than ever his was.

3. The strength that we have, it is not put into our own hands to keep and so
to improve, and there is all. But Jesus Christ the Second Person in Trinity, He
is filled with all fullness that we might receive grace for grace continually
from the fullness of Jesus Christ that has all the treasures of wisdom in Him,
In Him it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell; now the Saints by
faith have as it were a pipe laid into that Cistern that has all fullness, from
whence continually by the work of Faith they draw strength and nourishment, new
supply from Him, they have not somewhat given to them and so are set to trade
for themselves and improve what is given them, but they suck new virtue from
Jesus Christ as from a Head. Adam he was the head of the first Covenant
himself, but now it is Jesus Christ that is the Head of the Second, and all
Believers draw spirits from Jesus Christ, and strength from him as from the
Head, they have a Head that Adam had not to draw strength from, and therefore
they are to manifest the strength of Jesus Christ in all their ways, that
fullness that there is in Jesus Christ they are to make that appear to the world
in their lives and Conversations: And therefore that text Col. 1 10, 11. is
very remarkable, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God: mark in the
11. verse, strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power; This
is worthy of the Lord, because that now we come to receive of his fullness, of
the fullness of Jesus Christ, and to have a continual supply from him; Though
it is true, so God has ordered it that so long as we live we shall have some
mixtures of corruption here, but yet he has provided a help for us, a fullness
in his Son, that from Him we should draw of His fullness, and so come to be
strengthened with all might.

4. We now serve the Lord and obey Him in our lives as those that are delivered
from the hazard of eternal miscarrying. Adam obeyed, but yet he might know when
he was obeying; I now obey, but I am in danger to miscarry eternally, every
hour to undo my self and posterity for ever. But now certainly this very
thought, and the understanding of this, it could not stand with that full
freedom of spirit that the Saints may have now under the Gospel, the Saints
under the Gospel come in a way of obedience to God, and upon this ground they
have their feet (as it were) upon sure ground: Well, as for my eternal estate
the hazard of miscarrying there, it is over, I bless God that is over, for
that now my obedience it is not that I might work out, and earn salvation; but
my obedience to God now is (being set safe upon the shore) that I might live to
the praise of the grace of God that has delivered me from al danger of
miscarrying, and has set me with Jesus Christ in heavenly places, I am now
already set in heavenly places with Jesus Christ, and as sure of Heaven (for so
a Believer may come to be) as if so be that I were there already, and so I am
now to begin the life of Heaven, to be blessing and magnifying God, not in word
only, but in my life, therefore am I to hold forth the glory of God in my life
and Conversation, that I might bless and magnify the Name of God, that has
delivered me from darkness, and has translated me into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, and upon these terms do I serve God now; I do not serve God as one that is
in hazard for ever to miscarry, and out of a base and slavish fear lest I
should miscarry, I do endeavor to work out my salvation; but it is as one that
is redeemed and delivered from eternal misery, yea, I now begin to join with
the Saints and Angels that are in Heaven, that are there magnifying God, and
shall be to al eternity praising of Him for His free grace toward them; surely
this Conversation should be in a higher degree of holiness than the
Conversation of Adam could be even in Paradise: Yet still remembering this, we
cannot in this life attain to such a Conversation as to be without mixture of
evil, but we should be more spiritual and heavenly in our ways, we have more
cause to be so than Adam had in his innocence, and we do not walk answerable to
the Gospel except our hearts do rise in a more spiritual and heavenly way than
his heart could rise when it came new out of the hand of his Creator. That Is
the first consideration of the Law as it was a Covenant of life to him and al
mankind in him. Oh that as we go along we would but consider what cause we
have of humiliation then; Oh how far are our Conversations short of that that
becomes the Gospel if it should rise to so high a pitch as this is that has
been mentioned.

Secondly, Consider we the Law as in the administration of it to Moses, and so
to the people of the Jews: The administration of the Law to them it was under
another notion, it was to bring them to Christ, and that they might come to see
their inability of keeping of that Covenant, and come to understand Christ so
much the more, and to be driven unto Christ by having the Law presented to
them, God did never intend by giving of the Law to the people of the Jews that
it should be a Covenant of eternal life to them; indeed there was this in the
administraon of it somewhat different from us, some special Covenant about
their living in Canaan, and about mercies in that promised Land, beyond that
that we have in the Law, as we find in the new Testament, they (I say) had this
annexed to it. The Law that was first given unto Adam and written in his heart,
afterward even obliterated, then it was transcribed by the same hand in tables
of stone and given unto them chiefly to show them their misery, and their need
of Christ; to be a preparation for Christ's coming into the world; and with this
one addition beyond what we have in the new Testament, that there was a
temporal Covenant annexed unto it, that concerned their living prosperously in
the Land of Canaan, (and so far we are delivered even from the Law as it was
given by Moses, that is, from the connection of the Covenant that was added unto
the delivering of the Law) concerning their happy and comfortable condition in
the Land of Canaan upon the keeping of their Law; but now (how ever it was)
certainly that Conversation that becomes the Gospel should be beyond what could
be even from godly men in the time of the Law.

As first, The Law to them it was given under low Promises, their promises were
but very low that were under the Law: It Is true, they had somewhat of the
Gospel that we have, but extreme darkly, and very little that they knew of it,
but the chief Ministration of God toward them was then in a legal way, and
that had but low promises, as their living in Canaan; you shall find generally
all the promises that are annexed to the Law even by Moses, it is but, that they
shall prolong their days in the Land* the Lord their God shall give them, That
they should be blessed in their basket and store: their Promises were under
Heaven-Promises, Promises of this life only; and therefore it could raise them
but to a very low degree of holiness.

Secondly, Their Ordinances were but poor and mean, and beggarly in comparison
of our; for so the Gospel calls them, Col. 2. They were but beggarly rudiments,
which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
Ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation. Heb. 9. 10. They had
an earthly Tabernacle, a worldly Sanctuary, Heb. 9. 1. etc.

Thirdly, The burden of them under the Law was very great, they were under a
heavy yoke and burden that did bow them down: A man that is under a heavy
burden it makes him stoop and bend in the back, he cannot stand so upright nor
fast as others that have no such weight upon them.

Fourthly, The administration of the Law was with Thunder and Lightning very
terrible, It made even Moses quake and tremble, (as the Author to the Hebrews
speaks.)

Fifthly, Their spirits were very servile under the Law, they were subject to
bondage even all their days; God so ordered things as to carry on his people
even in a very servile way, they were but mean servants then, hewers of wood
and drawers of water.

But now under the Gospel, First, our Promises are far better, and our Covenant
better, in Heb. 8. 6. there the Apostle compares their Condition and ours, Who
serve (says he) unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, There was but
the shadow of heavenly things; the Gospel has the Heavenly things themselves,
and they are but the shadow, for so you have it in Heb. 10. 1. For the Law
having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things:
They had but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image it self.
As Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle, For
see (says he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to
thee in the Mount. And then in Heb. 8. 6. But now has he obtained a more
excellent Ministry, [that's Christ] By how much also he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was established upon better promises: A better Covenant,
and stablished upon better promises, or a better Testament: Their promises I
say were but low and mean; and our promises are high and precious, and we have
a better Covenant, a Covenant not of living in the Land of Canaan, but of
Heaven, of which that Canaan was but a Type, and therefore our Conversations
should rise higher in holiness according as our Covenant and Promises are
better than theirs.

Secondly, Our Worship is more spiritual than their worship was. As that known
place in Joh. 4. 23. where Christ says to the woman of Samaria, You serve God
in this place: But the time shall come that they shall serve him every where,
for God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and in truth. There is
more spiritual worship in the time of the Gospel than was in the time of the
Law: The Lord carried them on in a carnal and a sensitive way: and indeed this
has been a great design of Antichrist to bring men to a carnal way of worship,
To carnal Ordinances, for so they are called in Scripture, the Commandments of
God by Moses, are called carnal, Heb. 9. 10. For their worship was in
comparison of the worship in the Gospel but carnal; (I say) it has bin the
design of Antichrist to darken the glory of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, by
bringing the Church to a carnal way of worship, and to take away spiritual, and
therefore they are altogether about carnal Institutions, whereas Jesus Christ
has instituted but only two Sacraments, wherein there are outward carnal
things, wherein we worship God through the Creature, otherwise His worship is
altogether spiritual; but now Antichrist he would bring in altogether carnal
things, he would ad a hundred inventions of his own, as building sumptuous
Temples, railing in of the Communion Tables, and then turning them into Altars;
with such kind of apish gestures, foolish garments, and Heathenish music, all
which was carnal worship, the devices of men to please children and fools with:
exceedingly much against the very life and soul of Godliness, and the only rule
of worship in the Word of God. Besides this rediculous and carnal way of
worship, made the worshipers twofold more the children of Satan than they were
before. But now the more spiritual any worship of God is, the more spiritual it
makes the heart, the less we stick to the creature while we are worshipping of
God, the more communion we come to have with Christ, and so it does raise
holiness to a more higher pitch.

Thirdly, Under the Gospel our yoke is more easy: You know what Christ says,
(in a Scripture that I have opened to you at large) Come, take my yoke upon
you, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. You are delivered from that
heavy burden that they were under, and therefore you should run the ways of
Gods Commandments, and follow after holiness more readily and freely than they
could do.

Fourthly, We have access with boldness to the Throne of grace, (as the
Scripture speaks) God does not reveal Himself in that terrible way to his
Saints now, as in the time of the Law, but would have them come with boldness,
and have liberty of speech: for that is the word, as in the second of the
Ephesians, of the boldness that we have to come into the presence of God;
Through him we have access by one spirit unto the Father. [Access] the word
signifies a coming with freedom (as it were) being led by the hand of God. In
Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness and access (says the text there) with
confidence by the faith of Him. Three words here are together: We have
boldness, and access, with confidence by the faith of Him. The word that is
here translated [Boldness] it is, liberty of speech; we may come and speak our
minds and unbosome our speech freely to God without any such terror; and we may
come to God without desiring. Moses must go into Gods presence for them as he
did; Oh they durst not go themselves, but Moses must go and speak with God. We
may come into the presence of God and speak our hearts freely with a holy
boldness in the Name of Christ.

Fifthly, We have the spirit of adoption more than they. Romans 8. We have not
received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba* Father. There was a spirit of bondage under which, even
the people of God were in former times, and now the spirit of adoption is more
spread abroad and communicated in the world to the Churches than it was before,
and therefore the Lord expects a Conversation suitable to the spirit of
adoption. As now, take one that is a child and has a servile spirit and is
afraid to come into the presence of his father, it may be he will do some works
in obedience to his father, but in a heavy and dull way, but afterward when
his father is fully reconciled to him, and comes and speaks kindly to him and
there comes a spirit of adoption upon the child, Oh then he goes lively on in
duty to his father, then he rejoices in the presence of his father, and to do
any thing that may please his father; when he is acted by a spirit of adoption,
there is more service done according to the mind and will of Christ than there was
before.

So (my Brethren) we should exceed all under the Law with a more fillial
obedience, than ever there was in that time, or else our Conversation it is not
such as becomes the Gospel: Therefore when you open the old Testament and read
of those excellent gracious spirits that were there, especially in the Psalms,
what holy breathings and pantings after God there are, and in the Prophets,
what exemplary holiness then lived and shined in the world: Be ashamed of your
selves if you do not rise to as high a degree as they and higher too

Obj. Why you will say, But they were eminent men, they were the Prophets of
God and so were extraordinary; and can ordinary Christians rise as high as they
did, and be such burning and shining lamps as they were?

Ans. I Will give you one Scripture about that, in Zach. 12. 8. it is a clear
Prophecy of the times of the Gospel, In that day shall the Lord defend the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be
as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them. Mark, he that is feeble among them shall be as David, who was a
man according to Gods own heart. Oh read David's Psalms, particularly the 119.
Psalm, and see the holy breathings of David, and observe that there is a
Prophecy, that those that are feeble shall be as David, and those that are as
David, that is, the eminent Christians, the Lords Champions, and the house of
David shall be as God, as the Angels of the Lord. Christians in the time of the
Gospel that are eminent should live as Angels, Angelical lives, and the weakest
of all should be as David: Indeed considering what we have revealed in the
Gospel we should be ashamed that our hearts and lives should come short in
spiritualness, and heavenliness of any that lived in the times of the Law: see
in the 119. Psalm, how you find David's heart taken and ravished with the Word
of God, Oh how sweet was the Law of God to him, sweeter than the honey and the
honey comb. He does not mean there the Law in opposition to the Gospel, but the
whole Word of God; Now you should consider this, what part of Gods Word had
David there, he had not many of the Prophesies, he had but the Books of Moses
and some other Books; the Book of Job was then, and some of the Chronicles,
some part of the Kings, and the Book of Judges; but most part of the Kings he
could not have, for he was the second King: therefore what little part of the
Word of God was written at that time; and yet how sweet was the Word to him, as
sweet as the honey and the honey comb, and how he did delight in it above Gold
and Silver. And then for the Ordinances of God, O how was he taken with them!
though in comparison of ours they were but carnal: In the 84. Psalm, he did
envy the very birds that were in the Temple of God, How aimable are thy Courts
O Lord (says he;) now do but compare those Scriptures he had with these that
we have, The five Books of Moses, and Joshua, and Judges, and Job which were
the chief Scriptures then extant, and do but compare them with the History of
the Gospel, in particular the Sermons of Christ, from the fifth Chapter of
Matthew to the eighth; So those remarkable places from the fourteenth to the
eighteenth of John, and so on; O what heavenly things are there let down
amongst us! What Heavenly truths we have, study and read over Paul's Epistles
(which are several holy Letters sent from Christ to His Saints here on earth,)
Oh what spiritual transcendant truths! What great mysteries and depths of God
are opened and revealed there beyond what there is in Genesis, or Exodus, or
Leviticus, or Numbers, etc. And yet the Word of God was dearer to him than all the world, and he professed he did meditate in it day and night. Now we have that
word in two Testaments, that does reveal abundance more of God in Christ than
ever he had, and therefore our Conversations should rise higher in holiness
than the Converstions of those that were under the Law; we should endeavor to
be more exemplary in holy walking than they were. And thus much for the second
head.

Now for the third, which is the chief of all, If you would have your
Conversations to be such as becomes the Gospel, it must be suitable to what the
Gospel holds fo^^h unto you. Now this is a great point, and it will serve for
two ends.

First, To hold forth unto you the principal things in the Gospel.

Secondly, To show you how you should suit your Conversation to those things
that are in the Gospel. And we shall abide upon this head somewhat long.

The first and principal thing in the Gospel, It is the holding forth unto us
the infinite love of God to mankind; this is the very end of the Gospel, that
God might declare what an infinite love he has unto the children of men, yea
unto men rather than unto Angels; you know that Scripture in John, 3. ^6. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. And indeed that
one verse has more of God in it than all Creatures in Heaven Earth; the whole
frame of Heaven and Earth has not so much of God in them as that one verse
has; So God loved the world that he sent forth his only begotten Son that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life: It is
as if God should say when he comes to reveal the Gospel, I will have a way
wherein it shall appear to men and Angels for ever what the greatness of my
love is unto these poor creatures, unto the children of men: And to that end I
send my Son the second Person in Trinity to take their natures upon him, to
come to be their Mediator; there will I manifest what my love is; that shall be
the great fruit of love. It is the similitude of a learned Divine (says he)
the love of God in all other things in comparision of the love of God in Christ
revealed in the Gosspel, it is a little spark of fire in comparison of the heat
in a furnace; when a furnace is heated red hot, it may be a few sparks of fire
fly out, but what is one of those sparks of fire that fly out in comparison of
all the heat that there is in the furnace, (so says he) all the fruits of the
love of God to mankind in all the works that ever God did do, are but as that
one spark only; excepting this of Christ; and the love of God unto mankind in
Christ is as it were the heat of the furnace, there is burning love indeed, the
love of God in Christ, this is the great scope of the Gospel, the great aim of
God, the great design that God had in the Gospel to make known the infinitness
of His love unto the children of men: Now then if so be that God in the Gospel
does reveal what there was in His heart from all eternity to mankind (for so
it is) that is the scope of the Gospel; there was in the heart of God infinite
love burning toward mankind, God from eternity saw mankind before him, and
there was that strong inclination of his heart toward them in love, as did
even burn in his heart: Now in time God reveals this in the Gospel, in the
Doctrine thereof He does open His heart to the children of men: when ever the
Gospel comes to be preached in any place, God does look upon that place and
has these kind of workings in Himself, Well, that love of Mine that I have had
burning in my Bosom from all eternity toward these poor creatures, now it shall
be opened, now it shall be revealed; just as it was with Joseph that had his
heart so warm in love unto his Brethren, that though he kept it in a while he
could not keep it in long, but at length it breaks out as fire, his bowels
yerned toward his Brethren, and he weeps tears of love over their necks: So in
the Gospel of Christ, look upon God toward poor creatures, as Joseph toward
his Brethren, and God as it were keeping in his heart toward them for a long
time; but now when the Gospel comes among them God opens his very heart to
them, now therefore there must be a Conversation that becomes the Gospel, as
becomes this great thing in the Gospel, that is the chief thing indeed that the
Gosspel holds forth in every line of it, and discovers his eternal love toward
them in particular, in the Son of his love, Christ Jesus in whom he is well
pleased.

Quest. You will say, What is it that becomes this thing in the Gospel?

Ans. Surely love, answerable love, that we should return love for love, he
that dwells in God dwells in love, God Himself is love; Read but the first
Epistle of that beloved Disciple John, what abundance of love is there made
known of God? every letter thereof is a character of love; and what
commendations of love in heavenly expressions? But you read no such thing in
the Scripture before the Gospel was revealed in that cleerness as it was then;
now nothing but Love, love, and how it called for love: Then there must be this
conversation, Love to God, as God to us. And that must be real as Gods love in
Christ was.

Quest. How did God manifest his love?

Answ. A Conversation becoming the Gospel, must be a manifestation of our love
in some proportionable way: So God loved the world, as He gave His only Son:
that is as if he should have said thus, God so loved the world, so dearly, as
that which was the dearest thing unto God he gave for a testimony of his love
to mankind. The dearest thing, What Is that? His Son. If God should have said,
That I might testify my love to mankind, as I have made one world for them, I
will make ten thousand more, yea I will make so many worlds as every one of the
children of men shall have a world to possess; you would think this were very
much: Oh this were nothing in comparison of that expression, So God loved the
world, as He gave His Son; the Son of God is infinitely dearer to God than ten
thousand thousand millions of worlds are. Now, a conversation that becomes the
revelatio of such love, must needs be this, Whatsoever then is dearest to our
souls let that be given up to God. As it was a testimony of the love of Abraham
to God, Hereby I know thou love me. Why? Because he gave up his Isaac to God,
he would not spare his only Son whom he loved: so God showed his love to us: we
may say, Lord, hereby we know thou love us, that thou have given thine Isaac,
thine only Son for us, and hereby Lord shall men and Angels know that we love
thee, that whatsoever is dear to our souls thou shall have it, we will offer it
up to thee in way of sacrifice: this is a conversation that becomes the Gospel.
So that when God calls for anything, never think it much, Oh this is hard and
costly and dear to me, and how shall I part with this? Is this becoming the
Gospel, to stand with God for any thing? for thy love must be somewhat suitable
to Gods; His love was such as he gave the dearest to thee, and thy love
therefore (if it runs parallel with his) must give the dearest to him.

And then if we be acted by love (for that is the conversation that becomes the
Gospel to be acted in all that we do with love to God) to be in a flame of love
continually, as the Salamander (they say) does always live in the fire; so
should we do in the fire of love, not in the fire of contention: But now, Love
has no need of any argument to do any thing but only this, this thing will be
pleasing unto him that I do tender it unto, it will please my Father; that is
argument enough for Love, that if I do such a thing it will please my beloved;
therefore never stand arguing thus, Such a thing is a duty, but is it
necessity? Must I do it? Cannot a man be saved unless he do it? Be all damned
that do not this? These are arguments from base sordid spirits: but here is
enough for love, here is a thing would please God; if we did thus, we should
please God better than in not doing it: Therefore that place that you had
before, in the first of the Colossians, Walk worthy of the Lord to all
pleasing, let the heart presently spring upon this, There Is such a thing
propounded out of the Word at such a time, and I heard it would be well
pleasing to God if I did this.

If we put but this upon you, you that do not set up the worship of God in your
families, Do not you think that it would please God better to set up his
Worship in your families than not? Is there no Conversation that your
consciences tell you would please God better, than that Conversation which you
live in? Would it not be more pleasing to God (ask but your conscience now?) if
your hearts were acted by love you would presently fall upon that which your
consciences tell you would be more pleasing to God.

And then Love: This is a maxim of Love, Love never knows when it has done
enough, it knows no such thing as too much, for men to say, What need we be so
strict as to walk circumspectly? what need we do so much? why must we be so
holy? This is a base kind of reasoning; Is this as becomes the Gospel? If thou
were acted by Love then thou would never think that thou had done enough
for God, Oh thou would rather think, had I ten thousand thousand times more
strength than I have, Lord thou art worthy of it all, what soever I have,
whatsoever I am, whatsoever I can do, thou art worthy of it all, never stand
arguing thus, what need so much; is the thing a good thing? love never knows
any such thing as too much.

We know love, It cannot bear with dishonor done unto those that we do love, if
any wrong any one that we love, if our hearts be inflamed with love we know not
how to bear it; such strike us in the apple of our eye; Oh that is a
Conversation that becomes the Gospel, that when we see the Name of God
dishonored, our hearts rise more against any thing that is done against God,
than it does against any thing that is done against our selves, we are inflamed
for God when we see any thing done that is a dishonor to the Name of God.

And love we know it will make us mourn and melt for any offense to those that
are beloved of us: So that is a Conversation that becomes the Gospel, when we
manifest melting hearts, and mourning spirits.

Love makes us delight in the presence of those that we do love; so that is a
Conversation that becomes the Gospel, when we manifest that there is nothing in
the world that we delight in more than to be in the presence of our Beloved; Oh
to be always with God in the arms of Christ, it is our Heaven on Earth.

And then, a Conversation that becomes this Gospel, It is to be of a loving
disposition toward those that have any reference unto God. Read over the
Epistles where so much of the Gospel is revealed, for indeed there is the chief
of the Gospel, though we call those four Evangelists the Gospel, because they
are the story of Christ's coming into the world, and his Actions; yet there is
more of the Doctrine of the Gospel in the Epistles; for the time of the law was
not fully expired till the destruction of the Temple; which was after Christ's
death, and therefore though the Gospel began to shine forth, yet till after the
time of the destruction of the Temple there was not so much of the Gospel; and
therefore read (I say) the Epistle;, and you shall find there is no one
particular duty that the Gospel so calls for from men (besides faith in Jesus
Christ) as it does love in Christians one toward another, yea love to all: if
you read the Epistles of Paul, diverse places in the Romans, and in the
Ephesians, and Philippians, and Colossians, continually still they are beating
upon love; and especially in the Epistles of John (that was the beloved
Disciple and lay in the bosom of Christ) nothing so much as love, because this
indeed is the Conversation that becomes the Gospel, for the main thing in the
Gospel, it is the declaring of the love of God; and therefore Christians that
would live as becomes the Gospel, they must live so as acted by love: And so in
the story of the Acts, presently as soon as you read of any that the Gospel
did prevail withal, they had one heart and one mind, Oh how did they cleave one
to another! their hearts were one. And so we find in the stories of the
Primitive times, I remember Tertullian says, that that was the way that the
Heathens and persecutors did use to find out who were Christians, for the
Christians did meet at nights for fear of danger, and did as wisely as they
could to keep themselves from their persecutors, but they found this by
experience that when they were converted to Christian Religion, then there was
another kind of spirit in them that did act them, and especially a spirit of
love one to another, there was another kind of love of Christians one toward
another then, than of any other society of man kind; the Heathens saw this, and
wondered at it, and it was by this that they found out who were Christians, if
they saw any people beginning to have a spirit of love more than before, they
would think surely these have heard of this Christian Religion, and they begin
to be Christian; this was the glory of Christian Religion in those times, that
there was such entire love and union of hearts amongst them. The Apostle John
would have such love as that Christians should be willing to die one for
another, and they did so in the primitive times, Oh this were becoming the
Gospel indeed: But Oh how far, how far are we from such a Conversation in such
times as we live in now! as if so be that the Gospel were gone from us, we
speak of the Gospel as if it were revealed more now than ever, and much
concerning free grace in the Gospel, but look upon the Conversations of men,
they were never more unsuitable to the Gospel, and in this particular, in
respect of the sincere love in the hearts of Christians: My brethren, malicious
dispositions are extremely unbecoming the Gospel, hateful and malicious
dispositions, What does a beastly, brutish, savigeness do, the fierceness of
beasts do in the breast of a Christian? Oh it is infinitely unbeseeming a
Christian to have an unloving disposition, a hateful disposition, to be hating
one another, and to have a spirit of opposition and contradiction, and
frowardness one against another, there is nothing more unbeseeming the Gospel
of Jesus Christ than this. I remember I have read even of one of the Heathen
Emperors, that being convinced somewhat about Christ, and hearing much of him,
saw two that professed the name of Christians to fall out bitterly one with
another, which as soon as he perceived he calls them to him, and gives a
straight command that they should never afterward, presume to call themselves
by the name of Christians; No (says he) you do not do according to your Master
that you profess, your life is unsuitable to your Master, even one that was but
a Heathen himself speak this. Oh if we profess our selves Christians let our
Conversations be as becomes the Gospel in point of love, and make that to be
the argument of love, the love of God revealed in the Gospel; there are a great
many arguments of love from humane society, from reason, that men that live
together they should love one another as men, and that there comes a great deal
of hurt from frowardness and bitterness, and that it is against the rules of
society, and that men cannot live quietly except there be some way of sodering
by love; these arguments are somewhat, and yet these would be among Heathens:
Oh but now, those that profess the Gospel of Christ, have one argument that is
infinitely beyond all arguments that can be imagined, and that is in John, 3.
16. (before named) So God loved the world, loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten. We hear how the love of God that was in the heart of God from
all eternity is brought forth and revealed in the Gospel, Oh let this inflame
our hearts with love, Oh that there might be never a Christian that professes
the Name of Christ, but that it might appear in him that his heart is sweetened
with love, and that he does live (as it were) in the very element of love, and
acted by love in all that he does, O this would beautify your Christian
profession more than all your talking of this and the other things: Oh that it
were come again, that this becoming Conversation of Christians were come again
into the world. I remember I have heard a speech of Dr. Whittacre rebuking the
Conversation of the Scholars in Cambridg, he had this speech, Surely (says he)
this that we preach is not the Gospel, or otherwise we are no Gospelers,
because our Conversation is so different from the Gospel; and so we may say of
this one particular in respect of love, either it is but a fancy that we hear
so much of the love of God in Jesus Christ in the Gospel, or otherwise we are
no Gospelers, we are no true Professors of the Gospel: whatever profession we
make of the Gospel, yet except there does appear divine love to act us in all
that we do God will not own us for Gospelers; for certainly it is a main scope
that God has in the revealing the Gospel to sweeten the hearts of men with
love, either deny the profession, or walk more lovingly than thou have done
toward those that make the same profession: yea thou should walk lovingly
toward thy enemies, for the Gospel reveals much of Gods goodness even toward
the whole world in general, so that there should be love even toward all from
the knowledge of the Gospel; Oh that it might be said of men and women, that
were of rugged, harsh, and malicious dispositions before, yet since it pleased
God that they came to the Ministry of the Gospel, and heard the Truths of the
Gospel opened to them, Oh since that time their hearts have been altered and
changed, Oh of what sweet dispositions they are of now, the husband toward the
wife, and the wife toward the husband, in a family there was nothing but
harshness and brawling, but now nothing but sweetness and love and this from
the knowledge of the love of God in Jesus Christ: that love will be a Divine
grace indeed that is raised in the hearts of men, and acted from this principle
of the knowledge of the love of God in Jesus Christ. This is the first thing,
and the great thing that is held forth in the Gospel, namely the love of God to
mankind.

I Will but name one or two things more now, and the next is this.

The infinite willingness of God to be at peace and to be reconciled unto those
who have offended him, yea to his enemies, what is the scope of the Gospel? the
eternal love of God to mankind in Christ: That Is the first thing. Then the
second thing is the infinite willingness that there is in God to be at peace to
be reconciled to such as have offended him; this is held forth in the Gospel,
the Gospel is the Ministry of reconciliation, now what Conversation should be
in us becoming this in the Gospel that is held forth?

And then the infinite mercy of God in the Gospel in delivering poor creatures
out of a depth of misery, that is a main thing in the Gospel, and many other
particulars as the infinite hatred that God has against sin, and the great
price paid for souls that is held forth in the Gospel too, with diverse other
things that might be spoken of. But I beseech you consider of the point that we
are about, namely to show you what the Gospel holds forth to us; and then what
Conversation becomes all these things, and is suitable to them. If God would but
be pleased to go along even with this one point that we are now upon, we hope
it may lighten the Conversation of Christians, and withal may commend this word
of grace to those that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; and may (if
God will say Amen unto it) in some measure recover the dishonor that has been
cast upon the Gospel of Christ in these latter times, by that loose and uneven
walking amongst professors themselves; which has very much darkened the glory
of this mavelous great light, Which should be a lamp unto their feet, and a
light unto their paths. Oh that Jesus Christ from whose hand and heart this
Gospel came would now preach it home to every heart of us, that the truths
thereof, may be turned into grace, spirit and life in the midst of us, so that
our lives and Conversations may be a daily practical sermon of holiness, in
particular, That we love one another as becomes the Gospels

SERMON IV.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
WE closed with this the last day, March, ^2. 1645
that we should love one another. This holds forth unto us, not only the love
of God the Father, but the infinite love of Jesus Christ the second Person in
Trinity, and this calls for love one to another; And I Will hint unto you one or
two Scriptures more about this: there is union of Christian hearts in one bend
of love: No duty more inculcated in the new Testament (next unto Faith, that
great engine of the Covenant of grace) than Love, and love one unto another; and
upon the consideration of the infinite love of God, and of Jesus Christ unto us.

Ephesi. 3. 19. compared with Ephesians, 4. 1. And to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge; that ye might be filled with all fullness of God. Then
in the beginning of the 4. Chapter, I therefore (here is an inference with the
use of it) the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, That you walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called. You are called to Christ, to the Gospel, and
there you have the love of Christ made known. How shall they walk worthy of this
vocation; with all lowliness, and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one
another in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. He prayed before, that they might know the love of Christ: therefore
upon that he does exhort them, and builds his exhortation, or rather his
beseeching that they would with all lowliness, meekness, and longsuffering,
forbear one another in love; for you are called to the profession of the
Gospel, and there you have the love of the Father, and of Christ set forth unto
you: now would you walk worthy of this calling? then let there be much
meekness, and forbearing one another in love; In Ephesians. 5. 2. And walk in love,
as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: Walk in love as Christ has loved
us, that is, suitable; as if the Apostle should say, would you walk suitable to
the Gospel of Christ that you profess? Walk in love then as Christ has loved
us, this is a principal thing. In the Gospel you come to know the love of
Christ otherwise than other men do know it, therefore walk in love, Walk in
love as Christ has loved us, make the love of Christ to be a pattern for your
love; there is nothing (as I told you) that is more unbeseeming the Gospel of
Christ, than a hateful, malicious, rugged, dog star disposition, than for
Christians to be tearing one another, and falling out one with another, as
those beasts at Ephesus that Paul complains of; Oh this is infinitely
unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ: Do you know what the love of God means in
Jesus Christ? are you sensible of the love of Christ? Oh this love should
sweeten your hearts that there should be no more bitterness in you, but you
should live in this Element of love. Says an Ancient, what does beastly
fierceness and cruelty, and savigeness do in the breast of a Christian? it is
unbeseeming the name of a Christian, Therefore let your Conversation be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that holds forth love; Oh let there be much love
in you, be you acted by love in all your ways, so that they that run may read
this new Commandment which Christ left unto his followers, That they love one
another in deed and in truth.

Secondly, The Gospel of Christ it holds forth this, The infinite willingness of
God to be at peace with mankind, to be reconciled unto man, unto those who
have offended him, yea to those who are enemies unto him: This is the scope of
the Gospel, (a principal scope) I say God would in the Gospel make known to all
the world his infinite willingness to be reconciled to such as have offended
him: Indeed without the Gospel we might apprehend this, that the Lord is a God
that is full of goodness, that He is good and does good, that all good is in
him; but to apprehend God to be such a God of peace, so infinitely set upon it,
(as I may so say) to be reconciled to such as are enemies, could never have
been known but by this Gospel of Christ; herein we find that though there was
an infinite difference between God and man, between Heaven and Earth through
our sinning sin, yet the Lord was willing to be reconciled, yea though the
offense of man was exceeding great so that it cried for vengance, yet he was
pleased wonderfully to condescend to make a peace with him: Yea though the Lord
had man under his power and could do what He pleased with him, He had His enemy
under His feet, and might have broken him all to pieces with His iron-rod as a
Potters vessel (which when it is broken can never be made whole again) yet He
was willing to be reconciled.

Thirdly, Though God had no need at all of us, He was infinitely blessed in
himself, who is perfection and blessedness it self. Sometimes we are willing to
be reconciled to our enemies, either because we have them not under our power,
or because we have some need of them; but God that had us under his hand, and
might easily have destroyed us, and had no need at all of us, yet was desirous
to spare us, as a father spares his only son whom he loves,

Fourthly, The Gospel holds this out to us, That the Lord He begins the work of
reconciliation, He first loving us, the infinite God seeks to us his creatures
to come in to be reconciled, therefore he sends his Ambassadors of peace to
beseech us in Christ's stead to come in to be reconciled to him, to accept of
His Propositions of Peace which make so much for our everlasting salvation.

Fifthly, Though reconciliation must cost God very dear; that God must be at a
great deal of costs and charges to reconcile His creatures to himself* it cost
no less than the blood of his only begotten Son, and yet he is willing to be
reconciled: says God, my heart is set upon this work, and let it cost what it
will, if it were ten thousand worlds yet my heart i^ so upon it, that I will
bring them in that they may be reconciled to me, and made one with me.

Sixthly and lastly, The Gospel reveals this, That God is so set upon
reconciliation, and is so reconciled to such as do embrace the Gospel as he
will never be at enmity with them again. Being once reconciled, he will never
suffer such a breach to be made between Mankind and Himself any more. He will
be their Father in Christ, and ye shall be his Sons and Daughters through Him
to all eternity in Christ Jesus our Lord. Who shall separate us from the love
of God? Thus the Gospel holds forth, not only reconciliation, but such
reconciliation as this is, which men and Angels can never sufficiently admire
and bless God for. This is a Second beam (as I may so say) of the Gospel. Then
what manner of persons ought we to be? our conversations must be as becomes
this Gospel of Christ in this great thing that the Gospel holds forth unto us.
Surely then, this calls to us al aloud to love peace, O love peace, Is God so
set upon peace as he is? and is he willing to be at so great cost for peace? Oh
let us love peace, let us follow peace, lets pursue peace, let us seek peace,
let us do what we can possibly for peace, If it be possible as much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all men: Let us account peace never bought too dear
with any thing but sin: The Lord Christ would not sin to purchase peace, if it
could possibly have been conceived that any sin should have bin committed
Christ would never have purchased peace that way; but if it be by any way of
suffering, by his being willing to leave the Heavens for a while to take upon
him the form of a servant, yea to have the sense of the influences of the love
of his Father ecclipsed for a time, he was willing to endure, yea to be made a
curse, whatsoever he suffered in his Name, he was willing to endure any thing
to make peace between God and man, to reconcile the World to Heaven: Oh! let us
love peace, that is becoming the Gospel of Christ, for our hearts to be set upon
peace. And the exhortation that you have in the Ephesians (before mentioned;)
it is likewise built upon the consideration of Christ's working so for our
peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. For He is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in Hi^
flesh the enmity. And then in the 16. verse, That He might reconcile both unto
God in one body by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby. So that this
Scripture holds forth, not only that Christ is our peace in respect of God, and
he died for that end to make peace between God and us, but likewise that Jesus
Christ did die to make peace between man and man; it was one fruit of His death
to break down the middle wall of partition between us, and to slay the enmity;
he does not say, to kill our enemies, but to kill the enmity it is self; the
meaning is this, that Christ died to take down the partition wall between Jew,
and Gentile; there was an enmity between the Jew and Gentile that they might
not one converse with the other; now it was a fruit of the death of Christ to
take down the partition wall and to slay the enmity between them, that so there
might be but one sheep fold, that He might reconcile both unto God in one body.
Now, was this the end of the death of Christ, not only to reconcile us to God,
but one unto another in one body, Jew and Gentile? Certainly there cannot be
such a distance between one Christian and another as there was between Jew and
Gentile: and Christ did so love unity and peace in the world, especially among
those that made any profession of his Name, that he would die to that end, He
would lose His life that He might procure peace between Jews and Gentiles, and
bring them into one body: And truly so it should be with us, we should be
willing, and those whose hearts are right (I say) cannot but be so sensible of
the breaches that are among us, and the unpeaceableness of men's spirits, as if
they could by the laying down of their lives procure peace, they should be
willing to do it, every Christian should make it appear, that he is so set upon
peace that if the laying down of his life could procure peace he should be
willing to do it, that if we may make up breaches by standing in the gap, and
offering up our selves a sacrifice of atonement and pacification, let us thus
prove our selves to be the true followers of Christ our Lord and Master who
has left us his own example herein for our imitation: this were an excellent
thing beseeming the Gospel of Christ that we do profess, yea, we should not
only be willing to admit of peace, but seek for it, seek for it to our
inferiors, do not say that such a man has wronged me, and therefore let him
seek to me, Oh no, it does become you that make profession of the Gospel of
Christ, not to stay till he come to you that has wronged you, but for you that
are wronged by another, even to seek to those that have wronged you, that they
would be at peace with you; you might perhaps (consulting with flesh and blood)
think it unreasonable that you that are wronged should seek peace; I but it
becomes the Gospel of Christ that you should do so; God sought to you, you
never sought to him: If God had not begun the work of peace with you, God and
your souls would have been eternally enemies, and therefore remember that you
are not to live according to reason, you think there is all the reason in the
world that those that have wronged you should crouch to your feet rather than
you seek to them, well grant it, that there is all the reason in the world for
it, I but what is there in the Gospel to the contrary? and you are not to live
only in your Conversations as beseems reason, but you are to have your
Conversations as beseems the Gospel of Christ: If you stand upon these terms,
let him come to me rather than I will go to him, Is this as becomes the Gospel?
What do you hold forth of the great Work of the Gospel, if you do not hold
forth this? Your willingness to be at peace, and to seek for peace even from
your inferiors? and do not you say that the offense is great, Oh! it is a great
offense that such a one has committed, he has dealt very proudly with me, and
shall I seek to him; his offense to you is not so great as your offense was to
God, and yet God seeks to be at peace with you through Christ: But he is my
inferior, it may be he is a poor mean fellow that has so wronged me: Do not
you think there is such a distance between you and other men, it may be thou
have a little power in thy hand, and a few pence in thy purse more than thy
neighbor has; but what infinite distance was there between God and you then?
Oh remember your Conversation must be as beseems the Gospel of Christ: I but it
will put me to a great deal of trouble, I can with more ease have him punished
than I can bring things to make peace between us. With more ease? Could not God
with more ease have sent thee down to the nethermost Hell, how quickly could
God have brought thee down and undone thee for ever: but God was content to be
at peace upon hard terms (as I may so speak) indeed they were hard terms by
which God came to reconcile the world unto himself, the hardest terms that
possibly could be conceived, for Jesus Christ, his eternal Son, did take upon
Him our Nature, and was made a curse for us, that knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in Him; and therefore stand not upon any hard
terms, if peace may be purchased any way but by sin, stand not upon it, for
this is as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Yea, And when you are reconciled to your brother, be so reconciled, as to be
firm in your reconciliation: Not as some, there is peace made between them, but
how? so as they are ready to take advantage against one another upon any
miscarriage afterward: God does not do so with you, the Gospel holds not forth
such a peace as this is, that God shall be at peace with you for the present,
but look to your selves afterward, God will take all advantages against you
that he can; if there had been such a peace made between God and you, you had
been in Hell long before this time, and therefore let your peace be a firm, a
settled, and a constant peace; Oh! that this were but thought on in these
contentions days, wherein there is such breaches between Brother and Brother,
in every town, in every family, and none almost but are broken off one from
another with an irreconcilable spirit; Oh! how unbeseeming the Gospel of Jesus
Christ is an irreconciliable spirit? Certainly God has not made thee to know
what the mystery of the Gospel of peace is, who have war in thy heart and
tongue against thy brother. And that is the second thing that the Gospel holds
forth unto us.

Only take this one note in this second thing, That whereas there are many
arguments to move us to such a conversation as now I am urging upon you, yet
let Christians above all arguments, make the Gospel to be the argument of
arguments to move them to it: As now, for the matter of peace, there are many
arguments to move us to be at peace with our brother, from the inconveniences
that will follow upon our breaches and the like, now show your selves
Christians in this, Above all arguments make the consideration of what you
understand in the Gospel to be the great motive of motive to prevail with you
for peace, and this argument will do it when nothing else will do it. It may be
a friend comes and persuades you to be at peace, you will find a great deal of
trouble in Lawing and suing, and enmity one against another, there will come a
great deal of anxiety, and therefore be reconciled and live like neighbors one
with another: well, but when you find that your hearts do not stoop to any
other argument, then get alone into your closets, search the Scriptures, and
there lay to your hearts all the arguments that you can from the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, there see how God reconciled the world to Himself, and how God
was set upon the work of peace: lay them to your hearts, and when no other
arguments will move, the consideration of that through the blessing of God will
do it. And that is for the second Point.

In the third place, The Gospel holds forth the infinite mercy of God to
miserable creatures. When man was plunged into such a depth of misery, nothing
but bowels of mercy did move God to help men out of that depth of misery that
they were plunged into; and though man was unworthy of mercy, Gods mercy was
free, yea and it was a transcendent mercy of God, The mercy of God is over all
his works. The Heathens could understand that God was a merciful God, the light
of Nature will tell us something of the mercy of God; but there is nothing that
sets out the bowels of Gods mercy so as the Gospel of Jesus Christ does, there
you have the very bowels of Gods mercy (indeed) made legible to all the world,
in Luke, 1. 78. Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring
from on high has visited us: The tender mercies of our God, the bowels of
mercy, so the words are: here is the depth of the bowels of mercy held forth in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ; it is imposible that we could have understood the
depth of those bowels of mercy but by the Gospel: Adam in innocence knew little
of the mercy of God, for he not being in misery, had no need of that mercy to
help out of misery, but though he by his understanding must needs know that
mercy was a good thing, and therefore in God the First. being of all, but yet
he did not understand that mercy that the Gospel holds forth, yea the Angels in
Heaven know it not but by the Gospel, and so they desire to pry into those deep
mercies of God unto man kind; Oh here are the mercies of God that shall be the
subject of the praises of Angels and of the Saints to all eternity, held forth
in the Gospel: You think it is a great mercy when a child is sick, that God
recovers it; you think it is a great mercy when you are at Sea that God turns
the wind, when if it had stood but one half hour more that way it did, you had
lost Vessel, lives and all; when you have been in any danger abroad in foreign
parts, that the Lord was a present help in time of trouble, when there has
been any affliction upon your family, that God has sent deliverance to you,
these are mercies that God is to be praised for; Oh! but what are all these to
the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, His righthand mercies; and indeed this
would be a good argument of a gracious heart, when any particular mercy is
granted unto them, either family mercies, or personal mercies. Thus to
meditate, Lord I am less, I am less than the least of all thy mercies, yet here
is seasonable comfortable mercies to me and mine etc. but O Lord what is all
this to that infinite fountain of mercy in Christ, thy mercies in the Gospel,
thy mercies in thy Son, there is depths, infinite depths of mercy indeed, this
is but a drop, and indeed that is sweet, but the infinite Ocean of mercy it is
in Jesus Christ, Christ is the mercy of God to mankind, in the bowels of which
all other mercies are conceived and brought forth in the world: All my fresh
springs both upper and nether springs are in him, who is All in All. Oh it
were a good argument that the Gospel is revealed to you, if you admire at Jesus
Christ as the great mercy of all mercies, though thankful for every mercy, yet
when you come to consider of the mercy of Christ, look upon that as mercy of
wonder, stand amazed at the thought of that mercy; well it is the Gospel that
holds forth the glory of the riches of the mercy of God, God is said in the
word to be rich in mercy, He is not said so much to be rich in power as rich in
mercy. Now what Conversation is suitable to this?

What Is that but as Christ himself says, Be ye merciful as your heavenly
father is merciful, Oh have you a merciful heart one toward another? look with
a merciful eye upon those who are in great misery; this is it that becomes the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; Oh a harsh, rugged, and cruel disposition it is
infinitely unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ: To see a Christian, one that
professes the Gospel, that makes more profession of the knowledge of God and of
the free grace of God in Christ than others, and yet when it comes to it, that
he has to deal with such as are in misery, to have a hard heart, Oh a hard
hearted Christian is a monster, I say a hard hearted Christian is a monster in
the world, not to be ready to forgive others, and to do any thing for others
that are in misery is devilish; but to rejoice that they may have any object to
show pity and compassion unto, Oh this is that which becomes the Gospel of
Christ; though they be strangers to you that are in misery, yet be merciful to
them; for you were strangers to God.

Yea, Be merciful to your enemies, not only be willing to be at peace, but be
merciful: Do you see any that have wronged you to be in misery, do not let them
perish but let bowels of compassion even work toward them; Oh that our hearts
did yern toward all: Christ when He came near unto Jerusalem, He wept over it:
Oh that the like spirit were in us as was in Jesus Christ: There Is no such
argument for mercy to others, as the consideration of the mercies of God in
Jesus Christ: Oh bowels of mercy beseems the Gospel of Christ; and it should be
manifested really: Let not people that are in misery have verbal mercies from
you, that is, you seem to pity them in words, Oh but let there be real mercies
to them, open your hearts and let something drop from you for releef of them
that are in misery: it is a notable Scripture in Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. and suitable
to that in Col. 3. 13. in the 4. of the Ephesians. there the Apostle (speaking of
the mercies of Christ) says he, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye kind
one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you. Be tender hearted: Oh God manifests the tenderness of
His heart in the Gospel; and this is beseeming the Gospel, to set forth this as
a pattern, the tenderness of Gods heart to poor sinners in the depth of misery;
do you see any to be in misery, and do not you find your heart begin to break
toward them? if you do not find your heart breaking, Oh set before you the
infinite tenderness of Gods mercies in Jesus Christ, and it is that will break
your hearts if any thing in the world will: And so in Col. 3. 13. a place
somewhat parallel to this, Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; if
any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye:
and above all these things, put on charity. You see the Apostle accounts this
the great argument of all, and therefore know that the Lord takes it very much
to heart when the bowels of Professors are turned into gravel. Search into that
remarkable Parable, Matthew, 18 from verse. 28. to verse. 35. where Jesus Christ
Preaches down all cruel and unchristian like dispositions in those that are
fellow servants, belonging to one and the same Master, and living under one
roof; yea, the Zeal of Christ did break forth like thunder and lightning
against such a servant as takes his fellow by the throat, therefore (says the
text) ver. 31. His Lord was wrath, and delivered him to the tormentors til he
should pay all that was due to him. The Lord Christ delivered that cruel
servant, that hard hearted wretch to the tormentors that did a thing so
unbeseeming the mercy he himself had received from Christ, Oh says Christ art
thou cruel and unmerciful when thou have received so much favor from me, as a
full discharge of thy many great debts? get thee to the tormentors, let the
most cruel executioners of my sierce wrath torment thee without any mercy and
compassion. Oh those that have hard hearts walk unsuitable to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ which is full of the riches of Gods grace to all. Oh you that have
received any pardoning mercies from Jesus Christ, take heed of cruelty to your
servants, to your children; It Is very sad to see how some Professors cast the
Gospel of Christ behind their backs, if their passions are but moved; what will
ye bite and devour one another when ye receive the least offront either by
tongue or hand? Oh where is you bearing and forbearing with one another? for
shame do not fly in the faces of any (as a Bear bereaved of her whelps) when ye
are buffetted by men, Oh remember Jesus Christ, Oh remember you that stand in
so much need of mercy every day from God, for you to be cruel toward other, Oh
here is a Conversation infinitely unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ, and it is
unbeseeming the grace that is offered, to have a sullen, a despairing, and an
unbeleeving disposition, when as we see those that are Disciples, and yet every
little thing causes them to despair, and to be sullen, and their hearts to snk
within them, Oh friends is this an Evangelical frame of spirit! let me speak
plainly to you, when you come to hear the glorious, riches of the grace of the
Gospel set before you in the Word, ye seem to be somewhat taken with it, but
when you go home to your family, are ye not ready under the least cross then to
bury a thousand mercies? Oh what a dishonor is this to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ that reveals so much mercy of God in it, that it does call for
Christians that do profess it, to go through troubles, and through
discouragements with cheerful hearts? and although there be many things that
might daunt the spirits of others that do not understand what the mercies of
God in Christ are, yet those that profess the Gospel should show undaunted
spirits, for why? It is infinite, free, rich, glorious grace that is made known
to them by the word of Christ's lips.

Obj. You will say, I, if I knew that this mercy were mine*

Ans. I but do thou hear in the Gospel that it is free, and there is no soul
has any right to this mercy, but by casting its self upon this mercy, and
therefore it is as free for thee to cast thy self upon it as another; indeed
the mercy that is revealed by the light of Nature, Is such mercy of God that is
more conditional, that is, if I do such and such things then God will be
merciful unto me, the light of Nature goes no further than this; if I obey and
leave my sin then I may hope that God will be merciful to me: It Is true, the
Scripture tells us, if I do not leave my sin, God will not have mercy; I but
the Gospel holds forth mercy thus, There is mercy in God, first to pardon thy
sin, and then to take away thy sin; now the Gospel reveals Gods mercy in
justifying the ungodly; though I am poor and blind, and miserable, and naked,
and have not power to leave my sin, yet I have free leave to cast my soul upon
Gods mercy, both for pardon and for power together against my sin, for so it
must be, indeed I have no power, I may not stay till I have power against my
sin, and then I will venture all that I have upon Jesus Christ, this is the
mercy of the Gospel; I speak of this despairing and sullenness of heart, as
it is manifested in the Conversations of men and women, by which they do
dishonor the Gospel of Christ, when they live in their families and their
hearts sink in such a sullen way as if there were nothing in the Gospel of
Christ for encouraging of poor troubled souls, no more than men might
understand by the light of Nature; Indeed if I did live better, and honor God,
I might have encouragement that God would show me mercy; but the mercy of the
Gospel it is such, that there is mercy to pardon and to heal my soul too, and
therefore though I be sinful, I must not stay from believing in Gods mercy till
I be healed, but I must believe in Gods mercy that I may be healed. That Is the
third particular that the Gospel holds forth unto us.

Now the Fourth thing that the Gospel reveals, is this, That though God be
infinitely merciful, yet He is merciful in such a way that justice shall not be
wronged: and this is proper to the Gospel too. It Is impossible for Men or
Angels to come to understand this Mystery but by this Gospel Light, how God
should be infinitely merciful, and yet that He should be infinitely just too;
this is held forth in Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God: To declare, I
say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus. Now this is a great mystery of the Gospel; a
Scripture that Luther fasted and prayed that he might understand, and he was a
great while before he could know the mind of God therein. Now the Gospel says
this, I will manifest infinite riches of my mercy, but yet so as my infinite
justice shall be no loser, and therefore though I le save Mankind, yet I Will
save them by such a way, as I Will have as much glory of my justice as if all the
men in the world had bin damned to all eternity: this is the mystery of the
Gospel, and it is clear, that though God manifest infinite mercy, yet God has a
way for the manifestation of his mercy in the Gospel, by which the justice of
God is as much honored and satisfied as if all the men in the world had been
cast into everlasting burnings, that is, through his Sons dying for man's sin,
being made a curse for us; this is the great point of the Gospel, which unless
we understand, we know nothing of Christ and his Gospel as we ought to know it.
Most men and women in the world they seek to God for mercy, Lord be merciful to
me, a sinner, but they think not of a way of Gods showing mercy, so as yet he
may have the glory of infinite justice, God seals the forgivenes of sin in the
Court of Justice as well as in the Court of Mercy; few think of this, and
that is the reason why people are ready many times to despair, because a great
while they having but slight thoughts of God, they hope Christ will be merciful
to them, yet in time of temptation, when the Devil comes and does set before
them the dreadfulness of Gods justice, that God is a most just God as well as
merciful, this makes their hearts to sink like a stone within their breasts.
But now the soul that sees the way of God in the Gospel, sees that God is
infinitely set upon mercy, and likewise sees a way how Gods infinite justice may
be satisfied and seeing both these, this is a mighty help to faith; now let
there come never so many temptations, when the soul is catching hold upon Gods
mercy; I but says temptation, God is a just God as well as merciful, and do
not thou presume? No says the soul, the way of mercy that my soul rests upon,
I see there is in it a way of satisfaction to infinite justice, as well as a
way for the manifestation of mercy, and therefore though God be a righteous
God, and a just God, yet here I see a way for my soul to be saved, yet for
Divine Justice to have no wrong neither, and therefore I can believe and
venture my soul upon this: It Is impossible for a sinner to venture his soul
upon any way of mercy, if it comes to understand with what a God it has to
deal, except it comes to know God in Jesus Christ, in that way wherein infinite
justice is satisfied to the utmost farthing which is declared in the Gospel.
Now what Conversation is suitable to this?

Hence let there be that Conversation in you, that may manifest that you do not
turn the grace of God into wantonness, Oh a wanton Conversation is infinitely
unbeseeming the Gospel, Oh there is infinite mercy and free grace treasured up
here, and what will thou be wanton and vain and loose therefore? there is
infinite grace, but what way does God take to manifest infinite grace? Is it
not in a way wherein the dreadfullest Justice of God appears too? Is not the
grace of God let out to you through the blood of his Son? wherein the most
dreadful fruit of Gods justice is manifested that ever was since the beginning
of the world, or ever shall be manifested to the end of the world; if so be
thou should see all the damned in Hell, the chambers of death unlocked under
the wrath of God there flaming out in fire and brimstone; it would not be such
a dreadful sight as to see Jesus Christ made an offering for sin, and lying
under the vials of the wrath of his Father, falling down upon the ground,
grovelling and sweating out great drops of water and blood, and crying out upon
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This is the way of the
purchase of thy mercy, therefore there is infinite justice together with
infinite mercy, Oh be not wanton then, do not turn the grace of God into
wantonness, but rejoice in Gods mercy, yet rejoice with trembling and with fear
and reverence of the Name of God: When thou speak of the free grace of God,
and when thou come to believe in the free grace of God in the Gospel, thou
may come cheerfully and boldly, I but come with reverence and holy humble
fear, I do not mean despairing fear, nor servile slavish fear, but with awful
reverence of the glory of God that does appear in the Lord Jesus Christ; I need
not send you to the Law to cause fear in your hearts, there is enough in the
Gospel to cause your souls to tremble before God, as well as to believe in God,
Even our God is a consuming fire: Oh what was he to Jesus Christ? I need go no
further to lift up God to make him an object of my fear, but to look upon him
in his dealings with his Son; and therefore those Christians that walk loosly,
and altogether upon slight thoughts of mercy without any fear to ballast their
hearts, Oh certainly their Conversations are not Gospel Conversations, for if
thou did understand the way of Gods mercy in the Gospel, thou would see
that that should fill thy heart with fear and reverence all the days of thy
life. And as to take heed of wantonness, so to reverence Gods Justice, even the
dreadfulness of it so as the Gospel holds forth; to think that God would only
have you to have your thoughts about his mercy, and not to have your hearts to
give glory to his justice, it is certainly a vain conceit, and I fear it will
cause the Gospel to vanish into little in the hearts of men; when men apprehend
the Gospel so, as not to apprehend the dreadfulness of his justice; as if so be
that God would not have the glory of his justice. Christ has satisfied that:
Has Christ satisfied that? consider what thou say when thou say so, do
but consider how much of the glory of Gods justice does appear in what Christ
has done and suffered; I desire to hold forth no further the glory of justice
than by holding forth Jesus Christ to thee, Do not thou think that God would
have thee to sanctify in thy heart and life all the Attributes of God that
does appear in Jesus Christ? Now the glory of justice does appear as much in
Christ as the glory of mercy does; then thou that do profess the Gospel,
thou must sanctify this Attribute of God as well as the other, thou
sanctifiest them both in honoring Gods justice; I do not say that thou
should have a despairing heart, nay it will keep thee from despairing, or
that thou should have a servile spirit, but that thou should sanctify it
with reverence.

And another thing that is very considerable, What is God so set upon the glory
of his Justice in the Gospel? Oh labor you to be just in all your
Conversations; you see how God prizes justice, that he will rather have his Son
die and be made a curse, than justice should not have honor; Oh take heed of
injustice, the sin of injustice is a sin unbeseeming the Gospel; and here is an
argument against injustice, a stronger than I know any in all the Book of God,
or can be imagined by men and Angels, which is this, That in the Gospel I find
that God, has His heart so set upon justice, that rather than justice shall
not be satisfied he will not spare his Son one farthing (as the Scripture
says) He spared not his own Son, but His Son must pay to the uttermost, His
Son must bear his very wrath, and all, that God may show his infinite love to
justice; Oh then, let Christians love justice in all their dealings, in their
dealing with God, in their dealings between man and man. To see one that
professes the Gospel, and sometimes accounts the feet of those beautiful that
bring glad tidings of salvation, yet unjust in his dealings, so as do but
follow him in his course between man and man, there he makes no conscience of
justice, there he will rather break the rule of justice than (it may be) he
will lose six pence, or a shilling* what if it were the losing of thirty, or
forty pounds, is it such a thing, that the rule of justice must rather be
broken than the loss of a little money? Is this as becomes the Gospel? when as
thou hear the Gospel say, that rather than the glory of justice shall be
darkened, the Blood of his Son must go for it, and God expects that Christians
should be so in love with justice, that they should rather be content to be
undone in their estates, to beg their bread from door to door, than be unjust
in any of their actions, Oh it is an exceeding ecclipsing of the glory of the
Word when Professors of it shall be false in their dealings; Oh remember thou
Christian who hold up the Gospel with thy right hand, that when thou hear
of the death of Christ, there the love that God bears to justice is held forth,
and God is set upon the honor of justice and he will have it: thy justice in thy
trading, this must be made up one way or other, either thou must pay eternally
for it and so justice made up, or else it must cost the Blood of Jesus Christ,
God is set upon justice in another manner than you think of; Oh let your
Conversations be as becomes this truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, That the Lord in the Gospel, shows how he is set upon satisfying the
Law, and what a high price he puts upon the Law; The excellency of the Law does
more clearly appear in the Gospel than in the Doctrine of the Law its self; as
thus, Christ came to fulfill all righteousness, surely God set a high price of
his Law, that he would not save any soul living that had broken it, but by his
Son that must come to fulfill it: first, He must have all righteousness kept;
and to the end that he might manifest his love unto his Law (I say) therefore
it was that Christ must come and subject himself to the Law, he must be under
the Law; It was from thence that Christ says, It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. So was God set upon his Law, that when Christ did undertake for
mankind, if Christ had not satisfied every part of the Law that was required,
if there had been one jot of the Law unfilfilled, all mankind must have
perished in everlasting burnings: God sets an high rate on his Royal Law,
therefore learn to prize the Law of God: It Is true, you cannot keep it for
justification, that was Christ's task, so to keep the Law that he might justify
sinners, God by this teaches us to esteem highly of it, and not to slight it
and contemn it: the Law of God it is a precious Cristal glass, it is the very
glass of the holiness, and righteousness of God, and you must prize it, as you
do prize your great glasses that your Mariners have from other parts; you
bring home your great Cristals, of 20. or 40. or threescore pounds according to
the largeness of them: Now would not you take it extreme ill, when you have
bestowed so much upon it, that a child or servant should come and break it al
to pieces? Now (my brethren) consider, The Law of God here resembles the
Cristal glass; and as in your glasses you may see your faces, so in that
Cristal glass of the Law, the holiness of God is transparent, it is such a
glass that God prizes it more worth than all the world; this is visible: for
the Lord stands much upon the observing of the Law, and upon obedience unto it,
and therefore take heed of breaking it merely to satisfy your lusts, to
accommodate and befriend your own base ends, this is unbeseeming the Gospel of
Christ. There are many that make a great noise about Evangelical truths, so
that they cry up the Gospel of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, as they once did,
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and they think that this does
wholly take away their obedience to the Law of God, and that it must not be so
much as a rule of life. Certainly there is nothing hold forth the excellency of
the Law more than the knowledge of Jesus Christ (the only Lawgiver) being
subjected to the Law, and his subjection it was to take away our guiltiness,
to cancel the bond of the Law, binding us to eternal death: But we never read
that this subjection to the Law was to make void our obedience to it, so that
it should not be any rule of life unto us, for indeed, what is the Law of God,
but the pure Will of God? and do you think that Christ came to take us away
from obeying the Will of God, which was Christ's meat and drink to do? I stand
not so much upon that term, Whether as given by Moses? but upon those things
that are therein contained, therein revealed as part of the will of God, God
stands much upon that, that we should make the revealing of these things in the
Word to be the rule of our life, and this is manifested by Christ's ready and
full subjection unto it. And that is the first particular, what it is that we
come to know by the Gospel, according to which we should suit our Conversations.

SERMON V.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
IN the sixth place, Would you know what Conversation becomes the Gospel?
Consider what it is that the Gospel holds out to you, It holds forth Gods
infinite hatred of sin more than any other thing whatsoever.

1. A man may come to know the evil of sin partly by Reason, he may understand
that sin it is against a right rule, yea, by the light of reason he may
conceive it is but reasonable for a rational creature to live by rule, and to
transgress against the rule of justice and equity is evil.

2. A man may come to know the evil of sin by Gods Command: the Law of God
forbids sin, and therefore it is evil, certainly to transgress the Law of God,
to go against the Will of God must needs be a great transgression.

3. A man may come to know the evil of sin by the Dreadful Threatenings that are
added to the Law, Cursed is he that abides not in every thing that is written
in the Book of the Law to do it. This discovers a dreadful evil in sin: when a
soul comes to have a real sight of the dreadful threats that are in the Law, it
does exceedingly terrify conscience and raise up that sleepy Lion out of his
den.

4. A man may come to know the evil of sin by some dreadful judgments that God
has executed upon sinners here in this world, and by the terrors of conscience
that there are upon the wicked, as on Cain, Saul, and Judas etc. men many times
here for their sins, by the wrath of God that is revealed from Heaven against
sin in the execution of it, but take all those together, yea, did we see the
woeful execution of the wrath of God in Hell its self, did the Lord open unto us
a door into the chambers of death to discover the torments that are there, and
to hear all the shreeks and cries of the damned in everlasting burnings; yet
all this, the threats of the Law, the terrors of it, the agonies of Conscience,
the torments of the damned in Hell, (I say) put all together, and they would
not so much, nor so clearly discover Gods infinite hatred of sin, as what we
find in the Gospel; the red Glass of the blood of Jesus Christ, that was shed
for sin, does discover more of Gods hatred against it, than all the torments of
Hell can do, or all the threats of the Law can do; God does in inflicting his
wrath upon his Son for man's sin, thus preach unto the world? Well, I see that
you cannot be brought to understand how I hate sin with a perfect hatred, but
I Will have one way of argument to convince you, that it is impossible you should
stand against, I will therefore send my Son to take your nature upon him, and
to stand charged with your debt, and you shall see how I Will deal with him, who
is your Surety, I Will not spare him, I Will power out the vials of my wrath upon
him to the last drop, I Will make him a curse for sin, though he be infinitely
blessed, and equal with my self, yet I Will make him cry out in the anguish and
trouble of his soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He shall tread
the winepress of my wrath, I Will make the burden of sin heavy to Him, that shall
make Him fall grovelling upon His face, and sweat great clodders of blood in a
winter season, that shall run down from His body upon the cold ground, I Will do
this to that end that all the world (to whom the preaching of the Gospel shall
come) may see how infinitely I hate sin: This is one of Gods ends; though it is
true, that the principal end of the death of Christ it was, to satisfy Divine
Justice: But there is another end that God aims at in the death of his Son, To
declare to all the world, to men and Angels how infinitely the Lord does
abominate all sin: Now this is held forth in the Gospel more than in all the
execution of the Law; if the Law were executed to the full upon all the world,
it would not hold forth Gods hatred of sin so much as this does.

Do you believe this Gospel? Has God let you live under this Gospel, that you
hear it it your ears? And do you profess that the Lord has enlightened you by
his holy Spirit, to understand the certainty and reality of this? Oh then, let
your Conversation be as becomes this Evangelical truth.

Quest. What Conversation does become this?

Answ. Hence then, your own reason cannot but make a consequence from this that
the Gospel holds forth. Hence then, Cast away al sin as an abominable thing
from you; What have I to do any more with Idols? Hence then, Call no sin little
which so much provokes the Lord. Indeed if you were only acted by the light of
reason, reason perhaps will tell you that such things are but little and small,
and you need make no such great matter about them. But now, Art not thou a
Christian? A follower of Christ? A friend to the Gospel? For shame call no sin
little; for in the Gospel you see the infinite hatred of God against all sin,
yea, there is more evil in the least sin than in the greatest affliction
whatsoever (that is a point that has been long since opened to you at large,
and this will show it clearly, there is more evil in any sin than in the
greatest affliction, by the dealing of God the Father with his Son) and
therefore if you will be willing to live as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
rather be willing to bear any affliction in the world than wilfully to commit
the least sin: Are these two in the balance? Here is a great and a sore cross,
you think, how shall I endure that? On the other side, Here Is a sin to be
committed; if I venture upon this sin, it may be I shall be delivered from this
affliction? Now would this become the Gospel of Christ, for one that professes
that he does believe that God the Father dealt thus with His Son, that had sin
but by imputation upon Him, that He let out the vials of His wrath upon Him,
and made Him a curse for sin; and if Christ had but undertaken for to have
satisfied for one sin, though the least sin, He must have died for it, For the
wages of sin, is death! of sin indefinitly, it is death: And do I believe this,
and yet shall I rather choose the commission of a sin than the bearing of any
affliction? Oh this is infinitely unbeseeming the Gospel of Jesus Christ: do I
believe this, and is it real unto my soul? Oh let me then manifest in my whole
course and life that I tremble at the very thought of a sin, at the appearance
of evil, and am as much afraid of the least spark of lusts as of the fire of
Hell: let me discover the temptation to sin, that I may endeavor to avoid all
temptations to sin, because God has given such a testimony from Heaven against
sin, Oh it is a loud testimony indeed that God has given from heaven against
sin in the death of his Son, Oh then let my Conversation be such as I may make
it appear that I am afraid of the beginnings of sin, of the first whispering
and motions to sin, Oh set me not stand dandling of sin in my thoughts, and
roll it as a sweet morsel under my tongue, let me not entertain it in my
affections in the least degree, as to love it, to approve it, to delight in it,
but as soon as ever it enters into thy heart cast it out presently, let it not
lodge within thy doors one moment, raise up all the power of thy soul against
it, follow it with Hue and Cry, till thou have overtaken it, and then do
justice and judgment upon it, what though it may be a Delilah, yet cut it off;
Oh let me take heed of lying in any sin, have I bin overtaken in my sin? Oh let
me be willing rather to shame and condemn my self, to deny any thing in the
world rather than to continue in that sin, the Lord forbid that if I have been
once drawn to any sin, that I should think to cover it by another sin, by
adding one sin to another, to think to shift for my credit or esteem by adding
more sin to that already committed, Oh no, the Lord in his mercy has made
known unto me in the Gospel of Christ what sin means, the evil of sin, and
therefore I have learned rather to endure any thing than to multiply iniquity;
Indeed before I came to understand Jesus Christ, I thought sin was an evil
thing, and I abstained from gross sins by that dim light of Nature that is
within me; but since I came to understand the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the great
mystery of godliness in his Son, and the dealings of the Father with his Son,
the Lord knows now I abhor a sin in secret (though I were sure no body in the
world should ever know it) more than I do abhor Hell its self; I such a
Conversation as would manifest such a work of God upon the heart as this is
would become the Gospel of Christ indeed. Whereas otherwise brethren, if any of
you that do profess the Gospel of Christ shall make sin but as a slight thing,
and shall be ready to entertain sin in thy bosom, know that by this means, you
do no other but trample under foot the Blood of Jesus Christ as a common thing,
as a thing that had no worth at all in it. This does despite to the Gospel of
Christ, you do dishonor Jesus Christ, and you do put him to open shame whose
Name you have taken upon you by your profession: I Will give you a Scripture now
for this in Heb. 6. 4. etc. He speaks of some, that were once enlightened, and
had tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and
tasted of the good word of God (that is the Gospel) and the powers of the world
to come: if they should fall away, it were impossible to renew them to
repentance. Mark the reason: Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame: Such as fall off after the profession of
the Gospel into sinful ways, they are said here to crucify the Son of God
afresh, and to put him to open shame. This is far from walking as becomes the
Gospel. And so you have another text in Heb. 10. 29. etc. (he speaks of those
that had fallen off from their profession into sinful ways) Of how much s^rer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy of, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he
was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of
Grace? See how the holy Ghost speaks of such as fall from their profession into
sinful ways again. And there is a great deal of reason for it, for it is not so
much for those that never made profession of the Gospel, to fall to sin, not
such a horrid thing for them; but for those that have made profession of the
Gospel, that they hold forth thus much; this is the language of their actions
(though they dare not say so) Lord I acknowledge that I have seen the fruit of
thy hatred of sin in the death of thy Son, that thou did so hate sin, that
thou made thy Son to be a curse for sin; but yet for all this, such is the
strength of my lusts, I must have my lusts, though it be so vile in thine eyes
as the blood of thy Son went for it, yet I must have it rather than deny my
lusts; Oh what a dreadful thing is this? how provoking must it needs be to the
holy God? Oh happy had it been for such men and women that they had never heard
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But of the evil of walking unbeseeming the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, we shall speak to after, when we come to the
application; That Is then the sixth particular of what the Gospel holds forth The
infinite hatred of God against sin.

Now the seventh thing that is held forth in the Gospel that calls for a
Conversation beseeming, is this, The great price of souls. There Is nothing in
the world that ever God did, that does discover the worth of man's immortal soul
so as the Gospel of Jesus Christ does, there God manifests to all the world
what a price he puts upon man's soul, the Lord saw that men by sin had undone
themselves and that those souls that he made were like to perish to all
eternity, yea, were under the sentence of eternal death, and must certainly
perish eternally, if so be that some way were not found out by an infinite
wisdom for to ransom them; now says the Lord, rather than I will have all
souls perish; (it is true, the love that I have unto my Justice is such, as for
many souls I Will let them go, and they shall perish; but yet that I might show
that I have an high esteem of the souls of the children of men, for the
ransoming of that number that I have appointed from all eternity to save,) I Will
send my Son, and he shall die for the saving of souls, that souls may not
perish: If the Lord should have said concerning any one soul, I do so highly
prize this soul, and account the worth of it to be such, as rather than it
shall perish I Will disolve heaven and earth, heaven and earth shall perish
rather than this soul shall perish, you will say, this had been a great
testimony of Gods esteem of a soul: But know that the Gospel holds forth a
higher esteem of a soul than this comes to, when God shall say, Rather than
this, and the other soul shall perish, I Will send my Son to be made a Curse;
This the Gospel holds forth; this is infinitely a higher price that God puts
upon a soul: You know therefore what the Apostle says in 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed (says he) with corruptible
things; as silver, and gold: Then in the 19. verse, But with the precious blood
of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, or without spot: It Is not silver and
gold: or any corruptible thing that can redeem you, but the precious blood of
Jesus Christ, Oh that blood, that is more precious than the world, even all the
world must let the redemption of a soul alone for ever, all the Angels in
Heaven if they would have joined together to have redeemed a soul, and would
have ventured themselves to have been destroyed for ever that they might have
redeemed a soul, it would not have been, they must all let the redemption of a
soul alone for ever; the matter then of the redemption of a soul is more than
we are aware of, and we could never have come to have known this but by the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: The full price of a soul is writ down by the finger of
Gods Spirit in the Gospel of Christ, which is only this, The Blood of the Son
of God, the Blood of the Son of God.

Well then, let our Conversation be as becomes this that is held forth in this
Gospel, that is thus, Manifesting in your Conversation that you set a high price
upon your souls: do not venture your souls upon nothing; Oh how unbeseeming is
this, that when God shall set such a price upon a soul, as to give for the
redemption of it more than ten thousand thousand worlds are worth, yet that a
man or woman that professes themselves to be Christians shall venture the loss
of their souls for the getting of sixpence or twelvepence, hazard those
immortal Jewels for one or two minutes of sensual pleasure, to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh; what is it else, when such will lie or cosen for a little
while for thick clay? For the Lords sake, do not lay down thy everlasting soul
at stake for a little gain, some for a little credit; art thou a Christian?
did ever read the Gospel, man or woman did thou ever hear of Christ? and
do thou know what the death of Christ meant? and wherefore Christ came into
the world? must Heaven and earth be moved to provide a way to ransom souls? and
do thou set them at so low a rate? Oh how unbeseeming is this to the Gospel?

And others pawn away their souls, when God manifests what a price he sets upon
them, yet will pawn their souls to the very Devil.

Quest. You will say, Is any man so wicked as to pawn away his soul to the
Devil?

Ans. Yes, When any man will venture upon sin, but upon this condition, I will
repent before I die; that is, as if I should say thus, Here I give my soul to
pawn, if I do repent, then I Will have it again, if I do not repent before I die,
then it is gone for ever. As when you give a pawn, you give it upon these terms,
Well, I give you this, and if I bring you by such a time so much money, then
I Will have it again, and if not, then it is gone. So do men and women, they say
thus, Here Devil, thou shall have the possession of my soul all this while so
long as I am in a way of sin, if I do repent, then I must have it again, but if
I do not repent before I die, then thou shall have it for ever. Now do thou
know the price of a soul? Oh! is this to show the high price of a soul, that
will pawn your souls thus? And mark to whom you pawn it, you pawn it to the
Devil, he has it all this time, it is in his custody: all the while that any one
sins upon hope of repentance, (I say) til they repent the Devil has their
souls in his possession, in his hands: as when you pawn a piece of
housholdstuff, til the time that you bring the money, so long the man you pawn
it to has the possession of it. And thus do people; you put your souls into
the Devils hands, and upon such a condition that you are not able to perform;
that is, if you repent, you will have it again, if not, he must have it for
ever: Oh friends, you little know what repentance means! What is it to repent?
it requires a mighty work of God, the same power of God that made the world is
required to break the heart of a sinner, so that you put it to pawn upon that
that is impossible for you your selves to perform by all the power that you
have: Now if a man put a thing to pawn for that which is impossible for him to
redeem, it may be, if he should have a great many friends that will do some
great matter for him, then he may redeem it, but it is beyond his power; you
will say, there is a great deal of danger then that that pawn shall never be
redeemed. So know, when you pawn your souls, you put it into the hands of
Satan, and lock it up in the powers of darkness, and pawn it for that that you
have no power to bring: Do you prize the Gospel? and know what a price God has
set upon souls? O then take heed and set a greater prise upon your souls than
to pawn them away for every trifle, a thing of naught.

And then, If this be held forth in the Gospel, O then do not pollute and
defile you souls with sin as you do from time to time. God has a high esteem
of them, have you a high esteem of them likewise. Do not make your souls
drudges and scuullions to your bodies, only to make use of your souls to
provide for the satisfying of the lusts of the flesh, as many men and women
have no other use of their precious immortal souls all their lives, but only
their souls are employed to be slaves for the lusts of their flesh: Oh! are
these the souls that must cost the blood of Christ, that God has put such a
price upon? surely you do not know the Gospel nor Jesus Christ. If I should tell
you what Philosophers say of the soul, of men's immortal eternal souls (though
this be now doubted, yet it was plentifully known among the Heathens) these
would be but dry things to you in comparison of this, to tell you that Jesus
Christ has died to redeem souls, there is more in this than in all the arguments
that possibly can be brought to show the excellency of the soul of man.

Oh then, likewise let your Conversation be as becomes this of the Gospel, in
your care of the souls of those that are committed to your care and charge. Do
you profess the Gospel? then you profess withal that God so esteemed of a soul,
that he gave the life and blood of his Son to ransom a soul; Oh then, really
demonstrate that you do highly esteem of the souls of your children, and
servants, by walking convincingly before them, that you may do all the good you
can to them, by instructing of them, by praying for them, and with them; and so
before all your friends and acquaintance, let such kind of meditations work
thus in you as these, Oh Lord, since I came to know the Gospel, I have learned
what a high price thou have put upon souls, Lord, this shall make me for
evermore to value souls at a higher rate than heretofore I have done. Oh it
were an excellent point to urge upon Ministers, who are charged with many
souls, Oh let them so watch over them, pray for them, and preach to them all
the Counsels of God, both in season and out of season, that in the great Day of
Christ, they may be clear of the blood of all men, as Paul was. And that is the
seventh thing that the Gospel holds forth unto us, The preciousness of souls;
and let your Conversations be as becomes this great point of the Gospel.

But then Eighthly, which is as principal a one almost as any and nearly
concerns us, and that is this: The Gospel discovers unto us, the great honor
that God has put upon humane Nature above the Angels. This could never have
been known but by the Gospel, this is as proper a thing to the Gospel as any I
have spoken of: And one special design that God had in the Gospel, was, To
reveal those thoughts and counsels that he had from al eternity, to put mighty
and great Excellencies upon our humane Nature in these two particulars.

First, In the Personal Union of Man's Nature to the second Person in Trinity;
That Is the first, and great way of honor that God has crowned human Nature
with. Hence the Apostle in 1 Timothy 1. 6. Without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness. What is it? God was manifested in the flesh. God
manifested in the flesh! that is a great mystery of godliness. Now it could not
be such a mystery, if God had only taken an humane shape upon Him, (for so it
was in the time of the Law) Jesus Christ often took humane shape; as when He
strove with Jacob, it was Jesus Christ, as might easily appear. But great is
the mystery of godliness, without controversy it is great. God manifested in
the flesh: that is, God taking flesh of man into a personal union, which is
more fully expressed in John, 1. 4. The Word was made flesh. This was a strange
speech, but proper to the Gospel. An Heathen would have thought this a strange
speech, and especially if he knew, that by the Word was meant, He that was true
and eternal God. And then, in Heb. 2. 16. it is said, That Christ did not take
the Nature of Angels upon him; but the seed of Abraham. So that it appears by
the personal union of our Natures to the Son of God, God has advanced human
Nature above Angels, above all creatures. Truly my Brethren, in Christ's taking
our Nature upon Him, which the Gospel holds forth to us, me thinks we may see
God (as it were) resolving to do a work from Himself, to the uttermost, to
manifest the uttermost of his glory in a work out of Himself, the work of God
within Himself, it is, His eternal generation, and the possession of the holy
Ghost: but now God would work out of Himself, and work out of Himself to the
uttermost extent; I Will make a world (says God,) Heavens and Earth by my Word.
But this is not such a glorious work as I am able to do: I could make ten
thousand worlds, and when I have made them I could make as many more, and more
glorious: But I would do some work wherein I might manifest even the uttermost
of my glory: What work is that? that is, The work that God pitched upon, He
would do one work from without to manifest the uttermost of his glory, and the
Lord rather pitches upon this, To take the nature of Man into a personal union
with His Son, that is the uttermost: And it is impossible that Men or Angels, if
they were left to all eternity to imagine, could think of a work that it were
possible for God to express more of His power, wisdom, and glory in: but we
know but little of it now, but we shall know more in Heaven. Now, Oh how has
God honored humane Nature in this! That when He would do a work to the utmost
of His Excellency, that He would pitch upon Man's Nature, to take it into
Personal Union with Himself; here is the mystery of the Gospel: now this is
indeed the marrow of the mystery of the Gospel, The Word made flesh: the
second Person in Trinity taking Man's Nature upon Him; This is the mystery of
the Gospel that Angels and Saints admire at, and shall be taken up to all
eternity in admiring and praising and magnifying God for. That Is the first way
of Gods honoring Man's Nature. And then, there is a second thing which the
Gospel reveals, and that is this, In putting honor not only upon the Nature of
Man, as having soul and body, but putting a mighty honor upon the very Body of
Man, the meanest and the very lowest part of Man, the very shel, outside, rine
and case of Man: that you have in 1 Cor. 6. 19. What, know ye not that your
body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you? Your body is the Temple
of the holy Ghost. You have no such thing revealed in the old Testament, this
comes by the light of the Gospel, that the Lord has made the bodies of the
Saints to be Temples to the holy Ghost, that the holy Ghost dwells in their very
Bodies as in a Temple; as the King in his Palace, so the holy Ghost in His
Temple: Now these two are great things revealed in the Gospel, and had we but a
clear understanding of these two things, Oh! it would mightily elevate our
spirits. And Conversations suitable to these two particulars surely must needs
be a high raised Conversation. As now for instance,

3. In the personal union of our natures with the second Person in Trinity: Oh
how should this raise up our hearts and we should manifest the elevation of our
spirits in our Conversation, so as it becomes those that may expect great
things from God, surely that God that has honored our natures so, as to be
personally united to his Son, he does intend great things to some of the
children of men, as now, Suppose you that are the poorest and meanest here in
this Congregation, you had a Sister that were married to the greatest Emperor
in the world, yea, to one that were Emperor of all the whole Earth; now you
would think to live another kind of life than you did before, were it beseeming
such a man to live now upon scraping of Channels, or wiping of horse heels, (or
any mean employment,) when his Sister is married to the only Monarch of all the
whole earth, surely he may think now, I must live at a higher rate, for I may
expect something by this: So should every one of the children of men think
thus, indeed I have lived in a mean base way, the humane nature of mine has
been basely subject to filthy lusts, all my days, I have been a bondslave to
sin and Satan, but when I come to hear of the Gospel, I hear that the second
Person in Trinity, God blessed for ever, equal with the Father, that is the
Heir of all things, that he has not married my humane nature, but has taken
it into a personal union with himself, and is become my kinsman, my near
kinsman, has taken this into the nearest union as is possible for a creature
to be taken into with God: Oh let us be raised then in our thoughts, to think,
surely God intends higher things for some of the children of men, than to eat
and drink, and satisfy the flesh, and be brutish here in the world, there are
higher things that God will do for mankind, and why not for me? I am not
excluded no more than others? It was a speech I remember of Seneca, (though a
Heathen) I am greater (says he) and I am born to greater things than to be a
slave to my body: A Heathen could say so: Oh but when we hear of humane nature
so advanced and enthroned in Christ, we should think with our selves, that any
one that has humanity in them is born to higher things, than to make provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: What will thou be a slave to the
Devil now? Thou hear how God has dignified the nature of man into so near a
union with himself, Oh does not this mystery of the Gospel call to all the
children of men? Oh all you children of men! Behold what God has done for man
kind! surely the thoughts of God for mankind are great and glorious, there be
higher things you may attain unto, and will you yet perish, and choose your
portion here in this world, and be grovelling on the ground, as if there were no
higher thoughts that God had for your good, than merely to live as brute
beasts, to eat and drink, and then rise up to play? Oh if God has advanced
man's nature so, do not despise it in the meanest of the children of men, the
lowest servant, or poorest boy that lies begging at your door for a piece of
bread, (for it is of the same kind that is united in a personal union with the
second Person in Trinity, of the same nature which this poor boy that lies
begging at your door for broken bread and meat) therefore honor humane nature
in every one, and do not vilify it in thy self; those men that live under the
Gospel and vilify humane nature, they put a dishonor upon Jesus Christ. And
even reverence thy self in private when thou art alone, (I say) reverence thy
self, do not abuse thy body, it is the Temple of the holy Ghost. Oh remember
this all you that are professors of Religion, that these bodies of yours, this
flesh of yours (if you be godly and walk answerable to your profession) I say
this flesh of yours it is the very Temple of the holy Ghost, do not abuse it;
it is the Apostles argument, Therefore fly fornication, and be not joined to
whores; for your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost: Oh it makes the sin
of uncleanness to one that professes the Gospel of Christ a cursed sin, the sin
of uncleaness in a professor of the Gospel, it is a thousand thousand times more
abominable than the sin of uncleanness in another: why? Because they know how
God has advanced humane nature into a personal union with himself, and how
their bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost. What shall I make the Temple of
God a ^^y for the unclean spirit, a cage of unclean birds? God forbid. There
has been a great deal of do about stony Churches and Temples, and you should
have a great many base whoremasters plead for the Whore of Rome (the Mistress of
all fornications) in bowing, and cringing with Cap, and knee as soon as they
set their foot in some of our meeting places; and in the mean time abuse the
Saints which are the Temples of the holy Ghost, and abuse their own bodies, and
yet they profess themselves Christians; Oh now, either deny thy Christianity,
or do not abuse thy body to any filthy lust, for it is the Temple of the holy
Ghost. This the Gospel holds forth. And let thy Conversation be now as becomes
the Gospel of Jesus Christ; not abusing thy body so; For we see that the Gospel
calls for bodily cleanness, as well as spiritual cleanness, and truly I do not
know stronger arguments to godliness than these that we have mentioned here in
the Gospel: We have gone through three, Gods infinite hatred of sin. The price
of souls. And the honor that the Gospel shows that God has put upon humane
nature. Conversations but becoming these three, would be other manner of
Conversations than you have. I shall only speak of a fourth, and that is this.

4. The Gospel holds forth the greatest example of self-denial that ever was in
the world, and by all ways that ever God has made known his mind, he never
has revealed his will in an example of self-denial so as he has done in the
Gospel, and that is in the example of the Lord Jesus Christ: God evidenceth
there such a work of self-denial, as never was: and it is impossible to
apprehend a greater example of self-denial than that is; though Christ thought
it no robbery to be equal with God; read but the second of the Philippians,
verse. 7, 8. and there you may see what Christ was, and yet how he emptied
himself, how he denied himself in his honor, how vile he was made in the world,
though he was the brightness of his fathers glory, yet he was made of no
reputation; how he denied himself in riches, Christ that was the Heir of all
things, though he were rich, yet he was made poor for us; how he denied himself
in his pleasures, he was the delight of the Father from all eternity, and yet
he was made a man of sorrows; he denied himself in his life, for he was the
Lord of life, and yet he subjected himself to death, to a cursed death for us:
Oh the example of Christ in self-denial is the greatest that ever was: and this
seems to be one great end of the humiliation of Jesus Christ to hold forth a
preaching pattern of self-denial to the world: And there is a great deal more
power in the pattern and example of self-denial, then in the commands of
self-denial, I only present this to show you that it is the most unbeseeming
the Gospel for any one that professes the Gospel to be selvish, altogether
scraping for themselves; and whatsoever service they are put upon, except self
may have an oar in it, they have no mind to it; Oh it is becoming the Gospel of
Jesus Christ for men and women to be emprtied of themselves, no matter what
becomes of our selves, but be willing to give up our selves for public good,
to venture your estates, and lives, and all your comforts, yea to be swallowed
up in the glory of God, to be nothing, that Christ may be all. In the Gospel of
Christ, we find that Christ he was swallowed up with the glory of his Father;
and he came not to do his own will, but the will of his father that sent him;
and though he was one that had infinitely more excellency than all men and
Angels in Heaven and Earth, yet he was content for the honor of his Father to
be made as a worm and no man, to be trampled under foot, to endure the greatest
extremities of all sorts; this holds out an example to us, that while we live
in this world we should be taken off from our selves: Oh this self-love sticks
much in the hearts of men and women: now upon the example of Christ's
self-denial, we are required to deny our selves, and it is the proper lesson of
the Gospel, He that will follow me, let him deny himself, you never read of
such a precept in all the old Testament; (though no question the people of God
did deny themselves then,) but in express terms so fully you have not such a
thing there: and there is no such rules among the Heathens for a man to deny
himself, Let him deny himself; those that know the Original, know that the word
is, not only to Deny, but there is that joined to it that does increase the
signification, let them deny themselves, thoroughly, there is a Preposition put
to the word, to show that those that will come to Christ must deny themselves,
and that thoroughly, it is a proper lesson of the Gospel, and the first lesson.
Oh when our Lord and Master has thus denied himself, and emptied himself for
good to us, what is beseeming this Gospel, but that all that are professors of
it should deny themselves? It is very unbeseeming the glorious Gospel, for a
Christian to be selvish, to have his self ends, and self-waies, and interests
in every thing, as generally almost al men in the world they are acted by self,
some self ends, or self-excellency carries them on in their actions, or else
they have no heart to do any thing; this is unbecoming the Gospel. But now I
say, one that would live as becomes the Gospel, must be wholly emptied of
himself, whatsoever parts, estate, credit, or honor he has in the world, must
be melted into the glory of God; Jesus Christ for the glory of His Father, was
content infinitely to deny Himself more than we can; For what have we to deny
our selves of? Do you or I live as becomes the Gospel? when (I say) all that we
apprehend to have any excellency in, we have it all swallowed up in the glory
of God, when we can dedicate and consecrate our lives, honors, liberties,
estates, comforts, and all to the glory of God, and be as nothing to our
selves, and let God be all in all to us, Ministers may bring many reasons why
we should deny our selves, but all these reasons comes to nothing, till the
soul comes to behold the clear light of the Gospel, and there beholds the Son
of God by faith, how he did empty Himself; nay then, says a believing soul, if
the Son of God did deny Himself, was emptied thus for me, Oh then let me be
wholly taken off from my self, and venture wholly upon God, I must not live in
my self, nor live for my self, nor live to my self; but wholly live in God, and
for God, and to God, and upon God: Oh this is that which becomes the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

SERMON VI.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
THE Ninth thing that the Gospel holds forth is this, That our Conversation
should be suitable to spiritual worship, the spiritual worshipping of God. The
worship that there was in the time of the Law, it was carnal in comparison of
what there is in the time of the Gospel: And therefore a great part of the
worship of God is called, a carnal commandment, and rudiments of the world,
and beggarly things; If you read the 2d of Colossians, there you have strange
expressions about that which was even the worship of God: and so in the Hebrews
diverse times. But now you know what Christ says in John 4. to the woman of
Samaria, The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem worship the Father: But the hour comes, when the true worshipers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for such the Father seeks to
worship him. We must not think to worship God in such carnal ways as before. I
beseech you consider this one thing, Certainly God will have as much worship in
the time of the Gospel, as ever He had: But where we have one external thing to
worship God in now, in the time of the Law there was an hundred, an hundred to
one of external things: yet now this worship of God must be made up some way;
we are not called to those outward worshipings, offerings, sacrifices, and
costly things as they were in the time of the Law; now, how should this be made
up, but in spiritual sacrifices, in presenting our bodies and souls to God as a
living sacrifice, therefore such men and women as altogether are for the
outside of things in the worship of God, and because God has appointed but a
few things in his worship; we have use of no other creature in the worshipping
of God, but merely the Bread and Wine, and Water, only these elements; and the
Man to speak to us, to be either Gods mouth to us, or our mouth to God; there is
all we have appointed in the Gospel for the worship of God; therefore it is
expected if we would have our Conversation be as becoms the Gospel, to be very
spiritual in our worship, and therefore to take heed of thinking to make up
Gods worship with external things of our own, that is exceedingly unbeseeming
the Gospel: Many thought in former times, they did honor God much by adding to
His Worship ceremonies, external things; and peoples hearts are set most upon
them, because they are from man, they are humane: I Will give you but
one-Scripture to show how we should for ever take heed of traditions of men,
and of mixtures in the Worship of God, because that the Gospel points at
spiritual worship: That place in 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold: from what? from
your vain Conversations received by traditions from your fathers; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. See
what an argument the Apostle uses here unto those he writ to, says he, There
was a time that you worshipped God in an external way, and in a superstitious
manner, according to the traditions and fancies of your fathers, this was
before you knew Jesus Christ; but (says he) now you come to know Jesus Christ,
know it was the blood of Jesus Christ that was shed to redeem you from this
vain Conversation that you received by tradition from your forefathers. I do
not know any one Scripture has more power in it to take off men's hearts from
all false and superstitious worship, from all old customs that they had from
their forefathers, (as people are mightily set upon old customs, to worship God
according to them) what a stir and do had we to get off men from their late
Service Book (the great Diana of England) which was made up of the ends and
shreds of the Romish Mass Book, only printed in an English letter; and reading
and babbling over Burials, and such kind of trumperies, Oh how were those old
Samaritan customs settled in the hearts of men? as coming up to the Communion
Table, and there to kneel down at Rails like so many Beads-men to the Pope, and
Votaries to Rome. Men's hearts are mightily set upon such foolish things as
these are. But now this text tells you, that if you know what it is to be
redeemed by the blood of Christ, you must know that the blood of Christ was
shed for, to take you off from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your forefathers: Christ shed his blood that he might deliver you from all
such traditional things, that so you might worship God in spirit and in truth;
this becomes the Gospel. And at your leisure do but read over that second
Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, speaking of men, that in a voluntary
humility, worshipped Angels, intruding into those things which they have not
seen, and vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind. And then in the 16. verse, Let
no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, not that you may not eat flesh
at such and such times in the year) or in respect of an holy day, or of the new
moon, or of the Sabbath days, (the Jewish Sabbath day:) let no man judge you
(says the Apostle) in regard of these things, which are a shadow of things to
come. Then in the 19. verse. And not holding the head. Those that stood upon
such things as these are, they are here charged for not holding the head, that
is, they did not hold Christ; as if the Apostle should say, If so be that you
hold Christ, and profess Christ, you would not stand upon these things, upon
these kind of superstitious ways in the worship of God. And you shall find in
the Epistle to the Galatians, the Apostle telling of the GALATIANS about such
kind of ways of continuing and holding of the worship of the Law, says he in
Gal. 4. 10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years: What then? I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. As if the Apostle
should say, I profess I see you stand upon such old things, and worshipping of
God in an external way; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed all my labor
in vain: This is so opposite to the Gospel, as makes me think, and am afraid
that all my preaching of the Gospel to you is in vain: and yet mark my
Brethren, what were these days, and months, and times, and years? they were
such as God heretofore had appointed, but now they were ceased, after Christ
came, out of date, and yet they sticking to them after the death of Christ
(says the Apostle) I profess I am afraid of you, that all my preaching in vain
to you: Now my brethren what shall we say to those that stick upon these things
that God had never appointed, but were of Popish ordination: As keeping one
time more holy than another, and thinking thereby to tender up service to God:
Why should we not keep the memory of such and such times? Now as to keep them
so as to think that they shall sanctify any time, is a dangerous thing, a sign
that they understand the Gospel but little, to think that any men upon any
reason whatsoever should be able to sanctify a time, to make that time to be
holy, (I say) that is unbeseeming the Gospel; no man can make a holy day under
the Gospel.

Obj. But you will say, We keep days of fasting, and thanksgiving.

Ans. But there is a great deal of difference between them and these times that
here the Apostle speaks of.

Now the keeping of holy days is this: We account the time holy, and the very
duty is more acceptable because it is performed at that time; as now on the
Sabbath day, there may be a Sermon on the week day, but certainly it is a more
holy worship of God to hear upon the Sabbath, than on the week day, and we
sanctify Gods Name more on the Sabbath than on the week; why? Because the time
does sanctify the duty, being set apart by God: As in the Temple, the duty was
more acceptable than in any other place, why? because it was set apart by God;
but we cannot make any place holy, and so no time holy: so that our days of
fasting and thansgiving are only thus, that we will spend that time in holy
duties, to humble our selves, or to bless God, but not to make this time holy,
so that the duty should be holy because it is on this day rather than on another
day; that is the superstition of it, when a duty should be holy rather on this
day than on another; as now, some they think it is a more holy thing to receive
the Lords Supper on an Ester day than on another day; this is superstition, to
think the duty is more holy by any holiness that men put upon a thing, that is
unbeseeming the Gospel; and we are redeemed from such vain Conversations by the
blood of Christ; and while men stick upon these things, and say, let them do
what they will me thinks these things are good and right, it is very evil. Thus
it was with the Galatians, they had more seeming reason to think that those
things that they stuck upon were according to God than you, yet says the
Apostle, I am afraid of you lest I have spent all my labor in vain, lest I have
been a burning and shining lamp to no purpose: and truly there is no people of
which there can be less hope that the Ministry of the Word should work sayingly
upon, than those people that are set upon old customs in the worship of God, as
wines upon their lees: and till the Lord be pleased to take off your hearts
from old customs in the service and worship of God, there is a plain
demonstration that the preaching of the Gospel has not prevailed with your
hearts, for you do not live as becomes the Gospel: That which becomes the
Gospel it is worshipping God only in a spiritual way, the consecrating of your
souls and bodies. and all you have to the worship of God, in making them to be
an holy sacrifice to God, and that according to the rules of the Gospel, which
is your reasonable service. And that is another particular that the Gospel
teaches: And therefore to live as becomes the Gospel is, to worship God in
spirit and in truth.

The tenth thing that I shall further add of what the Gospel holds forth to us,
and that is of such consequence that I shall a little insist upon it, that is,
The near relation that we are in to God and Christ, and spiritual union with
him. This is opened in the Gospel more fully than ever it was before. The
relation to God.

First, God as a Father, and Believers as Children, yea, and as Children of
age; for though in the Law, it is true, we find that God was there a Father, and
Ephraim was his deer son: But you shall find in the 3. of Galatians, That now
we are as Children of age; whereas Believers in the time of the Law were under
age. Now you know any of your children when they come to be of age, and to live
to themselves, and out of their Apprentiships, then their lives are after
another manner than when they were little children in their nonage, now they
come to have stocks in their hands, to trade for themselves, and not to be any
more as servants; a child before he comes of age is under Tutors and Governors
in the family, but when he comes to years of discretion, then he lives like a
man, and commands rather in the family, and is serviceable to none, but his
father and mother. So we should live as becomes children of age, that is,
manifesting in our Conversations a staiedness, wisdom, and gravity, and now to
live more above the things of this world than before we did, as children of age.

And for the union we have with God, that is, That the Saints now are made one
with God, and with Christ his Son: In 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit. It Is a very strange expression, we are one Spirit with God
and with Jesus Christ. O what Conversation becomes this, that we should be
principled and acted with the same Spirit? surely such a one as must manifest
that we are crowned and graced with the same Spirit, that is Gods Spirit, and
the Spirit of Jesus Christ his Son; now surely that must needs be a very holy
spiritual Conversation. 1 Cor. 3. 16. Yea, the Spirit of God dwells in you
(says the text) and 2 Cor. 6. 16, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my People. See the near union that we
have with God that the Gospel holds forth to us. Yea and there is another
phrase which is very remarkable, That as the Spirit of God is in Believers, so
Believers are in the Spirit: Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also
walk in the Spirit (says the text.) The Spirit lives in us, and we live in the
Spirit, what Conversation must there needs be here then? Oh let us walk, not in
a fleshly way, to satisfy the lusts of the flesh, but in the Spirit, the
fruits that do become the Spirit of God: You shall see them in this 5. of Gal.
22. verse. etc. But the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such
there is no Law. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts of it. If we walk in the Spirit, then here is the fruit of
the Spirit; Would you have your Conversations such as becomes the Gospel, then
mark but these three phrases.

1. The Spirit of God is in you, in a constant way taking up his habitation and
residence in your bosoms.

2. You live in the very Spirit, as in the proper element of a Christian.

3. You are one Spirit with God. Put these three, and Oh now, how unbeseeming
to these three expressions (that we have in the Gospel and no where else) is it
for professors of the Gospel so satisfy the lusts of the flesh? Oh how
unsuitable are fleshly lusts to a spiritual man? Oh take heed of this for ever
you that make profession of the Gospel, do not wallow in the mire of
uncleanness, do not give liberty to the lusts of the flesh, but mortify the
lusts of the flesh and the deeds thereof, for you are joined so near to God
himself, ye live in God too: Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God.
It Is a very transcendent phrase that the Saints do live in God; you do not only
live in the air, and breath in the air, but while you live here in the world
you live in God, Oh the wonderful mystery of the Gospel! and the high things
that are held forth in the Gospel, That Gods Spirit is in us, and we are in the
Spirit, and we are the same Spirit with God, yea, and we live in God; Oh then
what a Conversation should be suitable to these things; seeing these things are
thus, what manner of persons ought we to be? Yea, and there is another
expression and that is more full than any of these, and that is in the prayer of
Christ, in the 17. of John, 21. That they all may be one, as Thou Father art in
Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us. The Gospel discovers this
union, for the Saints to be one with the Father and Son, as the Father and Son
are one; now those that are joined so near to God, their Conversations had need
be holy, and blameless, witnessing the glory of that God that they are so near
related to. I remember in handling of that point in drawing nigh to God in his
Worship: There we showed what holiness is required in those that are so nigh to
God; but those that are one with God, and in God Oh how much of God, of Jesus
Christ should shine forth by their lives in the faces of others? Read these
scriptures and by faith make them real to your souls, and then let your
consciences tell you what Conversations is required of you: If you be a
Believer, this is so: Charge your souls with this, when any temptation to evil
comes; What, is it fit for such a one as I to live thus, who have the Spirit of
God dwelling in me, yea and I dwelling in the Spirit of God, and joined so as
to be one spirit with God, yea and to live in God, and to be one with God, as
the Father and the Son is one? and is this conversation such as beseems one
that is raised to such a height of honor as this is? Christians, remember this,
it will be a mighty help to your holy Conversations, to put you on to shine
before men in a holy Conversation, to walk in the Spirit, considering the near
union we have with God; we should never have known these things had we not had
them revealed to us by the Gospel. Oh this glorious Gospel that has revealed
such glorious things to us as this is.

And then, Our relation and our union with Jesus Christ. You know the Scripture
makes Christ sometimes to be the Root, and we the Branches, therefore we are to
bring forth fruit, seeing that we are Branches in Him that is the Root: Bring
forth fruit suitable to the Sap. You that bring forth sour grapes, grapes of
Gomorrah, that have bitter tart spirits, and live in any wicked and sinful way:
Is this the Sap that is suitable to the Root? You are graffed into Jesus Christ,
and not into a Crab-stock: And do you receive this Sap from the Root? Oh you
are a dishonor to the Root you grow upon. I am the true Vine (says Christ,)
and every Branch in me bears fruit, and my Father purges it, that it may
bring forth more fruit. Christians should so live in their Conversations as to
manifest the fullness of the sap and juice that there is in the Root, the Lord
Jesus Christ; it is not enough here and there to have a leaf, and a grape or
two, but full ripe clusters of grapes becomes those that grow upon such a
fruitful Root.

And then you know, Christ is the Head, and we the Members. Then do not
dishonor your Head: When there is a temptation comes to any sin, but will not
this be a dishonor to my Head? do I receive such a spirit from the Head to act
after such a sinful course? Oh be not a crown of thorns to your Head Jesus
Christ. Yea, and the Union is very great; for it is not only that we are
Members of Christ, and so we are in Christ; but Christ in us: the Root is not
in the Branch, though the Branches be in the Root: and the Head is not in the
Members, though the Head be joined with the members. But Christ is in us, as we
are in Him, and so the union is very glorious and mysterious. You complain of
weakness: But is there not strength in Christ? are you not joined to Christ
thus, and a member of Him, and a branch in Him? what ever infirmities you have
which bows you down, yet there is power enough in Jesus Christ to convay to
any, to enable them to walk in an holy Conversation before the Lord, to renew
their strength as the Eagle: Manifest then the virtue of your Head, from whence
all the sinnews of every members strength does arise.

And then, you know the relation we have to Christ, As He is the Husband, we
the Spouse: Oh do not discredit your Husband. Any wise virtuous Wife would make
it a mighty argument against any evil way; It will disgrace my Husband;
especially if her Husband be a public man in place and authority. Oh let this
be an argument against every sin, even the appearence of evil, it will be
dishonorable to the Lord Jesus who is my Husband, How can I do this wickedness
against my Lord, and my God, who has betrothed me to Himself, so that I am
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. That Is the second thing.

And then a Third thing that the Gospel holds forth to us that we should labor
to suit our Conversations according, is this; The near Union that the Saints
have one with another. It Is not so revealed any where as in the Gospel. Romans
12. 5. we are said there, to be members one of another, as we are members of
Christ. (I beseech you observe it) so we are members one of another. That
Scripture may be in stead of all for this, in Ephesians. 4. 4. the exhortation
there to unity; We must endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. Why? For, there is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. See, here is some
seven ones to be an argument of unity. One body, and one spirit, and called in
the hope of one calling, and one Lord, and one Faith, and one Baptism, and one
God: Where have you such a unity demonstrated but in the Gospel of peace and
love? And I do not know in all the Book of God where any one duty is more
pressed than unity. Somewhat we hinted in speaking of the love of God, which is
a great design of the Gospel to hold forth, and there we spoke somewhat of
Love: But here of the unity of the Saints, being so near united into one thing,
the Saints should be one; and certainly it is the most unbeseeming thing in the
world that can be for Saints to be divided in their affections upon some little
differences in judgment; Let me argue with you, What? was the Coat of Christ
without any seam, and shall the body of Christ be rent all to pieces? Fie for
shame, the Gospel of Christ is in your hands which teaches another lesson.
Next to our salvation, the Gospel intends the union of Saints, and there is
nothing pressed more strongly in every leaf of it, and it is here in my very text
that makes me to speak to this; for mark the very words that follow in this of
my text, Phil. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

Now if you should say, Wherein should we walk so? The Apostle does answer
then, That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for
the faith of the Gospel. Mark, striving together, he would have the Saints to
be strivers: I but strivers for what? Not for their own will and humors, and
opinions, and fancies, and customs, and traditions which are out of date; But
strivers for the faith, for the faith of the Gospel, for the Doctrine of faith;
and they should labor to join all their strength together (both shoulders and
hearts:) There Is a great deal of striving now, Professors of the Gospel they
strive asunder; but the holy Ghost would have us strive together; and this is
as becomes the Gospel (says the text:) The Apostle here does instance in this
particular above all others, that to live as it becomes the Gospel, it is to
stand fast, with one Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel. Oh how unbecoming the Gospel is the ways and lives of most
Christians now!

Q. You will say, From whence are these sad divisions and risings up of hearts
amongst the Tribes, so that one thinks that he has the truth, and another
judges that he alone is in the right way?

A. I beseech you therefore, because it is so fully instanced in the very words
of the Text, that the Apostle instances in this particular, give me leave to
speak of it in a few words, certainly his meaning is not (when he says, that
you shall be of one spirit, and of one mind,) that men should give up their
judgments and consciences to the opinions of other men, that others (according
to their power) may again lord it over us and so enslave our selves, to draw in
their yokes, to grind in their mills, and plow with their asses, yea that were
against other Scriptures. No, but the meaning is this, That we should labor to
find out what is truth, search for it as for silver, and go according to what
light we have, but yet so, though we should differ, to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, and join in all things that we can, and walk so
lovingly, that it may appear, that if there be difference, it is merely that
which conscience makes, because we dare not deny what we are persuaded in
conscience is a truth: We cannot put out the convincing light of the candle of
the Lord which is set up within us, yet we can live in unity and peace and be
useful one to another, communicating our gifts, and graces, comforts and
experiences one to another as it becomes Christians. And indeed it is a greater
honor to the Gospel, for men though they do differ in their judgments, yet if
they can keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, I say, it is a great
honor to the Gospel than if they were all of the same mind. You know the Turks
they are al of one mind, but I cannot say so of the Papists, yet they have a
chain to keep them together. We read of the Egyptians, that when it was
darkness among them, they sat still and kept close together, but when it came
to be light, every man went about his own business: so when light does begin to
break forth, and there is liberty given to search into truths; we cannot imagine
that at the very first men should be of the same judgment, except they will
give up their consciences and sacrifice their reason one to another, but though
they be not of one judgment, yet there may be kept a blessed unity of
affection, there may be a golden girdle clapsed about their loins: yea and of
practice so far as men can with peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost,
so as not to sin against conscience and light; Unity of affection and practice
should be endeavored to the utmost, and it is a most Christian thing so to do;
and certainly this should be studied and endeavored by us, as much as lies in
us. Me thinks when I read over the Epistles of Paul, or any part of the new
Testament, I see nothing more pressed than this (next to believing in Jesus
Christ,) and therefore it should be the care of Christians. And as it ought to
be the care of Christians to study unity and peace; so I beseech you that small
differences may not be abused and heightened so far, as because some do differ
from others, that therefore presently (if they be the least part especially)
all the odium should be cast upon them, though they can appeal to God that they
do endeavor to know the mind of God, and to keep unity so far as they can
without sin. And we shall see that the Scripture does never lay the sin of
devision upon any, except those that do lay it upon them are able to say, that
those make division from some corrupt end or other of their own: and then it
charges them deeply; as that place is most famous that you have in Romans 16. 17,
18. (and I verily persuade my self that there is many of your that hear this
text very much abused) Now I beseech you brethren, mark those which cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them. This is the great place against that sin which we call schism, for
schism is nothing but a rending asunder, That cause division, [schism] contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them. Now you know the sin of
schism was cast by the Popish Bishops heretofore upon all that would not be of
their minds in any ceremonies and will worship, and because many would not come
up to the Rails, and submit to receive the Lords Supper by kneeling in that way
that it was then admistred by our Prelatical Priests, therefore they were
termed schismatics: And so at this day, many cry out of others if so be they
cannot swallow Camels with them, if so be they differ in some things wherein
they cannot join with them because it would be sin and a snare to them, they
presently say they are guilty of schism, and faction (There is a great deal of
taking Gods Name in vain in this thing;) yet they do not tell you what the true
nature of schism is, but if any persons join not with the greater part (which
is usually least conscientious) that is schism in an high degree; this is not
that that becomes the Gospel, presently to judge all that differ from us. But
mark the next words and there the Apostle tells what schism is.

First, it must be contrary to sound doctrine, for (says he) They that are
such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words,
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple: The Apostle could take it
upon his conscience by seeing the behavior of these men, that the cause why
they differed from others it was, not out of tenderness of conscience and
desire to know the mind of God, but by their behavior he saw enough to satisfy
his conscience, their Conversation gave their profession the lie; and therefore
(says he) avoid such. So I confess, if men can take it upon their consciences,
as they would answer to Jesus Christ; I see such and such men to differ thus;
but I can appeal to Christ in it, that upon these and these grounds I am
persuaded it is not out of tenderness of conscience, and I am verily persuaded
that there is no willingness in them to know the mind of Christ, but it is to
serve their own carnal ends, and purposes. I confess if we can take this upon
our consciences as we will answer it to Jesus Christ, that there are such and
such grounds upon which we believe Christ will so account, that such men do not
differ through their tenderness, but from their own carnal ends, these men may
be accounted schismatics: This is the sin of schism, when through want of love
and to serve their own by-ends men shall rend one from another: But now is it
possible to think that the holy Ghost should lay so great a load (as to command
the Saints to avoid such persons) upon men whose consciences are upright with
God, sure when a man shall be able to appeal to God, and say, Lord, thou that
know all things, know that it is the desire of my soul to know thy will,
and I search for it, and pray for it, and it is the affliction of my soul that
I differ in any thing from my brethren that I see to be godly, and if I knew
thy mind, thou know I would quickly close with them, and account it the
greatest happiness that can befall me in this life to shake hands with them in
such and such particulars; But thou have laid this charge upon me, that I must
do what I do out of faith, and I should sin against that rule of thine if I
should yield to that that I see no footing for out of thy Word. Now if a soul
should make this moan to Jesus Christ, do you think that Christ would account
this man a schismatic? and that he must be avoided and persecuted (...) a
schismatic? no certainly there is a great mistake in this, and this is merely
for want of charity; and that which the holy Ghost is so bitter against is,
when men for want of love to their brethren, and for to serve their own base
ends make breaches and rents in the Church; judge such now to be guilty of the
sin of schism and no other; for that is to break unity, to judge others guilty
of schism, merely because they differ from you, and cannot read by your
spectacles, these extremes that I have spoken of are ways that are very much
unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ, for men our of base ends to break unity, to
rend from the Saints; or otherwise because men join not with you in every thing
you desire, therefore presently to put such a brand upon them, as to stigmatize
them for schismatics, certainly this unchristian like nicknaming the children
of God maintains the breach and widens it more and more; whereas the
Conversation that becomes the Gospel is to study, to find out the truth. And do
I see Learned and Godly men of another judgment? Let me pray more unto the
Father of lights for the Spirit of revelation: It may be I may mistake; If I be
mistaken, Lord discover it, let me not go on in the ways of darkness, but take
away the scales from my understanding, that I may see into the deep things of
God and his Gospel; And therefore others that they differ from should tender
these as brethren, and look upon them and see, are they not conscientious in
all their other ways? Can I be able to find any fault with them in their lives
and Conversations? It may be it is their mistake, then let me pray for them and
labor to help them, and tender them all I can, it may be God will reveal his
mind to them more fully afterward: Now in what we have attained let us walk,
and if any be otherwise minded God will reveal his mind to them, and this
carriage should be in Christians one toward another, that differ one from
another, and this is a Conversation becoming the Gospel: But when one differs
from another, for to give reviling speeches, and names of disgrace, and to cast
dirt one upon another, this is exceeding unbecoming the Gospel, yea, if the
Heathens were amongst us, they would even loath the Gospel of Jesus Christ to
see the carriage of Christians that there are at this day amongst us: But the
Conversation that becomes the Gospel of Christ, is that which manifests unity,
to live in unity one with another, for the Gospel preaches to us the greatest
unity of Christians that possibly can be between man and man.

Again, The Gospel holds forth this, The glorious happiness of the Saints in
Heaven. You cannot find much of that in the Law, in all the old Testament you
find but little of eternal life, I cannot discover three texts from Genesis to
the end of Malachi that does clearly hold forth eternal life; it is true, our
forefathers (no question) in the old Testament did know that there was eternal
life, and some Scriptures there are that do tend that way; but I believe
there is none of you can give many texts from Genesis to Malachi that do
expressly hold forth the Glory of the Saints in Heaven. Now the Gospel that
holds it forth in 2 Timothy 1. 10. says the Apostle there (speaking of the glory
of the Saints and immortality) in the 9. ver. Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which he has givin us in Christ Jesus before the world
began: But is now made manifest by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ,
who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel. How comes life and immortality to be brought to light
through the Gospel? Did not our forefathers know of life and immortality
before? Yes, but very darkly, and some of the eminent ones knew but little of
that exceeding riches of glory and happiness the Saints shall be crowned with
in Heaven, life and immortality is brought to light through the Gospel.

In former times was it known (till Christ came in the flesh) that the
happiness of the Saints should be in the vision of God, in standing before the
face of God, and beholding him in glory in Heaven?

Did they know the communion that the Saints shall have with God, and with Jesus
Christ in his bodily presence in glory?

Did they understand the fruition of God, and Gods being all in all to the
Saints, as he shall be in the communication of all fullness of good?

Did they understand the inheritance of the Saints which is in light?

Did they know that the Saints were not only Heirs, but Coheirs with Jesus
Christ? These things are known only in the Gospel, the glorious reward of the
Saints.

Did they in the time of the Law, know that these bodies of ours should be made
more glorious than the Sun in the firmament? This the Gospel tells us, that
these lumps of clay which we carry now about with us, shall be one day more
glorious than the Sun shining in his luster.

Did they know that our bodies should be made like to the glorious body of
Jesus Christ? That it is sown in weakness; but it is raised in power; sown in
dishonor, but raised in glory; sown a natural body, but should rise a spiritual
body; and sown in corruption, and should be raised in incorruption? Certainly
these things were very little known to the forefathers, (if known at all.)

Now these things were the great Counsels of God, that were kept hid from all
eternity, only the Lord did reserve the discovery thereof to the coming of his
Son, that was the time for opening of Heaven, Heaven was shut, and there was
little seen of the glory thereof till Christ was incarnate in the flesh, the
Lord (I say) reserved the opening of the Gates of Heaven, and the showing of
the glory of it to the Saints till the coming of Jesus Christ. Christ now tells
us of mansions that He is gone before to prepare for us, and when our earthly
tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building, not made with hands, but eternal
in the Heavens. Oh now my brethren, how ought we to live? It Is the argument of
the Apostle when he speaks but of the great chang in the Church here (speaking
of new Heavens and a new Earth) it is meant of the state of the Church that it
shall be in even here; and says he, What manner of persons ought we to be in
all holiness and godly conversation? But then when we hear of the highest
Heavens, Abraham's bosom, the Paradise, the Saints shall be living with Christ,
wrapped up to the third Heavens (as the Apostle was:) Oh what manner of persons
ought we to be in all godliness and holy Conversation?

Now if you should ask me, what Conversation is becoming the Gospel? I would
tell you, that which we have in the third Chap. of this Epistle; For our
Conversation is in Heaven. Upon what ground is it? from whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall chang our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like to His glorious body. We look (says he) for the Lord Jesus
Christ from Heaven, who shall put forth such a power as shall change our vile
bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto His glorious body; therefore our
Conversation is in Heaven. Do you expect that this flesh of yours should be
made like the Sun in the Heavens, like the glorious body of Jesus Christ? Oh
then do not abuse your flesh to sin, make not provision for the flesh to
satisfy the lusts thereof, let no member of your body be a weapon of
unrighteousness to sin against God withal: when you are tempted to any bodily
sin, stop your selves with this meditation: Shall I sin against God with this
body of mine that I believe shall one day be more glorious than the Sun in the
firmament, which ere long will be made like to the glorious Body of Jesus
Christ? Have we the hopes and promises of such an inheritance in Heaven? Oh
then, let not only our thoughts be there, but our Conversation, our Trading,
our only business be there also; Oh let it appear that we have heavenly hearts,
and spiritual carriages, that we live as it becomes those that hope within a
few days, or months, to be possessed with the glory of Heaven which Christ has
prepared for us; such should our Conversations be, heavenly Conversations,
shining with the light of the glory of Heaven upon us, Heaven should appear in
our Conversations now, so that they who look upon us and converse with us, may
truly judge, these are the Citizens of the new Jerusalem, free Denizons of
Heaven, they speak the very language of Canaan already, and ere long they will
be possessed of that promised Land.

I Will conclude all now with one Scripture, in 2 Cor. 3. 3. Forasmuch as ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written, not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in
fleshly tables of the heart. Mark; the Apostle here tells the Corinthians that
they are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ: observe the text, the
People of God, Believers, are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ.

Quest. Epistle of Christ (you will say) what is the meaning of that? or what use
can you make of that to your point?

Answ. The meaning of it is this, That Christ does by them, or in them, write
an Epistle to the world, to declare to the world His mind and His will; it is as
if the Apostle should say, You that are believers, know that Christ makes use
of you to declare to the world, what He is, what His glory is, you are His
Epistle; Christ sends by you the knowledge of Himself into the world, so that
when the world looks upon you, they that run may read in your lives and
Conversations, and examples the very Epistle of Christ (transcribed to the
life) whereby He declares to the world His excellencies and His glory in lively
Characters. Now my brethren, this should be the Conversation of all Saints,
(that is) They should in their lives be the Epistle of Jesus Christ, there
should be (as it were) fairly written in their lives the graces of Jesus
Christ, the mysteries of the Gospel, the deep things of God. Would you know
what Christ's mind is? and what the excellencies of Christ are, and of the
Gospel? Read it in the Saints, in their lives, see their ways and you may
know much of the mind of Christ in them, you that cannot tell a letter in the
book, yet you may read this Epistle, you may read the Epistle that Jesus
Christ sends to the world, to convince the world: Now the Epistle that Christ
sends to the world, is not only in His Word (there indeed is a great Epistle
that Christ has sent, for the Scripture is no other, but as an Ancient calls
it, the Epistle of God to the world, God sends His Letter to the world) but the
Saints are Christ's Epistle likewise wherein Christ's mind is to be read and
known; then let your Conversations be such, as that you may be a full Epistle
of Christ to the whole world, that all the world may read what Christ is in
you, take heed of blotting and blurring this Epistle. If there be a Letter sent
from a great man, if a Prince or a King send a Letter, it uses to come fairly
written, and if those that should bring it, should all besmeer it, and blot the
Letter so as it could not be read, it would be taken exceeding ill. So, you
that profess your selves to be Christians, you do not bring the Letter only,
but you are the Letter, therefore do not blot and blur this Epistle of Christ,
but keep it fair, that all with whom you converse, all in the family may every
day read somewhat of the mind of Jesus Christ in your Conversations, that so
you may be the glory of Christ, as in that scripture, 2 Cor. 8. 23. it is said
of Titus and other fellow-helpers, That they were the Messengers of the
Churches, and the glory of Christ. Oh! this all Professors of Religion should
endeavor to be, the glory of Jesus Christ; that wheresoever they live, all
might see the glory of Jesus Christ held forth there; whithersoever you go, you
may carry the glory of Jesus Christ about you. Oh Christians! I appeal to your
consciences, Do you live so, as the glory of Christ shines in you in the course
of your lives? As the shine of the Candle goes through the Lanthorn, so the
shine and glory of Jesus Christ should go through Christians in their
Conversations to dazzle the eyes of the world; Oh! do not darken the glory of
Christ, but make it as bright as possibly thou can, that so this pu^blind
world may be able to see somewhat in the glory of Christ in your Conversations;
this should be the great care of your lives.

SERMON VII.
PHIL. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
WE have preached (you know) many Sermons upon this necessary and seasonable
Duty; April 12 1646.
That as Christians are to sanctify the Name of God in Worship: so in their
Conversations: their lives and Conversations must be such as becomes the Gospel
of Christ, [worthy] of the Gospel of Christ, (for so I told you the word
signified.) Now we are upon this great point.

What Conversation is that which becomes the Gospel of Christ.

I Will only add one Scriptare more to the last thing I named, and then proceed.

That the revealing of the glory of Heaven in the Gospel should work mightily
upon our hearts to labor for a Conversation suitable thereunto. In Titus, 2. 11,
12, 13. For the grace of God (says he, that is the Gospel) that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men: (What does it teach us?) That denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. We have made use of this Scripture thus far already; but
that which I quote it for, is the refference of this to the next words, Looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. Here Is a Scripture that if ever the Lord did enlighten us
in the things of the Gospel, that we have been brought to believe it is a
Scripture that would mightily work upon our hearts to live godlily and holily:
The grace of God that brings Salvation; what does it teach us? Not to be
licentious, and vain, and slight, and bold in our sinful courses; but teaching
us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. Mark, it is not enough to live
soberly, not to be a drunkard, to live righteously, that is, not to wrong any
body, many think that is enough: But mark, indeed the light of nature (as I told
you) would teach us that; but now the grace of God that brings Salvation
teaches us more, To deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly, and that in this present world: though we live
in the midst of a wicked tempting world, yet to live godly. And what is the
great argument in the Gospel to cause us to live godly in this present world?
Looking for the blessed hope: Oh we look for a blessed hope that the Gospel
reveals, Oh we did not understand this hope, this blessed hope till the Gospel
was preached to us; but since we apprehend a blessed hope, the holy Ghost has
raised in our hearts a blessed hope of glorious things: What glorious things?
Looking for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. We have some little glimps of the great God when we set
forth to Sea, and lance into the deeps, we see the glory of the great God, who
rides upon the wings of the wind, and whom both the Winds and the Seas obey:
Oh but we look for another manner of the glorious appearing of the great God
than ever yet has appeared. I beseech you consider of this text, God did never
appear great and glorious in comparison of what he will appear, and blessed are
those whose Conversations shall be such, that can look upon the face of this
great God with joy when He shall appear in glory; we look for this blessed
hope, and then when this great God shall appear in His glory, then we shall
have our blessed hope, and this teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, the knowledge of this; Oh do you look to be saved? have you a blessed
hope, and do you expect the appearing of the great God in glory? has the
Gospel revealed these things unto you? O let this that the Gospel reveals teach
us to deny all ungodliness, and all worldy lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

But there are yet some other things that the Gospel holds forth that are very
remarkable, for the furtherance of our godly Conversation in this world, and if
we would live as becomes the Gospel, we must have a right understanding of
these things, or else we shall never suit our selves to the Gospel, except we
do thereby apprehend these great points that are published to us in and by the
Gospel.

As now, this is a great point, That the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is not of this
world. The Gospel holds forth this to us, that Jesus Christ the Son of God,
having taken our nature upon him, he is a great King, He has a Kingdom, but He
has a Kingdom that is not of this world, neither is Christ of this world, nor
His Kingdom of this world, nor the Saints, those that are the Subjects of His
Kingdom are not of this world; the right understanding of this would much help
us in our Conversations, and a Conversation beseeming this would much honor the
Gospel. First, We shall show how the Gospel holds forth this, That the Kingdom
of Christ is not in this world, mark those Scriptures in John, 18. 36. Jesus
answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but
now is my Kingdom not from hence. Therefore (as if he should say) you must not
wonder or think much that I am thus apprehended, and delivered up to men, that
they do with me what they please; though I be the great King of my Church
appointed by my Father, yet my Kingdom is not of this world, and I came not
hither for pomp and glory. The glory of Christ in His Kingdom, here is
Spiritual. Indeed when this world shall be at an end, then Christ will appear
gloriously, though the Scripture speaks of a world hereafter wherein Christ
shall appear gloriously, but whether personally or otherwise that we speak not
of: But that Christ shall appear a glorious King even in the world, not this
world, but upon the earth, and yet the Scripture speaks of that as another
world, a new Heaven, and a new Earth, but for the present; for that that the
Scripture calls this world, we must not expect a pompous and glorious Kingdom
till there ebe a new world, till there be new heavens, and a new earth, this the
Gospel holds forth. Whereas the people of the Jews they thought as soon as the
Messiah came, He presently should be an outward Monarch, in outward pomp and
glory; no says Christ, this world must pass away first, I must come first and
reign spiritually in another way, and for my Kingdom there is a time for the
glory of it to appear when another world shall come, but while this world
lasts, never expect any such outward pomp and glory in the way of my Kingdom, I
have a Kingdom indeed here in this world, but it is not of this world, I have a
Kingdom wherein I reign spiritually in the hearts of my people, there I have
set up my Throne, and therein I have writ my Laws by which I guide and order
all things for their eternal salvation, but my Kingdom is not of this world:
yea and he says likewise in John, 8. 23. I am not of this world neither. And
John, 15. 19. (for John that beloved Disciple who lay in the bosom of Christ he
knew much of the mind and heart of Christ, and was much instructed in this
mystery, and indeed none of those that did converse with Christ knew more of
the bosom of Christ than John did) If ye were of the world, the world would
love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of
the world. So that as Christ is not of the world so the Saints are not of the
world: in the 17. of John, 14. I have given them thy Word, and the world has
hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world*
Mark, as I am not of the world, so they are not of the world: thus Scripture is
clear, that neither Christ nor his Kingdom is of this world; and therefore
believers are not of this world. And hence then, what Conversation becomes this
Gospel of Christ? even a Conversation sequestered from the things of this world,
a Conversation that shall manifest the hearts being taken off and disingaged
from sublunary comforts and accommodations, a Conversation which proves that
the soul seeks not great things for its-self here below, but is fully content
with a morsel of bread and a cup of cold water, though others fare deliciously
every day; so believers should manifest in their Conversations that they do not
much pass or care how things go in this world, because Christ is not of this
world, and the Kingdom of Christ in which they make account their happiness to
be involved, that is not of the world, yea they are men redeemed from this
present world; Gal. 1. 4. it is said, That by Christ we came to be redeemed
from this present evil world; (it is a very remarkable Scripture) who gave
himself for our sins; (to what end?) That he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God, and our Father. I beseech you observe
this text, Christ gave Himself to deliver us from our sins, that we might not
perish eternally: And was that all? No, That He might deliver us from this
present evil world; I do not know a more forcible text in all the Book of God
to take off the hearts of those that profess the Gospel from the world, so as
they should not whine and murmur at the loss of every little thing in the
world, nor be solicitously careful for the things of this life, nor be offended
though the men of the world prevail in the world, and have the upper hand, and
carry things in a worldly way, let them go on in all their pagentry and
greatness: but if thou be one that belongst to Christ, know that Christ has
laid down his life to purchase this for thee, to deliver thee from this world;
Now, is Christ blood laid down to purchase this? and yet will thou have thy
heart glewed to the ground, and wholly place thy contentment in the earth, and
seek for thy happiness here in the dust? Oh get up thy heart then from all
these things, and make it appear by thy Conversation that thou art one that by
the virtue of the death of Jesus Christ art delivered from this world, and
therefore though thou have not such a portion in worldly goods as other men
have, never envy them, for Christ has ransomed you from the world, there is
another kingdom that thou have thy portion and interest in, Christ has made us
Kings and Priests to his Father, and has made us heirs and coheirs of that
Kingdom that His Father has given Him, yea, and that He Himself has
purchased; and so you must in your Conversations make it appear, that you do
see another kingdom beyond this kingdom of the world that you are made
partakers of, wherein you shall reign with Christ for ever: now this
Conversation does beseem the Gospel. And therefore you shall find it in the 10th
of Matthew. about the 37. verse. Christ shows what kind of Conversation He would
have in those that once come to believe in Him, (says He) He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or
daughter more than me, is not worthy of me: And he that takes not up his cross
and follows after me, is not worthy of me. He that finds his life shall
lose it; and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Here he shows
what it is that would make the soul worthy of Christ in a Gospel sense. If our
hearts be taken off from father and mother, and those comforts and relations
that are the dearest in the world, brother, or sister, or son, or daughter; not
to take off our natural affection, but to take off our hearts so, as they
should not be hindrances of us in spiritual things, that our main affections
should flow forth after spiritual things; then we come to be worthy of Christ:
then the other conversation is unworthy of Christ. Did thou ever know the
Lord Jesus Christ and the way of His Kingdom? Then why is thy heart set upon
the world as the hearts of other men that are strangers to Jesus Christ? In
Ephesians. 5. 3. (when the Apostle speaks of those things that most men in the world
are greedy after) But fornication, and all uncleaness, or covetousness, let it
not be once named among you, as becomes Saints. As if he should say, Saints,
those that know Jesus Christ, and the way of His Kingdom, for them to have
their hearts either set upon bodily lusts, or covetousness, the things of this
world, it does not become them, it is not a Gospel Conversation becoming Saints;
a heart greedy of the things of this world, and wallowing in the lusts of this
world, Oh it is unbeseeming Saints! those that do profess the Gospel of Christ
that shows unto us that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world.

Again, Another great point that the Gospel holds forth to us, is this, The
great difference or the change that it makes in the estate of a man or woman
when once it prevails with him: then the great difference is made in him, from
what he was before, and from other men; this is held forth in the Gospel and no
where else: I say the wonderful change that the Gospel makes in men when once
it comes to work upon their hearts in the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, and the great difference between their estates before and what now is,
and between them and other men; I put these two together,

First, The great change that the Gospel makes in the hearts of men from what
there was before the Gospel came. You know the Scripture in prophesying of the
times of the Gospel says, That the Wolf shall eat with the Lamb, and the Lion
with the Kid, and the child shall play upon the very hole of the Asp: the
meaning is generally carried thus, that when the Gospel comes it shall change
the hearts of men so mightily, that though they were wolvish before, and cruel;
as if you should see a Wolf changed into a Lamb, or as if you should see a Lion
changed into a Kid, you would say, this were a mighty change; the Gospel makes
such a change as this is, they that are in Christ are new creatures, it is a new
Creation; suppose God should make a new world, what a mighty thing were this!
or a new Sun should be created in the Firmament that never was before, how
would we stand and wonder! Those that are in Christ are new creatures, God puts
forth a creating power upon them, 2 Cor. 5. Old things are passed away, all
things are become new (you know the Apostle says:) and the change that is
made, it is called a new birth, Except you be born again, you cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, John, 3. If there were a new soul put into one, or if
God should infuse a rational soul into a beast, here would be a mighty change;
thou were a beast before, but here is the soul of grace, there is a new birth
when the Gospel comes to prevail, and to enter in upon an heart, and it is
called a new resurrection; if there should be a voice come from Heaven that
should open all the graves that you have here in the yard, and all the dead
bodies should stand up and live, what a mighty change would there be? Such a
change does the Gospel make when it conquers a people; indeed the Gospel may be
preached and little change may be wrought, because the power of the Gospel
prevails not with their hearts; but when it does prevail in their hearts there
is such a strange change.

Oh then, What Conversation become this? it must be a Conversation that does
hold forth to the world that there is such a mighty change wrought in you: Now
I appeal to you, you that make profession of the Gospel, you know what you have
been heretofore, worldly, and base, and carnal, and sensual, and froward, and
peevish, and profane men, altogether unsavory before the Gospel came to you;
now you profess that God has begun to work upon you by the Gospel, What change
has it wrought in you? Can those that live with you see your Conversations so
changed as to make them stand and admire at the work of the Gospel upon your
hearts? the husband to stand and admire at the work of God upon the heart of
the wife as if she were another woman, and so the wife to admire at the grace
of God upon the heart of the husband, as if he were another man; and so your
children and servants not the same that heretofore they were? Oh what honor
would this be to the Gospel, that in places where it comes to be preached in
power there might appear a change, that becomes the Gospel of Christ? Certainly
if your Conversations be not such as holds forth a mighty change that God has
wrought in you, then it is not such as becomes the Gospel of Christ: It may be
you are somewhat better than heretofore you have been, as not to be a common
drunkard, you see that is despised by men; Who regards drunken fools, madmen,
very beasts? Therefore you come to be of more understanding, that you will not
be so profane and lascivious as you were wont to be, but live somewhat better.
Oh but this change is not that change which holds forth the work of the Gospel,
for when the Gospel prevails it makes the gre^test change that ever was made in
the world, we may boldly ascert this, that since the Creation of God in the
first six days, there was never such a change made in the world as the Gospel
makes; and therefore a Conversation becoming the Gospel, must be a Conversation
that must be a changed Conversation, must be mightily different from what they
were before: sometimes we see it so through the mercy of God, that when men and
women come to hear the Word in the cleerness and power of it to be revealed,
they have such changes, that al their friends stand wondering at them, What
shall we have of you now! Oh such have cause to answer and say, Blessed be God
it is so, it is the Gospel that has made such a change in me. I, this becomes
the Gospel, when it shall appear that your Conversation is so changed, so holy,
and godly, and gracious now over it was before. But you whose lives are not
better than they were before; before you made some profession, only your
profession now is greater than it was before, but your lives no better, know,
this is a Conversation that does no way become the Gospel of Christ, the Gospel
of Christ has no honor by this Conversation of yours.

And then, The great difference that the Gospel makes between one man and
another. As now, those that the Gospel does not prevail upon, the Scripture
tells us, they are the children of wrath, they are dead in trespasses and sins,
they are under the curse of the Law, they are even enemies to God; this is the
condition of al men before this Scepter of Christ conquers their hearts,
children of wrath, enemies to God, dead in sins, under the curse. But now, when
the Gospel comes to prevail over men's hearts, then they come to be the Children
of the living God, Heirs of Christ, Coheirs with Him, they come to be
partakers of the life of God, they increase with the increase of God, and their
lives are hid with Christ in God, and they come to be reconciled to God, to be
friends with God, to be at peace with God, and to inherit blessings: Oh the
change that the Lord puts upon the heart and state of the Saints when the
Gospel prevails! How high are they raised above other men? Therefore you must
not make other men to be your example in your way, you must not think to live
as the world lives, and to say, I do as other men do; the Gospel makes a mighty
difference between your estate and the state of other men, therefore never look
to what other men do, but consider as God has made a vast difference between
you and other men, so let there be a great difference between your Conversation
and the Conversation of other men. Now this meditation should have a mighty
deal of power to prevail upon the heart; I believe that I have such and such
privileges beyond other men, and I look for such and such mercies above
others; now what things I look for beyond others, I must labor to be as much
beyond them in holiness of Conversation, as God has made me beyond them in
spiritual privileges, and spiritual mercies; I think sometimes I would not be
in the condition of such men as are in their natural estate for a world, nay I
would not be one our in their estates if I might have ten thousand worlds, for
fear I should die that hour, and then I should be lost for ever; Well, has God
made such a difference? then let not my life be like theirs for one hour, nay
for one moment. Oh this meditation (through Gods blessing) would mightily help
us in our Conversation.

Our Conversation should be such as becomes the Ordinances of the Gospel: The
Word, and Sacraments, they have a great deal more in them than the Ordinances
of the Law; but because I spoke of the Gospels being higher than the Law
heretofore, and these things may fall something near, yet had I time I would
speak a little concerning these, and show how we are to hold forth a
Conversation suitable to them.

Our Conversations should be suitable to the power of the Gospel: there is a
great deal of power in the Gospel; it is called the power of God unto salvation,
in the 1. of the Romans 16. The very light of the Gospel it is a transforming
light, it has a mighty power in it, the Gospel it is called, the Wisdom of God,
and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. it brings a great deal of power with it to
help men against strong corruptions, to overcome violent temptations, to carry
them through in any difficulties: Powerful corruptions, powerful temptations,
powerful difficulties are overcome by the power of the Gospel; and therefore it
is said by faith, that is, by faith in the Gospel, we overcome the world; the
Gospel certainly does not only stir in some men and women, some wishings, and
wouldings and faint desires, but it brings a power to transform their hearts.
to make a metamorphosis there; when there comes the light of the Gospel there
comes the light of life together with it; as that Scripture in Heb. 10. 32.
After ye were illuminated (that is, by the Gospel) then he speaks of their
great sufferings, they were willing to endure any thing for Christ; therefore a
Conversation that becomes the Gospel is such an one as exemplarily demonstrates
the very power of godliness, that men and women should not be always learning
and never come to the knowledge of the truth, not always wishing and desiring,
and never come to any powerful resolutions and determinations, for certainly
where the Gospel has the upper hand in a soul it does bring power, but I do
not say it brings power so as to overcome all our lusts, so as there should be
no sin remaining, for so long as we live we must be hungering after a further
degree of righteousness and sanctification; but certainly when the Gospel
prevails there comes a great strength; there is the strength of Christ put
forth, the Spirit of power (as the Apostle says) We have not received the
spirit of fear, but the Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind: be not
therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord. As if Paul had said to Timothy,
it is true, you meet with many difficulties, but has not the Gospel given you a
Spirit of power? There Is spirit of power and resolution when the Gospel comes
in. Timothy was a poor weakly, sickly man in his body, and Paul himself had no
bodily presence with him, a poor contemptible man in regard of his bodily
presence, but he had a Spirit of power given him by the Gospel; so we should
manifest a Spirit of power, that is as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Lastly, The Gospel of Christ is a glorious Gospel. 1 Timothy 1. 11. it is called
there by the title of a glorious Gospel, According to the glorious Gospel of
the blessed God. Mark, what a title is here? the Gospel is the glorious Gospel
of the blessed God, that is, the glory of all the Attributes of God does appear
in the Gospel more brightly than they do appear in all the works that God has
made; There does appear indeed a great deal of the glory of God in the Heavens,
Earth, and Seas, and you have seen much of the glory of God there, but I appeal
to you in this, Have you seen more of the glory of God in the Gospel, than ever
you did in all the works that God has made? that were a good argument that you
have had a true understanding of the Gospel, and that the Spirit of God has
shined into your hearts, if you can say, Lord I have seen much of thy glory in
thy Works, when I have been abroad in the mighty waters where Gods paths and
footsteps are, Oh the Seas they are thy glorious creatures, but thy Gospel
that is glorious beyond all, there do I see thine infinite wisdom, and infinite
power, and infinite justice, and infinite mercy, and infinite faithfulness, and
the Lord knows that all the glory of the creatures has been darkened in my eyes
since the Lord has showed me the glory of His Gospel, Can you say so? This is
a good evidence that the Gospel is a saving Gospel to your souls, if you stand
and admire at the glory of God in the Gospel; Certainly there is none though
never so weak in parts, yet if so be that God has revealed Himself in the
Gospel to them, they see that which makes them stand and admire at God, and
darkens all the world in their eyes; have you seen the Gospel thus? then it is
to you the glorious Gospel of the blessed God: and in the 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them: Oh read
over this Scripture again and again, The God of this world has blinded their
minds. Mark, compare this Scriptrue with that I said before of Christ, that His
Kingdom is not of this world, but the Devil is called the God of this world,
note this, he has blinded the minds of them which believe not, if any which
live under the Gospel believe not, it is because the Devil as he prevails in
the world and by worldly things, by the pomp and vanity of the world he
hoodwinks the eyes of those which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ who is the express Image of God should shine into them, Oh the
Devil is loath that the gloriou Gospel should shine into the hearts of men; he
is content that they should come and hear the Gospel, but he labors to keep off
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, that it shine not into them, for he
know when once it has shined into men's hearts, then all the glory of the world
will be darkened in their eyes, and they will admire then at nothing but Christ;
Oh none but Christ, none but Christ, Whom have I in Heaven but Christ? and
there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of my dearest Savior, who
is the fairest of ten thousand; I never knew God before I saw him in the face
of Jesus Christ; and now I see God in the face of His Son, I see him in another
way than ever I did; O the Gospel is a glorious Gospel, there is more of the
glory of God in one sentence of the Gospel, than in all the Heavens and Earth
beside; this we may boldly aver. Now our Conversations must be as becomes the
Gospel, then there must be a glory in our Conversations, we must hold forth the
Gospel in our Conversations: therefore Professors of the Gospel they should
shine as lights in the world.

I beseech you mark this one Note. I remember in the close of all the last day,
I showed you, that the Saints and godly people are called, the glory of Jesus
Christ Himself; surely you that are Professors of the Gospel should live so as
to be the glory of the glorious Gospel, and what manner of persons ought we to
be then? it is not enough that our Conversations be not defiled with the most
filthy and abominable pollutions of the world, but our Conversations should be
such as should be a glory to the glorious Gospel: Look in the Gospel, there
shine the Attributes of God in glory, so in our lives there should be shining
the glorious Attributes of God, that all that behold our Conversations may
admire the Attributes of God shining in our lives, and glorify our Heavenly
Father. Certainly a child of God that keeps close to God, and lives holily in
his life, does let out more of the glory of God shining before the world than
the Sun in the Firmament; A Christian that professes the Gospel, and does walk
answerably to the Gospel, I say he is a more glorious creature in this world
than the Sun in the Firmament; certainly if we do but consider this, that we
are appointed here in this world while we live, to hold forth the glory of the
Gospel, to make it to be a glorious Gospel before all that we live among, it
would cause another manner of Conversation than as yet we have.

But to wind up all in a few words of Application, more particularly (though
all the way as I have gone I have labored to apply it) all that I shall say may
be referred unto these two particulars.

Application.
And the first is, For the rebuking of those whose Conversations are not as
becomes the Gospel.

I appeal to your consciences, Do not your consciences in hearing these things
condemn you? If this be a Conversation becoming the Gospel, O Lord, how far are
we from honoring the Gospel in our lives? for how do many of your Conversations
disgrace the Gospel of Jesus Christ? you put Jesue Christ even to open shame by
your Conversations; and such as you are, are blots to profession and stains to
Religion, and the truth is, it had been better you had never bin born, if God
does not work upon your hearts in some measure before you die to recover the
honor that you have taken away from this glorious Gospel. Gal. 2. compare the
11. verse. and the 14. together, and in the. 11. ver. you shall find Paul, when
he did but see Peter to walk not as he ought to do, (says he) I withstood
Peter to his face: What Is the matter? You shall see the cause in the 14. verse,
(for says he) He did not walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel:
In that one particular (it seems) Peter was blameworthy, O how was Paul's
spirit stirred! I resisted him to his face says he. Though Peter was a glorious
Apostle, yet because in that thing he did not walk according to the truth of
the Gospel, Paul resisted him to his face. And are there any that make
profession? and do you see that they walk not according to the truth of the
Gospel? Resist them to their faces, though they be never so eminent, either in
Church or Commonwealth, to be head and shoulders above others, yet these are
to be resisted to their face. Oh the Gospel was precious to the heart of Paul,
and therefore he could not bear, no not a Peter, not to walk according to the
truth of the Gospel. Oh how many! how many are there among you that do not walk
according to the truth of the Gospel? Now the Lord cause your consciences this
day to resist you to your faces, and to speak in secret to you, and to convince
you of the dreadful evil that you are guilty of: is such a Conversation as you
walk in such as become the Gospel? I remember I have read a story, you shall
find it in Richard the first, when he prevailed in war, and took a Bishop, the
Bishop of Bevoice, the Pope was angry, and sends and expostulates with him,
that he would presume to meddle with one of his Sons, and imprison him. The
King sent this answer again to the Pope: He takes the Habergion and other
warlike instruments that the Bishop had, and sends them to the Pope with these
words; See, Is this thy Sons Coat? is it fit for him to wear such things as
these? So I may say concerning many professors, look upon their Conversations,
and what is this the Coat? this the Conversation of the son of God? As that
Richard the first, thought it such an unbeseeming thing for a Bishop to have
warlike instruments about him, and to be taken clad in armor. On it is an
unbeseeming thing for such as profess the Gospel of Christ, to have instruments
of death about them, to have wicked Conversations, to live in wicked and
ungodly ways, Oh! it is not Christ's Livery, not the Coat of one that professes
godliness: Certainly there must be another manner of Conversation than this.

EXHORTATION.
And therefore to close all in a word or two of Exhortation. Oh that God would
move our hearts now by what we have heard, to labor to honor the glorious
Gospel that we do profess, O that that worthy Name (in Jam. 2. 7.) may not be
blasphemed by wicked men; Oh let not that worthy Name of God and Christ (which
you profess) be blasphemed for your sakes, but walk worthy of that worthy Name
of the Lord, and of his Christ, and of his Gospel. My brethren, know that when
you undertake the profession of the Gospel, you undertake a great matter; do
not come to the profession of the Gospel and look upon it as if it were a
slight matter; it is a great matter, the profession of the Gospel: In 1 Timothy 2.
10. it is a good Scripture for women, he speaks of women, that they should walk
as those that do profess godliness, such should preach the contents of the
Gospel in an Evangelical behavior before others, they should therefore bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance, or meet for repentance: Has the Lord
wrought upon your hearts, to chang your minds and turn your hearts to him? O
then bring forth fruits worthy of repentance; that is, your Conversations must
be worthy of the Gospel, and that is fruit worthy of repentance: and in Acts,
26. 20. Works meet for repentance. Oh you say, you have repented you of your
sins: the word that is translated there repentance; it is, change of mind: Oh
has God changed your mind? Then let there be works worthy of this change of
mind.

And diverse motives there should have been named for the stirring up of your
hearts to walk worthy of the Gospel: O consider what is this Gospel you profess,
the Scripture calls it as here the Gospel of Christ: So the Gospel of the grace
of God, Act. 20. 24.

It Is a Gospel by which you are begotten, 1 Cor. 4. 15.

Thirdly, It Is the Gospel of your salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13.

And fourthly, It Is an everlasting Gospel, Revel. 14. 6.

And then as you had it before, a glorious Gospel.

Oh walk worthy of this Gospel that you have got so much good by. I appeal to
you any that have had the Gospel working upon your hearts, Have not you got so
much good by the Gospel that you would not part withal for ten thousand worlds?
Oh then walk worthy of that Gospel, seeing you have got so much good by it. And
I beseech you consider that motive in the text, Only let your Conversation be
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. [Only] as if the Apostle should say, the
Gospel has many things that darkens it, and many adversaries that do oppose
it, Oh but, Only let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel; you need
care for nothing that opposes, so you walk worthy of the Gospel, only let your
Conversation, be as becomes the Gospel. Now what a many enemies has the Gospel
at this day? and what errors and divisions are there to eclipse this
Evangelical Sun? Why now, Only let your Conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel: That is, in these times wherein there is so much done against the
Gospel, as if the Apostle should say, Let all Devils and wicked men do what
they can they shall never prevail against the Gospel, if your Conversations be
as becomes the Gospel; this is enough to stand out against all that is done
against the Gospel: Oh me thinks this argument should be a prevailing argument.
Oh! do not your hearts bleed when you hear what opposition is made against the
glorious Gospel of Christ that should be ten thousand times deerer than your
lives? here is the way that the Gospel should stand against Hell, and the gates
of Hell, all counsels of the enemy shall not prevail against the Gospel, if
your Conversations be as becomes the Gospel, This will do it. And mark what
Paul says, he looks upon it as a thing thing dearer than his life, to walk so
as might further the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 12. We suffer all things (says he) lest
we should hinder the Gospel of Christ: Mark, (as if he should say) Oh it is more
dear than our lives a thousand times, we will do any thing, and suffer any
thing; Oh the Apostles spirit was filled with the sweetness of the Gospel, he
had found the good of it. And here in this Scripture he says, Oh what shall I
do? what shall I suffer that I may not hinder the Gospel? Let them do any thing
that possibly can be to me, or take what they will from me, I crave not, we
suffer all things that the Gospel may not be hindered.

Now you will neither do nor suffer for the Gospel, you will not part with a
base lust that the Gospel may not be hindered; one professor being overtaken
with an apparent sin may do more hurt to the Gospel than he can do good all his
life, let him live as long as Methuselah; that sin of yours that is so dear to
you, Will not you part with it? it will hinder the Gospel, Oh wilt not thou
part with thy sin, when any temptation comes to sin? Let every one of you that
profess you love the Gospel, but think thus, Oh but shall I not hinder the
Gospel if I listen and yield to this temptation? indeed this will bring me a
great deal of comfort and content, and I shall get so much by it; Oh but will
it not obstruct the Gospel? the very thought of this that it possibly may
hinder the Gospel, should cause your hearts to rise with indignation against
that temptation, and cast out that sin; God forbid that I should meddle with
that sin which will hinder the Gospel. And therefore in Act. 20, 24. the Apostle
professes, that his life is not dear to him, so be it he might but further the
Gospel: And in 1 Cor. 9. from the 12. verse. to the 23. he professes there, he
would become all things to all men, he would be a servant to any man, and yield
to all things that he could, so be it he might not sin against God, to be never
so vile in the eyes of men, and all that he might but further the Gospel. Oh
that it were but so in our hearts. We read of an excellent commendations of
one, in the 2 of Cor. 8. 18. That his praise is in the Gospel in all the
Churches. Oh this is an excellent thing, when it can be said of a Professor of
Religion (it may be this man has not any great commendation for parts, no but)
his praise is in the Gospel. As the Saints of God and all the Churches of God
that knew him, they highly commended him, Why? Because that the Gospel is
furthered by him, his praise is in the Gospel: this we should labor al of us
what possibly we can. My brethren, what a mercy is it, that God should account
any thing that we do worthy of the Gospel! Mark the Text, Why, can we poor
worms do any thing worthy of the Gospel? I but though you can do but little,
God will account your endeavors even worthy of the Gospel. John says, that he
was unworthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe, nor worthy to carry the shoe
of Christ^: Then, are we such as can walk worthy of the glorious Gospel? Oh
it is Gods infinite goodness that shall account us to be worthy of the Gospel. The
Apostles did not account themselves worthy to suffer for the Gospel, Acts, 5.
41. And shall God account us to do that which is worthy of his Gospel? Oh this
should be a mighty encouragement to us, to walk worthy of the Gospel. And there
is an notable encouraging text, in Luke, 21. 36. Walk worthy of the Gospel: And
then you shall see what God will account you worthy of: Watch ye therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. Watch and Pray, be
watchful in all your converse, keep your communion with God close: What will be
the fruit of this? That ye may be accounted worthy to escape these things: that
is, the many afflictions, dangers, and evils that shall come upon the world,
you shall escape the evil of them at least. And to stand before the Son of Man.
Here Is a notable Scripture to quicken up our hearts to walk conscionably and
strictly in our Conversation, watch over your ways, stand upon your guard, and
pray, that you may be accounted worthy to stand before the Son of Man: Why? Is
there any that can stand before the Son of Man in glory? or that shall be
accounted worthy to stand before Him? Yes, a godly and gracious man or woman
that walks conscionably in their Conversation, when the Son of Man shall come
in his glory, they shall be able to stand before Him, and be accounted worthy.
Oh then, let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel, and you shall be
accounted by God, worthy to stand before the Son of Man. Jesus Christ* He walks
toward you as becomes a Mediator; yea Christ does al things that are suitable
to His relations, as a Husband, as a Savior: Oh do you all things that are
suitable to your relations.

And for the close of all, I beseech you lay but to heart the great Design that
God has in the Gospel, think thus with thy self, Surely the Work of God in the
Gospel is a glorious Work: Well then: surely God has some great Design that He
drives on in the Gospel. What is it? Let me labor to serve it whatsoever in me
lies. Now if you read in the Gospel you shall find that the Design that God
has, it is, To purchase to Himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works:
to promote holiness and godliness, that we being redeemed from the hands of our
enemies, might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
lives. This is the Design that God has: I see that Mankind is fallen from me,
and the people in the world are generally fallen into wickedness, the whole
world lies in wickedness, over head and ears in sin; but I would have holiness
advanced, I would have my Image renewed, I would have a peculiar people that
might live for ever to serve and worship me: Here Is the Design of God: Oh let
me now serve this design of God, and labor to do all that I can to serve, and
honor, and bless, and magnify that God that has wrought such glorious things
for us, as He has wrought in the Gospel. And as Christ says in Mat. 3. when
He came to be paptized of John, It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Now
shall the Lord Jesus Christ Himself say thus, It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness; surely then it becomes you to fulfill al righteousness. Would you
walk as becomes the Gospel? Give up your hearts, strength, and endeavors what
possibly you can to fulfill all righteousness, do not say, Why should I do
thus? and why need we be so forward and strict? Oh remember the text; If any
talk of too much strictness, and too much forwardness; then answer thus; I
heard in such a place such a Text opened and applied to me, that my
Conversation must be as it becomes the Gospel; and certainly let me do what I
can, I cannot do so much but that the Gospel will require ten thousand times
more than I can do, and therefore I do endeavor to walk as becoms the Gospel:
And I hear that Christ Himself says, that it became Him to fulfill all
righteousness; And why should not I walk as Christ Himself walked? O my life
has bin too vain heretofore, my heart has been dead, and I have not been
quickened up so as to walk worthy of the Gospel; but for the time to come my
care and endeavor above all things in the world, shall be, That I may honor
this glorious GOSPEL of Jesus Christ, from whom I do expect to have such
glorious things hereafter.

Consider now what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in these
things, that you may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

SERMON I.
IF you please to reflect back upon the last days Exercise, when we finished
that Scripture in the Philippians, that teaches us to walk as becomes the
Gospel; in the prosecution of which we showed what it was the Gospel
principally did hold forh unto us; and what Conversations ought to be in the
Professors of it suitable unto those things the Gospel holds forth; and among
those, this was one particular of great moment, that we did then but hint out
unto you in a word or two, That the Kingdom of Christ was not of this world.
They are Christ's own words. Now because it is a consideration of very great
use, I would be loath the benefit of it should be lost: therefore I have now
picked out that to speak to more largely, and to open the meaning of it unto you
from this Scripture; JOHN, 18. 36. Jesus answered and said, My Kingdom is not
of this world.
THE words are a part of the story of Christ's arraignment before Pilat. Behold
here the King of Heaven and Earth stands arraigned at the Bar of a wicked man.
In this Arraignment we find a special Charge which his Adversaries bring
against Him, which was this: THAT HE MADE HIMSELF THE KING OF THE JEWS. He was
an enemy to Government. The usual charge that the world has had against the
Saints, that they are enemies to Government. They fare no worse here than
Christ did.

Pilat requires of him to answer to the Charge, (whether it were so or no, that
He has made Himself a King.) Now you shall find in the answer of Christ, He
does not deny the thing, but implicitly grants it, neither does he answer him
fully to his mind, but says, My Kingdom is not of this world.

My Kingdom] As if he should say, I acknowledge that I have a Kingdom, as mean
and low as I am brought now, though I stand here before you as a despised man,
a Carpenters son, yet I confess I have a Kingdom, but it is not of this world.

Not of this world] He does not say, not IN this world, but says, it is not OF
this world, it is not a worldly Kingdom. We have in the words these two things.

First, That Christ has a Kingdom.

Secondly, What kind of Kingdom Christ's is, Not of this world.

I shall not here speak much unto the former, and so to handle the common place
of Christ's Kingly Office, but only hint it to you as it makes way to the
latter, there we shall stay a while.

Christ he has a Kingdom, He is anointed by the Father to be King, as well as
Priest, and Prophet of His Church: Psalm. 45. 6. Thy Throne O God, is for ever
and ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter: (that Psalm is a
Prophecy of Christ:) And in the 19. of Revel. 16. Christ is there called, The
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Christ God-man, is the King of Heaven and
Earth, Christ God-man, is the King of Angels and over all the World; and we
must know Christ as a King, and act our faith upon him as a King or else we
know Him not aright, we have not the true work of faith except (I say) our
faith act upon Him as a King as well as a Savior: In Acts, 2. 36. God has made
Him (says the text) both Lord and Christ: Mark, He it not only Christ, but
Lord and Christ; though it is true, that in the word Christ all His Offices are
employed, which signifies, anointed to them all; but yet this is expressed by
its self, Lord and Christ, for indeed properly He is Christ unto His Church;
but He is also Lord over all the World in some sense.

But then you will say, How does He say, that His Kingdom is not of this world,
if He he Lord over all the world?

Now that I might come to that point that I have chosen the text for, we are to
know that Christ has a double Kingdom.

First, Together with the Father He has a Providential Kingdom (as I may so
say for distinction sake.)

Secondly, He has a Mediatory Kingdom (as Divines call it.)

First, A Providential Kingdom together with the Father whereby He mannages all
the affairs of the world. (I say) God-man, the second Person in Trinity does
manage all the affairs of the world, His Scepter rules over all: as God did
make all things by Christ, so He does govern all things by Him; if God had not
deputed the second Person in Trinity God man the Mediator to have been the
Governor of all things, the holiness and justice of God according to the
Covenant of works by which he had to deal with man would have destroyed the
world upon man's sin; had not the ordering and governing of the world been put
into the hand of the second Person in Trinity God-man the Mediator, for though
he was not manifested in the flesh, He had not actually taken our humane Nature
upon Him, yet He was looked upon as God-man with the Father even before the
foundation of the world was laid, and so all things were committed to Him; And
hence the world notwithstanding the sin that has been in it has been
preserved so as it has been to this day; Christ therefore has a Providential
Kingdom together with the Father, and so he is King, not over the Churches
only, the King of the Saints, but He is over all the Heathen, over all the
world, from the rising of the Sun to the setting thereof: And the Civil
Magistrate (as I may so say) is the Deputy of Christ in this his Providential
Kingdom, Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, all Magistrates whatsoever are Officers
subordinate under Him.

But now, there is another Kingdom of Christ that this Scripture speaks of, My
Kingdom is not of this world. That is, the Kingdom of the Mediator (as Divines
calls it,) that more properly concerns His Church in the execution of His
Mediatory Office: Now this Kingdom of Christ it was ever since there was a
Church, but it was very dark under clouds and curtains, the glory of it was
little till the second Person came to be manifested in the flesh, then indeed
this Mediatory Kingdom of Christ came to be revealed abundantly, more clearly
than before, and Christ exercised it more fully; this is that which the
Scripture so often in the Gospel calls the Kingdom of Heaven. Repent for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: it is not of this world, but it is called the
Kingdom of Heaven; the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ is not of this world;
there is a great deal of difference between a worldly kingdom and this Kingdom
of Christ. And that is the subject that I am now to open to you, How Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world, the vast difference between worldly kingdoms and
Christ's Kingdom, which you will find to be a point of very great use.

First, Christ's Kingdom has not that pomp and glory, that bravery and galantry
that the Kingdoms of the world have; you know in the Kingdoms of the world
there is a great deal of outward pomp and glory; Bernice and Agrippa, they came
in great pomp (the text says;) the Kings of the earth have glorious
attendance. Christ has no such thing, His attendance was a few poor
Fishermen: Kings have great Courts, and crowded with Courtiers: His Court was
but small, only a few of such kind of men, mean and contemptible, taken from
the hedges, and out of the high ways: They have sumptuous Palaces: Christ had
not a place to hide His head here in this world; He says himself, that the
Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has
not wherewithal to hide His head, and yet a great King for all that: Surely it
was not of this world. The Kings of the earth have all kind of delicates that
this world can afford, they carry things in great state: It was not so with
Christ, Zech. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly, Oh Daughter of Zion, shout Oh Daughter of
Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee, He is just, and having salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the foal of an Ass. He comes
lowly and mean, the way of Christ in this His kindom is a way of humility and
outward meanness and lowliness, it is a way of outward contempt, scorn and
dirision, this is the way of the kingdom of Christ, by poverty, and lowliness
He would overcome the world, not by bravery and magnificence, nor by great pomp
and glory, He does not dazzle the eyes of men by such means; but His glory
consists in self-denial, in emptying of Himself, in becoming poor; and therefore
His Kingdom is not of this world. Luke, 17. 20. The Kingdom of God (says the
text there) comes not with observation: that is the word: the meaning of it is
this: It is not a thing that by any outward pompous Ceremonies can be observed.
Now Kings when they go from one place to another, by their attendance, and by a
great many ceremonies that are used for the setting out of their pomp and
glory, they are taken notice of and observed; you may know the King comes here,
say the people, when they see such things. But says the text there, The
Kingdom of God comes not by observation; there is no such outward pomp and
glory, there is nothing but outward meaness and baseness to the eye of the
flesh, in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. He that is in Himself the most glorious
King, and from whom all other Kings have their power, yet He has a Kingdom
that is not of this world, that has nothing but meaness, poverty, and
lowliness that does appear in it to the eyes of men.

Secondly, The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, in regard of His
Subjects. Look what subjects Christ has, they are such as are not of this
world: So Christ tells His Disciples, as you may find in the 17. of John, I am
not of the world: and you are not of the world. Kings, they have for their
subjects, Nobles, Peers, and great Personages, especially those that are near
about them: but now the subjects that Christ has for His Kingdom (for the
generality of them) they are of the poor, mean, base, and contemptible men of
the world, such as are looked upon, as the offscouring of all things, these
are His subjects: as in the second of James, 5. verse, Hearken my beloved
brethren: Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom? The poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom: they are the great hears, even the poor of this world. You know what
an offense it was unto the Jews, say they, Do any of the Rulers believe in him?
but this multitude, which is accursed. A company of poor women, illiterat
people they flock after Jesus Christ. The subjects of Christ are men chosen out
of this world, he himself appeared not with the glory of the world. And
secondly, His subjects are men chosen out of the world.

Thirdly, The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; that is, the rule that
Christ has in His subjects, and over these His subjects in this His Kingdom it
is not of this world, the rule it is spiritual, It is principally upon the
hearts, the wills, the consciences of those that are His subjects, every
subject of Christ has his will and heart subdued to Jesus Christ. It is not so
in this world, men may be subject to the Kings of this world merely by
constraint because they dare not do otherwise, many Kings in this world have
subjects whose hearts are not with them, who love them not, the Kings of this
world they rule only the outward man* But Christ's Kingdom is another kind of
Kingdom, He rules in the hearts of men, there is His Throne, in the wills, in
the affections of men, in the consciences of men, Christ swaies His Scepter in
men's souls: men by conquest they subdue subjects to themselves; Christ he
subdues too in a way of conquest, but he does not subdue the outward man so
much as the inward man, the will is subdued to Christ, He swaies His Scepter in
their hearts: this is a great mystery of godliness, the swaying of the Scepter
of Jesus Christ in the hearts of the Saints; and therefore the Scripture tells
us, That the Kingdom of God is within us, it is an inward Kingdom. That Is the
third thing wherein the difference between Christ's Kingdom and the Kingdoms of
the world consists.

Fourthly, The Laws of Christ are Spiritual. Observe the difference between the
Laws of Christ in the government of His Church, and the Laws that are for the
government of the world, it will be of very great use for you to know: The Lord
in His Providential Kingdom appointing Magistrates to govern here in the world
in His room, He leaves them to make Laws according to the general rules of
prudence and justice, such Laws are sufficient for the governing of the outward
man, and for the attaining to a Civil end for which their government is
appointed; But now Jesus Christ in His Mediatory Kingdom, in His Church He
makes all the Laws Himself, He does not leave it unto the Church to make new
Laws, according to the rules of their own prudence, what they conceive to be
fit in way of prudence, no, but they must fetch the Laws out of His Word, and
impose none but the same Laws that are in His Word, they must have a Scriptum
est, it is written, here are these and these texts of Scripture for what is
enjoined, nothing must be added unto what He has in His Word revealed, only
there are Divine Laws for the government of His Church: now it is true, that the
Church because they are a society of men, they have some things natural, and
some things civil among them, so far as they have need of natural and civil
helps, so far there may be Laws made according to rules of prudence and
justice, and Magistrates may come in to be helpful to the Church, so far as
they have need here of natural and civil helps as a society of men; But now to
speak properly to that which belongs to them merely as they are the Church of
Christ, besides that that they have need of as they are men, and natural and
civil societies, (I say) what belongs to them, merely considered as a Church of
Christ, they are to be governed only by the Laws of Jesus Christ who is the
only Lawgiver, only by the Laws of the Word; and there is not that liberty of
making new Laws in the Church as there is of making new Laws in the
Commonwealth and State; and that is a great difference between the Kingdom of
Christ and the Kingdoms of this world. That Is a fourth; The Laws are different.
The Laws are different, not only that they are by Divine revelation in the one,
and left to humane prudence in the other: But 2ly in the one the Laws bind
conscience, in the other they do not, they do not bind conscience any further
than the nature of the thing that is required binds, except it be in case of
scandal and contempt, so our Divines that have been the most orthodox have
gone; that the Laws of men in the State they bind not conscience, that is, if a
man should not do the thing that is required, he should in conscience be bound
over to eternal death for not doing it, this is a very hard bondage, a cruel
yoke: but thus, if the thing that is required be right and just, then the
nature of the thing may bind conscience, for then there comes in a Law of God,
if the thing be just and right that is required: or however, if I know nothing
to the contrary but it may be just and right, I must not break the Laws of man
so as to give scandal, or in a way of contempt; but if it be privately, so as it
be no scandal, nor no contempt, and the nature of the thing bind me not, then
my conscience is not bound over as guilty of eternal death, if so be I do not
every thing that man requires. But now the Laws of Christ they are such as bind
conscience as they come from him, he is such a King that (I say) because they
come from him and from his Will, though we see no reason in the matter of the
thing, though they have nothing in the nature of the thing but merely the Will
of Christ, it is enough to tie conscience, and to bind us even upon pain of
eternal death to obedience.

Fifthly, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world: That homage that the Saints do
unto Christ it is not worldly but spiritual, the Worship of Christ, and the
Ordinances of Christ they are not worldly but spiritual. Now the Kings of this
world they may appoint what kind of worship they please, that is, what
Ceremonies they will, whereby their subject, should tender up their homage to
them: and now men have ventured to be so bold with Christ the King, because men
may tender up their homage unto their earthly Kings by any ways invented of
their own, therefore they have thought that they might presume to tender up
their homage to Christ their spiritual King by any ways of invented worship;
and therein was a great error, they looked upon the Kingdom of Christ only in a
carnal way, whereas the Kingdom of Christ is such as all our homage that we
tender up to Him must be Spiritual, it must be Heavenly, it must be from
Heaven, it must be from Christ Himself, it must be from some Institution and
Appointment of Jesus Christ: and the more the kingdom of Christ does prevail,
the more Spiritual shall that homage be that the subjects tender up to Him: and
therefore you shall find that when the holy Ghost speaks of the Kingdom of
Christ in the new Testament, with reference unto that which was then in the old
Testament, He calls, even those ways of worship in the old Testament worldly,
in comparison of the worship and homage that the Saints tender to Christ in the
new Testament, as in Gal. 4. 3. Even so we, when we were children, were in
bondage under the elements of the world. The ceremonies of the Law are called
here the elements of the world, that we were in bondage to, while we were
children, for though we were subject to Christ then, yet we were but in our
nonage; and indeed in comparison of what we are in the times of the Gospel we
were slaves rather than subjects; we were then in bondage: and then in Col. 2.
8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
[after the rudiments of the world] These rudiments of the world they had some
reference (as it appears in reading this Chapter) unto the ceremonies of the
Law, and together with them there was mixture of men's own inventions, they were
the rudiments of the world, not after Christ; you do not acknowledge Christ to
be a King when you worship him in a worldly way, after the rudiments of the
world; As now for instance, because men were wont to honor the Presence Chamber
where the King sits, when you go into it you are to be uncovered: Now like unto
that (according to the way of the world) men think that because they meet here
for Religious ends to worship God, that when they come (as any time in the
week) into such a place as this is, they must come uncovered; now this is after
the rudiments of the world, you think to worship this King after the same way,
but his way of worship is no such low institution. And as they bowed to the
Chair of State, and so they would bow with cap and knee to the Communion Table
that they called the Altar; now these are according to the rudiments of the
world; but Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, His worship must be spiritual,
in Heb. 9. 1. Then verily the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine
Service, and a worldly Sanctuary. Mark, in the time of the Law it was but a
worldly Sanctuary in comparison of what is now in the times of the Gospel;
those ways of worship though they were once appointed by God, Christ the King
of His Church in the new Testament would not have His homage tendered up by
these ways of worship, they were too worldly for Him; then surely to have the
inventions of men in the worship of Christ, in the new Testament especially, it
is too worldly for Christ: No it must be Divine and Spiritual, he that
worships, must worship in spirit and in truth: all that worship and homage we
tender up to Jesus Christ, we must look to have it spiritual and not worldly;
and so the Ordinances, though they have something external, as the Sacraments,
yet if we stick to the outward part, we do not worship Christ as our King in a
right way; but we must be spiritual in all, look upon the spiritual part in all
Ordinances, or else (I say) we do not tender up that homage to Christ that is
due to Him, as the King of His Church.

Sixthly, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world: that is, The Officers that
Christ has appointed, for the government of His Church, are not of this world,
are not to be of this world; but they are all to be by Divine Institution.
Observe the difference in the Administration of Christ's Kingdom, and the
worldly Kingdoms: In the kingdoms of this world men may invent as many new
Officers as they please, they may errect new Officers in a State and
Commonwealth: But all the men in the world cannot errect any one new Office in
the Church, cannot make one new Officer otherwise than is in the Word; we do
not read of any such name as Tryers there: Now though we do not find Officers
of States in the Word, yet a Human Creation is enough, as the Apostle calls it,
1. Pet. 2. 13.
Be subject to every Ordinance of men. You have it in Peter, the word that is
there translated, Ordinance of men, it is, a Humane Creation. Humanae
creationae. (...).
In the Church there can be no new Officers created: Christ has made Pastors,
and Teachers, Elders, and Decons, and Widows in the Church; and not any new
sort can be added by all the men in the world. And therefore it was heretofore,
as in Popery, so in Prelacy, they would errect a new kind of Religion (as they
called it) more spiritual, and so made the Kingdom of Christ like unto the
kingdoms of the world, and thought that they had power to make as many new
Officers in the Church as they pleased. Certainly this was a derogation from
the kingdom of Christ, they made it too worldly. A second difference in the
Church Officers from the Officers in the kingdoms of the world, is this, If
once they be put into such a place in the Church, they have the full power of
the place. As supose now a Pastor or a Teacher has as much power as any one
Pastor or Teacher upon the face of the earth; there cannot be a difference
between one Officer and another of the same kind in the Church as in the State:
Now the State may limit their Officers as they please, in some Countries they
may make Justices of the Peace for one use, and in another Country for another
use, they may limit them according as they please, how they shall execute their
places, and when they must leave their Offices to others: But in the Church,
one Pastor (whatsoever he be) has as much power of Christ in him as any that
live, for as there can be no new Offices in this kingdom of Christ but by
Divine Institution, so there can be no limitation of their Office but according
to the Institution of Jesus Christ. So His Kingdom is not of this world. It Is
true, if so be that the Magistrate shall come in by Law to help the Church, so
far as they shall come in to give Civil help to the Church they may appoint
Officers, to see that their power be not abused; but not any that are properly
Church Officers, to administer any spiritual Ordinances in the Church, but such
as are by Divine Institution.

Seventhly, The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; the weapons by which
Christ does fight with His adversaries to maintain His Kingdom, are not the
weapons of the world; in that notable Scripture 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. For the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong bolds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. Mark, here is the weapons of the
Kingdom of Christ, Christ brings into captivity every thought, easts down
strong holds, whatsoever strong hold, or high thing is lifted up against the
Kingdom of Christ, Christ has weapons in His Kingdom to cast it down; but
says he, the weapons of our warfare (there is a warfare) they are not carnal
but spiritual.

Christ in His kingdom He does not appoint carnal weapons, He gives not unto
His Church weapons of the flesh, to make men believe whether they will or no.

You will say, If there be not such weapons that are outward to force men, then
all will be to no purpose, it will be nothing?

Yes says the Apostle, Our weapons are not carnal, but Spiritual; and he
answers that objection, That men will not care for them if they do not come in
an outward compulsary way, by imprisonments, and fyning, and such kind of ways.

We speak not what power the Civil State has, but Christ has committed no
such thing to the Church, as the Church: and these weapons the Apostle speaks
of, though they be not carnal but spiritual, yet they are mighty through God,
and the more spiritual they are, the more mighty they are to cast down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts its self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

The weapons, What are they? They are the two edged sword of the Spirit, the
Word of God in the Name of Christ, and with the authority of Christ preached to
the people in the Word of God, binding men in a dogmatical way, these are our
Spiritual weapons; Christ has never appointed his Church to defend its self by
carnal weapons, the Church goes no further than Spiritual weapons, it is in the
very text that I have read to you, My Kingdom is not of this world: Mark what
follows, What were the weapons Christ had to defend His Kingdom? surely no
worldly weapons, My Kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were (says he)
of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence; if my Kingdom were from hence,
I should have the like weapons to defend me as the Kings of the world have to
defend themselves.

Q. You will say, What Is the fighting and Wars for now? May there not be Wars
and fighting for the maintenance of Religion and the Kingdom of Christ?

A. Now to that I answer thus, That the Church has not these weapons, as a
Church they have only spiritual, yea and were it that any Church of God were in
any place where they had not a Civil Right to the exercise of their Religion,
then I confess (merely for their Religion when the Civil right of the State is
against it) if they should take up arms and fight for it, I think they should
go beyond the Commission of Jesus Christ: they should trust Christ for His
Kingdom; and we find no Warrant in all the Book of God for to take up weapons
merely for the defense of Religion. And therefore in the primitive times, never
took up weapons, all their armor were prayers and tears.

Obj. But we do (you will say) now; Are not our Wars for the defense of Religion.

Ans. Now to that it is clearly answered thus, Our Wars are for the defense of
the Civil Right we have to the outward practice of our Religion, and so by
weapons we may defend our Civil Right, that is, if we live in such a State
where we have Civil Right by the Laws of the Sat to the peacable enjoyment of
our Religion, if any shall come to disturb us, then by the virtue of our Civil
Right we may take up weapons to sight and defend our selves with; I but this is
not as a Church, nor merely for Religion, for if now the Civil State should be
so changed that the Supreme Power should be against the ways of Religion, yet
for Civil things they would defend us, but for the ways of Religion they were
against us in it, I confess in such a case for men that have no Civil authority
at all to take up weapons, to force any practice, or way of Religion, this
would not be warrantable by Christ, and by this we should fight for the kingdom
of Christ by other weapons than ever Christ has appointed; but now, when we
have the Civil Power, the Civil Magistrate may grant Civil Liberty, and Civil
Liberty for the outward practice of Religion, and so we may defend such a Right
as this for the peaceable practice of our Religion, that none should come to
force any other false Religion upon us. But now, the kingdom of Christ is not
of this world, the weapons of Christ's kingdom are spiritual weapons; and in
those times when there were no outward weapons to defend the kingdom of Christ,
as in the Primitive times when all Civil States were against the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, Did it not thrive? We are ready to say, Al Religion will be taken
away except there be such compulsary ways; I do not say but there may be
compulsion to keep men from mischieving of others in things that are against
the foundation. But now for the raising up of the Kingdom of Christ we know
that when there was no compulsary ways, yet the kingdom of Jesus Christ went
on and flourished as much as ever it has done since, so that the kingdom of
Christ is not of this world, He has not committed to His Church those weapons
that are carnal, all their weapons are weapons that are spiritual, to prevail
with the hearts and consciences of men and no further: And if we did understand
this aright, it would mightily quiet our spirits; and the more we did rest upon
the weapons Christ has appointed in his Word, the more we did look into the
Armory of the Gospel to find what weapons there are there against errors and
abuses in his Church, the more we should have the Kingdom of Christ prevail
amongst us.

Eighthly, The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world: that is, the Privileges
of Christ's kingdom are not worldly privileges, but Spiritual, and Divine, and
Heavenly Privileges. Men that live in several kingdoms have several
privileges, some in one way, and some in another; so every society of men, and
every kingdom have privileges, men that are subjects of such a Kingdom, they
have the privileges that belong to such a kingdom. We plead for many
privileges as we are the free born Subjects of England, that the people have a
right to by their freedoms, being born free Subjects, as those that are above
them have a right to that power that they have. So now in the kingdom of
Christ, there are some privileges that those that are in the kingdom of Christ
have that others have not.

As now, When any man comes into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Oh he comes to
partake of a great many excellent privileges, being once made a free Denizon
in this Kingdom of Christ, he comes to have a great many privileges that
others have not. But of these I shall treat more particularly afterward.

Ninthly, The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; the penalties and
punishments that Christ has in his Church are not worldly; I do not mean only
external ones, for they may be referred to that head of the weapons of Christ;
but we take them under another notion; Those that are truly the Subjects of
Christ they may be under penalties: You think that those that are believers
cannot be chastised for their sin; as if there were no penalties in Christ's
kingdom; I confess they are delivered from the penalties of the Law; But
Christ's inflicts penalties as he is King, there may be penalties in Christ's
kingdom. And the right understanding of this would much help us in that point;
Whether Believers may be chastised for sin or no, though they be Believers.

Oh they will say, No. Why? Because Christ has satisfied the Lawfully, and how
can God require it in them?

I confess the Law cannot; I but Jesus Christ in His administration as He is
King, not as He is the Judge of the Law, but as He is the King over them, He
may inflict chastisements upon them; they may in Christ's kingdom have some
chastisements, they cannot be carried out of that kingdom to have the
chastisements of the Law, but in Christ's kingdom Jesus Christ many times
inflicts spiritual chastisements upon them, by hiding his face from them for
sin, and by many spiritual discertions; and such men as are but by outward
profession under the kingdom of Christ, and do seem to be His Subjects, and are
not so indeed, the Lord inflicts spiritual judgments upon them, as hardness of
heart, blindness of mind, reprobate senses; and I beseech you observe it, The
Lord Christ does not so much observe the way of outward judgments upon wicked
men that are in the bosom of the Church, as He does observe to inflict outward
judgments upon the Heathens and others that are out of the bosom of the Church;
no, Christ has other manner of punishments for those that are in the Church,
though now and then Christ does inflict outward judgments upon them; but the
main thing that Christ looks at in His Church, is, To reward with spiritual
rewards; as righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost and the like; so
He does inflict spiritual punishments; Those that are professors in the Church
and naught and vile, it may be God may prosper them for a while as well as
others outwardly, Oh but the punishments of Christ in His kingdom they are
spiritual, your souls are bound over to eternal death, your hearts are hardened,
your consciences are benumbed, and that is more dreadful wrath a great deal than
if the Lord Christ should punish your bodies, or take away your estates, those
are punishments in Christ's providential Kingdom, but the penalties as Christ is
the King of the Church they are ever spiritual punishments which we should more
fear and tremble at a great deal. Thus the kingdom of Christ is not of this
world.

Now I should have showed you how this kingdom of Jesus Christ will certainly
prevail in the world, let the world do what they can. In the 2d Psalm. Yet have
I set My King upon My holy Hill. It will at length prevail over all the world,
and bring under all the kingdoms of the world to it; but when it has done so,
then there shall be a new world: Certainly there is a time that Christ shall
have the kingdoms of this world to reign over them in another manner than now
He has, and that is at the end of the world; I will give you a Scripture or
two about that. Revel. 11. 15. The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of
our Lord, and of His Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever. That is, He
shall subdue the kingdoms that were of this world, and then He shall reign; He
shall reign for ever and ever. Now they are the kingdoms of this world, but
when He reigns it is in this manner that is here spoken of, it is in another
world, as appears in Heb. 2. 5. For unto the Angels has He not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. Here the Apostle shows that
Christ is above the Angels, for he has not put in subjection the world to come
unto the Angels; therefore there is a world to come wherein Christ shall have a
further dominion than yet he has: and Adam was a type of Jesus Christ in this,
Adam he had the command of this present, world. Now in this world Christ does
rule but in the midest of his Adversaries, but there is a time coming that
Christ shall have all under him; as Adam in his innocence had the whole world
under his feet: And Christ does promise unto his people in the 3. of Revel 21.
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
also overcame and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Mark, it seems
there is a Throne of Christ yet that has not been, for here is a promise that
he will set them upon his Throne as he sits upon his Fathers Throne: Now Christ
rules together with his Father, but says he, You that are my Saints, and my
Subjects now, you shall sit upon my Throne.

I but you will say, That is in Heaven? (in Heaven indeed the Saints shall
reign.)

Nay, It connot be meant of a kingdom wherein the Saints shall sit eternally
with Christ in Heaven; I might give you many Scriptures for that, but I will
only give you one Scripture, 1 Cor 15. 28. And when all things shall be subdued
unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him, that put all
things under Him, that God may be All in All. Here he tells us that there is a
time that God shall be All in All, both unto Christ, and unto His Saints; yea,
and you shall find in this chapter, that Jesus Christ shall give up the kingdom
unto the Father, (speaking of the time of the resurrection) When all shall rise
again; and when that shall come, the kingdom shall be delivered up unto the
Father; so that this is a time before the general resurrection, that Christ
shall sit upon the Throne, there is yet a time between this and the Saints
being in Heaven, when the Saints shall sit upon Christ's Throne (as he upon his
Fathers) in another manner than now they do: Therefore surely Christ shall have
the kingdoms of this world subdued unto him in another manner than yet he has;
and for the proof of it, do but read the 7th chapter of the book of Daniel,
and you shall find abundant of proof, there shall be abundant deal of glory in
that kingdom of his, there he shall have attendants to purpose, thousand
thousands administered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before Christ; and though there was a Judgment, and the Books were brought, yet
its apparent afterward, that the Scripture speaks of a time that should be
before the Saints should come to Heaven; for he says this, That as concerning
the rest of the Beasts, they had their Dominion taken away; yet their lives
were prolonged for a season: Therefore it is not meant at that time when the
Saints shall ascend up into Heaven with Jesus Christ, for the Beasts had their
lives prolonged for a season and time after that: But says he in the 18. ver.
The Saints of the most High shall take your Kingdom, and possess it for ever,
even for ever and ever. And in the 21. ver. I beheld, and the same born made
war with the Saints, and prevailed against them until the Ancient of days
came, and Judgment was given unto the Saints of the most High; and the time
came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. And then in the 27. ver. And the
Kingdom and dominion, and the greatest of the kingdom under the whole Heaven,
shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. What
Dominions shall there be when the Saints are in the highest Heavens, to serve
and obey Christ? He means the Dominions that are here upon the earth, shall
serve and obey Christ: Therefore the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is not of this
world, nor be said hereafter to be such a world as this is: but when there
shall be another world, then Christ shall have a kingdom that shall have such
glory as shall be apparent to all; and such a Kingdom as the Kings of the earth
shall come and bring their glory to it; as in 21. of Revelations, you shall
find, that it is said, of the Kings of the earth. Read but that description of
the glorious condition of the Church of God there, and you shall see this true:
And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the
Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor to it. But that is in another
world, not that world that Christ speaks of here in this place of John.

Only now, do but consider a little of the excellency of this point by way of
preparation to you for the next time. It would be a notable Scripture to take
off our hearts from all the things of this world: The right understanding of
this would spiritualize the hearts of the Saints, would take away the offense
of the Cross of Jesus Christ, would help them to carry themselves through this
world with a great deal of joy and triumph, and not much to regard how things
go here below. I through the mercy of God am brought into the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ. And I find the whole tenor of Scripture carries it so, that the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ is not of this world, but in a spiritual way: Oh then, let me
have spiritual mercies, let me enjoy Jesus Christ in way of His spiritual
Kingdom; and farewell the world and all things under Christ. Truly, Christians
are not acquainted with this point of the spiritual Government of Jesus Christ
in His Church, and how God the Father has so ordered things, that In this
world Christ should have a Kingdom, but not Of this world.

And blessed are they that have by the holy Ghost an enlightening to understand
this Mystery, to see the reality of it indeed, That the Kingdom of Christ is
not of this world.

SERMON II.
JOHN, 18. 36. Jesus answered and said, My Kingdom is not of this world.
MAny particulars I past over the last day briefly, which I told you would need
some further explication. I Will give you some few things about that, and then
proceed to Aplication of al*

The Privileges of this Kingdom of Christ they are not of this world. I Will
name a principal one; and this is the privilege of all that are under the
Kingdom of Christ; That all businesses, transactions between God and them, are
in the Court of Christ the Mediator: They are not in the Court of exact and
severe justice, but they are to be tried for their eternal estates, and for all
they do, in the Court of Christ, in his Kingdom; which is a mighty privilege
the Saints have. As kingdoms have several privileges: it is a greater privilege
to be tried in one kingdom than in another: All men and women in their natural
estate, not under the kingdom of Christ, they are to be tried in the Court of
Justice, i. e. the Court of Gods providential kingdom, and there they are
either to be acquitted or condemned by the Law; that is the way of Gods
proceedings toward those that are under His providential kingdom, only to be
dealt withal according to the Law. But al those that are under the kingdom of
Christ, have all their businesses, in reference to God, tried in another Court,
tried in the Court (as I may so call it) of the Gospel, in the Judicature of
Jesus Christ, for Christ He is as Mediator to them, He is the Judge to pass all
sentences concerning them: and the right understanding of this would much help
in the point of Believers being chastised for sin; it is true, they are not
chastised by judgment out of the court of Law as other men are; but they are
chastised by Christ that has the Judicature committed to Him, and the
Administration of all things, especially concerning His Church and People, and
by a sentence from Him chastised; not by a sentence from the Father, as He is
the Judge of all flesh proceeding according to the Law. This is the main thing
which we spoke to before. But yet there are diverse other things.

2ly That all that are in Christ's Kingdom, are Freemen, they are delivered
from bondage: all that are out of this Kingdom are bondslaves, they are under
the prince of this world, (that is, the Devil) and in slavery unto him; they
are all as vassals under the Law, in bondage, and have no other spirit but a
spirit of bondage in them, they are slaves to sin, they are under the curse of
the Law: But now being brought to the Kingdom of Christ, they are made free,
they are free Denizons of Heaven.

3ly And then from hence follows in the third place: All that are in Christ's
Kingdom, have the privilege of a free-trade to Heaven, they have free traffic
to Heaven: there is now a blessed intercourse between Heaven and them, that
they have by being subjects of this Kingdom: As we know the subjects of this
Kingdom have many freedoms that foreigners have not, that those that belong to
another Kingdom have nothing to do with. So the subjects of Christ's Kingdom
have a freedom of coming into Gods presence, of trading to the promised Land
that others have not; others are cast out of Gods sight and cannot trade to
Heaven so as believers do that are brought under the Kingdom of Christ.

4ly By virtue of this Kingdom they come to have right unto all the Ordinances
of Christ: And only by this we come (I say) to have right unto them, so as to
be our own. Indeed, Christ for the sake of such as are His Elect Ones, that He
intends to bring into His Kingdom, He sends forth His Word, the preaching of
the Word unto them* but when they are brought into his Kingdom then they are
under the Ministry of the Word in another way, Christ then is their great
Pastor and Shepherd, and so His Ministers are in a more peculiar manner Pastors
and Shepherds unto them. And besides, there are other Ordinances that they have
nothing to do withal till they be brought into the Kingdom of Christ, namely,
the seals of the Covenant, with some others that might be named: That Is the
great privledge of those that are under the Kingdom of Christ, to have right to
all Ordinances; Certainly all Saints and Believers, have right unto all, but
they are to come in an orderly way to them.

5ly By being under the Kingdom of Christ, there is this Privilege:
Protection. As Kings should be the protectors of their subjects: Jesus Christ
has taken upon Him the protectors of their subjects: Jesus Christ's has taken
upon Him the protection of all such as come under Him, all power in Heaven and
Earth is given unto Christ, and it is al exercised for their protection, to
deliver them from dangers bodily, and spiritual, to protect their souls, they
are under Christ's Kingly power for protection; when any temptation to sin
comes, they should fly unto Christ as King, to shield them from their enemies,
when their spiritual enemies come in like a flood, then the Spirit of Christ
sets up a standard against them.

6ly They shall certainly have victory over all their enemies: This Kingdom
shall never be shaken, let all the world conspire what they will against it,
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, no cunning devises, no subtle
ways shall ever overcome this Kingdom, no, nor any one subject of this
Kingdom. This is a privilege beyond what is in the world. A Kingdom may
preserve its self so as to continue a kingdom, but many subjects may be
destroyed in the preservation of it: but this is such a kingdom as there shall
never one subject be destroyed in it, that is, All the enemies shall never take
off one subject from this kingdom; indeed they may take away their bodily
lives; but that is but a transferring of them to the more glorious part of the
kingdom that they shall attain to: Then may a subject of this kingdom be said
to be destroyed, when he shall be cut off from Christ and lose the grace that
he has received: but none shall be thus destroyed, but shall be preserved by
Christ, and shall certainly overcome all enemies, both inward and outward. And
that is a sixth privilege.

7ly By being in this Kingdom, Believers are made every one of them Kings:
though they be subjects in some sense unto Christ, yet Christ has made them
Kings and Priests unto God (so they are called in Scripture.) There Is no
kingdom where all the subjects are Kings; it is so here, Christ makes all that
come under His kingdom to be Kings, and they have too (according to their
Princely state) the Angels to be their guard; as Kings have their guard where
ever they go; so the poorest and meanest Believer that is under this kingdom of
Christ has his guard of Angels wheresoever he goes; though it be a poor smokey
hole or Cottage that he lives in, yet it is guarded by Angels, every night they
keep the Door and watch about the Bed: Thus the Scripture tells us that the
Angels are Ministering Spirits for Gods Elect.

8ly The benefit of this kingdom of Christ, It is Spiritual peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost: So in Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God consists not in meat and
drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; There Is
another manner of peace than the world gives. So Christ in John, 14. 17. Peace
I leave with you, My peace I give unto you, not as the world gives give I unto
you. It Is the note of a learned Interpreter speaking of this place, I give not
peace as the world gives; the world gives peace (says he) by taking away
afflictions from a troubled person; but Christ gives peace by taking away a
troubled person from affliction His meaning is this; the worlds way to give
peace is to take away trouble from us, but the way that Christ has is to take
the trouble of our hearts from our affliction; the world cannot give so long as
the affliction continues, but Christ gives peace though the affliction does
continue; that is thus, Christ He takes off the troublesomness of men's hearts
from the affliction; the world takes off the affliction from the trouble of
men's hearts: now this is a great deal better peace when the trouble of our
hearts is taken away though the affliction continues, rather than when the
affliction is taken away and trouble of heart continues. I give peace, not as
the world gives peace, it is inward peace, the worlds is outward, the world
takes away some trouble, but I take away the very root of all trouble; the
branches are taken away by the peace of the world; that is, whereas you had not
trading before, nor the freedom of your estates before, you shall have that
now; but the root of all your trouble the world cannot take away, that is, sin,
but I take away sin that is the root of all trouble. We may (through the
blessing of God upon Armles, Parliament, we may) come to have outward peace,
that is freedom from outward troubles; Oh but there may be vexation and trouble
in our spirits in the mean time. But Christ's peace is especially in the
conscience and heart, within doors; we may have peace here mixed with abundance
of sin and wickedness: it may be procured in a sinful way, or it may be the
cause of much sin; but my peace is a holy peace, it does further holiness
wheresoever I give it, my peace is a lasting and a stable peace; peace here may
be but for a few months, but my peace shall be eternally, I give peace not as
the world, that is the fruit of the kingdom of Christ: So the truth is, though
there be many outward afflictions attend the Kingdom of Christ, yet the Kingdom
of Christ is always in peace and in joy of the holy Ghost. That is a
privilege which we can never be crowned with but in the kingdom of Christ, as
we can never enjoy peace but here, all the peace that men's consciences have
till they come under the kingdom of Christ it will turn to greater trouble,
that peace they have and live loosly, not being subdued to the kingdom of
Christ will turn to horror and misery; and so the joy that there is in the
world it will turn to sorrow and vexation; it is proper to the kingdom of Christ
to have joy in the holy Ghost; thou may have joy in thy cups, joy in thy
dishes, joy in thy mirth and wicked company, but it is proper to the kingdom of
Christ to bring joy unspeakable and glorious unto the soul; the soul never
knows experimentally what the joy of the holy Ghost means, till it comes under
the kingdom of Jesus Christ, it is the privilege of the kingdom of Christ to
bring spiritual peace which passes all understanding, and joy in the holy
Ghost.

Ninthly, This is a privilege in the kingdom of Christ, That all that are in
His Kingdom have right to all the gifts and graces of all the Saints in the
world: Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephus, or Life, or Death, all is yours,
for you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. They have (I say) right to all, all
the gifts of all the Ministers of the world, and the graces of all the Saints
they work for good unto them.

Tenthly and lastly, They are all Heirs of Christ with an immortal Crown of
glory, that is laid upon Heaven for them. Thus Christ's Kingdom is not of this
world, the privileges of it are beyond the worlds, which can only be seen by
the eye of faith, for they are spiritual and glorious privileges.

Quest. If you ask me why it is that God the Father would not have His Son to
have his kingdom in this world? Certainly God might have given to Christ all
the Government of this world, might have made Him the great Emperor, to have
ruled in an external way, and all His Subjects to have been in pomp and glory
here below; but God would not have the kingdom of His Son here in this world
for these reasons,

Ans. First, Because that hereby He would confound the wisdom of the world, and
show the vanity of all the things of this present world, and the folly of the
hearts of men that are set upon the things of this world; we look upon these
things as great things, but God has showed that he does not look upon them as
great matters, but as things that have little value and excellency in them, and
therefore He would not have His Son to have His kingdom here of this world;
surely if there were such excellent things here as men dream of, then
undoubtedly Christ should have had His Kingdom of this world; but that God
might confound all the glory and nonplus the wisdom of this world, therefore
he would go another way to work, God would so order things that He would fetch
about the glory of his Name and those great things that he did intend from all
eternity, He would fetch them about in a way that should be hidden from the
eyes of the world, in a way that should appear contemptible in the eyes of the
world, and he would by this rebuke and shame all the pride, folly, and vanity
of the world, there is no greater rebuke of the pride, folly, and vanity of the
world than in my Text here, that says, The Kingdom of Jesus Christ is not of
this world.

Secondly, Because the Lord delights so much in the exercise of the graces of
His Spirit, the spiritual workings of the hearts of His Saints; there is nothing
that is ab extra from God, that is more delightful to Him than the exercises of
the graces of His Spirit in the hearts of His Saints, (excepting what is in the
Person of Christ himself) nothing more pleasing in all the works that ever God
made in which He takes more pleasure than in the exercise of faith, and of
humility, and of patience, and the like; and the holiness of His Saints. Now
the less the Kingdom of Christ is of the world, the more bright and glorious do
the graces of the Saints appear, the more do they come to be exercised; had the
Saints a worldly glory and pomp here, their graces would not shine forth so
eminent, there would not be such a spiritual luster and shine upon them: but
now that God may exercise, especially the grace of faith, and humility, and
patience, and selfdenial, and brotherly love which are so precious to Him;
therefore God has so ordered things that the Kingdom of His Son should not be
of this world, but it should be spiritual; (it may be) you think it a sad
affliction that you have not those comforts that you see others have in the
world, you have not such estates and bravery as others have, brave dwellings,
costly furnitures, and fine clothes as others have, and you cannot provide for
your children as they do; I but is there the exercise of faith in God in the
want of these things; the exercise of humility, self-denial, of patience? know
that these are more glorious things than if thou did sit upon a Throne with a
Crown of gold upon thy head and a Scepter in thy hand, and all the people
prostrating themselves before thee, this were all but a childish vanity in
comparison of the exercise of the graces of Gods Spirit, thou have that that is
more excellent in the eyes of God and of His Son, and in the eyes of the
blessed Angels, far more excel, lent than these outward, pompous, glorious,
glittering vanities that are here: and when thou find by experience that the
Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, Oh then think, that surely God delights
much in the exercise of the graces of His Spirit in His Saints: And this is the
reason why he would not have the kingdom of Christ to be of this world.

Thirdly and lastly, Therefore He would not have it to be of this world, that
hereafter when the Lord shall come to fetch out all his glory from those things
that seem to be the most contrary, that his power and wisdom may be more
glorious and appear more evidently, that his glory may be more conspicuous: as
certainly it will hereafter at the great Day when the issue of all the great
designs that God had in sending of Christ into the world, when the issue of all
shall come and be accomplished, then the Name of God will be so much the more
honorable to all eternity, because He has wrought out such glorious things,
from that which did seem to the eye of flesh to be so mean and contemptible.

APPLICATION.
But by way of Application; and that shall be built upon the consideration of
the point more generally; and upon the Reasons that are named, why the Kingdom
of Christ is not of this world.

From hence follow, thus much in the first place, That if the Kingdom of Christ
be not of this world, then there is a happiness beyond the things of this world
to be had; that we must certainly conclude and determine: If we believe this
point, That Christ Kingdom is not of this world, we must lay down this for a
certain and infalible ground that we may build upon, That there is a happiness
to be attained unto that is beyond this world, for surely there is a good in
the of Christ, there is somewhat beyond this world for the souls of the
children of men to look after as their cheef good, as their happiness; that is a
confectory that follows from it. The Kingdom of Christ whatsoever it be, it is a
glorious Kingdom, it is the Kingdom of His dear Son (as the Scripture speaks)
and therefore very glorious: And all the glory of the kingdom of Solomon, it
was but to typifie out the glory of the Kingdom of Christ; now that is not of
this world: therefore there is some glory beyond that of this world: and it is
a good sign of a spiritual eye and a spiritual heart, to be able to see an
excellency and glory that is beyond this world; to be able to look higher and
further than this world can: We think that all the good things that God has to
communicate to the children of men, should be here on earth; but I beseech you
consider of it: Can we think in our consciences that all the good things that
God has to communicate to such as He loves should be here in this world?
Certainly, no. Consider therefore that all the good things that God intends for
his people are not of this world.

First, It Is called, An evil world. Truly it is no great matter, and we should
not account much that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, if we
consider these things:

First, That this world it is an evil world. Gal. 4. We are delivered from this
evil world.

Secondly, It Is a world, that the Devil (in Scripture) is called the god of,
and the prince of this world; 2 Cor. 4. 4. Whose eyes the god of this world
has blinded. Surely all the good things that God has to communicate to His
Saints, are not of this world, that is an evil world, that is a world that the
very Devil is god of it (in scripture phrase.)

Thirdly, A world all whose bravery and pomp and glory it is not of the Father.
1 John, 2. 16. you have an epitomy there of what the excellency of the world
is; for says he, All that is in the world, the lusts of the flesh, lusts of
the eyes, and the pride of life: Under these three heads are all things that
the men of the world look upon as desirable; either they are the lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, or the pride of life: But says he, All that is
in the world, is not of the Father, but is of the world. Surely the chief
things that God has to communicate to His Saints, are not of the things of
this world; for all that is in the world, is not of the Father, And would
not thou have the riches of the Father? It Is true, God is the Creator of all
things, and has the dispose of all things; but that that the men of the world
look upon as the excellent things that are here, they are not of the Father,
they are none of the good things that God the Father has to bestow upon His
children; and therefore surely, there is a happiness beyond the things of this
world. Oh my Brethren, that I could but so take off the hearts of people by
this point from the things of this world, as to make them look after the
Kingdom of Christ that is not of this world; for you see that all that is here
in the world, the Scripture says, it is not of the Father.

Fourthly, As all the excellent things are not of the Father, so the truth is,
all the glory that is in the world it is but darkness, it is a dungeon of
darkness to a spiritual eye: As the Bats can see in the night; so the men of
the world they think they see some glittering here in the world; but in the
language of Scripture, and to spiritual hearts, it is but darkness: Hence the
Apostle Ephesians. 6. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world.
Rulers of the darkness of this world are the unclean spirits, spiritual
wickednesses; the Devils are the Rulers of the darkness of this world, this
world it has a darkness in it, and therefore surely, the chief good things
that God has to bestow upon the Saints, they are things that are beyond this
world.

Fifthly, The world knows not God, John, 17* 25. The world is that that Christ
says, does not know the Father; Oh, righteous Father, the world has not known
thee. Take men that are the wisest of the world, and have all the wisdom that
this world can afford, it will not help them to the knowledge of the Father,
the world knows not those excellent and glorious things that are of the Father.

Sixthly, The world it lies in wickedness, 1 John, 5. 19. (as sometimes I have
opened that Scripture to you) Just as you see in a common shore, a carrion, a
dead dog that lies over head and ears in the mire or mud in a common shore, and
in its own filthiness: so the whole world lies in wickedness, the wickedness of
the world is like the common shore, in which there is nothing but filth and dirt;
and the world as a dead carrion lies in its own pollutions; surely, then there
are other things that God has to communicate to his Saints than the things of
this world: and we should not be offended though the Kingdom of Christ be not
of this world.

Seventhly, The world it passes away with the lusts of it, 1 John, 2. 17. it
is a notable Scripture for that: And the world passes away, and the lusts
thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever, (speaking before
of what was the glory of the world) and it passes away with the lusts thereof.
Mark, Not only the things of the world passeaway, but the very lusts to those
things passes away: As now, men and women who have their healths, and live
bravely for a while, Oh! how greedy are they for the contents of this world?
how do they long and desire that they might have such a merry meeting with such
friends, and such cheer, and such commings in; They make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. But now (mark) within a little while, not
only these comforts shall be taken from them, but the very lusts of them shall
pass away; that is, they shall have no mind in the world to them: Take a poor
man that was wont to long for these things, when he lies upon his sick bed, at
the point of death, now he looks upon these things as those things that are dry
leaves, he has no mind to them, not so much as a fancy after these things,
all the varnish of the things of the world are gone in his eyes, he tastes them
no more than the white of an eg, yea, the desire of his heart is dead to them:
as now, a man that lusted after drink, when his desire is satisfied, the very
desire after it is gone; and one that lived in gluttony, when his body is a
little distempered, the very lusts thereof passes away: surely there are other
things that God has for his people than the things of this world.

Eighthly, There must be somewhat else besides the things of this world: for
Christ Himself is not of this world, John, 8. 23. Are all the good things that
the Father has to communicate of this world, and not Christ Himself of this
world? Let me tell you, Christ is the greatest gift that ever was given, or
possibly could be received, and yet Christ is not of this world; therefore
there is somewhat else besides the things of this world, that God has for some
of the children of men, that He intends good unto.

Ninthly, The Saints are said, not to be of this world, Joh. 15. 19. and 17.
14. If they be not of this world, then their happiness is not here, God has
other happiness for them than that which is here.

Tenthly, The Scripture makes it to be a sign of a child of wrath that he walks
according to the course of this world (in 2 John 2.) this is enough to describe
a child of wrath.

Eleventhly, It Is made a sign of one that is an enemy to God; and that is
hateful before God, that is a lover of this world, Jam. 4. 4. And 1 John 2. 15.
He that loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him; and the
friendship of the world is enmity to God (says the Holy Ghost in those two
Scriptures*) If so be that in the world there were the special things that God
has to communicate to the Children of men; certainly then God would have his
people to love the world, He would say, Love these things, for these are the
fruits of my favor and love, these are part of the riches that I have to
communicate to those that I intend good to; and therefore delight in these,
expatiate your heart in these: Oh me! says the holy Ghost, whosoever loves the
world is an enemy to God. And, if the love of the world be in you, the love of
the Father is not in you: surely then here are not the things that God intends
for the children of men.

Twelfthly, The world is that that shall be condemned: 1 Cor. 11. 32. That ye
may not be condemned with the world* that notes that God intends to condemn
this whole world, all these things are under the sentence of death, and all the
men of the world are condemned before God; and therefore these are not the
things that men should so much look after to make them happy.

Thirteenthly, Take all the world together; the Scripture speaks by way of
supposition, That a man may gain the whole world, and yet his soul be lost for
ever; If one man could get all the world in to his possession and thereby lose
his soul, it would be an ill bargain; the world then has no such excellency in
it as we should place our happiness in it; God has something else for His
people than these things that are at the best under Moon-vanities.

Fourteenthly, If Christ's Kingdom is not of this world; then certainly those
that are of the world are not of His Kingdom; for these two cannot stand
together, that Christ's Kingdom should not be of this world, and yet that these
that are of the world should be of his Kingdom, if such as are of the world are
none of his kingdom, then certainly a worldly man or woman is not of the
kingdom of Christ, Christ owns them not as under His kingdom, they are
Vagabonds and Runnagates not under the protection of Jesus Christ, not
partakers of any privilege of Jesus Christ.

Quest* You will say to me, How should one know when a man is a man of this
world? The Scripture makes a plain distinction of some that are of this world,
and some not; the best of all you will say they have hearts worldly enough, and
they desire to have the comforts of this world as well as others? well, though
there are some, yet we had need look to our selves; to examine whether we be of
the world yea or no, for there lies thus much upon it, that if we be of the
world we are not of the kingdom of Christ; now I would give you but these three
notes of a man of the world.

Answ. The first is this, One that is a man of the world is such an one as
could be content if God would let him live here in this world, and enjoy what
he does, he would be content for to live here for ever, and could be satisfied
though he never enjoyed any thing from God but what he has received here, if
he might always bold it. Here Is an evident Argument of a man of the world, I
mean such a man as has health of body in this world, he has for outward as
much as the world can afford any man, that for the properness of his body, his
comeliness, his health, he has as much as the world can give, he has
convenient dwelling, with all accommodations belonging thereunto, and he has
the comings in of the world as much as his heart can desire, he has his wife
and children about him, in which he has a great deal of delight and content;
now, I would but put it to this man, What say thou? would not this satisfy
thy heart if thou might always be here, always have thy house, and
gardens, and walks, and these comings in that thou have now, that thou might
fare deliciously every day, and have the sweet and fat of the world, would it
not satisfy thy soul, though God should never give thee any thing else but
this?

I beseech you, in your own thoughts, answer even to God this question, and
seriously look into your hearts, for you may know very much of your hearts upon
the answer to this question, you may come to know what is like to become of you
for ever, even from the answer that your consciences would give to this
question: That man or woman whose conscience tells them that this would
satisfy, then we may conclude, that surely that man or woman is of this world;
because the things of this world would be enough for his portion: But now take
a man or woman that is chosen out of this world, that is of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, unto whom the Lord has made known the things of another world
and the excellencies of Jesus Christ, and such a one though it had ten thousand
times more than it has, though it had what possibly can be imagined, it would
say, Lord, it is true, I am unworthy of the least crum of bread that I eat, or
of the least drop of water, but yet it is not all the world, nor ten thousand
worlds can satisfy my soul, for the portion of it, It is nothing but thy self,
the unsearchable riches in Jesus Christ, those blessed things that thou have
revealed in that glorious kingdom of thy Son, it is only that that can satisfy
my soul for the portion of it; and if thou should say, well, thou shall have
all the things in this world for thy portion and enjoy them for ever; I should
account my self in a miserable condition, for thou have revealed better and
higher things to my soul; this would be the answer of one that is chosen out of
the world that has a gracious heart and is brought under the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ.

2. A second note that I would give to know, whether a man be a man of this
world or no, is this, A man of this world is one that accounts the possessions
of worldly comforts, to be greater rices than any riches contained in the
promises; that looks upon the comforts of this world as real things, they have
them in possession: But looks upon the promise, as that that has but a notion
in it, as if there were no such reality and excellency in the things of the
promise; a man that dares not trust God upon his word upon his promise without
seeing in a way of reason or sense how things may come in unto him for supply
from the things of this world; this is a man of the world, he has a promise,
but things go very ill with him in respect of his outward estate, in respect of
whatsoever by sense or reason he is able to discern, he looks upon himself as
miserable, if indeed God would give him in the things of the world in real
possession, that would satisfy him, but not the promise: This is an evidence
of a worldly heart, that regards more the possession of the things of the world
than the promise of God for provision for him; as for promises, he thinks that
that man is but in a sad condition, that has nothing but bare promises to live
upon; here is a worldly heart that has low and mean thoughts of the promises.
But now, one who is taken out of this world, and translated into the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, regards more to have a promise to live upon, than to have
possessions to live upon: Promises in the word are greater and more real things
to that soul than any Bills or Bonds from men can be, he can live better upon a
Promise, than upon Bills, or Bonds, or Leases, or any such things in the world:
Have thou found such a principle within thee, that can close with the
promise, and can bless thy self in the promises, I have title to, and an
interest in many promises in the Book of God, for life and godliness are more
to me than all the treasures of Egypt, and though I do not enjoy so much in the
hand as others, yet my heart has enough, because it is possessed by Christ, in
whom all the promises are Yea, and Amen; that is, sure and infallible. God is
faithful who has promised; this is an argument that thou art taken out of the
world, and taken into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; but otherwise, thou that
can not trust God for thy outward estate, body and soul upon a promise, this
is an evidence of one that has his heart set on the world.

3 A third sign of a man of this world, is this, A man of the world blesses
those that are like himself, looks upon and measures the happiness or misery of
other men, according to what they do enjoy, or according to what they do enjoy
in this world. They call the proud, happy; I mean by this they measure the
happiness of other men, according to what they have of the world, and think
that the mere enjoying of worldly accommodations is enough to make men happy,
notwithstanding they see them to be very wicked and sinful, yet so long as they
flourish as a green bay tree, yet rejoice in them and with them, yea, get
themselves in the midst of the guilt that is upon them, when conscience (as a
woolf in their bosom) flies in their faces, yet they can bless themselves in
the enjoyment of outward comforts, and set that against any trouble of mind
whatsoever, as if so be it were enough to make up their comforts: I have been
at such a place, and contracted such guiltiness upon my soul, committed such
sins, Oh! what shall comfort me now? well, he comes home, and sees all well
about him, his house furnished, his table spread, means coming in as a flood,
and this quiets him: here is a worldly heart: whereas were the heart taken off
from the world, the possession of al under Christ would never calm a conscience
that has any guilt upon it; when I have contracted any guilt upon my soul,
although I see all well about me, Oh! till I have an assurance from the Holy
Ghost the Witness of the Spirit, that the guilt of my sin is washed away in the
blood of Jesus Christ, what will all these do me good? I have these and these
comforts, Oh! but I have an unclean conscience, a leprous soul: Do thou set
the good things here to countervail the evil of sin? Certainly, thou art a man
of the world, thy name is written in the earth* thou art but living dust and
ashes at the best. And the world is like to be the only portion of thy soul,
thou art a stranger to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. That Is a second Use.

Use 3. The third Use should have been this: Here we see the main thing that
does hinder people from the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: What is that which keeps
off men from coming under the Scepter of this King of Saints, from subjecting
themselves to His Kingdom? Certainly, this point shows it clearly, His Kingdom
is not of this world, were the Kingdom of Jesus Christ of this world, then
people would flock into it, Who would not join in such a Kingdom and be a
member thereof, where he could have worldly glory and pomp and riches and
bravery; but now because it is not of this world, therefore they slight it: As
I remember we read in the Gospel of Herod, that when he heard of the great
Miracles that Christ wrought, Herod sent for Christ, and he longed a great
while to see Jesus Christ, but when Christ came, and he saw Him a poor, mean,
contemptible man to the outward eye, he thought to have seen him to have done
such and such great things, and to have been such a man as not the like upon
the earth. But Christ contemned Herod as much as Herod contemned Him, and
Christ would not show his glory before Herod, but appeared in his outward
meaness, and the text says, Herod set Him at naught, he set Him at naught,
when he saw him so outward contemptible: And so it is reported of the Roman
Emperors, that hearing that Christ should be the King of the Jews, and that out
of David's stock there should come a King of the Jews, they sought to destroy
all of that family that they could find out, and all the Tribe of Judah: But
afterward, when they found out some that were of the Kindred of Jesus Christ,
and saw that they were poor laboring men, that labored with their hands to eat
their bread by the sweat of their brows, they set them at naught and contemned
them; certainly, this is the great offense to the world, that the Kingdom of
Christ is not of the world, and as Christ says, Woe to the world, because of
offenses* so woe to the world because of this great offense, Christ's Kingdom
being so spiritual, hence it is that the world receives Him not, in 1. John,
10. And so in John, 14. 17. Even the spirit of truth whom the world cannot
receive: Mark, the world cannot receive the spirit of Truth, the world receives
not Christ, and it cannot receive the spirit of Truth. If you speak of the
world to men, then they savor of those things, come to a man and tell him of a
good bargain on the Exchange, he will listen to you, and remember what you say,
but come and speak to him of the great things of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
of the glorious privileges of that kingdom, only there is a sound in the air,
and it passes away, and takes no impression at all on the heart of one that is
carnal, 1 John, 4. 5. there you have this expressed fully, the very guize and way
of a carnal heart, They (says the text) are of the world, therefore speak they
of the world: and the world hears them: those that are of the world, they
speak of the world, and discourse of the world, and savor the things of the
world, and the world hears them; but now, let a man come and tell them of
things that are heavenly, of a goodly Pearl, of Jesus Christ, they savor not
those things; and they hear them not: Oh! it is from hence that men come not
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, because it is not of this world. What Is the
reason that there are more comes into the Kingdom of Antichrist, than into the
Kingdom of Christ? Revel. 13. 3. The whole world wandered after the beast, says
the text, because they are of the world, and Antichrist does set up a worldly
kingdom instead of Christ's kingdom, and men that are of the world they flock
after Antichrist, and hence it was, that your great rich men in places where
the Gospel has not been, they were Papists, or Popishly affected, so that
therefore the Papists make outward prosperity to be one badge or sign of the
true Church; hence it is that Popery is so suitable to worldly hearts, and the
holy Ghost prophesied before hand, that the whole world should follow
Antichrist, only here and there a few poor ones Jesus Christ chooses out of this
world to follow him, for His Kingdom is not of this world.

One Particular more, in a word, seeing the Kingdom of Christ is not of the
world, then a worldly heart is the most unbeseeming thing in one that
professes himself to be a Christian, of any thing that can be in the world: If
Christ's Kingdom be not there, certainly thy heart should not be there: Thou
that professest thy self to be of the Kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual and
heavenly, and yet thou a worldly earthly heart, I say, it is the most
unbeseeming thing that possibly can be: what, for a Professor of Religion to
have an earthly, covetous worldly heart?

By that that I have already spoken in showing the vanity and the evil of the
world, and the great evil of loving the world were enough to strengthen this
use; but now that that I intended should have been to speakesp, ecially to
those that are Christians, that have hopes that God has made them partakers of
Jesus Christ, and would be loath to lose their hopes in the good things of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ for 10000. worlds, and yet there does remain much
worldliness in their hearts to this day, surely, this not beseeming one of the
profession that thou make, it is no honor unto thy King, the Lord Jesus
Christ; worldly Professors, they are great dishonors to the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ; when there shall appear no difference between those that we account to
be men of the world, and such as we hope are chosen out of the world; Oh! how
is Christ dishonored by this? Look but upon the lives of Christians that
profess Religion, and one would think that the Kingdom of Christ were a Kingdom
of this world rather than any thing else, for I say, to outward appearance,
though it may be Christ may see some integrity within the heart, yet to outward
appearance there is even almost no difference between them and the men of the
world.

It does become Christians to live so in their whole course, as to make it
appear that they are men and women above the world, whose Conversations are in
Heaven, that they do believe the Kingdom of Jesus Christ that is not of this
world.

SERMON III.
JOHN, 18. 36. Jesus answered and said, My Kingdom is not of this world.
WHAT this Kingdom of Christ was, and how different from the kingdoms of this
world we have already opened unto you. The fourth Use which we are to proceed
in, is, If the kingdom of Christ be not of this world, then of all
dispositions, a worldly spirit is most unsuitable to those who profess
themselves to be of the Kingdom of Christ. Certainly, then such as are
Believers, that are come under the Kingdom of Christ, they must not be of
earthly hearts: We find the Apostle in the Epistle of the Ephesians, does rank
Covetousness, and Uncleanness together, and says of them both, in the 5.
Chapter, 3. Verse, Let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints: So
that a covetous heart after the things of the world, it is such a disposition,
as it should scarce be named among Saints no more than whoredom, they should
abstain from it, as from whordom, as it becomes Saints. It is the most uncomly
thing for a Saint of God, one of the Kingdom of Christ to have a covetous heart
for the things of the world, that possibly can be. As it becomes them; it does
not become you; And Luther that was a great man for the promoting of the
Kingdom of Christ, he is bold to profess it; That of all sins, he was scarce
ever tempted to that sin, he found nothing tending almost that way; though it is
true, there is no sin, but we have the seeds of it in our hearts; but yet he
found his spirit most above that worldly sin, because he was so much taken up
with Jesus Christ. And indeed, the more any soul is taken up with the
excellency of Christ, and with the glorious things of His Kingdom, the more
vile will the things of the world be to them. We look not at the things that
are seen (says the Apostle) they are not things to be looked at, But at the
things that are not seen. And in the 6. of the Gal. 14. ver. The Apostle Paul,
that was the great man for the promoting of Christ in the world, and the
setting up of His Throne; he professes, That he was crucified to the world, and
the world was crucified to him: That is, he looked upon the world, but as a
crucified thing. What esteem would you have of a man that is hanging upon a
gallows? All the world was to him no otherwise, was a thing crucified to him,
and he was crucified to the world, the world cares not for me, and I care not
for the world, I am quit with it that way, and do as much slight, and contemn
the world, and trample it under foot, as the world slights and contemns me, and
tramples me under foot. This should be the disposition of a Christian that is
under the kingdom of Christ: for now it is to converse with things of another
nature: And therefore you find that Christ, He says of those that are given to
Him by the Father, They are given unto Him out of the world: John, 17. 6. I
have manifested thy Name to the men whom thou have given me out of the world.
No men have Christ manifested unto them, but those whom the Father does give
Him out of the world: Says the Father, Here Is so many of the world, And there
are a select company that I will take out of this rude heap and mass of
mankind; and I Will give them to thee: Take them, and manifest thy self unto
them. If this be so, that those that come under Christ's Kingdom, are given
unto Him out of the world, then though they live in the world, they should not
live as of the world.

Secondly, They are chosen out of the world, John, 15. 19. And they are
delivered from the world by Christ. Gal. 1. 4. And they are opposed to the
children of the world. Luke, 16. 8, speaking of diverse sorts of people; and
makes the distinction between one and another: The Lord commended the unjust
steward because he had done wisely: For the children of this world are, in
their generation, wiser than the children of light: These two are opposed one
to another, the children of this world and the children of light are quite
contrary one to another; for indeed one is in the kingdom of darkness, and the
other in the Kingdom of light, in the Kingdom of the dear Son of God; you must
be children of light, others are children of the world; it becomes a child of
the world to follow after the things of the world; but not the children of
light: You are chosen out of the world, that you may be the light of the world.
So the Scripture speaks of the Saints, That they should be the light of the
world: Philippians, 2. 15. Now if they have as worldly hearts as others, how
can they be the lights of the world? Oh! many that are Professors of Religion,
they are indeed but dark lanthorns, they have a candle in them, have some kind
of knowledge, but by their worldly Conversations they are made but as dark
lanthorns, that the light of knowledge and profession that they have is so
darkened by it, as none can see the beauty and excellency of Jesus Christ
shining through them.

Thirdly, Surely it is a very unbeseeming disposition in one that is under the
Kingdom of Christ to be worldly: for he is appointed to be one that shall judge
the world another day, In 1 Cor. 6. 2. The Saints shall judge the world. Now
there should be a great deal of difference between Judges, and those that are
judged by them: if they be of the same disposition that the world is, why
should any be chosen out of the world to judge them? Now all the Saints if they
do believe themselves to be brought into the Kingdom of Christ, they should
look upon themselves as those that are appointed by God hereafter to judge the
whole world, and therefore they should not live so as the men of the world do,
but as Judges, very precisely and strictly according to rule.

4ly It is required of them that they should hate their own lives in this
world, John, 12. 15. Now if the Saints should be such as should see so much
excellency in the Kingdom of Christ as to hate their very lives in this world,
then surely to look upon all things in this world as contemptible as hateful in
comparison: it is not meant Hate their lives, that is, Absolutely, but in
Comparison: when any comfort or preservation of their lives in this world,
comes in the least competition with the furtherance of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ: They should look upon the comforts of their lives as a hateful thing,
and look upon the very preservation of their lives as a hateful thing; shall I
make my life comfortable with any hindrance unto the Kingdom of Christ? Oh it is
that that my soul should abhor, and so should I preserve my life with doing any
thing that may be any prejudice to the Kingdom of Christ, I should look upon
the very suggestion to such a thing as that that my very soul does abhor, And
we find in Scripture that it is made an argument of apostasy, of one that is
falling off from the profession of Christ to embrace the world, as it is said
of Demas in the 2 of Tim. 4. 10. Demas (says Paul) has forsaken me, but what
is it that has made Demas to forsake me? he has embraced this present world.
So look upon many of your Professors of Religion, such us have been very
forward in former times, and Oh nothing but Christ in their mouths, they
afterward begin to decline, and wax worser and worser, but observe them, they
embrace this present world, it is because of some honors and esteem, some
comforts, riches, and estates that they would have, or live at ease in this
present world, they cannot endure the hatred of the world. So it was with
Demas, when he began to hear Paul, he perceived that it was a great excellency
to be one of Paul's followers, Paul, he wrought miracles, and Demas (I say)
thought it an excellent thing to follow Paul; but after he had followed Paul a
while, he found that he was persecuted, and he saw there was no preferment came
in by Paul's preaching, nothing but blows and imprisonments; and scorns, and
contempt, then Demas begins to bethink himself better, and thinks he was
mistaken; I had thought that this Paul would have been a great man in the world
one day, and that by my following of him I should get great matters to my self,
but when he saw that all men were set against Paul, and nothing but persecution
was like to betide him, and his Disciples; Demas begins to bethink himself, And
is it not better for me to keep my credit, and esteem in this world; so Demas
leaves him to shift for himself: and therefore says the Apostle, Demas has
forsaken me, and embraced this present world. This may be written upon every
Apostates grave, Here lies an Apostate that has forsaken Jesus Christ, and
has embraced this present world. But observe it, and look upon those that were
forward in Religion, and now are not; and see whether they have not more
worldly hearts than before, and give themselves up to honors, and pleasures,
and profits; Therefore it is exceeding unbeseeming the Saints to have worldly
hearts, they will certainly Apostatize, if their hearts take deep root in the
earth. If you find your spirits so glewed to the things of the world, that you
know not how to part with them, that you know not how to live in a place, and
not to have your neighbors love and respect, and to honor you, and to have the
countenance of the times in which you live; Do you find your hearts thus
cleaving to the things of the world, like the Serpent, that dust you eat, and
upon your belly you go? Know that thou have a worldly heart, and thou art like
to be an Apostate from the Truth of God ere long. In the 2. of Titus, 12. the
Apostle says, That the grace of God that has appeared to all men, teaches
them to deny all worldly lusts. Oh my brethren! let us labor to walk worthy of
our Calling into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. There the Apostle
with a great deal of earnestness speaks to the Thessalonians, exhorting them,
that they would, Walk worthy of God, who has called them into his Kingdom, and
Glory. Are you converted to Christ? you are called into this Kingdom; walk
worthy of Him: And mark his earnestness in the verse before, As you know, how
we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you, (as a father does his
children.) We comforted you, in showing you the excellency of the Kingdom of
God, and the Privileges of this Kingdom; we exhorted you, and we charged every
one of you, as a father does his children; And what did he exhort, and charge
them to? it was this, That they would walk worthy of God, who had called them
into his Kingdom, and his glory. Oh! it is a great mercy that God has revealed
any thing of the Kingdom of his Son unto you, walk worthy of it, as it becomes
those that are called to be the Subjects of such a glorious Kingdom as this is;
and above all things, have a care, and let me warn you of this worldliness in
the hearts of the Saints: Namely, of a crafty, cunning subtilness in the things
of this life; there is nothing more unbeseeming a Christian, than a crafty
cunning subtilness for the world: many men bless themselves in this, and they
take abundance of content to think, that by their craft and cunning sophistry,
they can fetch about things, circumvent others, and so provide for themselves
in this world: (I say) there is nothing more unbeseeming a Christian, than to
be crafty and cunning in circumventing others, and providing for themselves in
the matters of this world. In 1. Cor. 2. 12. says the Apostle, We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, it is that we
have received. There is many men (you may plainly see that) they have the
spirit of the world, that is thus: I have many times wondered at it; some men,
come and speak to them about any matters of the Kingdom of Christ, they speak
so foolishly and childishly, either they must hold their peace, and say
nothing, or else if they do speak they discover so much ignorance, and
childishness that a man would wonder where the understandings of such men are
that have lived so long a time in the world as they have done, and heard so
much of Religion, and when one hears them speak so, one would wonder how these
men should have understanding to live in the world: but now, these in the
businesses of the world they are as worldly politic, no man can out go them
there, they can foresee all kind of dangers in any miscarriage, and can judge
of twenty things together in their thoughts, and compare one thing with
another, see further into the world than other men; so that a man would wonder
sometimes (I say) when one hears them speaking of Religion, whether these men
have any wit or understanding? but when one follows them in the things of the
world, you shall see them as witty, as understanding, as judicious, and as
cunning as any men (almost) can be: they have received the spirit of the world,
and they are led by the spirit of the world, the god of this world has taken
possession of them, and it is that that makes them so: but they have not
received the Spirit of Jesus Christ, they may say quite contrary to the
Apostle; says the Apostle, we have not received the spirit of the world, but
the Spirit of Jesus Christ: they may say, we have not received the Spirit of
Christ, but of the world: it is true, Christ would have us so long as we live in
the world, to be as wise as serpents, yet innocent as doves; the wisdom that is
for the promotion of the Kingdom of Christ it is a wisdom that has an upright
plainess in it, and is according to the simplicity of the Gospel; indeed when
they have to deal with wicked men, they may exercise a natural wisdom, to avoid
the dangers of persecution, or to avoid the circumventing of wicked men; but
when they have to deal with spiritual things, there the wisdom is that that
holds forth a simplicity of the Gospel, that is carried on with plainess and
simpleness of heart. The Hebrews have the same word that signifies a naked man,
and a cunning subtle man. You shall find where it is said of Adam and Eve, they
were naked, nakedness of spirit and subtilty may stand together, they signify
the same thing, to show what kind of subtilty should be in those that are the
People of God, it should be that that may stand with a naked spirit, so as if
God would discover the secrets of all their hearts to all the children of men,
that they should not be ashamed to have all their secrets to be opened to them:
But now, the cunningness, that is, the cunningness of the serpent, is such a
cunningness, as men (if they were but laid open) would quickly be ashamed of.
And so much of the fourth use, that it is unbeseeming those that are of the
kingdom of Christ, to have the spirit of the world, because Christ's kingdom is
not of this world.

5. Use. Hence we see the reason of the meanness of the outward condition of
the people of God in this world, why is it that Christ has so ordered things
that the people of God should be so outwardly poor in this world? My Kingdom is
not of this world (says Christ) Therefore, why should any that come under my
kingdom look for great things in this world? they must look to have their
comfort and glory in things that concern my Kingdom, and not in the things of
this world: in Psalm. 73. 12. Behold! those that are ungodly prosper in this
world, (says the Scripture.) As for men that are godly and come under the
Kingdom of Christ, they must look for a prosperity that is beyond this world;
God gives the earth to the children of men, and to the men of the world: Let
them prosper says God, here is their portion, here is all that they are like
ever to have. But now for the people of God, they must not look to prosper
outwardly in this world; John, 16. 33. In the world, you shall have trouble
(says Christ.) Christ does tell His Disciples plainly beforehand, That in the
world they shall have trouble; never make account to have ease and prosperity
here below in the world; Certainly you shall have trouble, this is not your
kingdom; and therefore John, in the 1. of Rev. 9. ver. There he styles himself
in writing to the Churches: Your Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom
and patience of Jesus Christ. Observe it, John that was such an Eminent Member
of the Kingdom of Christ; when he speaks unto others that are brought into the
kingdom of Christ, says he, ^ John, who also am your Brother, and Companion in
Tribulation, and in the kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ: These two may
well stand together, to be of the Kingdom of Christ, and companions of men in
the Kingdom of Christ, and in Tribulation: yea, mark how the Kingdom of Christ
is set in the middle, Companion in Tribulation, and then Kingdom, and then
patience; So that trouble, and afflictions are on both sides (as it were) of
the Kingdom of Christ. And it is very observable here, John he does not to get
himself credit, say, I John that was the Apostle of Jesus Christ, I John, that
was the beloved Disciple of Jesus Christ, I John, that was a Kins-man of Jesus
Christ: no, but I John, your Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom, and
patience of Jesus Christ. If you would be the Companion of the Saints in the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, you must be willing to be their Companion in
Tribulation, and in the patience of Jesus Christ. So things are ordered by
Christ, that the Saints should be in Tribulation, live in trouble in this
world. When any of you that are godly shall meet with crosses, and afflictions,
(the briers and thorns which spring out of the world ever since it was cursed
by God) the very thought of this Text may be a means to quiet your hearts, and
not to have any risings in your bosoms against the dispensations of God
toward you: Do not I desire to fear the Lord, and follow Him in all His ways?
and yet, how does the Lord cross me in this world? These murmuring, and
repining thoughts will be; yea, it may be since the time that God wrought upon
me by His Word, I am more afflicted than before; Is not God displeased with me?
it may be I am not in the right way because of these afflictions. Oh take heed
of these temptations, let my text come into your minds, and answer all these
temptations: Christ says, His Kingdom is not of this world: since the time I
was called out of darkness by the Ministry of the Word, no mervail though I
meet with afflictions more than before, for I am translated into another
Kingdom, which is not of this world; it pleases the Father to make Christ (who
is my Captain) to be perfect through sufferings: Heb. 2. 10. For it became Him,
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto
glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings: It Is
an excellent Scripture to quiet the hearts of the Saints in the midst of their
sufferings. [It became Him] (says the Text) for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of
their salvation perfect through sufferings: The Captain of your salvation, yea,
your King, that is the King of glory, yet He was made perfect through
sufferings. Now you must go the same way that He did. Now if you must enter
into a full possession of this glorious Kingdom through sufferings, why should
you murmur? Luke, 24. 26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and
to enter into His Glory? It Is a speech of Christ Himself. So I say concerning
you: Ought not you to suffer first, and then to enter into your glory? Why
should not you come to the fullness of the glory of that Kingdom that is
prepared for you; as Jesus Christ your Head came to the fullness of the glory of
His Kingdom? It was by suffering. Remember His Kingdom is not of this world.

6. Use. Here Is the reason why the wicked hates the Saints. Why? they love
their own: John, 15. 19. If you were of the world, the world would love you;
but you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you; you are translated
into another Kingdom, and therefore their spirits are bitter against you, and
their tongues as sharp as two edged sword; you come to live by other Laws than
they do; they know no other Law but the Law of the Land where they live but you
have other Laws that they do not understand the authority of, you have other
rules for your consciences than they have; their consciences can yield to this,
or that, according as may serve for their worldly ends; but now your
consciences are subjected to another authority, you cannot have your
consciences yield up and down as they can, and thereupon they think it to be
^^outness in you, but God knows it to be otherwise: And they wonder at this,
they understand not the reason of this, and therefore it is that they malign
you, they hate you with a perfect hatred, you are Rebels against their kingdom,
they are under the kingdom of Satan, but you are brought under the kingdom of
Christ, and so do Rebel against that kingdom. We hate Rebels. It Is true, in
some sense all the Saints are Rebels, that is, they do rebel against the
kingdom of Satan, and the powers of darkness, and if any thing should be
enjoyed by men, yet if it be against the Kingdom of Christ, they cannot but
rebel in a sense, that is, their spirits must needs be against it, and whatever
they suffer, they cannot submit to it; they do not rebel against lawful
authority, but against the kingdom of darkness, and the power of darkness; and
therefore it is that the world does so much hate them: When you come into the
kingdom of Christ you live upon other principles, and have other ends, you are
a kind of separated people from the world; and we know there is nothing more
odious to the world, than that we should be a certain kind of separated people
from them; the world would have all to be like themselves, and for any kind of
people to make a profession as if they were called out of the world, and live
after another kind and fashion, and have other sort of hopes, and comforts, and
ends, and rules by which they live; Oh this the world cannot endure: so long as
Paul was in the world, and lived as the men of the world, they loved him, and
he was a man of authority among them, but when he was called out of the world,
then a pestilent fellow, then seditious; this separation from the world it
cannot be born, there is nothing more provokes the world than separation from
the world, and therefore no mervail though the people of God be hated in the
world, and looked upon as the ringleadees of sedition: they are separated from
the world, and translated into another kingdom, into a kingdom that is not of
this world.

7. Use. From hence may appear the wickedness of the world, that they should
reject Christ and His Kingdom. That they should not (...) it, that is not so
much wonder; but that they shou^^ (...) it, and persecute it, and reject it;
there appears their wickedness.

You will say, How does it appear? From my Doctrine it appears thus: If Christ's
kingdom be not a kingdom of this world, it would do men no hurt at al, it no
way would hinder any lawful comforts or honors here in this world; it is not
opposite unto the kingdoms of the world, that is, so as to hinder any thing
that is good in the world, the kingdom of Christ may be set up, and the world
need be never the worse for it. Indeed, it does oppose the wickedness of the
world, but it does not oppose any thing that they dare say themselves to be
good Herod persecuted Christ, because he heard a King of the Jews was born: But
it was without cause; Jesus Christ He did not come to take the Kingdom of Herod
away from him: The Kings of the Earth (the text says) they conspire together,
and are engaged against Christ: it is their wickedness; Christ, He does not
envy them or their Kingdoms, they may live and be the Kings of the earth still,
and yet the kingdom of Jesus Christ may go on; the truth is, that the kingdom
of Jesus Christ does not entrench upon any Civil Liberty of men, and it is their
hatred to it, that makes them think it cannot stand with Civil Peace; the
kingdom of Christ may be set up, and Civil Liberty maintained. You may have
your estates still, and yet have the kingdom of Christ, and you may be in place
of Rule and Government, and have outward honors still, and yet be of the
kingdom of Christ. It Is true, if you be brought into the kingdom of Christ;
perhaps God may call you sometimes to suffering, but then it is so as you will
be willing to it, you shall never be called to suffering, but you shall see
cause to be willing to it, you shall have as much good by what you suffer, as
you have (...) of outward comforts: but this I speak, that the kingdom of
Christ intrenches not upon any Civil Liberties of men: they may enjoy all their
lawful comforts, their Estates, their Rule, their Government: and yet the
Kingdom of Christ may flouri^^^* Now what a wickedness is this? When as Chri^^^
would come and set up His Kingdom without any prejudice at all unto the
worldly Kingdoms, and yet they cannot endure it: You would account that an ill
neighbor if you should come and live by him and no way prejudice him, and yet
for all that he would malign you, because you do but live by him; thus it is
with the world, they do malign Jesus Christ for living but by them; indeed if a
neighbor comes and will entrench upon your ground and liberties, you cannot
bear it; Jesus Christ does not do it: One would wonder sometimes why wicked men
should be so opposite against men when they come under the Kingdom of Christ
more than before: I appeal to you, when God converts a wife to be under the
Kingdom of Christ, Does that take her off from subjection to her husband? let
me assure you, it makes her to acknowledge her husband to be Lord more than
before; indeed if when the wife were converted it did take the wife from
subjection to the husband, then there were some reason why the husband should
storm at it; but when the more the wife is under the Kingdom of Christ, the
more does she acknowledge the authority of of her husband over her: and so for
servants, I confess if the bringing of them by the Word under the kingdom of
Christ, did take them off from their obedience to their Masters and Mistrisses,
then there were some ground to oppose them from going to hear the Word; but
when your conscinece tell you that the more they go to hear the Word, and are
wrought upon by the Word they are the more obedient to you, why should you hate
them then? why should you so malign Christ's Kingdom when as Christ's Kingdom
would help you? I appeal to the consciences of diverse Masters, You have one
servant that is profane; another cannot lie in his bed in the morning but he
must come to ^^ar the Word; now if you had Trust to commit to one of them, so
that your whole Estate lay upon it, Which of these two would you trust? your
consciences would tell you that that servant that is come under the Kingdom of
Christ were rather to be trusted* so that you would trust him in a case of
great trust; and (...) your conscieaces tell you that you hate that servant
more than the other. Now here is the wickedness of men, that they do hate the
Kingdom of Christ though the Kingdom of Christ does not entrench upon them. Oh
let Christ alone with his Kingdom, and do not oppose Him, He will not oppose
you in any thing that you can desire as a rational man.

And for the outward Government: Christ would have no man to be compelled to it,
but those that are convinced that it is the best way; He gives no such rules to
force any man; if you think the Government is to strickt for you, that you
cannot live under it; indeed there may be something used as a natural help,
some outward, means used to take men off from their wantonness and wilfulnes:
but now if it appear that you desiring to know which is the best way, and
endeavoring to know, and after your desires, and endeavors you cannot be
convinced that this is the way that you should walk in; Christ gives no rules
to compel you; but if you belong to God, He is content to stay till the Word
and Spirit ^^all convince you to come under His Government; Oh! why should you
be against it then, when it forces you not to come into it? Oh! be not such an
enemy to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, but let those that believe another way is
the way wherein they come most under the Kingdom of Christ, and enjoy (...)
^ommunion with Christ, let them alone in that way especially, when they live
peacable with you, and are every way useful as much as your hearts can desire
in all civil things, living neighborly, lovingly, and faithfully with you in
all things; why should you malign them because you know there is some other way
wherein they may enjoy more sweet communion with Jesus Christ than your selves
do? That Is the seventh Use, which shows the wickedness of the world in opposing
the Kingdom of Christ, when as it is not of this world, it is not that that
does entrench upon their worldly privileges.

8. Use, Hence this Kingdom, if it be not [of] this world, then it does not
depend upon (...) world; become of the world what will, the Kingd^^ of Christ
will go on. Men are afraid, Oh! if the Enemies should prevail, and overcome and
take away our Civil Rights, Oh then the Kingdom of Christ, what will become of
that? Let us not be too solicitous about that, for the Kingdom of Christ is of
another world, there is no such dependence of the Kingdom of Christ upon the
Kingdoms of this world, but though they were broken, the kingdom of Christ
would subsist. We indeed should labor to preserve our Civil Liberties as much
as we can, yea and our Civil Liberty in exercise of Religion in a Warlike way,
and I should wonder that any should mistake in that, when as this has been so
declared from the beginning of the War to this time, that we may fight for the
Civil Liberty we have to the peacable practice and profession of our Religion,
so far we may, and that has been the ground of our War: had we indeed lived in
such a Country, as the Christians in (...) primitive times, where the Governors
and the gener^^^ty of the Country had been against it, then indeed the taking
up of Arms, might have been very questionable; but now when we live in such a
place where our Civil Laws are for the protection of us in the practice of our
Religion, if any will come and disturb us, we may take up Arms because we have
a right to the profession of it, by the Laws of the kingdom, (...) have to our
Houses, Lands, and Estates, (but that by the way:) But that is the thing I aim
at in this use: that though our Civil Right should be lost, yet the kingdom of
Christ would go on for all that: Heb. 12. 28. this is a kingdom that cannot be
shaken. At those times when the Magistrates were the greatest enemies unto the
kingdom of Christ: yet even then the kingdom of Christ went on as fully as ever
it has done since that time; but the Magistrates may be helps, and there is a
promise that Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to the
Church, but yet so it fell out that at the first when the Church was in its
infancy, that it did thrive as much when Magistrates and Civil Power was
against it as ever it has done since, and thereby Christ would show us that
His Kingdom does not depend upon this world, but the Kingdom of Christ does
stand and will stand, and it does and will prevail to the end of the world, The
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, it shall be more than conqueror;
and this is a great comfort to the Saints.

9. Use. If the kingdom of Christ be not of this world, but of another; then
hence we collect the absolute necessity of living by faith, Christians had need
then have a principle of faith to live by, for their greatest good is in things
that are beyond this world, their very King that they obey is a King that
cannot be seen by the eye of sense; nor by the eye of reason, they had need
have an eye of faith to behold their King in his glory: The Throne of this King
of Saints is not a visible Throne to be seen by the eye of sense, and reason
but by the eye of faith.

The Privileges that we speak of, are ^ot to be seen and enjoyed by sense and
reason, but by faith,

And so the Ordinances of this Kingdom, and the Laws and Statutes of it, they
are Spiritual, and must have faith to close with them, and all the comforts of
this Kingdom must be drawn in by faith, therefore it is of absolute necessity
that the Saints should exercise much faith in their lives, that they should
live continually by faith; As the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 5. 7. For we walk by
faith, and not by sight; It is not by Sight we walk; indeed all the good things
that there are in the kingdoms of the world they are seen by sense and reason,
reason and sense is enough to order us in the matters of the kingdoms of this
world: but now the kingdom of the Son of God that we are translated into, it is
a Spiritual, an Heavenly kingdom, so that the Saints must walk by faith, and
not by sight: therefore my brethren labor to strengthen faith, and act your
faith, and live upon faith, exercise faith in all your ways, make much of
grace and faith or you will never have much good in the Kingdom of Christ, but
that grace will help you comfortably to enjoy, and spiritually to improve all
the good things in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to an everlasting advantage.

10. Use. If the Kingdom of Christ be not of this world, then the greater mercy
to thy soul, that ever thou wast brought under this Kingdom of Christ: Oh! thou
may look back unto thy former time, and know that thou had a worldly
heart, worldly apprehensions, thy spirit was worldly, altogether for things of
the world, taken with the pomp, and glory, and the pleasures of this world: How
comes it to pass that thou should have a Heavenly Kingdom revealed to thee?
Whence was it that ever Jesus Christ should be known to thy soul, that was so
worldly, so drossie, so earthy a soul? thou wast as deep rooted in the world
(it may be) as any, and yet that the Lord should cull thee out of the world,
and reveal such a Kingdom to thee, that is such a mystery as the Princes of the
world have not known, that thou that art a poor creature should come to
understand the ^^alities of Christ, that the wise and learned men of the world
have not known: Oh! the Free Grace of God to thee, and not unto the world! As
Judas, (not Iscariot) said, How is it that thou revealest thy self to us, and
not unto the world? how comes it to pass that such wise men, that bear sway in
the world, they have very poor, and low, and mean, and contemptible thoughts of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ? they look upon it but as a mere notion, and a
conceit of men, and the rather because they see but a few poor people that are
but of mean parts that do embrace such a way, upon that they contemn it; and
through the worldly wisdom that they have, they come to undervalue it. Oh! then
bless God that ever he should choose such a poor weak wretch as thou art, for to
make known the things of the Kingdom of Christ unto; and therefore of al men,
you rich covetous men they are hardest to be wrought upon by the Ministry of
the Word. When Christ Himself was preaching, it is said in Luke, 16. 14. That
the Pharisees who were covetous, they derided Him; they blew their noses at
Him, for that is the meaning of the Original. Like as a man that scorns and
derides another snivles in the nose; that is the propriety of the word, that is
here translated derided. Oh! a worldly heart is hardest brought unto the
Kingdom of Christ: therefore bless God so much the more, that has brought thy
soul to understand the mysteries of Christ's Scepter, that has translated thee
into another Kingdom.

11. Use. If the Kingdom of Christ be not of this world: then they are rebuked
that do seek to make the Kingdom of Christ a worldly Kingdom. I might name very
many sorts of men that do this: I will speak but of Three or Four.

The first is the Papists, those that are Popishly affected; all their way is
under the name of honoring of Christ, to raise up a worldly Kingdom; and
therefore they make the Pope to be as an Emperor of all the world, as the King
of Kings; and their Cardinals, and many of their Bishops to be Princes, and all
in a worldly pomp, and they carry it on, and maintain it by a worldly policy,
and by worldly means, and worldly weapons, and therefore stir up the Kings of
the earth to root out all those that are against them: these understand not the
Kingdom of Christ.

Secondly, Such as would conform the Government of the Church merely to worldly
Government; that because worldly men may by their prudence order things as they
please in Commonwealths, so as shall be most suitable to them: therefore they
falsely think, that the Kingdom of Christ must be so too; that it must be suited
to every Country: whereas the truth is, there is but one way of the Government
of Christ in all the world. The great Argument of the Prelates was, Indeed say
they, in some places there may be another Government, where there is an
Aristocracy in the Civil Government; but where there is Monarchy, there must be
a Bishop. Now certainly that is not the way of Christ, to suit himself in his
Government, to the Government of the world. But the Government that was in the
primitive times, must be still.

Thirdly, Such kind of men as think that the success of the Gospel, and the
Ordinances do depend upon worldly things; as now, upon outward pomp: except
there be some outward pomp go along with the Gospel; As now, Great preferments
of those that are the Preachers of the Gospel, they think the Gospel will be
contemned else, and except the Ordinances be carried on in an outward pomp:
They conceive that all will be despised: except there be Magnificent Temples
built and beautified, and except brave Gold and Silver Chalises, the Sacrament
would be despised; and except they have their Altars, and Rails about them:
with all their heathenish vanities, Christ is not worshipped. But this is to
look upon the Kingdom of Christ as the Kingdoms of the world; but Oh no! the
kingdom of Christ prevails where there is but little of the world with it. I
remember I have read of one Boniface a Martyr, that being asked, whether it
were lawful to give the Wine in the Sacrament, in a wooden Challis; says he,
There was a time (indeed) when the Church had wooden Challises, and golden
Priests; but now, the Church has golden Challises, and wooden Priests. No
question, in the primitive times, they had very mean things in the Lords
Supper, and all things were carried in a very low way to a worldly eye; but
(says he) though their Challises were wooden, the Priests were golden: and so
the Gospel did prevail. Oh! it is the spiritualness of things that makes the
kingdom of Christ to prevail; many think that the Gospel cannot prevail, except
it has abundance of gingles of men's wit, and tongues, and such kind of
school-boy-vanities as these are, but the Gospel never prevails by such things;
but that which the world calls foolishness, that is made the power of God, and
the wisdom of God to Salvation: They have carnal hearts that think that the
outward pomp, and glory of the world should be such a furtherance to the
Gospel, as if it should not thrive without it.

Lastly, Those that think that the Gospel and the promoting of Christ's kingdom
depends wholly upon humane policy and strength, these do make the kingdom of
Christ to be but as a worldly kingdom.

The last Use is this: If Christ's Kingdom be not of this world, then it teaches
us all for to labor to further a kingdom of Christ as distinct from the world,
it is a great Point that I am speaking of, about furthering the Kingdom of
Christ as distinct from the kingdoms of the world. Christ himself professes
that he came into the world to witness to this truth: and therefore certainly
we should do so likewise. It is in the very next words to my text, when Christ
had said his Kingdom was not of this world, Pilate said to Him, Art thou a King
then? Jesus answered, Thou say I am a King. To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the Truth.
Truth, Pilate asked Him what the Truth was? but he said not for an answer: but
certainly the Truth that Christ means here, is the Truth of His Kingdom. Oh my
brethren, it is a matter of so great consequence, that it is a special end why
Christ came into the world, why He was born, that he should witness to this
Truth. Then certainly we should account it a great end of our lives to set to
our seal to this Truth of the Kingdom of Christ, as distinct from the world,
let this be a great engagement on our spirits, to further the preaching of the
kingdom, further it as many ways as you can, improve your Estates, improve
your Credits, your Esteem, your Places for the kingdom of Christ; and then, Oh
how comfortable will your death be! though you should not live here to enjoy
all the privileges that the Saints in other ages shall have in the kingdom of
Christ; yet when you die your death shall be but a passage of you into the
glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, for there is a Kingdom of Christ beyond this
world, though Christ will rule Spiritually while this world lasts: but when men
are taken off from this world yet they do but go into the Kingdom of Christ. In
2 Peter, 1. 5, 6. etc. with which I will conclude, and besides this, giving all
diligence, Ad to your faith virtue, and to virtue, knowledge; ad to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity; for if these
things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: And so he goes on further
in his exhortation; and in the 10. verse, Wherefore the rather brethren, give
diligence, to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things
you shall never fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the evelasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Christ is here
a King, He rules in his Church in a spiritual way: but when this world is done,
He shall be a King, and if you be now godly you shall have an abundant entrance
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Mark, when a
Believer dies, he goes into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, he goes but from one
administration of it to another, but still he is in the same Kingdom of Christ:
here is the difference between the death of the men of the world, and the death
of the Saints: the men of the world they are of the world, and they are under
the kingdom of darkness, and when they die they go to the kingdom of darkness:
and the Saints they are now under the kingdom of Christ spiritually, and when
they die they go to another administration of the kingdom of Christ, and the
more godly men are, the more abundant entrance shall they have into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Now suppose his Excellency, that has done so much service for the kingdom,
when he shall come, What an entrance will be made for him into the City? Every
man that is a free subject may come freely into the City, no body may wrong
him, and he shall enjoy the Liberty of the City; but he has not that Abundance
Entrance into it as a man that has done much for the kingdom we live in. So
now, every godly man or woman, if they have but the least degree of grace, they
shall come into the Kingdom of Christ, I but those that are powerfully godly,
burning and shining lamps, and have been very active and faithful to the death;
when they die, the Gates of Heaven shall be set wide open, and they shall have
an Abundant Entrance into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.
THE MISERY OF THOSE MEN THAT HAVE THEIR PORTION IN THIS LIFE. Preached on
Easter Monday April 3. 1643. before Isaac Penington then Lord Major of London.

PSALM. 17. 14. -- From men of the world, who have their Portion in this Life.
THis Psalm is David's moan unto God under Saul's persecution, Mol. in Psalm.
without doubt the Psalmist aims at Saul in it: In it we have these four things.

1. He appeals unto God, to judge the righteousness of his heart toward Saul,
verse 2. Let my sentence come from thy presence: from Saul and his Courtiers,
there comes a hard sentence, they call me Traitor, they call me Rebel, but Lord
leave me not unto their sentence, let my sentence come from thy presence: that
I know will be another sentence than what comes from them, for thou have
proved me, and tried me, and find nothing in me. That is the first thing.

2. His prayer to God, to keep him in his way, his going, and his footsteps
from sliding, verse 5. Lord whatsoever the wrath of Saul be against me, yet let
neither that, nor any other thing, put me out of thy way, but keep my heart
close unto thee, and keep my paths in thy way, let not my footsteps so much as
slide from thee, for Lord they watch for my halting; if they can find but the
least slip from me, they take advantage of it to the utmost; and I am a poor
and a weak creature, therefore Lord help me, that my footsteps may not slide.

3. He prays for deliverance, verse 7. Show thy marveilous loving kindness to
me; Lord my straights they are marveilous; I know not what to do, whither to
turn me, but my eyes are toward thee; as straights are marveilous, so let the
loving kindness of God be marveilous toward me, and keep me as the apple of
thy eye; O Lord unto them I am but as a dog, a vile creature in the eyes of
Saul, and those about him, but blessed be thy Name, I can look up to thee, and
know that I am deer unto thee, as the apple of thy eye; All the Saints of God
are dear to God at all times, but the persecuted Saints, they are the apple of
Gods eye; If at any time they are dear to God, then especially when they are
most persecuted; now they are the apple of his eye, and the apple of an eye is
weak, and little able to resist any hurt, but so much the more is the man
tender of the apple of his eye: The Saints are weak and shiftless for
themselves, but the Lord is so much the more tender over them; and one Argument
that the Psalmist uses in praying against his enemies in this, and a special
one, because they prospered so much in this world, they are enclosed in fat,
and have their hearts desire, and thou fillest their bellies with thy hid
treasure; they leave to their babes, they have their portion in this life, Lord
keep me from them.

4. He does professes is resolution, yet notwithstanding all the dangers he was
in, to go on in the ways of God, and expects a gracious issue; But I (says
he) will behold thy face in righteousness; indeed I cannot behold the face of
the King without danger to me; there are a great many that run to kill me, and
they desire his face; but though I cannot see his face, yet Lord I shall behold
thy face; I will behold thy face, and it shall be in righteousness, I will
still keep on in the ways of righteousness, and when I awake, for I believe
that these troubles will not hold long, I shall not sleep in perpetual sleep,
but I shall awake and be delivered, and then shall I be satisfied with thy
likeness: There shall be the manifestation of thy glory to me, that shall
satisfy me for all the trouble that I have endured for thy Names sake; that my
soul shall say, I have enough; and this is the sum of this 17. Psalm.

Now the words are ^^ad unto you: they are a description of David's adversaries:
implying an argument, why he would be delivered from them; they are described
to be men of this world, they are only those that were adversaries to him: And
a comfort it must needs be to the Saints of God, to see that none are their
enemies, but the men of this world; men of this world, who have their portion
in this life, they have somewhat here, and here is all they are like to have.

1. It implies the Argument, why he would be delivered; Lord, deliver me from
them, because they are men of this world, who have their portion in this life;
Wherein does consist the force of this Argument? where lies the force of this
Argument, that he would be delivered from them, because they were men of this
world, that have their portions in this life? It consists first in this: Lord,
They care not what injustice they do, they have no regard to any thing, but in
this world, therefore be it right or wrong, may they have but their lusts in
this world, that is all they care for, Lord deliver me from such men.

2. Here is all their good, their portion is in this life, and therefore they
are greedy upon this; let it be upon the ruin of never so many men, though it
be to raise their estates by my ruin, and the ruin of others that are never so
innocent; what care they? they are greedy upon having their lusts satisfied,
for here is all their protion.

3. Their portion is here in this world: They care not for Religion, they will
make use of pretenses of Religion any way for their own ends, what care they
what Protestation they make for Religion, and the maintenance of it, so be it
that they may ruin me* they regard not at all any thing in regard to have
their own ^^ds: Lord deliver me from such men.

4. They have their portion in this world: Hence it is that their hearts are so
swelled with pride in their lusts, and so warms their malice, it is so heated
with such outrages; Oh let not the foot of pride come upon me, deliver me from
proud men, that are flushed with the enjoyment of their hearts desires.

5. They look only to what they enjoy in this world, and therefore so long as
they may have their own ends and own lusts, they will be exceedingly hardened
in their own ways, they will give no glory to thee, but will be so much the
more enraged against me, by taking it as an argument, that their ways are
good, Lord therefore deliver me from those men.

6. They are men that scorn at prayer, or at any thing that is said concerning
the tenderness of conscience, they despise conscience and prayer* Lord let me
never fall into the hands of such men as those are, deliver me from the men of
this world, who have their portion in this life. For the opening of the words,
from the men of the world: the words are translated by some, from mortal men,
from men though of the world, yet are not like to enjoy the world long, for the
Original does signify as much from frail men, they shall not have it long, in
the 89. Psalm, 47. Remember how short my time is; what little time I have in
this world, the word is from the men that shall have but a little time in this
world, and the men of this world, the Hebrew word here, that is translated men,
sometimes with but the change of the position of one prick, it signifies dead
men, mortui as well as vivi, I say, with the change not of a prick, but only of
the position of one prick, of one point, it signifies dead men; they are men of
the world, but such men as are within one prick of death, within one point of
death, howsoever they rejoice; who have their portion, their dimension that is
given out unto them in this life; the word life, though in the singular number
in your books, in the Hebrew it is in the plural, Lives, they are men that have
all they have, but only leased for their lives, nay not so much as leased, they
have but an estate for life at the most, and this present life unto them is
instead of all lives; from the men of this world, that have their portion in
this life; there are these Two Doctrinal Conclusions in the words that lie
plainly before you; the first is,

There are a Generation of men, Doct. 1.
to whom God gives some outward good things for a while, but these are all that
ever they are like to have, they shall never have any more good from God, than
they have here for the present; that is the first.

That Gods Saints do desire to be delivered from such kind of men; Doct. 2.
These two contain in them the scope of the holy Ghost in the words.

First, There are a Generation of men, unto whom God gives out a portion, some
comforts in this world, and here is all that they are like to have. And now set
your hearts (I beseech you) unto what I have to say in this Argument, for in my
thoughts, thinking what to pitch upon, for such an Assembly as this, at length
I could not determine of an argument, that I thought might more reach unto the
hearts of those to whom I was to speak; as I hope (before I have done) you will
find it such a serious argument that concerns us all; I have read of Gregory,
that being advanced to preferment, professed that there was no Scripture that
went so to his heart, that struck such a trembling into his spirit, that
daunted him so much as this Scripture did. Here you have your reward, Son, in
your life time, you have had your pleasure. Oh this was a dreadful Scripture,
that sounded in his ears continually, as Hierom speaks of that Scripture,
Arise you dead and come to judgment: night and day he thought that Scripture
sounded in his his ears; So Gregory, here you have your reward, in this life
you have had your pleasure; This was the Scripture that night and day sounded
in his ears* Oh that it might please God, to assist so far, to speak out of
this Scripture to you, that I might make this Scripture ring in your ears, even
when you lie upon your beds, after the Sermon is done* that yet you may think
this Scripture rings in your ears. Men of this world, who have their portion in
this life; If this Scripture should prove to be the portion of any one of you,
of the richest in this place, Woe unto him that ever he was born; which I shall
after make out more fully to you: But (you will say) do you think to preach to
men, that have their portion here in this life? I fear me, I may meet with
some, whom it does so nearly concern, yet do not think that I have those
thoughts of you all, for you shall find (before I have done) this Scripture
will concern every one in this Congregation; but yet be not any of you too too
ready to put off this from you, to think your selves out of the danger of this
Scripture, for it was spoken concerning Saul, and Saul might have (for ought I
know) as strong arguments of Gods love to him, as many of you (I fear) have
this day.

1. Saul was a man chosen immediately by God himself, to be the first King that
ever was over his own people; and was not that a great favor?

2. Saul for his person, was one of the goodliest men that was amongst all
Israel, higher from the shoulders to the head than any of them.

3. For his Endowments, he was a man whom God did endow with admirable gifts of
Government: he caused another spirit to come upon him: he was a man that when
he heard of his preferment, seemed to be very humble, as judging himself
unworthy of such a dignity; in the first of Samuel, 9. 21. Says he, Who am I,
and what is my Fathers house, that I should be thus chosen? And when he had
been chosen, some that would reject him, Children of Belial, that
notwithstanding God honoring of him, yet would seek to cast dishonor upon him,
yet this Saul, had mighty power over his Spirit, he was very meek and a quiet
man, in the first of Samuel, 10. 27. the text says, He held his peace, when
the Children of Belial said, What have we to do with him?

4. Though he were quiet in his own cause, yet he showed himself to have an
excellent spirit of Government in him, in a public cause; he was full of anger
when it was for the good of the people, that he was a Governor over; though
quiet in his own; in the first of Samuel, 11. 6. When he heard of a dishonor
done to the people of Israel, the Text says, that his anger did rise within
him; an excellent pattern for all Governors, for all in public places, to be
very silent, and quiet, self denying; putting up wrongs in their own cause; but
to be full of zeal for the public cause; to reserve their spirits for a
public good: Many there are in public places, that when they are angered in
their private cause; how full of Spirit they are, and they spend their Spirit
there so much, that they have no spirit at all, when it comes to a public
cause; Saul went beyond them in this.

5. Saul was one, who was much troubled at the sin of the people against God;
not only had a spirit to vindicate a public wrong, but when he saw the people
sin against God, his heart was much troubled at their very sin, and seemed to
be grieved for it, and mighty solicitous and careful about it, to prevent sin
in the people; this you shall have in 1 Samuel 14. 33. they told Saul there, That
the people had sinned in eating with blood, upon that Saul shows himself
displeased, Come (says he) and do not sin against the Lord, roll a stone to me
hither; and so he would see with his own eyes, that they did slay the Cattle,
and they did power forth the blood, that they might not sin against God, in
eating blood; this was his care.

6. Saul he was very careful to enquire of God, what he should do in businesses
of great consequence, in the 37. ver. of that 14. chap. of the 1 of Samuel,
there he would not go out, till he had first enquired of God. Yea more than all
this,

7. He was a man that had a very reverend esteem of the Prophets of God: when
Samuel came to him, in the 1 of Samuel 15. 13. O thou blessed of the Lord
(says Saul to Samuel) Yea, yet further than this;

8. When Samuel showed unto him, what his sin was, in the 30. ver. of that 15.
chap. he comes and confesses it before the people, and says, I have sinned, I
have sinned against the Lord: merely at the conviction of one Prophet: Yea, yet
more than this,

9. God seemed to be with Saul very much, and to show great respect unto him,
to make him an Instrument of much good to Israel; He granted unto him as
glorious a victory as ever man had in this world: (for so we may call it) and if
there be any outward thing in the world might be gathered as an argument of
Gods love, then such a remarkable victory as he had over his enemies: the
victory you shall find in the 1 of Samuel, 13. 5. and so read on afterward in
that Chapter, and the next, you shall find there, that the Philistims were
risen up against him, and Israel; and there were thirty thousand Chariots, of
his Adversaries of the Philistims, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the
sand of the Sea for multitude, besides all this; Well, here was a mighty Enemy:
What had Saul to oppose these? You shall find in the 2. verse of that 14.
chapter, that there were but six hundred men with Saul: here was of one side
thirty thousand Chariots, here was six thousand horsemen, here was people as the
sand of the Sea without number, and Saul had but six hundred with him, at this
time; yea, and of those six hundred, there was not any one of them that had a
sword, but only Saul, and Jonathan; for the Philistims were wise enough to
disarm all the Malignants (that they accounted so) and would not let so much as
a Smith be amongst them, they would not only take away their Arms, but they
would look to them, to see that they had no arms supplied unto them; that was
the wisdom of the Philistims; yet we find, (if you read afterward) in the
Scripture, that God was so far with Saul, that he blessed him, and gave him
victory over all these. Besides all this.

10. God blessed Saul with a very gracious Child, a godly son, of a sweet
nature, Jonathan, which indeed, if any outward argument in the world, might be
an argument of Gods love, that might be; But now put all these things together,
and yet here is the man that has his Portion in this world: I now challenge
the man, especially one, I challenge him that has certain evidence of a mighty
work of God upon him in Christ, let him show me greater arguments of Gods love
to him, than Saul might have done; and yet it proved to be Saul's Portion, that
he should have only his portion in this world: God herein shows that His mercy
is His own, and that He will let out His mercy as He pleases; It is your
Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom: The Father doles out the Portion as He
pleases unto His Children; God will let the Line of His mercy to go thus far
to one, and there stop; and so far to another, and there stop; and then come in
a cross line again unto them; God so disposes of his mercy that there are some
that shall have Heaven and Earth to be their portion, and their portion is
blessed indeed; There are some that shall have Earth, but not Heaven, and their
portion is poor, and mean, and sad; there are others that shall have Heaven,
but not earth, and their portion is good; And there are others that shall
neither have Heaven nor Earth, and their portion (you will say) is miserable
indeed: Gods mercy is His own to dispose of, as He will. We read that Abraham
in Genesis 21. 14. He calls for Ishmael and Hagar, and he gives them a piece of
bread, a bottle of water, and sends them away, there is an end of them. So
Jehoshaphat in the 2 of Chron. 21. 3. He gave his other son (says the text)
gifts, but the Kingdom he gave to Jehoram. So God has people to whom he gives
pieces of bread, bottles of water, yea some to whom he gives great gifts in
this world; but he keeps his inheritance for his Isaac, He keeps the Kingdom
for Jehoram: Esau, he had his portion in this world, and such a portion as he
thought to be a very good portion: in Genesis 33. 9. Brother (says he) I have
enough. Most rich men are complaining: they go not so far as Esau, they have
their portion, and yet complain of it; Esau has his portion, and thought he
had enough. Christ's Auditors, in the 6. of Luke, 24. they had their portion in
this world, Woe to you, here is your consolation (says Christ unto them:) O
dreadful speech! woe to this man, woe to these here is their consolations. Dives
he had portion in this world, in Luke, 16. 25. Son, remember in thy life time
thou had thy pleasure; and thou had thy good things, they were thy good
things, those things that were measured out for thee, thou had them in thy
lifetime.

In the handling of this Argument, a shall divide what I have to say in these
six Particulars: that you may every one of you, go on the more readily along
with me.

First, Why is it that God will deal out somewhat to wicked men in this world,
why they shall have any Portion at all?

Secondly, That this their portion, it is confined to this life; and why so?

Thirdly, Some Corrallaries that you will see will naturally flow from those
Two.

Fourthly, We shall consider the condition of these men, who are such that have
their Portion in this world.

Fifthly, We shall endeavor to show unto you, who are those men, to cull out of
the Congregation what that man is, or woman is, that is like to have their
Portion in this world.

Sixthly, Conclude in the words of Exhortation unto you all.

For the first: God does give to wicked men a Portion, He doles out something.

First, They are all His Creatures. Says John concerning Jezebel, Go, take
away this cursed woman, show some respect unto her, let her not lie there in
the streets, but take her away; for she is the Daughter of a King. So says
God, Well, though these be cursed, yet they are my Creatures, some respect they
shall have from me, some good I Will communicate to them; Indeed, it is not an
Argument strong enough, that because you are Gods Creatures, therefore God
should be merciful eternally to you; but it may be an Argument strong enough,
because you are His Creatures, you shall have somewhat.

Secondly, This time of life, it is the time of Gods patience, the day of Gods
long-suffering.

Thirdly. Therefore, somewhat you shall have; and the day of patience is man's
day: in 1 Cor. 4. 3. says the Apostle there, I pass not for man's judgment:
The words are in the Greek, For man's Day. I pass not for man's day, so the words
may be translated; as if the Apostle should say, it is true, Man carries all
before him now, man has all the doings now at this day, and he may judge and
censure as he pleases; it is but his day, and I pass not for man's day; the day
of patience may prove to be man's day; that is the third.

Fourthly, Wicked men, they do somewhat for God here, some kind of service,
that is at least materially a service for God: and God will not have them
clamor upon Him, that they have nothing for their work; God will give to every
one something for what they do for Him, though it be never so little, here in
this world. You have a famous place for that in Ezekiel, 29. 18, 19, 20.
Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon, caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus, yet had he no wages for his Army, (says God) he had no wages
for his service; well, therefore, God He enquires about this, and seems to
complain, that when a Nebuchadnezzer did Him any service, yet he should be all
this while without his wages; therefore (says God) Behold! I will give the
Land of Egypt unto him, he shall take a spoil and a prey, and that shall be his
wages; He will give him wages for what he does. Many wicked men God does make
use of in diverse services, and much refreshing and good, His Churches shall
have from them; the Lord causes the very Earth to help the woman; earthly men
to be of use to the Church, and God will not be beholding to them for their
work; A thron may serve to stop a gap, though it be but a thorn bush, and if it
serve to stop a gap, and be of any use, it has that Benefit by it, all that
while it is kep from the fire, whereas were it not of use, it might presently
be brought to the fire. An argument by the way, to provoke all men to be of as
much use to the Church of God as possibly they can, it may be that is the very
thing that keeps thee from the fire; thou art a thorn, but God has use of
thee, and therefore brings thee not to the fire; but if thou once come to be
un-useful, the fire is the next thing thou shall hear of. I remember Austin (in
his 5th Book, De Civitate Dei, and the 12. Chap.) speaks of the Romans, that
had such a flourishing condition for a while, and he gives that for one Reason,
the Romans had brave spirits, they were men that had excellent moralities, and
had Herotick kind of spirits, and were delivered from that baseness of spirit,
that other people had, and therefore God showed some kind of respect unto them;
here many instances might be in that kind. That Is the fourth.

Fifthly, God gives wicked men a portion here, to show unto them what little
good there is in all these things, and to show the world what little good there
is in all the things that are here below in the world. Certainly, if there were
much good they should never have them; it is an argument there is no great
excellency in the strength of body, for an Ox has it more than you: an
argument there is no great excellency in agility of body, for a Dog has it
more than you: an argument no great excellency in gay clothes, for a Peacock
has then more than you: an argument there is not any great excellency in Gold
and Silver, for the Indians that know not God, have them more than you and if
these things had any great worth in them, certainly God would never give them
to wicked men, a certain argument: As it is an argument there is no great evil
in afflictions in this world, because that the Saints are so much afflicted; So
no great argument, there is any great good in this world, for the wicked they
enjoy so much of it. Luther has such an expression as this is, in his Comment
upon Genesis, says he, The Turkish Empire, as great as it is, it is but a
crum, that the master of the family, that God casts to dogs: the whole Turkish
Empire, such an esteem had Luther of it: and indeed it is no more. All the
things of the world, God in giving of them to Turks, and wicked ones, His
enemies, shows there is not much excellency and good in them, God therefore
will cast them promiscuously up and down in the world, because he looks upon
them as worthless things; God does not so much regard whether men be prepared
to give him the glory of them, yea or no, they shall have them however, He is
content to venture them: Indeed when God comes unto His choice Mercies in
Christ, there he looks to have glory from them, and he does never give them to
any, but first he prepares them, that they may give him the glory of those
mercies: but it is otherwise with others; As suppose you see a man gathering of
Crabs, although Swine be under the Tree, he cares not much to drive them away,
they are but Crabs, let them have them; but if he were gathering any choice and
precious fruit, if any Swine should come under, he drives them away. As for
outward things Crabs, the Lord suffers the Swine of the world, to come
grunting, and take them up; but when he comes to his choice Mercies in his
Christ, there he makes a distinction, Oh! that is precious fruit! A Blacksmith
that is working upon Iron, though a great many Cinders, and little bits of Iron
fly up and down, he regards them not: but a Goldsmith that is working upon
Gold, he preserves every ray, and every dust of Gold: and a Lapidarie that is
working upon precious Stones, every little bit he will be sure to preserve: a
Carpenter that is only hewing of Timber, he regards it not much if Chips fly up
and down; but it is not so with a Lapidary. So these outward things are but as
the Chips and Cinders, and such kind of thing, as those are, and therefore God
even gives a Portion to wicked men out of them.

Sixthly. God knows that He has time enough to manifest His Justice upon them
hereafter, He has an Eternity hereafter, for the Declaration of His Justice;
and therefore (says God) Let them have somewhat for a while. As you know it is
natural in all, when they see a man going to execution, that is not like to
live above an hour or two, every one is ready to pity him, and to be any way
officious to him, Oh! (says every one) the man shall not have comfort long, we
cannot do much for him, he shall have pain enough ere long, and misery enough
ere long, and so every one pities him. It is observable, let a man go to
execution for wickedness, and then he is pitied by all; but if a man should
suffer for godliiness, then perhaps they will not be so full of pity toward
him. As I remember in the Book of Martyrs, there is a story of Mr. Ino Frith, a
learned, godly Minister, and Andrew Hewit that were Martyrs, and were to suffer
for their conscience, and the Story tells us, that one Dr. Cook, a Parson in
London, he openly admonishes the people, that they should pray for them no more
than they would do for a Dog; that Charity of theirs that they talked so much
of, is such toward them that suffer out of conscience; and as amongst Papists
so amongst ungodly men, let a man suffer out of conscience, they will rather
rail at him, and when he is in his sufferings, they will rather give him gall
and vinegar to drink, (as they once did Christ upon the Cross) though in other
sufferings they pity men.

Seventhly, By this that God gives to the wicked, the Lord shows, what great
things he has reserved for his own Children; what a portion there is for them;
Surely if the dogs have so much, the Father keeps a good house; if the hangbyes
may have such doles, certainly there is good provision for the Children within:
As by the afflictions of the Saints, God does declare to wicked men, and would
have them draw such an argument from it, that there are fearful things, that
are like to befall them; If judgment begin at the House of God, where shall the
wicked and ungodly appear? So by the prosperity that wicked men have in this
world, God does declare to his Children, and he would have them argue from
thence, what then has he reserved for his beloved Ones? for his Saints, for
his Children, that are so dear unto him?

Eighthly. God fetches a great deal of Glory from hence, He fetches about His
own ends very much, from the portion that wicked men have; as sometimes He does
it, that they might stumble and harden their hearts, and break their necks at
it, and to ripen their sins; hence He lets them go on a long time, and have
their wills; in Isa. 33. 1. Woe to thee who spoilest, and were not spoiled, and
dealest treacherously, and were not dealt treacherously withal; when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; I Will let thee go on, thou shall spoil as
much as thou will, and when thou have done spoiling, thou shall be spoiled. And
sometimes God does it, to fetch about this end, Namely, to chastise. His own
people, with the prosperity of the wicked: And as an Ancient writer has this
Story of one that (he says) by an extraordinary way, from being a Monk was
advanced into an Episcopal Seat, and being a lewd wicked man, he began to be
proud of this his Advancement, and being proud, he heard these words in the
story, Ab angelo audivit, Cur superbus o infaelix, non es creatus Episcopus,
quia tu dignus, sed quia Civitas haec digna fuit tali Episcopi; it was a wicked
place, and this was the answer: Why art thou so proud Oh unhappy man, for thou
art not advanced because thou art worthy of this advancement, but because this
City is so ill; it is worthy of such a Prelate to be over it: In way of
judgment to that place God advanced such a man: And so many are advanced that
they may be heavy judgments unto others; God gives them such a portion, not out
of His love to them (though they are ready to gather the Argument) but out of
His displeasure unto others: And then He gives a plentiful portion to many, to
teach us all to do good unto our enemies, not only humanitati (as they say) but
homini, not only to human nature, but to men, to men that are wicked, some good
must be done unto them.

Ninthly. The Lord would show hereby, that He would have no argument of love or
hatred to be drawn from these outward things; and also because He would not
have them to expect any more. It may be many men that are ungodly, prospering
in this world, they gather this argument, That therefore God loves them, and
intends mercy to them, Cujus contrarium verum; nay, you may rather gather an
argument quite the other way, because God intends no further good unto you
hereafter, therefore it is you have so much now. We use to answer men, that come
for their dole, who have had out a dole, and they will come again, Why do you
come again? you have had your dole already. So God will answer to many men,
when they shall cry to him for mercy, at that day, Why come you to me for more?
you have had your dole already; Have you not had already more than your work
comes to, more than you have done? you have had your part and portion already:
indeed men speak much of Gods mercy, and the mercy of God we acknowledge to be
very great and glorious; well, God does show himself glorious in mercy, that
thou being so wicked, have so much as thou have in this world, and therefore
though thou should be denied of eternal mercy hereafter, yet thou have cause
to tell Devils and damned creatures that shall be thy companions, that God was
very merciful to thee, while thou did live in this world? Somewhat thou had
then, but here is all.

Secondly, Here is all that ever thou art like to have.

1. Because there are some men, whose names are written in the Earth, and not
in the Book of Life: In Jer. 17. 13. there it is spoken of men that are written
in the earth; whereas the Saints are described to be men that are redeemed from
the earth. In Revel. 14. 3. It is their happiness to be redeemed from the
earth: and it is all the happiness thou have, that thou art written in the
earth.

2. Here is their portion, because they are vile in the eyes of God; If you
should ask the Question; why you give bones to the Dog, and swill to the Swine,
and nothing else? The Answer would be; Because it is a Dog that has it, and
because it is a Swine; it is Dogs meat. Certainly God does speak exceeding
contemptibly of all ungodly ones in the world, let them be never so great in
regard of outward; In the 11. of Daniel, 21. A vile person shall arise: What
is this vile person? Interpreters generally consent in this, that it is meant
of Antiochus Epiphanius, that was a mighty great Prince, such a Prince as when
the Samaritans did write to him, they writ, Antiocho magno deo, to Antiochus
the great god; and his very name shows him to be a great one; Antiochus
Epiphanius, is as much as Antiochus the Illustrious, and the Famous: and yet
when the Holy Ghost speaks of him, it is Antiochus a vile person: they are vile
in the eyes of God. If there be any in a family that you care not much for, you
make no great provision for them, Does God take care for Oxen? Somewhat they
have, but little; Does God take care for wicked and ungodly ones?

3. Here is their portion, it is confined to this life; Why so? Because they
choose it themselves; and in that they have no wrong; make choice of this
Portion themselves: Moses, (speaking to the people, says he) I set before you
life and death: So do the Ministers of God in preaching to you, they set before
you Life and Death: What do you choose? Now you choose the way that goes out of
life, and into death; you have but your choice; you choose Vanity to be your
portion, God does you no wrong to give you Vanity: Now you that will indent
with God for your penny, you cannot take it ill, if when the end of the day
comes, God puts you off with your penny; you know those in the Vineyard, that
agreed for their penny, they began to murmur indeed, when they came to receive
their wages; but says the Master of the Vinyard, Did you not agree with me so?
So you agree with God, all you intend in Gods service, is, that you may have
some present comfort in this world, you dare not trust God for the future; and
here is that that God will show His infinite displeasure against the sin of
distrust by, that when the Lord propounds now in this day of Grace, such
glorious and blessed things to the children of men, and (for ought you know)
any of you may have your portion in them, as well as others, and yet you dare
not trust God for those gracious things; you think rather with your selves, let
me have somewhat now, somewhat for the present, some present pay; the reward
that you talk of, which is to come, I know not whether they be imaginations
yea, or no; therefore you mean (it seems) to serve God for your present pay,
and present pay you shall have, and no more. There are some servants that are
your day-servants, they serve you so as they expect their pay at night, and
perhaps you give them their two shillings at night, and there is an end: but
there are other servants now that will serve you in expectation of some
reversions, and expectations of honor, especially when they serve Noblemen, and
Princes, though they have no present pay given them at night, yet they go on
cheerfully in their service, they expect some great Reversions, as Leases and
preferments, they may have afterward, and now though they have not their two
shillings a day as the others have, yet when the other befalls them, they are
made rich men, they and their posterities: So now, the poor man that has his
pay every day, when a Lease and preferment falls, if he should come in for his
part, No, he may be answered, you had your pay every day; here was one was
content to rely and trust upon me, and had no pay, and he did trust upon me,
and now he comes to be preferred: This is the direct difference between the men
of the world and Gods Saints; the men of the world will do nothing without
present pay, that which is just before them, they must needs have, their hearts
are upon it; but the Saints they hear what a blessed thing God has revealed in
his Word, what a blessed Covenant of Grace there is, what rich Promises of
glorious things to come; now they believe God, and trust in God for these, and
they say, Lord, let me have my Portion in the life to come, and whatever thou
do with me here, I care not: As it was the speech of Austin, Lord, here
burn, here cut; but spare hereafter: I am content Lord, to be burnt, to be cut,
to endure any thing in the world, any sufferings in the world for thee, only
hereafter I look for somewhat else, and I Will wait for hereafter: You will not
wait for hereafter, but you must have it for the present, and that is the
reason, you are put off here: Oh it is a serious thing I speak of to you, many
a soul will wring its hands, and curse it self eternally, that it was not
content to trust God for hereafter, but would have present pay. You that are
great Merchants, if you buy a thing that is but a trifle, you pull out your
purse, and give the money down presently; but suppose you go to the Exchange,
and bargain for 10000l there, you may give a little down now, but the great pay
must come upon pay days afterward; it is not expected it should be presently
done: So there are some men in the world, will trade with God, but they trade
with God for pedling things, for their Credit, and applause, and for their
preferments and estates, God gives down the pay presently, you shall have it,
there is your 12d presently, it is done: but now there are other of Gods
Saints, that trade with God for great things, for immortality and glory, and a
Kingdom, and a Crown of eternal life; now they expect not to have it done
presently, they are content to stay: Oh these are the best Traders, the best
Merchants that will trade with God for great things, and be content to stay;
you will choose that you have here for the present, and therefore you have your
portion.

Fourthly, These things that are here, they are the only suitable things to your
hearts, and what will you do with any more hereafter? these things do
exceedingly please you, and give you content as agreeable to you, and the
things that are to come, are disagreeable; what would men do that are carnal
and wicked now? what would they do in Heaven? Certainly if you hate Gods Saints
now, that have but a little Grace for their Grace sake, you would hate them
infinitely more afterward, when they are perfect in Grace, when they shall be
perfect, and then when all your common gifts shall be taken away; for so it
shall be. Now the things of God are unsuitable to you, though you have now many
common (...), and you now abhor the Grace of God, though it be imperfect, what
then, when all common gifts shall be taken from you, and Grace made perfect?
how unsuitable will it be then to you? Therefore expect nothing hereafter.

Fifthly, You abuse your portion you have now, what will you do with more? Who
will trust you with the true riches? You abuse that you have. Indeed men of the
world that are wicked, and very rich, are presently in places of honor and
power; Oh! what a deal mischief they do in the world? what dreadful evils are
they unto the earth? Such men, how do they abuse their portions? Why now, as it
is with the Tooth, in a man's head, a Tooth indeed is preferred, to have an
eminent place in the Head, but when the Tooth comes to be rotten, and put us to
pain, what do we but pull it out, and throw it away? So when God prefers men to
eminent places, when through their wickedness they grow rotten, and so do a
great deal of hurt, the Lord plucks them out in His anger, and throws them
away; they abuse their portion, and do a great deal of hurt, and therefore must
expect no more. But above all the argument is,

Sixthly, Because they have no interest in Jesus Christ; The rich Treasures of
the infinite grace of God, they are let out in Jesus Christ; God has diverse
Conduit-pipes (as I may so say) of His Grace, to let out unto His Creatures;
there are some lesser Conduit-pipes, and those Conduitpipes, may be opened
through the general bounty of God; but now the Lord has the great Current of
His eternal mercies, for some that He does intend eternal good unto, and this
great Current of His it is stopped by justice, the infinite justice of God does
stop this great Current, so as it cannot be opened to have any drop of the
mercy let out, until Divine Justice comes to be satisfied; In the mean time the
other smaller pipes, they run, the general bounty of God; Now then, this is the
very work of Jesus Christ, Christ the Second Person in Trinity, and it is the
very mystery of the Gospel; The Second Person in the Trinity, sees that the
children of men, are capable of eternal happiness, eternal glory, and that
there are glorious treasures with God, to be communicated to the children of
men; but through man's sin, this great Current is stopped; in the mean time Gods
general bounty lets out a great many outward comforts; Christ therefore out of
pity to mankind, that man-king may not be put off with these general outward
comforts, He comes and satisfies Gods infinite justice, that He might open the
Current, the sluice of His infinite, and eternal Grace to others: Now happy are
those Creatures, who have interest in the Lord Christ; for this is His work, to
satisfy the Justice of the Father, that so the great pipe may be opened, and
then flows in all Grace, infinite, eternal Grace, when that comes once to be
opened: No mervail though we hear of such glorious things, that the Saints of
God have in the life to come, no mervail, for Christ does come and open the
great sluice of Gods infinite Grace and Mercy to them; as for the men of the
world, they have but a little of the drizling of Gods general bounty through
some crannies, but the Floudgates of Gods grace are opened in Christ; therefore
til Divine Justice be satisfied, there can be no further good for a Creature
here, but the fruits of Gods general bounty, and patience: There are some
Creatures whom the Lord has left to the Course of justice, they shall have
what they earn, and no more: this is the difference between Gods dealings with
some Creatures and others, (I say) some there are that shall have what they
earn, and no more: others there are whom God has set His Heart upon, and
whether they earn or no, God intends eternal mercies: unto them, and will bring
them unto eternal mercies: Here Is the difference of the Covenant of works, and
the Covenant of Grace; and therefore the one is left to Himself, and the other,
Christ the Head of the Covenant comes to undertake for him, that that he cannot
do: and here is the very Cut between the condition of some men, and other men;
that some have their portion in this world, and others have another higher
portion in the world to come; Those have no interest in Christ, these have.

Seventhly, They are no Sons, no Children, and therefore they must not expect
childrens portions; As many of you rich men, when you die, you will leave your
servants some Legacy, perhaps you will give every servant in the house five
pounds, or so; but when you come to your children, to write in your Will, what
such a Son, such a Daughter shall have, that is another manner of business than
4. or 5 l. great things you leave to them: Now the truth is, the world may be
divided between Children and Servants, for though the truth is, all men are at
defiance with God, yet God makes them servants one way or other; and there is
some little Legacy that servants shall have, but they must not expect the
Childrens portion; therefore they have it here, but must not have it hereafter.
In Ezekiel. 46. 16. Thus says the Lord, If the Prince give a gift unto any of his
sons, the inheritance shall be his sons; but if to his servants, then it shall
be but till Jubilee. This was Gods Law, that if a Prince gave a gift to his son,
the son should inherit it for ever, but if he give it but to a servant, it
should continue with him but for a while. So here is the difference of Gods
administration of all His gifts, He gives some to servants, and these shall
continue but for a while, within a little while all will be called for again;
all the good, and all the comfort thou have, God will call for it all again:
but that which he gives to His Sons, to His Children, they shall have mercy for
ever, though not to enjoy it in the same way, they shall enjoy the same good
and comfort Eternally. And then further:

Eighthly, The portion that the world has here, (you heard before) it comes
from Gods patience; now there will be an end of the manifestation of the glory
of patience in this world, as thus: As there are some graces of the Spirit of
God in the Saints, that shall have an end in regard of their exercise here in
this world, so there are some attributes of God, that shall have an end in
regard of the manifestation of them in that way that God does now manifest them
here in this world, and that is, the patience of God toward ungodly ones; Now
if they hold all upon patience, when the time of the glory of that in this
world shall come to be at an end, then all their good is at an end. Further:

Ninthly, Ungodly men, they shall have to deal with God immediately in the world
to come, (I beseech you observe but this answer, I Will hasten;) they must have
to deal immediately with God in the world to come; Now they have to deal with
God through Creatures, and while they have to deal with God through Creatures,
they may get a great deal, and may make shift for much, but when they shall
come to deal with God immediately, then it will be otherwise with them: As for
example, There are a great many hang-bies, at great men's houses, perhaps when
they come to have to deal with the servants, they get some bits and scraps, and
many things from the servants, but if they know they can have nothing, but from
the very hand of the Knight, or Lord of the house himself, then they will
expect no great matter. So wicked men of this world, they are as hang-bies,
that all that they have are but as scraps from the servants, they have to deal
only with creatures, they look no further; but hereafter things shall be settled
another way, and all things shall be weighed by God Himself, in a balance of
Justice, and distributed by the hands of God Himself immediately, and now
things will be carried after another manner, the Lord Himself will come to
dispose of things. It was a speech of a German Divine, though he were a good
man, and lived very innocently, when he lay upon his sick bed, and apprehended
Death, he was in great terrors of spirit, mightily troubled, and some of his
friends came to him, and asked him, Why should you be so troubled, that have
lived so good a life, as you have done? This was his answer, The Judgments of
God are one, and the judgments of men are another, I am now to deal with God;
it is true, I lived thus before Men, and Men gave their Verdict of me, as good,
and thought I was in a good condition, but O I am now to go to God, and to deal
immediately with Him, and Gods judgment, and Man's judgments are different
things; when God shall come to weigh all men's portions out, as it will be then,
So much Righteousness, so much portion, so much happiness, you will say then,
Lord, what shall become of us all? All our righteousness is as the menstruous
cloth; I but for the Saints, the Righteousness of Christ will be put into one
Scale, and their Portion into the other, and their Portion will be weighed by
the Righteousness of Christ. Now when thou come to God, thou must come to the
Scale, and thou will put in thy good servings of God, and thy coming to
Church, and some good Civil actions, and Natural and Moral things thou have
done, thou will put them in the Scale; says God, That which thou have had
already, weighs down all those; Have thou nothing to put into the Scales but
this? thou have had thy reward already for all this, and much more than this;
then if there be nothing to but into the Scale but this, thou art undone, and
there is nothing for thee for Eternity. And here is the ground of the
confinement of the Portions of wicked men. These are the Two first things.

Thirdly, I will give you some CORRALLARIES only from hence.

Is it so that wicked men have a portion here, and here is all?

First, Here we may see the Reason why the men of the world are so cunning in
the things of the world, why they can make so good shift for themselves in the
world, rather than other men can: Why, here is their Portion, their very
happiness and good is here; no mervail though they make such shift as they do
here: the Apostle in 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world
(says the Apostle,) we cannot tell how to shift in the world so as other men
do, for indeed, we look further than these things, and so cannot shift as other
men can; They that have the spirit of the world, and have their portion in the
world, they can shift; but we have not received the spirit of the world. You
know a Swine though it goes abroad all day wandering up and down, it knows the
way to the trough at night; but a Sheep if it go a wandering a little way out of
his place, a Sheep does not know how to come back again, but wanders up and
down till it be even lost, and is as a lost sheep when it is once wandering up
and down; but Swine are not so. So ungodly men, though they go up and down
wandering, they know how to come to their trough at night, they have better skill
in the world, they are more artificial in the things of the world, they have
better understanding (as the Scripture speaks,) The children of this world are
wiser in their generation, than the children of light: Why is it? Their Portion
is in this world. That Is the first Corrallarie.

2. Corr. Here we see the Reason, Why there are so many great ones in the world
that regard Religion so little as they do, and the ways of God, and the Church
of God; why it is not their portion; those things that concern another life, is
not any part of their portion; they mind what it is that concerns the present
life, because this is their portion. When many come into places of dignity and
power, What are their thoughts? Now they think of gratifying their friends, now
they think of respect and honor that they shall have abroad in the world, and
be accounted somebody, now they think of revenging al their wrongs, of making
up of all their broken titles etc. This has been heretofore (I suppose very
ordinary) in men advanced amongst you; these are all their thoughts: as for
doing service for God, and for His Church, and vindicating the Truth of God,
and Honor of God, that is scarce in all their thoughts, for they do not look
upon that as part of their Portion: Here is the reason why so many Magistrates
are like to Galio, in Acts, 18. 17. Carring for none of those things; they were
to him but matters of words, and yet they were about the great fundamental
Points of Religion, Whether Christ were the true Messiah, and whether He were
God, or no; but to Gallio these things were but matter of words: And so the
great things of God, and Religion, to carnal hearts, they are things that are
of no great consequence at all; yea when as Sosthenes that was the Ruler of the
Synagogue for countenancing of Paul, had the rude multitude of the City, rise
up in a rude manner to apprehend him, and to lay violent hands upon him, Gallio
cared for none of these things; but so far he did not go, Gallio went not to
stir up a rude multitude to lay violent hands upon a Ruler of a Synagogue, or a
City, but he cared for none of those things (says the text:) What did he care
for rectifying any thing that was amiss in Religion? Oh let us (say they that
have their portion here) what ever becomes of things, let us make peace (say
they) that we may go on and be quiet in our houses, and enjoy that we have
quietly, and peacably, and they look no further: Their portion is here, and as
for Truth, how do they reject it, and contemn it! It is a speech (as is
credibly reported) has come even from a Citizen here, in cursing of the Truth
so; (as had he lived among the Jews he would certainly have been stoned to
death) Let us have Peace, and a Pox of Truth. (I say) such a speech as this
among the Jews would have caused him to have been stoned to death, being such
horrible blasphemy. But how many are ready to say with Pilat, in the 18. of
John, 38. when as Christ was before Pilat, and talked to Pilat of Truth, Truth
(says Pilat) What is Truth? You shall observe it at the 38. ver. What is
Truth? (Says Pilat) as if Pilat should have said, What a strange man is this,
the man is in danger of his life, and he talks of Truth, when he is in danger
of his life, What is Truth? (says Pilat) and turns it back upon him presently.
Just thus are the hearts of many, What should we look at Truth, or at any thing
now, but to preserve our lives, and estates, and outward comforts in the world?
What is Truth? They are a company of mad-brain'd fellows, that are factious,
and seditious, they talk of Truth, and know not what they say, Come, let us
have peace, though it be upon any terms: Who is there in this place that
desires not Peace? The Lord knows it is the desires of those that are accused
most for want of desires in this thing; yea so as we dare challenge any of you
with this Challenge: Those who have been most at the Throne of Grace begging
unto God for peace for England, let them carry the day; those that have put
forth most prayrs for Peace, before the Throne of Grace, we are willing they
shall have the day. We read that amongst all the Tribes that came up in a
warlike way, to help the people of God against oppression, in the 5. of
Judges, 18. and so in that Chapter, that of all Naphtali was the only Tribe
that joined with Zebulun, that jeoparded their lives in the Cause of God, that
would take up Arms to defend themselves, and the people against oppression;
Surely these two Tribes, by the others that would not venture themselves, were
at that time accounted very factious, and very seditious; What they! only
Zebulun and Naphtali; Yet it is observable, though there were none joined with
Zebulun but only Naphtali, there is no Tribe of which it is so much spoken, to
be a Tribe, full of Courtesy, and Civility, of a peacable and quiet
disposition, as Naphtali was; you shall find it, if you read in the 49. of
Genesis, 21. and afterward in another text, there are these two things said of
Naphtali, only these two first, That he was a Hind let loose, and give goodly
words. But they may be but words of Complement, not reality; Nay, (when Moses
comes with the blessing, you shall find these two places, one in Genesis and
the other in Deuteronomy,) when Moses comes with the blessing again upon
Naphtali: Naphtali filled with favor, and with the blessing of the Lord. What
is the meaning? Naphtali was a Tribe that had most courtesy and civility of
all; compared to a goodly Hind, of a quiet disposition, and one that gave
courteous language to all, and not mere words, but reality; it was such a one
that was filled with favor, that had the favor of God, and the favor of Men;
he had such a courteous carriage, and he had the blessing of God upon him; and
yet this Naphtali, was the Tribe that would jeobard their lives, and take up
Arms in defense of the people of God, against oppression in those times, above
all. And Phinebas (ye know) was so zealous, and would make use of the sword, so
as he did; yet in the 25. of Number. 12, 13. God says there, He would make a
Covenant of Peace with him. Beloved! Phinehas, that is such a fiery hot man,
yet a Covenaut of peace must be made with him, by God Himself; for he did
indeed, by that way procure peace to Israel; for so the Text says there in
that place of Number. That because Phinehas was so zealous, it was, that I might
not consume them in my jealousy: Now it is observable, the word in the Original
is, Because he was zealous, therefore it was, that I might not consume them in
my Zeal. Its translated in your books; Because he was thus zealous, that I
might not consume them in my Jealousy; the words are different in the English;
but in the Hebrew they are the same: and so be turned thus, Because he was so
zealous, it was, that I might not consume them in my Zeal; as if he should have
said, If there had not been some among them that had been zealous, (and as they
account fiery) I would have been zealous my Self, and fiery my Self, and
consumed them, and it was well they had such amongst them; and one day those
that cry out of them, may come to see cause to bless God for them; that would
not have the world put off, and gul'd with the fair name of peace; we know the
Devil has made much use of it in former times, and would fain make use of it
now; As if those that desired Truth most, were not greatest friends unto peace;
God forbid, but it should be so: Though it is true, we think not, we have our
portion here, and therefore we would not have peace upon any terms; indeed we
confess our portion lies higher, and that wherein our portion does consist we
would have upon any terms; and therefore Saint Paul says in Philippoans, 3. if
by any means, I may attain to the Resurrection of the dead; If by any means,
upon any terms, that I may have peace at the great Day, whatsoever I do endure:
so say we for our portion; and you say, Let us have peace upon any terms; why?
because your portion is here: We would be glad that all our Mountains, were
Mountains of Olivet, but we would be loath to have them Mountains of Corruption:
In 2 Kings, 23. 13. You read there of a Mountain of corruption, Of Mons
offenssionis, Of offense; so it is in the old Latin; Now, what was that same
Mountain of Corruption? if we compare one Scripture with another, we shall find
it was no other, but Mount Olivet, Mount Olivet was made a Mountain of
corruption: In 1 King. 11. 7. There Solomon built Idolatrous Temples, for the
honor of the gods of his Queen, those gods that his Queen did worship, Solomon
built Temples for to gratify her, and it was upon the Mount before jerusalem,
which was the Mount of Olivet, that was the Mount. Now you know the Mount
Olivet was a Mount that had his name from Olives that did grow there, and were
Emblems of peace; but yet the Mount Olivet may be made a Mount of Corruption:
we would be glad that we might live upon Mount Olivet all our days, but are
loath this Mount Olivet should be made a Mount of Corruption. Give me leave but
in a few words, yet to put some Considerations to you, and if I speak not
reason in them, reject them.

First, Because that you are so greedy of Comforts in this world, you would
fain have peace; be wise even for your own portion; you would have peace, but I
hope a safe peace, and that is all we do desire: If the peace be not safe, Oh
the bood that may follow after. We read in the 27. of the Acts, 13. that there
was indeed a Calm, and the South wind did blow softly, for a while, warm wind
and very softly, but presently follows, not long after it appears that there
did arise a Tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon; Euroclydon did arise presently
after: Take we heed (my brethren) that we be not deluded with the softly South
wind; Take heed that there be not an Euroclydon, that blows presently after;
were we sure to be delivered from that same Euroclydon, we should be glad of
continuance of soft blowings of the South wind: Can you think of a safe peace
that live under any Arbitrary Governments? No (that you will say) and therefore we
account our condition ill now, for we have Arbitrary Governments amongst us
now, And who are they?

Obj. Do not the Parliament themselves Govern in that kind of way?

Ans. Give me leave in a word to answer this: Consider of the difference
between that Arbitrary Government the Parliament complains of; and what now you
feel.

Ans. 1. That was then, when the Kingdom was in a settled way, and then when
there was no contrary Arbitrary power to oppose it, yet then it went on, and
surely then it did but make way for worse Arbitrary government; but now it is
in a way, when the Kingdom is unsettled, and in a way, where there is a
necessity of some help beyond the ordinary course of Law, because of a contrary
Arbitrary Power, that is opposed; And is it possible for any man, that has any
wisdom, or understanding in his head, that cannot see the difference between
these two? But I Will show you a greater difference than this.

Ans. 2. That which was before, those that did so Govern suffered nothing in it
themselves, but gained all; now those that are accused for the present, (if it
be Arbitrary,) they suffer themselves as much as we do, and their posterity
does suffer as much as we do; and therefore the thing is far different from
what was before. And yet further, if you would not be carried away with words,
but judge righteous judgment, Consider this:

Ans. 3. Can you think that if the Adversary should prevail, you should be
only at the dispose of the King? Do you not think that those that are with him,
and give such strength and assistance for the present, that you must lie at
their mercy too, in great part; And will that be safe for you? I put it to
every man's conscience, whether he can think that it is safer for Church, or
Common wealth to be governed by the King, with those that are now about him,
and an Army of Papists, than to be governed by the King, with His Two Houses of
Parliament? Which is the safest way in the consciences of any men living. And
yet further than this, Consider (if you have your eyes in your heads)

Answ. 4. That perhaps what you aim at as your End, your Adversaries may aim
at, but as their Means; and what will become of you then? If that that you
would have as an End, they shall look at, but as a Medium; Consider what
Consequences may come of it. And yet lastly:

Answ. 5. You that do desire so much Peace, to preserve your own Portions here;
Would you not willingly have such Peace, as those that have appeared for you in
Houses of Parliament, in City, in the Ministry, that have been most active, be
preserved too? Are you so desirous of it, as to be willing to leave them to the
fury and rage of their Adversaries? Were not this one of the horriblest
wickednesses that ever were committed in a Kingdom? If they from desire to save
their own particular estates, should betray those that have been faithful to
them, in their places of Trust. It was once a speech of Demosthenes to one that
would fain have peace, he affirms, that it is a vain and preposterous thing, to
desire peace with the flock, upon this condition, That the Keepers of the flock
may but be betrayed, and taken away. The fair name of Peace will never so
prevail with a wise man, when this shall come to be the condition of it. The
good people in Chrysostoms time, (however you may think of those that have most
appeared for you, and ventured themselves) they thought it such a thing, to
have but the mouth of one Chrysostom stopped. And also they professed, That if
the Sun should take back, or bring back, or keep in his Rays, it were more
tolerable, than that the mouth of John should be stopped; they had such an high
esteem of a faithful Minister in those times. And therefore if you would be
faithful to God, and to the Kingdom, and to those that have appeared for you,
look after such peace, as wherein you and they may be safe; God knows they
would have been willing to have been as silent as you; but suppose all the
Ministers in the Kingdom, and men that had ability to appear publicly, had all
been silent, so as the business had been wholly betrayed, and at length an Army
of Papists had risen, when you had had no help to have resisted them, Would you
not have cried out of Ministers? would you not have cried out of Magistrates?
would you not have cried out of Parliament Men? If they have ventured
themselves to be faithful for you, know you can have no peace, except they have
it; and it were an unworthy thing, to think of your safety without theirs
likewise.

Object. But you will say, We would not have our Estates and Peace thus, as you
speak, upon any terms, without any regard to Religion; we have our portion in
Religion, as well as you, and we have our Consciences to look after, as well as
you, and God forbid it should be otherwise, but that Religion should prosper
too with our Peace; but we would not have Sects and Sectaries to be maintained
in the Kingdom; let us have Truth, and Religion; but away with them.

Ans. 1. Do you understand what they are you speak of? Do you know wherein you
and they differ? You cry out of them, as if they were of another Religion,
whereas when it comes to be scanned, the difference between you and them will
not be so great. But further, I put this to you:

Ans. 2. Do you spend as much breath in praying for these kind of men, as you
do in railing upon them? then somewhat may be said.

Ans. 3. It is a vain thing to think, that true Religion can be maintained, and
have the liberty of it, without some difference of Opinion amongst us: Indeed
the Turks have as much peace in their Religion, as any Religion has in all the
world; and there is as little difference of Opinions amongst the Turks as there
is in any Religion whatsoever; but well may that Coat have no seam, that has
no shape; If the Truth of Religion comes to appear, certainly it is impossible
but many differences in opinion must come, and it is a most intolerable pride
of hear, and tyranny in any whatsoever, to think by violent means to force all
to be of the same opinion that they are of, in matters that are not of the
Foundation, and that may stand with the Peace of a Commonwealth too; You take
upon you in that more than Christ does, more than the Apostles ever did.

Object. But You will say, If men be in an Error, why should they not be
forced? Shall every man be lest to his Opinion, to do what he will?

Answ. No, I plead not for that neither: Therefore I except all Opinions, 1.
Against the Foundation of Religion: 2. All those Opinions that are against the
Foundation of Civil Government. Take these Two aside, and then for other
Opinions that are of a lower inferior nature (I say) there you take too much
upon you, whosoever you are, if you should think to force men to be of the same
Opinion as you are; and there is no such way to make disturbance in Churches or
Commonwealths, as to force men to be of the same Opinion, in things that are of
an inferior nature.

Object. But you will say, If it be an Error, they must not be left to live in
it.

Answ. Nay, stay there; A man may be in an Error, and yet you have nothing to
do to offer violence unto him to bring him out of his Error; you may seek to
convince him as much as you can, but to offer violence, you undertake more than
God has given you Commission to do, whatever you are; and I give this
Scripture for it, that is clear, in Romans, 14. 2. One believes he may eat all
things; another eats herbs. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not; and let him that eats not, not judge him that eats. And so he tells us,
Who art thou that judge another? Who art thou that judge. These two
Opinions could not be true: One man does eat herbs; the other man makes
conscience of it, and cannot do it; Certainly, one of these was a sin at that,
time one of them was a sin, to eat herbs, and that he might eat no flesh, for
God never commanded them, that they should eat no flesh; to make conscience to
eat no flesh was a sin, but yet though one were a sin, yet they that were in
the right, must not by violence force those that were in the wrong, to their
opinion, but they must leave them to God; I say, in matters of such consequence
as these, it is a point of Antichristian tyranny, and pride, and notorious
pride in men, that have taken so much upon them, as to force all to be of the
same opinion; this is not the way certainly for true peace. But thus much for
the second Corrallarie. The Third follows.

3. Corr. If men have their portion in this world, here is the Reason that
there is such a stir in the world by men to maintain this their Portion; what a
deal of stir is there? what rending and tearing is there, that they might
maintain their Estates? Especially if some men have a higher Portion in the
world than others, Oh what a deal of stir is there to maintain it. I remember
Henry the fourth, writes to Pope Gregory, and tells him, that by reason of an
Emulation there was about the Popedom, one being chosen in Rome, and the other
in another place, that there were 230000. men lost their lives out of that
Emulation; merely about two men, two Popes, it cost the bloods of two hundred
and thirty thousand men. O what a stir is therein the world to satisfy the
wills of a few men in the world? Certainly one day the world will be wiser, and
will understand that they are Men, and not Dogs, that they were not made to be
subject to the humors and the lusts of men, and that no man has now any
further power over him, but what they have by an agreement from them one way or
other, either implicit, or explicit, one way or other, it is by their
agreement, that any man has any power over them, and can exercise any; The
world (I say) ere long I hope will be wise enough to understand this, and
therefore will not so sacrifice their lives for the satisfying of the wills of
a few men in the world, they shall not make such a stir in the world as
heretofore they have done; Indeed men make a great stir now to maintain their
portions, for the contention is not, de finibus, but de haereditate; not about
matters of bounds and limits, (as he said) but it is about the inheritance it
self; it is about their portion; it is their God; And do you say, What ails me,
when you have taken away my gods? Here is the ground of all the stirs and
Combustions in the world, because carnal hearts look upon what they enjoy as
their portion; But how comes it thus to pass, that men should be so greedy of
this their portion? Is it such an excellent portion that they are so greedy of
it? Is it worth so much, that they contend so much about it? This makes way for
me to slip into the Fourth Particular.

Fourthly, To enquire what kind of Portion this is, that these men of the
world, have in this world, that they make such a stir about. And therefore to
make way for that;

First. Consider what poor things they are, that they make such a stir about.

Secondly. Consider the Tenure, upon which they hold whatsoever they do enjoy.

Thirdly. Consider the mixture of Evil, that there is in that they do enjoy.

Fourthly. The blessed Portion that they lose, that they might enjoy.

Lastly. The dreadful end that there will be to such men that have their
portion here.

1. The poor things, that men have here in this world; What are they? Their
Comforts for the most part, are but imaginary; In Hosea, 12. 1. Ephraim feeds
upon the wind: And when a bladder is full of wind, one prick lets it quite out;
and so when Death comes, it lets out all their Comforts: even as the wind goes
all out at one prick in a bladder; so all the comforts of the men of the world,
go out by the prick of death. In Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thy heart upon that
which is not? it is not, it has no reality in it. And in Acts, 25. when
Bernice and Agrippa came in great pomp and state to the Assembly; that which
you have in your books translated great Pomp, it is in the Greek, with great
Fancy: all the pomp and jollity in the world, it is but a fancy, this is their
portion.

2. That which they have, it is of a very low nature; this would be an
argument, we might phylosophize in, if it were fit, or if we had time, but I Will
quickly pass over these things, it is of a very low nature, it not much concerns
the soul, all the portion they have; Therefore says the Text here, Thou
fillest their belly; it is but a belly full; what is that to the soul? Indeed
the rich man in the Gospel could say, Soul, take thy ease, for thou have goods
laid up for many years, eat, drink, etc. Will thou say, Soul, take thy ease,
because thou have goods laid up, and because you may eat, and drink? What is
all this to the soul? Ambrose has such a speech upon the place, If the man had
the soul of a swine, what could be said otherwise? for indeed these things were
suitable to the soul of a swine: you shall find that a man is not the better,
because of outward things, not a whit; the heart of the wicked is little worth;
his estate may be somewhat worth, his house may be somewhat worth, his lands
may be somewhat worth; But the heart of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10.
And would not you think it to be a great evil, if so be that when you go up and
down abroad, you should certainly know, that there is no man does give you any
entertainment, or any respect, but it is for your servants sake that tends upon
you, would not that discourage you, and trouble you? Indeed you come to such a
man's house, and he seems to make you welcome, and you have entertainment; I but
you come to know afterward, that it was not for your sake, but for your
servants sake that be loved; would you think you had a good entertainment
there? the truth is, so all the respect you have in this world, it is for your
servants sake, for your goods, house, and lands, it is not for any worth that
is in you. It was a speech that Socrates spoke once, to one Achilous, when he
had a fine house, and a many brave things there (says he) There are many come
to see thy house, and thy fine things there, but no body comes to see thee;
they know there is a worth in thy fine house, and in thy fine furniture, but
they see no worth in thee. Indeed all these things are not souls meat, it is
not man's meat they feed upon, it is but ashes, it is nothing to the soul of
man. Further:

3. Suppose it were for the soul, What thou have here, is but a very poor
pittance, a scantie portion, thou have not all the world neither, thou have thy
portion in this world; If thou had the whole world at command, yea if God
should make a thousand worlds more for thee to command, this were all but a
poor pittance to put off an immortal soul withal: but now, that thou have is
but a little minnim in the world: All Nations of the Earth are but as the dust
of the balance, and drop of the bucket to God; What is thy dust then? what is
thy house, and land then? As Socrates wittily rebuked the pride of Alcibiades,
when he was very proud, that he had so much Land lay together; He brought his
Map of the world to him, and says he, Pray show me where your land lies here,
one prick of a pen would have described it all. Should we take a rich man here
that has a great deal of land, and bring a Map of the world to him, all
England, Ireland, and Scotland, are but three little spots unto the world; And
what are your Farms, and your Mannours you have? you have but a little portion,
if you had all, it were no great matter: the truth is, All you have in this
world cannot be enough to make you live in fashion in the world, like a man;
it is not enough (I say) for to live like a man in the world, to live like one
that has an immortal soul, like one that has the Image of God upon him, and
was sent hither into the world to do some great service as every one of you was
sent hither to do; therefore it is but a mean thing, little cause you have for
to rejoice in it; It Is true, they that are godly, account themselves unworthy
of the least thing they have here in this world, but I Will tell you a Mystery of
Religion now, a practical Maxim of Religion, that is a great Mystery to the
world, and that is this, That a gracious heart, though he thinks himself
unworthy of the least crum of bread, yet all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth
will not serve him to be his portion, will not satisfy him; though he has a
heart that will be satisfied with any thing, as counting himself unworthy of
the meanest condition in this world, as a present gift of God, but if God
should give him Heaven and Earth, he has such an unsatisfying heart, as he
would not be satisfied with Heaven and Earth, except God gives him Himself:
therefore certainly thy portion is but a very little portion.

4. Those things that thou have, are things that will vanish, and quickly come
to nothing. It is said, of the whole world, in Job; 26. 7. The whole earth hangs
upon nothing; and so all things of the Earth do: and therefore it is said of
Abraham; in Hebrews, 11. That he sought a City that had foundations: All other
things, are as things that have no foundation at all; There is a worm in every
creature, that will consume it in time; and the Scripture calls all our riches,
Uncertain riches; and Christian thou art made for an eternal condition, these
things are fading; when thou come to enter in upon thy eternal estate, if
thou should then ask, what shall I have now? I have now thus much, and thus
much, in my whole life, but what shall I have now I come to enter in upon my
eternal estate, truly nothing at all. If a man were to go a great Voyage to the
Indies, and all the provision he makes is this, he gets a Vessel that can make
shift to carry him as far as Gravesend, that he will do, and what need he has
of provision to Gravesrnd, or perhaps to the Downs, he provides for; he goes
on, and should go on now to the Downs, and begins his Voyage to go to the
Indies, and is gotten into the Ocean; alas the Vessel is a rotten Vessel; Were
not this an unwise man? Truly this is the condition of thousands in the world,
Man, Woman, thou art ^^ade for an eternal condition; God intends Eternity to
every Mothers Child that is here this day, and God expects that thy life should
be spent in making provision for this Eternal estate of thine, and thou
think of nothing but that thou may provide for a few years here, and live
in some fashion, and be some body in the world here; Oh! when thou come to
enter upon the Ocean of Eternity, thou will give a dreadful shreek, and cry
out, I am undone, I am undone, I have provided nothing for Eternal life; these
things are very uncertain: Oh what a deal of difference there is between the
same men in two or three years? I might tell you (but the time so hastens) that
great difference two or three years have made between man and man, but I
forbear it, because I see the time will not give leave: And yet further for the
meanness of the Portion.

5. What ever thou have in this world, it is no other, but what may stand with
the Eternal hatred of an infinite God toward thee; it may be the portion of a
Reprobate, and will this serve thy turn? will this satisfy thee? will that
satisfy thy soul, that may be the portion of a Reprobate? There are many now
that are sweltring under the wrath of the infinite God, that have had twenty
times as much as any of you have, that are here before the Lord this day, they
have had greater estates than you, and lived merrier lives than you, and yet
are now under the wrath of God; Will a Reprobates portion serve thy turn?
Therefore surely it is but a mean thing, that will stand with Gods Eternal
hatred; Consider it, To enjoy the Dominion of all the world, may stand with
Gods Eternal hatred; but to have but the least dram of saving grace, cannot
stand with Gods Eternal hatred: What a difference is there between the having
the least dram of grace, and the enjoyment of all the world? what a goodly
portion is there here that thou so much rejoycest in? It is certainly, because
thy heart is so straight, that thou think these things to be so big; As in a
narrow Vessel, a thing will appear big, but in a mighty wide Vessel, it appears
little; So when the Lord by grace shall widen and enlarge thy heart, then all
the things of the world will be little to thee; Grace has the Image of God in
it, now what says God of Himself, in Isa. 40. All the world is but as the drop
of the bucket, and the dust of the balance; Now grace has Gods likeness, and
through the Image of God in a gracious heart, the Soul says thus of the world,
as God says of the world, that all the world is but as the drop of the bucket,
and the dust of the balance to me; When the Lord promised to persuade Japhet
to dwell in the tents of Shem; the word that is translated persuade, it
signifies to enlarge, that He would enlarge the heart of Japhet; and indeed
when God does convert a soul, the Lord does enlarge that soul, does enlarge the
heart, and therefore all the things of the world, are now but little; Indeed if
a man be below here, and looks upon that which is next to him, that has any
bigness in it, it shows somewhat great, but if a man were advanced on high,
upon the top of a Pinnacle, then that which seemed great, appears but little to
him; so the men of the world, that here lie grovelling below, and the curse of
the Serpent is upon them, Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou
eat; they think the things of the world great matters; but grace lifts up the
heart on high to God and Christ, mounts it up to Eternity, and then they can
look upon all these things here below, as mean things; and this was the reason
that Luther, when he had great gifts sent in to him by many of the great men of
Saxony, he began to be afraid, lest the Lord should reject him, here in this
world, and he has this expression, I did vehemently protest God should not put
me off so; that is his word, according to the manner of the man, you know the
man, and his language; according to the manner of his language thus he speaks,
when there came in things of the world, and he began to be tickled with honor,
and great men did respect him, Oh (thought he) I shall be somebody now in the
world, thus corruption began to work, but grace did prevail, and he breaks out
with this expression, I did profess God should not put me off so, the Lord
shall not put me off so; there are other things which I look for, things which
are better and higher, these are poor pittances for this soul of mine to be put
off withal, there are other things I must have from the Lord, or else I cannot
be satisfied. That Is the First thing, the poor things of the world, which is
the Portion of wicked men.

Secondly, Consider the Tenure by which they hold it.

All you have in the world, you hold it not by a good Tenure, it is not held in
Capite, that is not the tenure you hold it by: I confess this, I think not the
men of the world to be Usurpers for what they lawfully get in the world, I do
not think they shall answer merely for their using what they do, merely for
their right to use that they have, but they shall answer for their not
right-using; they shall not answer (I say) for their right to use, but for
their not right-using; they have some right, but what right is it they hold it
upon? what tenure? There is a Threefold right:

1. A right from Justice, that we may claim a thing by: One can claim by
Justice, such a thing is his due: That Is not your right, you cannot claim any
thing.

2. There is a right from Creation, that God gave to man at first Creation: you
have lost that too.

3. There is a right from Promise? God has now promised all good things to his
people; you have not that right neither: You have neither the right of Justice
to claim; nor the right from your Creation; nor the right from Promise: What
right then? There is a Fourth right, and that right I confess you have, and
that is.

4. A right from Donation: God is pleased to give to you, but just thus; You
hold all your Honors and Estates, that are ungodly men, just thus, Even as a
man that is condemned to die, and there being a little reprieving for two or
three days before his execution, the Prince out of his indulgence, gives order
to have provision made for him according to his Quality, that if he be a
Gentleman, he shall have such provision, if a Knight, a Nobleman, a Peer of the
Realm, he shall have provision according to his Quality, till his Execution;
now no man can say, this man usurps, though he has forfeited all his right to
his Land and Estate, yet if the King will give him this refreshment, he is no
usurper, but it is a poor right he has, it is a right from Donation: and thus
God gives the ungodly men, in this world they have a right to outward comforts:
you have your Portion, but you see how you hold it. That Is the Second thing. I
have but one or two things more to dispatch of this particular: and two things
further, and I shall wind up all as briefly as I can. (I am told I may take
some liberty at such a time as this is, and seeing it is only the preaching
opportunity we meddle withal; give me leave a little the more to transgress
upon your patience, in that I hope it will not be very much) The next thing to
be considered, it is, That this Portion here, as it is poor in regard of the
mean things, and the Tenure: So,

Thirdly; There is a great deal of Mixture here in this you have.

1. There is a manifold Mixture of Cumber, of Trouble; and the truth is, All
the good things that wicked men enjoy in this world, will scarce bear charges;
that is, there is so much trouble they meet withal here in this world with
their Portion, that all they have will scarce bear charges: And if a man goes a
Voyage, we use not to count any thing he spends by the way to be part of his
Treasury. Now all we have here in this world, is but Spending-money to bear our
Charges, in regard God knows we shall be at a great deal of Charges, and
afflictions we shall meet with here. But besides:

2. There is a Mixture of Curse in every Portion of an Ungodly man. If any of
you think you get such a rich Match, you get an Heir that is a very rich Match,
and you get her portion, and there you go and fetch away the bags of God that
are her portion, but if it should prove that every bag of Gold you have of your
Wives portion had the Plague in it, it were but a poor portion. Certainly it is
thus with all ungodly ones in the world, that all the while they live,
whatsoever they enjoy, so long as continuing wicked, they have a Curse of God
that goes along with it, and makes way unto Eternal misery for them: As those
that are godly have the blessing of God in outward things, that makes way for
their Eternal good; So thou have the Curse of the Lord mingled with all thy
outward things that makes way for Eternal evil unto thee. And then, Consider,

3. What portion thou losest; thou have gotten one, but thou losest a great
deal more: If a man had been at the Exchange, and made some bargain about some
petty thing, and afterward when he comes home, knows that by not buying such a
thing, he has lost a bargain that would have made him and his posterity, he
has little cause of rejoicing in that bargain he has made: So though thou
have got a portion that may seem to satisfy thee somewhat, know thou have lost
a portion of infinite worth and value; and it is impossible to show you what this
portion is; for the Devil could show Christ all the glory of the world in the
twinkling of an eye; but if I should come to show you the glory of Heaven, I
had need have Eternity to show you what the portion of the Saints is, but
though I cannot show it you all, I will only give you a hint or two, that you
may know somewhat, what it is:

1. It is such a portion, as is fit for the Spouse of the Lamb, as is fit for
the Spouse of one that is to marry the Son of God, the second Person in Trinity.

2. It is such a portion, which is fit and suitable to an Heir of Life and
Glory, an Heir of Heaven and Earth.

3. It is such a portion, as God does give it unto them, to this very end, As
to declare what the infinite Power of God is able to do, to raise a poor
creature to the height of happiness; What think you this must be? that (I say)
it must therefore be done, that it might declare to Angels, and all creatures,
what the infinite power of God is able to do, to raise a poor creature to
happiness and glory. This must be somewhat.

4. It must be such a one, as in which God must attain unto the great design
that he had from all eternity in making the Heaven, and Earth; the special
design that God had in making Heaven and Earth, from all Eternity, it was, to
magnify the Riches of His Grace, to a Company that He had set apart to glory;
it must be such a portion, and guess you what this must needs be.

5. It is such a portion, as must require the infinite power of God to support
a Creature to be able to bear the weight of that glory: it is such a portion.
And do you but think what kind of portion that must needs be?

6. All this must needs be now to all Eternity. I remember when Esau did but
hear Isaac his father tell what a blessing he had given unto Jacob, the Text
says, that Esau fell a weeping. Oh! that God would strike upon the hearts of
men that have so little minded any thing, but the present things of the world;
thou hear but a few words of what the Lord has reserved to all eternity for
his Saints, and compare but that with what is thy portion, and what is like to
be thy portion; and thou have cause to weep; I, but more cause you will have to
weep, if so be you consider the last thing.

Fifthly. What is like to be thy End, thy Portion is in this world; if indeed
thou could ruffle it out in this world, and enjoy thy hearts desire, and
there an end, it were somewhat: Oh but there is somewhat else remains
afterward: As first,

1. Oh the perplexity of Spirit that any worldly man will have, when Death
comes, when he shall see an end of all the comforts of this world, now farewell
house, and lands, and friends and acquaintance, and all merry meettings, and
jovialities, I shall never have comfort more in you. As it was the speech of
Pope Adrian, when he was to die; O thou my soul! my soul! whither art thou
going? whither art thou going? thou shall never have more jests, nor be merry,
nor be jocund any more; where art thou going? So may a man that has his
portion in this world here, say at his death, Where is this poor soul of mine
going? I have lived here thus many years, and I have had many merry meetings,
and I have eaten of the fattest, and drunk of the sweetest, and gone in brave
array, but now my day is gone, what shall become of me? what peace have I now
when all is gone? I remember Latimer has such a story in one of his Sermons
that he preached before King Edward, he tells a story of a rich man, that when
he lay upon his sick bed, there came one to him, and tells him that certainly by
all reasons they can judge by, That he was like to be a man for another world, a
dead man: As Soon as ever he hearts but these words, (they are Latimers words, I
only repeat them as his words, and they were before a King, and so they will
not be too broad words, nor too rude to speak before you; as soon as ever he did
but hear this) What must I die? send for a Physician; wounds, sides, heart,
must I die? wounds, sides, heart, must I die? and thus he goes on; and there
could be nothing got from him, but wounds, sides, heart, must I die? must I
die, and go from all these* here was all; here is the end of this man, that
makes his portion to be in this world. Another rich man that lived not far from
the place that I my self lived in heretofore, when he heard his sickness was
deadly, he sends for his bags of money, and hugs them in his arms, Oh! must I
leave you? Oh! must I leave you? And another, that when he lay upon his sick
bed, calls for his bags, and lays a bag of gold to his heart, and then bids
them take it away, it will not do, it will not do. Another when he lay upon his
sick bed, his friends came to him and said, What lack you? what would you have?
would you have any Beer? want you any thing? Oh no, (says he) I want only one
thing, Peace of Conscience; that I would have: it is not beer, nor friends, nor
an easy pillow I want, but ease of Conscience. Oh consider now, whether there
be not like to be perplexity in your Spirits?

2. You must be called to an Account for all; though (as I told you before) not
to account for the right to use, but for not right-using; and do but now think
with your selves, If you now have so much as you cannot reckon, how then will
you be able to reckon for it, if you cannot now reckon it? now you have so much
as you cannot count, how will you be able to give an account of what you have
now, especially when you have had no thoughts of this beforehand?

3. There is at last a dreadful portion indeed at the day of Judgment; Oh the
shame and confusion that will be upon the faces of the men of the world!
especially when they shall see perhaps their poor neighbors have their portion
with Christ, in glory: perhaps a poor boy, a poor servant in the house advanced
to glory, and they stand on the left hand to be cast out; perhaps some of these
poor Hospital boys shall be admitted to eternal glory, when as some of you
that are their great Masters, shall be cast out eternally; and what an infinite
shame and confusion would this be to you? Oh now I see what it is to trust in
God, and not to trust in him; these are happy that would trust for the future,
but I miserable that dare not trust in him: and then the conclusion what will
it be? in Psalm, 11. 6. The Lord will rain snares and fire and brimstone, and
this shall be the portion of their cup; here is the portion of the Ungodly at
last: and in Mat, 24. 51. Appoint him his portion with Hypocrites, where there
is weeping and gnashing of teeth; that is the portion of Hypocrites in the
conclusion; Now here thou see the End of all, what do thou think then of
thy portion now? Think but of one text and I have done this, in Job, 27. 8.
What hope has an Hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his
soul? Mark, there were many Hypocrites that aimed to get in the world, and
cannot get in the world, God crosses them here; well, but suppose thou aimest
at gain, and can get what thou would have, thou have got all thou would
desire, but what hope has an Hypocrite though he has gained, though he has
grown never so rich, and got all he desires, when God takes away his soul? This
time is coming, it will be ere long, and it may be ere long the portion of some
that are here present; and perhaps this Text of mine, may then ring in their
ears, when they lie upon their sick beds, perhaps within a month or six weeks,
or a quarter of a year, when Gods time shall be, and then this Sermon,
Conscience may repeat in your ears; I heard such a day, there were a generation
of men, that have their portion in this world, and now I am afraid I am one of
them, and there is an end of my portion, only I must go to my other portion;
that will be very dreadful. But I must not make an end, till I shall speak
somewhat of the next, I shall leave the Point very bare else; I, but who have
you spoke to all this while?

Fifthly, Who is the man that has his Portion in this world?

It is a poor portion you have set it out to us, but every one will go away and
say, I hope it is not I, I hope it is not I, I hope God has a better portion
for me than this; therefore give me leave to speak in the Name of God to you,
and I Will only speak from God, and out of His Word to you, to point out the man
and woman, that is like to have his portion here, living and dying in such a
Condition, I now am speaking of; that man that is in such a condition I shall
open to you, in the present condition wherein he is, is certainly the man, and
the Lord pronounces it this day, that his portion is in this world. Who is he?

1. That man to whom God gives in this life nothing but what belongs to this
life; that is the man apparently: If God give thee thy estate, and if He give
thee not somewhat besides thy estate, a principle that is a seed of Eternal
life in thee here in this world, certainly He never intends good to thee in the
world to come; There are many men have a great deal in this world, and they
say, they hope God will be merciful to them in the world to come; now this is a
certain truth, that man to whom God denies Spiritual mercies in this world, God
will deny Eternal mercy to him in the world to come; this therefore should be
thy care, Does God increase my estate in this world? Oh that the Lord would
give a proportionable measure of grace too, else it is nothing; Lord thou
give me here a great estate, if thou give not to me grace with it, a
proportionable measure of grace to use it to thy glory, I had better have been
without this; Is this thy care? I put it to thy conscience; As thy estate
increases, art thou solicitious at the Throne of grace, that the Lord would
give thee a proportionable measure of grace, to manage thy estate for His
glory; then peace be to thee, thou art not the man. And then further, you may
examine it.

2. By the working of your hearts about your present Portions. As first.

1. Whether you enjoy what you have for it self, and whether your hearts be
terminated in what you do enjoy: One that is godly, and has his Portion beyond
these things, he enjoyes the Creature; I but it is God in it he enjoyes: It is
sweet to me, that I can see and taste the love of God in it: I but a carnal
heart enjoys the creatures, and runs away, and is terminated there, looks at
the Creature, but at little in God; as diverse of your Hospital Children, here,
look more at the Men that were their friends, to bring them into the Hospital,
when they were Fatherless and Motherless, and Sisterless, than they look at the
Founders of the Hospital, they little think of them, to thank God for them, but
if they meet with him, that was the next cause to bring them in, they will
thank him for his kindness. So it is with men, they look at that Creature that
was the first means of bringing them in; but a godly heart looks at the root of
all: I remember it is said of one that came into the Treasuries of Venice, he
saw tables of Gold, and Silver there, and he points down and looks at the
bottom of the table, and one asked him, Why is your eye so at the bottom? Oh
says he, I am looking at the root of all this. Oh! alas, it is a small matter
for a man that has a great Trade to have a great Portion: So many men, look
not so much at the Root; whereas a godly man, though he has but a little, yet
he looks at the Root, at the love of God, and the Covenant of grace, that is
the Root of all; and this is the thing that satisfies his heart: When a man
takes a portion of physic, he puts it into the Posset-ale, the Posset-ale is
not the thing that makes the Physic work, though it is that that is the
greater part, but it is the Physic in it. So it is the goodness of God that
satisfies a gracious heart, and not the Creature that is operative so much upon
a gracious heart: and then you may examine how your hearts are set upon these
things of the world.

2. Whether your hearts go out with full strength to them; If you make your
bellies to be your god, then your end will be destruction (as the Apostle
speaks:) That man that has his heart swallowed up in the earth like Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, that were swallowed up in the earth, if the things of the
earth be a gulf to swallow thy heart up, there is another gulf to swallow thee
up hereafter.

3. How do the loss of the things of the world take thy heart? Do not thou
count thy self an undone man, when thou have lost some comforts? Do not thou
come home to thy wife and children, and say, I am an undone man: Why? what is
the matter? I have lost some part of my estate: O carnal heart! one that is
gracious may have some crosses, but no losses at all, because he enjoyes all in
God, he has God to make up all his losses: And the truth is, if thou were
truly godly, whatsoever afflictions thou meetest withal; (as we say a man may
put all in his eye) so you may (if you be godly) put all your crosses in your
eyes, you are so far from being undone. And further examine,

4. Whether these things of the world, be not the only suitable things to your
hearts; whether you bless not your selves in these, as in your happiness: The
Ivy will clasp about a rotten tree, and cannot be taken off it without
tearing: And so the heart of a worldling will clasp about these rotten-comforts
as the only agreeable thing; You may hear them sometimes tell with joy, That we
were in such a place, and we were so merry, and had the bravest meeting: And
what was there? Why there was singing, and roaring, and blaspheming of the Name
of God, and yet it was the bravest meeting that could be. When did you ever
come from an Ordinance of God, and say, Oh! it was a brave day to me, the Lord
has spoken to my heart this day: Did you never go from the Word with as merry
a heart, and can rejoice for it amongst your friends, as you did from a merry
meeting? You may fear you are the man, that have your portion here. And then
this is more clear, for every one to examine his heart in, and if I were to give
but any one Evidence, whether a man has Grace or no, I would give this as soon
as any one; A man that has got some estate in the world, I put this to him:

5. What do thou account to be the chiefest good of thy estate, more than
thou had before, or more than another man has? A man that has got an estate
more than he had, or more than his brother: there are many good things in his
estate, that he will think good; Now I may live in better fashion than I could
before, now I may have more freedom than I had before, now I may have more
credit in the world than I had before, now I may have my own mind, and satisfy
my own lusts more than I had before, or than another man can do; Is not this
the thing thou most rejoycest in? yea, is not this a truth, that some of your
hearts, if they were ripped up, this would be the language of them; that you
must rejoice in your estates, because by them you have fuel for your lusts? A
poor man has not so much fuel for his uncleanness as you have, nor so much
fuel for his lust of pride and malice as you have; and many rich men account
the blessing, the good, and happiness of their estates to consist in this very
thing; that now they may have a larger scope for their lusts, than ever they
could before; alas a poor man cannot go abroad and drink as you can do, a poor
man cannot lay out so much money on a Whore, an Unclean wretch, as you can do,
and you rejoice in this: and if this man have not his portion here, what man
has? the Lord strike such a man's heart. But on the other side, A gracious
heart when God blesses him in this world, though there be but a little grace,
it will work thus, The Lord has raised my condition above my brother, and
therein the Lord gives me a larger opportunity to do him service, than my
brother has or than I had before; there is such a poor man, he is an honest
man, but God knows he can do but little in the place where he is, he has but
little means: but God has given me means, and this means enlarges my
opportunity to do God service, and for this my soul blesses God; I count my
estate happier in this, because I now may be of more use, and do God more
service than otherwise I could do; Have you such workings in heart, you rich
men? if you have not never be at quiet til you get your hearts working in this
manner; this will be a blessed testimony that God gives you a portion here, and
intends another portion for you in the world hereafter.

6. What is that thing that you strive to make most sure? That which a man
strives to make most sure, that he counts his happiness to consist in; Oh for
thy Land, and Debts, thou strivest with all thy might to make that sure, but as
for the matter of thy Salvation, and peace in Christ, thou have a good hope in
God for, but take no pains to make it sure.

7. What do thou admire most men for? O! such a man is happy, he has so much
coming in, and has so much a year: But do thou call the vile man happy? it
is a sign that thou have not thine eye enlightened by the Spirit of God; but
now, Can thou look upon even those that are poor, and mean in this world,
that have the least portion here, yet as most happy Creatures, because the Lord
gives them the Grace of His Spirit; and think, well, it is true, I have a
greater estate than such a poor man that is my neighbor, or than such a poor
man, but God knows he does God more service than I do, he prays more, and more
heartily in one day than I do in a whole year: Oh! the Lord has other manner of
prayers, and sighs come from his poor Cottage, than ever he had from my brave
Palace; I have my City-house, and Country House, but they were never so
perfumed with prayers; Some that live in poor Cellers, send up more prayers,
and God has more honor from them, than He has from me; in my family (perhaps)
there is cursing, and blaspheming of God; in such poor Cottages there is
(perhaps) blessing, and praising of God. Now see if thou look upon them as
the most happy people in the world.

8. What, art thou careful to lay up for thy Children? That is like to be thy
portion; If the things of the world take up thy care for thy children most,
that is an argument, thou think thy Children have a good portion, if thou
can leave them so many thousands, it is like it is thy portion too, if thou
countest it theirs. And then further,

9. Examine thy services what they are:

1. Do thou put off God with slight services? Then know thy portion is like
to be of Gods slight mercies.

2. Art thou hypocritical in thy service? Do thou aim at the praise of men in
outward duties? That is a sign thou have thy reward here.

3. And are thy services forced, that thou art compelled? Is it merely
conscience compels thee, and not an inward agreeableness between the frame of
thy heart, and holy things? Then it is like a servants portion is thine, and not
a child's portion.

10. Further, Have thou heretofore been a forward Professor in Religion, and
have thou forsaken the ways of God? I Will give you a dreadful Scripture for
this, In Jer. 17. 13. All you that forsake the Lord, shall come to be ashamed,
and they that depart from him, shall be written in the earth. All that depart
from God shall be written in the earth. If thou have been forward heretofore,
and now thou come to be more ancient, thou art dead, and dull, and careless,
here is a Text for thee, go home and tremble lest thou be a man, whose name is
written in the earth.

11. Does not God for the present Curse thy portion? thou find the more thou
have, the worse thou growest; As if a man should eat meat at ones table, and
as soon as he has eaten it, begin to swell, he will conclude certainly the meat
was poisoned: So when thy estate rises, thy heart rises with pride, surely it
was poisoned with the curse of God that was in it.

12. Examine thy heart by this, whether has God convinced thee, of that which
stops the great Current of His mercy, I spoke of even now; that soul that has
its portion in this world, looks no further but to Gods general bounty, and
looks not to what stops the great Current of Gods grace, he is not brought to
be sensible of his need of Christ, and of his satisfaction unto Divine Justice;
but now the heart of God intends Eternal good too, such a heart the Lord causes
to understand that there is such an infinite breach between God and it, as
cannot be made up, but only by the Meditation of the Son of God; and therefore
Lord, it is not in any righteousness of mine, nor in any thing of any creature
in Heaven and Earth can do it, that I expect to have my portion from, but in
the Mediation of the Son of God; that I look after, and my heart closes with
that Mediation, and I look upon that as the spring of all my worth; He is a man
indeed that is not like to have his portion in this world, and I Will only name
that one more, What say thou to this?

13. That man that spends his days without having some fear, lest God should
put him off with the things of this world; there may be some danger of that:
Jude, 12. it is said of some, That they did feed themselves without fear. You
can go now to a merry meeting, and can go and feed upon the cheer, and you eat
without fear, you will never have such a thought in your heart, What if God should
put me off with these things? I hear indeed there are some men are put off so,
what if it should prove to be my portion? what a miserable creature were I? I
fear there are some men never had such a thought in their lives; What if it
should prove so, what a miserable creature were I? The wicked are described to
be men that eat without fear; and thus we have done the Fifth Thing: There is
only the Sixth, and that is,

Sixthly. Exhortation to you all, and then I have done all: And this
Exhortation it must be divided.

First, Unto you that have some Evidences that God has given you a better
Portion, that God has not put you off with the Portion of this world.

1. Oh bless the Lord for His goodness to you; the Lord He has showed you
better things than these are, your line is fallen into a good ground, you have
a goodly inheritance. When David looked at the prosperity of wicked men, his
conclusion is, in Psalm. 73. 13. I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocence; but guide me with Thy Counsel, and afterward bring me to
Thy glory.

2. Be content with thy portion here, do not murmur and repine, for though thou
have not so much as others have, yet thou have that that will make thee happy
for ever; I remember that Hierom in one of his Epistles, tells of one Dydimus,
that was a learned godly Preacher, but blind; Alexander comes to him, meeting
of him, and asks him, What, are you not troubled for want of sight? And he
indeed confessed, it was a very sore affliction to him; then Alexander begins
and chides him, What has God given you that that is the excellency of an
Apostle, of a Minister of Christ, and are you troubled for want of your sight,
that a pismire may have, that a brute beast, yea the very Pismires; the want of
thy sight, of that that Mice and Rats may have? are you troubled at that, and
rather not taught for to bless God that has given you so great a mercy, as to
make you such an instrument in his service? So may I say to you that are godly,
Has God given you Jesus Christ? has God given you His Son? has He given you
His Spirit? has He given you Himself to be your portion? And are you troubled
that you have no more of that that beasts may have as well as your selves? Oh
be ashamed of any mournful discontentments for want of the comforts of this
world. And then;

3. Do not envy at any wicked men for their portion. I remember a story that I
have heard of a poor Soldier, that was condemned to die, merely for taking a
bunch of Grapes from a Vine; for there was a strict Law, that whosoever should
take anything from that place they went thorough, should die for it; and he had
taken a bunch of Grapes, and he was condemned to die, and as he went to
Execution, he went eating of the bunch of Grapes, and some came to him, and
said, Thou should 'st think of somewhat else: he answered, I beseech you Sirs,
do not envy me my Grapes, they will cost me dear. So may I say of all the men
of the world, we have no need to envy them for any thing they have, it will
cost them very dear. And lastly.

4. Do you live like such as God has not put off with the Portion of this
world? Manifest it in your conversations, that you look for higher and better
things, than the things of this world, show they are but slight in your eyes:
Zebulun and Naphtali did jeobard their lives, they did look upon their lives as
little worth for that cause: So look upon your estates as dispicable, be
willing to improve them all for the public good, in a public cause, yea, to
jeobard not Estates only, but your Names, your Liberties, and your Lives; and
those that shall do so, those whom God has given hearts to do so amongst you,
perhaps some of you may look upon them, as men in a sad condition, Oh such a
man in such a place, is looked upon, and he is like to be undone, if not his
life in danger; but such a one that shall out of a good principle be willing to
venture his life and estate, and appear in a good Cause, that man shall be most
honored, and looked upon as the most happy man of all; and indeed herein he
shows himself to be a man that looks for an higher portion than these things
here: as those in Heb. 11. 14. By that they said and did, they showed plainly,
they looked for another Country. So, see you men that might live as comfortably
for outward things as you, and (did their consciences give way) they could be
as quiet as you, but conscience puts them upon it, that seeing God calls them to
a public place, they should be content to put all at Gods feet; now though you
may think it hard, and they are in most danger, they show plainly they are men
of another country, and should be most honored; and take but this principle
with you, The more any one gives up his estate, the more comfort he has in his
estate, whether in the enjoyment of it, or in the loss of it: I express it
thus, When one resigns up all he has, his Estate, Liberty, Name, Life to God,
the oftener it comes into Gods hands, the better it comes when God gives him
them again; A carnal heart when once he has these things, he will not trust
God with them, but he will have them at his own keeping: but now a gracious
heart, though he has all these from God, yet every day he is willing to give
up all to God, and to trust God with them again; though he be a rich man, he is
willing every day to come and beg his bread at his fathers gate, and give up
all; now he gives up all in the truth of his heart to God, and God gives him it
all again; so long as in a lawful way he enjoyes it, he has it afresh from
God; now this I say, The oftener any thing comes out of Gods hand, the sweeter
and better it is! wicked men's estates come but once out of Gods hands, and
therefore there is not so much comfort in them; but a godly man's estate comes
an hundred and an hundred times from God, for every resignation gives it to
God, and God gives it him again; and therein is comfort: and Oh! blessed are
they that live so, as that they declare they look for another Country, and that
their Portion is not here; let the men of the world think them foolish; that
they will venture themselves so; God and His Saints, have declared that their
Portion is not here.

Secondly, To you all; the word of Exhortation from God is: That every one in
this place would put on to make more sure of another Portion, besides the
Portion here in this world.

Put on: Why?

First, You are all made capable of higher and better things than the things of
the world are; never a one here, but has an immortal soul, and therefore is
capable of communion with Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and that is another
manner of business, than to eat and drink, and have pleasure with the flesh
here a while; Has God made your Natures capable of such glory? Do not debase
your selves, and that Humanity God has put into you, to satisfy your selves
with husks, when there is meat enough in your fathers house; and He may be your
father for ought I know: and therefore, put on. And,

Secondly, Let the poorest sort put on, to have but a little portion here, yet
there is as fair a way for you to have the God of Heaven and Earth to be your
Portion, to have whatsoever Jesus Christ has purchased by His blood to be your
Portion, to have Heaven, and Eternity, and Immortallity to be your Portion; (I
say) there is as fair a way for it, as for the greatesest Prince in the Earth;
you may come to have a Portion: Here indeed many a poor Apprentise may say, My
Father is dead, and has left me no Portion. I but you that are poor
Apprentises and others, and the poor Hospital Boys, that live upon Charity,
It Is possible some poor wretches there may have their portion in God, and
Christ, and Immortallity, as well as the greatest and richest of all; therefore
raise up your hearts here, you that are the poorest and meanest; and know, you
are born for high things: If I should come and tell one that is a poor Boy in a
blew Coat; Whatsoever you are now, there is such a rich man will adopt you to
be his Child, and make you his Heir; that would raise up his heart: Well, how
meanly soever you live now, you may be a glorious Creature hereafter; if so be
you have an heart to put upon it, and to seek after it for your portion: Then
you will say, Lord, what should we do, that our portion should be an higher
portion than in this world? The First thing I would put you upon, is this:

1. Let the whole Course of your life be steered (as it were) with the fear of
God, lest that this should be all that you have; as it was a sign before, so
now I may make use of it as a means; (I say) let your course of life be steered
(as it were) with the fear of God, lest that God with this should put you off:
hold forth this in every action, that any one may see by your Conversation,
surely this man, this woman has some fears, lest God should put them off with
a portion in this world: And especially you that have great portions in this
life, and you know you have done God little service; you know there are many
poor people that live upon Alms have done God more service than you; you have
most cause to fear; They that are Rulers, and Governors have most cause to
fear, unless they have mighty good evidence in their hearts: Chrysostom upon
the 13. of the Hebrews, speaking of those that are Governors; I wonder that
any Governor should be saved: he has such a speech there; we will not say so,
but he says so, there is a great deal of hazard: Christ tells us too, that a
man that has a great portion in this world, though it is possible he may have
more hereafter, yet it is doubtful. It is the Counsel of one, to a King of
Portingal, (says he) I desire you to grant me this favor, that every day you
would but think of this Text, What profits it a man. If he should gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul. Spend some little time every day, to think of
this Text, and pray to God that he would give you, the true understanding and
sense of this Text, and let it be the conclusion of al your prayers, that God
would show you what there is in this Text, what shall it profit a man, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul; The same counsel I give to
you, Daily pray to God, to make you understand what there is in this Text, that
there are men that have their portion in this world.

2. Labor to take off your hearts from all these outward comforts that are
here; take off your spirits: He that will be rich shall fall into many
temptations: Know it is not necessary (so you should conclude every one in your
own hearts, it is not necessary) I should have estate in this world, but it is
necessary I should make my peace up with God: it is necessary I should provide
for my soul, but how things are with me here there is no great necessity. And
then;

3. Set you the glory of Heaven and Eternity daily before your eyes, and be
trading for higher things than these are: you that are great Merchants, you are
trading for thousands; when as many poor people now that go up and down in the
streets, and cry some mean thing, they think well if they can get eighteen
pence in a whole day, carrying things upon their heads, and crying in the
streets: but a rich Merchant can go out in the morning, and make a bargain, and
perhaps get five hundred pound in an hour: he is trading for somewhat like. So
the men of this world are like the poor women that go with things, about upon
their heads, and get eighteen pence in a day; but a godly man has communion
with God, and in a quarter of an hour gets that he would not lose for hundreds,
nor for thousands. It was a speech of Cleopatra to Anthony; Why Anthony thou
art not to fish for Gudgeons, and Trouts, but thou art to angle for Castles,
and Towers, and Forts, and Cities, thou art to fish for them; so may I say, If
thou have an immortal soul within thee, thou art not so much to angle for to
make provision for the flesh, for meat, and drink, and clothes, etc. but for
Heaven, and Immortality, set that continually before thine eyes. And the next
thing is this.

4. Honor God with thy substance here; lay out thy portion here for God: and Oh
that I could but convince you of one Principle of Divinity more, and that is
this, That there is more excellency and good in one virtuous Action, than there
is in all the creatures in Heaven and Earth, (besides the works of Angels and
others of the Saints, excepting them:) Take all Creatures, Sun, Moon, Stars,
Seas, Earth, all the riches in the world, Pearls, put all together, this is the
true Divinity, (I say) that there is more excellency in one virtuous Action,
than there is if thou had all these things to be thy possession; If men were
convinced of this, they would be abundant in good works then: Thou think it
a brave thing, thou have so much coming in by the year; do but one good action
for God out of an upright principle, and there is more excellency in that one
action, than there is in thy estate, if thou had ten thousand times more
added to it: Certainly, this will make them that are rich, to be rich in good
works; so the Scripture says, Charge them that are rich in this world, that
they be rich in good works: There is a richness in good works, as well as in an
estate; Oh! improve, lay out thy estate for God: Ambrose I remember upon that
place, his Sermons upon the rich man, says he, Is it not more honor that so
many children shall ask of you as their father, than that so many pieces of
gold shall call you their lord? These pieces of gold they do (as it were) call
you lord, and there are two or three children shall call you father; Is there
not more excellency to have a couple of poor Orphants while you are alive in
this world, to call you father, than to have so many bags of gold call you
master? Oh therefore lay out your Portion, Give a portion to six and to seven.
In 2 Cor. 9. 8. there the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that God should make
them abundant in all Grace; fill you with Grace that you may abound in all
sufficiency: But what for? In the 11. verse. being enriched in every thing in
all bountifulness; and then verse 12. for the administration of this service;
that you may be enriched in all bountifulness; Wherefore? for the
administration of this service: Now the words in the Greek are, for the
administration of this Leturgie: so the words are in the Greek, that you may
abound, and have all grace to abound in the administration of this Leturgie. My
brethren, Oh how happy were it if so be that men were plentiful in this Divine
Service, that I am speaking of, and well verc'd in this Leturgie: the Apostle
calls bounty, a leturgie, the service of God, that is Divine Service indeed,
that is a happy Leturgie to be well verc'd in, and to be abundantly verc'd in
this kind of Leturgie; for so the words are in the Greek; and then again, If
you would not be put off with this portion in the world;

5. Be sure that all the services you perform to God be choice services; If you
expect choice mercies, let you services be choice services; be sure your works
be supernatural works; You Will say, How shall I know that? If I had time I could
make it out clear to you, but only thus, A supernatural work is that which has
a supernatural Principle, aims at a supernatural End, and done in a
supernatural manner; A supernatural Principle, that is grace that makes it
suitable to my heart, and not only that I do it out of conviction of conscience;
and a supernatural End, that I aim at God, and not at myself; but the
supernatural manner, what is that? I remember Seneca in giving of his rule, how
to know the affections, when they are Natural, and when not, (says he) you
shall know a natural affection by this, If it be kept within bounds, it is
natural; if it be out of bounds, it is not natural: I Will make use of it in
another way, When you come to the service of God, if you think to limit God in
His service, this is but a natural service, you will go so far, and there stop;
but if it be supernatural service, you will let out your hearts (if it were
possible) infinitely to God; you cannot be infinite, that is true; but you will
propound no bounds, no limits to your service; and this is indeed the truth of
Grace, when it has the impression of Gods infinitness upon it; Gods
infinitness is that, whereby He is without all limits; So where God sets no
limits, there the soul is without all limits, and bounds in the way of Grace;
that is, desires to answer God (if it were possible) by an infinite way; these
are supernatural works: And then, Would you not have your Portion in this world?

9. Be willing to cast away whatever of your portion you have got sinfully: I
in the Name of God charge this as a special thing to take home with you;
whatsoever man or woman in this place, would not have his portion in this
world, but would have his portion in the world to come, whatsoever of his
portion he has got in a sinful way, cast it away presently, never sleep with
it, lie not down one night with it: That Is an old rule, but a true one, All the
repentance you have in the world, and all your sorrowing for your sin, will
never obtain pardon without restitution, if you be able; Unless you do what you
are able to restore, you can never have comfort, or the pardon of that sin; If
you have go it when you were young, Apprentices, first set up, away with it,
else it will spoil all, you will never have any other portion from God; These
hands of mine had once that given to them, to be a means to convey, to restore
that which was got wrongfully, fifty years before, the wrong was done fifty
years ago, and after fifty years, the Conscience of the man troubles him, and
he comes to bring, to restore that wrong, and desires it may be conveyed to
such a place, where he had done wrong; know therefore, that all the sweet
morsels that any time you have so delightfully got down, they must up again,
and therefore willingly let them go up; resolve before you go out of this
place, whatsoever thou have gotten wrongfully, never keep it against thy will,
but do it willingly, else thou can not have any comfort in the portion thou
have, nor have any portion in the world to come; if there be any true Divinity
in the world, this is true Divinity: and yet it is hard to convince any
Covetous men, that have got much this way; and if there be any wrong, those
that have done wrong in things be trusted to them, as those that are Masters of
Hospitals, be sure you keep not that, for certainly you will curse the time you
ever took it; and therefore let the charge of God be strong upon you this day,
to cast out whatsoever you have got falsely. I read in a story of one that upon
a time, hearing that place of Scripture, in Isa. 5. 8. read, Woe to them that
join house to house: he bursts out into a loud cry, If woe be to them that join
house to house, Then woe to me, and to my children. So upon this that you hear
this day, There are a company shall have their portion in this world, and
especially those that will keep any thing they have wrongfully got, many may
have cause to say, Woe to us then, and unto our children.

7. Be willing to join with those that have suffered for God; If you would have
your portion in another life, be willing to join with the sufferers for Christ;
So Moses did, though he were in the way to preferment, yet he did choose rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; join rather with them, than with jolly blades of the world; It is
safer to join with the sufferers, than to join with those that are the jolly
and brave spirits. And so I have done, only desiring that the Lord would settle
all home upon your spirits; If so be, because something may not be so pleasing
to the pallat of every one, as some other, but if for that you should reject
what has been said, and go away, and slight this Word of God, know that this
Text one day, may prove to be as scalding lead in your Consciences; and that
that is said concerning Doeg, in Psalm, 57. 2. may prove to be your portion; it
is spoken of Doeg; This is the man (says the Psalmist) that did not make God
his trust, but trusted in his great riches; this is the man; So you may be
pointed out one day, This is the man: Doeg was a great Courtier, and because he
was an Officer of King Saul's, and because he had his favor, he trusted in the
favor of the King, and in his riches, and what did he care for David? Yea, by
the Text it appears he was one that made some show of Religion too, in the 1 of
Sam. 21. 7. He was detained before the Lord: Tremelius thinks, either out of
some Religious vow, or to keep the Sabbath, or somewhat concerning the Law, he
was detained before the Lord, and yet he was a vile Malignant against David,
and all because he trusted in the great countenance he had at Court: Now this
is the man that made not God his trust, but that trusted in his great riches:
the Lord forbid this Scripture should be made true of any of you; I leave this
Text with you that are rich men, take heed you trust not in your great riches,
I leave this Text with you, that are in places of dignity and honor; take heed
you have not your portion in this world. I leave this Text to Voluptuous men,
given up to pleasures; take heed you hear not one day, this, Son, remember, in
thy lifetime thou had thy pleasure. I leave this with those that dare not
trust God for a portion to come. And above all, I leave this with all
Hypocrites, let them take heed it be not said to them, Here is your reward.
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS
THE ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
ABuse, see Body Adam First Adam, what he was, and what he should have been,
had he stood Page 43 The state of Adam compared with the state of the Saints 44
Admiration Admiration of Saints and Angels 90 Adrian Adrian the Pope, his
woeful death 339 Alexanders rebuke 349 Angels Angels are the Saints keepers 155
Angels, see Love, Honor Anger Anger must be avoided 38 Arbitrary Arbitrary
Government, and the differences of it 324 Antichrist Antichrists great design
49 Argument, see Gospel
B
Beginning Beginings of sin to be feared 83 Believers Believers draw strength
from Christ 45 Believers should manifest Christ in their actions Ibid Believers
cannot fall away 46 Believers are not without mixture of evil ib. Believers
under the Law, were as children under age 100 Believers under the Gospel are
children of full age ib Believers must not be of earthly hearts, and why 270
Believe The manner how to believe 76 Bishops, see Prelates Blood The Blood of
Christ takes us off from vain conversations 98 Body The body of sin must be
mortified 39 The body of sin is unknown to Nature 40 Abuse not your bodies, and
why? 92 Boldness, see Saints Boniface Boniface his answer 288 Bowels Bowels of
mercy beseem the Gospel 71 Branch, see Christ
C
Canaan The Land of Canaan a type of Heaven 47 Carelessness, see Profession
Christians Carnal Carnal worship opposes the soul of godliness 49 Carnal, see
Weapons, Heart Ceremonies Ceremonies condemned, and why 97 Chastisement
Chastisements for sin, what they are 148 Children, see Believers Christ Christ's
love known in the Gospel 69 Christ is the mercy of all mercies 70 Christ's kept
the Law, and why? 78 Christ's self denial 93 Christ is the Root, and we are the
Branches 103 Christ's is a great King 116 Christ God-man, governs all things,
and why? 136 Christ's Rule 139 Christ's Law ibid See Dependence, Subjects, and
Peace Christians Christians must be careful of their families 19 Christians
should eye those whose Conversations are above them 29 Christians subject to
grow careless by degrees 31 Church Church of God as a City 3 Circumvent We must
not circumvent one another 275 Citizen A Citizen's wretch'd speech. 320 Civil
Civil men's worship of God 35 Companions, see Tribulation Compulsion, see
Persecution. Conscience Liberty of Conscience the way to procure it 22
Contentment Motives to contentment 349 Conversation The meaning of this word
CONVERSATION 3 What Conversation becomes the Gospel 5 Our Conversation must be
looked to after conversion 7 Conversation becoming the Gospel 57 How our
Conversation should be manifested 350 What Conversation becomes the Gospel 115
See Image, Wanton Cook Cook his opinion of the Martyrs 308 Covetousness
Covetousness unbeseeming a Saint 270 Customs Old Customs an hindrance to
spiritual worship 100
D
Days Difference between days of fasting and thanksgiving, and holy days 99
See Observing Danger, see Help Deceivers Self- Deceivers how? 13 Dependence No
dependence between the Kingdom of Christ, and this world 284 Design, see Gospel
Despair The reason of despair 75 Despise Despise not the meanest of men 92
Difference Difference which the Gospel makes 122 Difference between Saints and
worldly men 312 Divisions Divisions, whence they come 105 Duty, see Time Dying
Dying one for another becomes the Gospel 58
E
Elevation Elevation of spirit upon what ground 91 Enmity How enmity against
God is kept up 15 Epistle The Saints should be the Epistles of Christ. 113
Eternal life Little mention of Eternal life in the Old Testament 110 Excellency
The Excellency of a Saints portion wherein it consists 354 Eyes The eyes of all
are upon Professors 23 What the eyes of a Christian should be set upon 354
F
Faith Faith acts upon Christ as a King as well as a Savior 135 Necessity of
living by faith 285 Fleshly-lusts Fleshly lusts unsuitable to the Gospel 102
G
Gentiles, see Partition German The speech of a German Divine 137 God Gods
willingness to be at peace with man 63 See Hatred, Love, Glory People, Mercy
God is full of goodness 64 How the utmost of Gods glory is manifested 90 Godly
Why godly men are willing to live 2 Gospel What the Gospel is 3
Gospel-Conversation, what it is 38 Gospel Obedience proceeds from love 40
Difference between the Law of Adam and the Gospel 41 Those that live under the
Gospel must live in an higher way of holiness than those that lived under the
Law 42 The great Design of the Gospel 54 The Gospel calls for love 58
Gospel-arguments are the strongest arguments 69 Difference between the Gospel
and the light of Nature 73 See Law, Malice, Christ, Conversation, Dying,
Bowels, Wanton, Worship, Believers, Power. Government, see Arbitrary. Great
ones, see Religion.
H
Hard-hearted, see Monster Hatred Gods hatred of sin, how to know it 81 Heart.
Carnal hearts will not trust God 351 Help Helps against the danger of the times
24 Holy Ghost The Holy Ghost dwells in our bodies 90 Honor How the honor of
Religion is kept up 15 More honor put upon Men than upon Angels 89
I
Jews The error of the Jews about Christ's Kingdom 117 See Partition Image How
man holds out the Image of God Injustice A remedy against Injustice 77
Institution Whereon institution of Worship depends 21 Institution is the rule
of Worship 141 Justice Gods Justice is no loser by His Mercy 74
K
King Wherein the Kings of the earth are not like Christ 137 See Christ,
Subjects. Kingdom Christ's Kingdom is not of this world 116 Why Christ's Kingdom
is not of this world 157 When the Kingdoms of this world shall be submitted to
Christ 150 See Dependence
L
Latimer Latimers story 339 Law The Law of God goes higher than the light of
Nature, and how? 41 The Law considered under two Considerations 42 The Law
given to Adam, what it was 43 Difference between the Law of Adam, and the Law
given by Moses, 47 Difference between the Law given by Moses, and the Gospel.
ibid They under the Law had something of the Gospel ibid See Gospel, Christ,
Worship, and Believers Leturgie True Leturgie, what it is. 355 Liberty, see
Conscience Light of Nature, see Nature Life, see Spirit Looseness, see
profession Love The love of God is more to men than to Angels 53 The love of
God should work an answerable love in us 54 See Testimony and Christ Lusts, see
Flesh Luther Luthers opinion of the Turkish Empire 306 Luthers's Protestation
334
M
Magistrates How Magistrates are helpful to the Church 140 Malice Malice is
unbeseeming the Gospel 58 Man, see World Mercy Mercy must be real, not verbal.
71 Gods infinite mercy 286 Gods Mercy undervalued by worldly men ibid See
Transcendant, Christ, Bowels Ministers Ministers of the Gospel, what they are 4
Ministers ought to rule over none but those they teach 30 Ministers should be
eminent in their Conversations every way ibid Ministers Charge over souls. 88
Mixture What mixture is in worldly portions 336 Monsters Hard-hearted
Christians are monsters 71 Moses, see Law
N
Nature Light of Nature, its extent. 33 Difference between the light of Nature
before the fall, and since 41 Light of Nature shows something of the mercy of
God 69 Necessity, see Faith
O
Obedience The Obedience of a Believer, is of an higher nature than Adams in
his innocence 44 Observing Observing days forbidden 98 Old, see Customs
Opinions What Opinions are not to be tolerated 327 Opposed World opposed to
Saints 272 Overseeing, see Visitation
P
Papists Papists reproved 287 Parliament The PARLIAMENT defended 324 Partition
The partition wall between Jew and Gentile, taken down 66 Peace We should love
peace 65 Peace with our Brethren, what it should be 68 Difference between the
worlds peace and Christ's 155 Why men should have peace upon any terms 323 See
God, and Seek People Why Gods People are mean in this world 277 Perfection
Perfection comes by suffering 279 Persecution Persecution unlawful 283
Persecution opposed 326 Pope A mortal choice of Popes 328 Portion Why wicked
men have a portion 304 The worlds portion described. 329 Rules to know who has
his portion only in this life 341 See Excellency Power What the power of the
Gospel is 123 Prelates Prelates reproved 287 Privileges Privileges of the
Saints 152 Profession The reason why some men's profession vanishes 14 Looseness
of profession what mischief it does 16 The miseries attending a loose
profession 18 Why forward professors turn persecutors 19 See Eyes Promises
Difference between the promises of the Gospel, and Adams promises 45
R
Reason We are not to live altogether according to reason 67 Reason discovers
some sin 80 Reconciliation Reconciliation to God 65 Rebels How the Saints are
Rebels. 280 Redemption What the Redemption of a soul is. 86 Religion Religion
comes to nothing without consideration of the duties of relation 25 Why
Religion is so little regarded by great ones 319 See Honor, Weapons Repentance
Repentance is a mighty work 87 Repentance is out of our power 85 Root, see
Christ
S
Saints The Saints shall condemn the world 12 The Saints may come to the Throne
of grace with boldness 50 The Saints shall judge the world 272 See Rebels,
Difference Seek Seek for peace 66 Self-denial, see Christ Selvishness
Selvishness unbeseeming a Saint 94 Schism What Schism is 108 Services Gods
services are choice services 356 Sin Sin harbored in thought produces sinful
actions 29 No sin is little 82 The wages of sin is death ib. See Hatred and
Beginings Socrates Socrates his rebuke 331 Soul Souls Immortallity proved 1
Souls pawned to the Devil 86 See Worth, and Redemption Strength Strength drawn
from Christ 45 Strive We must strive together, not asunder 105 Spirit The life
of the Spirit, what it is 102 Subjects Difference between Christ's subjects and
the subjects of other Kings 138 Suffering, see Perfection
T
Temptations Particular temptations must be looked to 27 Tenure The tenure men
hold the world by 335 Testimonies Testimonies of Gods love to us 55 Testimonies
of our love to God 56 Time The time sanctifies the duty 99 Transcendent The
mercies of God are transcendent 69 Tribulation We have Companions in
Tribulation 278 Turkish Empire, see Luther
U
Unity Unity of the Saints 105 Visitation Visitation of the wicked, what it is
10
W
Wanton Wanton Conversation becomes not the Gospel 71 Well-doing Well-doing
stops the mouths of wicked men 11 Well-doing converts men ibid Weapons Carnal
weapons not to be used in defense of Religion 145 Wicked Wicked men do
something for God 305 See Portion Wickedness Wickedness is unbeseeming
Professors 128 The wickedness of the world. 281 Works Our good works should
shine before men 8 Difference between doing of good works that may be seen, and
doing good works that [they] may be seen ibid Women Women-Preachers, in what
sense lawful 9 Worship We must set up the Worship of God in our families 56 The
worship of the world is carnal 96 God will have as much worship under the
Gospel as under the Law ibid What worship becomes the Gospel 100 See
Institution Worth The worth of the soul 85 World How to know a man of this
world 263 See Peace, Opposed, Saints, People, Portion Worldly Why worldly men
are cunning 118 Worldly men, see Difference. Worldly portion, see Mixture.
Wronged We must seek peace of those that have wronged us 67
FINIS.

