THE DIFFERENCE Between the SPOTS of the GODLY, AND Of the WICKED.

Preached by Mr. JEREMIAH BUROUGHS at Cripple Gate.

LONDON Printed in the Year 1668.

Courteous Reader,
HEre thou have before thine eyes a little Manuel, taken by a Dextrous Baruch,
from the mouth of Jeremiah. By it, as Abel, though dead, he speaks; and
albeit the Carcass of the dead Lion lies rotting in the ground, yet his Name
and Doctrine yields, Sweetness. He needs no Herald to proclaim his praises.
His own works do sufficiently praise him in the Gates. Aaron and his Sons had
discerning spirits to destinguish the spots of Leprosy, shewing-which made
unclean, and which not; and this Author treads in their-steps, and, as a
judicious Critic, discerns between the precious and the vile, distinguishing
the Faint-spots of Weakness, from the Plague-spots of Wickedness, that so we
may cease from false plea's, and be found spotless at the great Day. He makes
no^ spots where were none, but seeks to cleanse them where they are, by the
sweet Calls of Admonition and Reproof: If he discover thy secret spots and
sores, like the good Samarit an, he will give thee oil and wine to cure them.
Some spots are inconsistent with grace, and if not cleansed, they will be thy
death, even Plague-sores that will eternally separate thee from God. Come
therefore, and purchase this little Treatise, which may be of great and eternal
concernment, helping thee to be found of the Lord Christ at the last day,
without spot, and blameless.

The First SERMON. July the 6th, 1645.
Deuteronomy. 32. 5. Their spot is not the spot of his Children.
THE words read, is a part of Moses Song, that he sung a little before he was
to die; (like the Swan that sings sweetest when Death approaches) The Scope and
End of this Song of Moses, it was to leave a Testimony behind him after he
should be gone, of the goodness, and mercy, and faithfulness of God toward
this people; and of their sinfulness, and perverseness toward; him again; to the
end, that if great evils should befall them after he was gone, they should have
no cause to speak ill of God, or of his Servant Moses. You have brought us to a
fair Land, you gave us many fair Promises, that God would be our God, and be
gracious to us, and that he would never leave us; yet see what befalls us.
Moses now leaves this on purpose behind him, for ever to stop their mouths; as
if Moses should say, It Is true, the Lord has made me an Instrument of bringing
you out of Egypt, and by me has made many Promises to you, to encourage you;
and has chosen you to be a peculiar people, and led you along all this while:
But, if evils do befall you, if you be brought into a sad, and distressed
Condition after I am dead and gone; Remember what I leave behind me, and know,
that God is to be justified in All, and his Words is to be justified; but you
have sinned and rebelled against God, and have brought upon your selves all the
evil that is come upon you. This is the Scope of thi^ Song of Moses.

He leaves this by way of a Song; for (...) was this 32d of Deuteronomy. in the Heb: a
Song like one of David's Psalms; and he leaves (...) by way of a Song, that
they might the bette^ remember it, and teach their Children the v^ry words of
it. And he begins in a very elegant way; Give ear, oh ye Heavens, and will
speak; and hear O Earth, the words of my mouth. Why Moses, there was a time
thou said, thou was it not eloquent? but that was because he would excuse
himself from work: But here it appears that he was very eloquent; Give ear, O
Heavens, and hearken, O Earth, as if Moses should say, That, that I am speaking
of this people (that are a wretched and stouthearted people) will not be
regarded; but Heaven and Earth shall be witness against them; the Heavens and
the Earth shall hear. Though what is spoken out of the Word by way of
reprehension of a sinful people, may be neglected and past by; yet know, that
there is an Impression upon the Heavens and Earth; and rather then the Lord
will want witnesses, Heaven and Earth shall come to witness against that people.

After his Preface, which is in the two first verses, He begins with lifting up
of the Name of God; Because I will publish the Name of the Lord, Ascribe the
Greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his Work is perfect; for all his ways
are Judgment: a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is he: As if
he should say, Whatsoever becomes of you, yet the Name of God is Great and
Glorious. -- And it is a good way to convince and humble sinners, by lifting up
their hearts to see the Glory of the Great God, with whom they have to do,
against whom they have sinned -- And it was an excellent Argument of Moses's
Faith when he was to die; yet he could bless himself, as it were, in God -- as
if he should say, Well, the Lord has carried me through many Changes and
Troubles, and many Afflictions, varieties of Conditions; and what yet God will
do with his people, I know not; but this I am sure, he is a Great God, and
Blessed; and he is a Rock, and his work is Perfect, and all his ways are
Judgment, a God of Truth, without Iniquity, Just and Right is he: I am sure,
whatsoever becomes of me, whatsoever bec^mes of the people; yet God is to be
acknowledged, Holy, Righteous, Just, Perfect, Great and Good in all his Ways.
O! it is good to have our heats so confirmed always in God, to keep good
thoughts of God, to have God high in our thoughts and hearts, whatsoever
changes o^ state we meet withal in this world.

But then he comes upon them, having lifted up God, and justified God, That
they have corrupted themselves; they have forsaken this Blessed and Glorious
God that has be so true to them in all his ways.

Corrupted themselves! you will say, who is not corrupted? who is not without
sin? O but were it but only some human frailty, were not so much; but they
have so corrupte^ themselves, that Their spot is not the spot of my Children;
It is beyond that could have been expected; for those that had so near a
Relation to God as this people had! they are bespotted and defiled with their
sin, and so, as this spot of theirs is not the spot of his Children. Thus you
have the scope of the words, and how they came in.

Their spot. The word translated here spot, signifies a blemish, a fault; it is
the same word that you have in the 17th of this Book, i. e. Thou shall not
sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, any Bullock or Sheep wherein is blemish, or
any ill-favouredness. But we know what the English word is; Their spot; the
spot of their sin; that sin of theirs; that blemish is not the spot of his
Children: What though the Children of God have spots, while they live in this
world? they have many sins that are defiling: But, the spots of these men is of
another nature, it is not the spot of his Children.

There are Three Doctrinal points in these words; the first two employed, the
third expressed: The two that are employed, are these:

1. Doct. First, That (...) is a spot.

2. Doct. Secondly, That even the Children of God while they live in this
world, have their spots.

3. Doct. Thirdly, (Which is the main and scope of the words) That there is a
great deal of difference between the sins and spots of wicked and ungodly men,
and the spots of Gods Children.

That Is that, that I aim at in the choice of these words, To show the
difference between the sins of wicked men, and the sins of the Saints; And I
have ch^sen this Scripture to handle this point for these two end:

First, To take away that great plea that most carnal hearts have, whereby they
put off the power of the Word from their hearts, and are secure in their sinful
ways. Why, say they, can we be without sin? are the best without sin upon
them? now because none are without sin, therefore they think to put it off, and
grow secure; and upon this very thought, put off abundance of truths that they
heard preached out of the word, that does them no good at all, and merely upon
this Reason. Now were it that this plea were but taken from them, the word
might prevail a great deal more upon them.

Now therefore, I hope before we have done this Scripture, I shall weaken, if
not wholly take away that plea that secure-sinners have for themselves, because
all have their sins: I shall show thee, that there is a great deal of
difference, perhaps, between thy sin, and the sins of a Child of God.

And then the second End why I chose this Scripture, is, for the comfort of
Gods Children. On the one side, one man is secure and ^ardened, because though
he has sins, why, all men have sins: On the other side, those that are Gods
Children, because they feel so much sin in them as they do, they are afraid
that they are not Gods Children; they are afraid that their sins that are in
them, does argue them not to be Gods Children. Now they will have help likewise
in the opening of this point, when they shall have laid before them that are
the sins of Gods Children, and the sins of the wicked, and the differences of
them.

I shall, for the making way to this great ^oint, first speak a little of the
two former that are employed, and no farther than to make ^ay unto the third,
which is the great point (...) the Text.

1 Doct. First then, That sin it is a spot; A (...), in Jam. 1. 27. Pure
Religion, and unde(...)d before God, and the Father, is this, To visit (...)
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world: ^^at is, to keep from the sins of the world; the (...) of the world,
are the world-spot. Sin it is,

First, A desiling spot; a spot that does defile, a blemish that does defile
the soul of man in the presence of the Holy God: It Is contrary to the pure
Nature of God, it is the mixture of the soul with that that is worse than its
self; it is a defiling thing. The mingling of Gold with Silver, does not defile
the Silver; but mingling of Lead with Silver, does defile the Silver, because
the Lead is worse than Silver: So the Communion that the soul has with God,
and as it were, the mingling of the heart in God, and with Divine things, does
not defile it, but make it better; but the mingling of the heart with the
world, it does defile the soul, because the soul is mingled with that that is
worse than it self; It is a defiling-spot: You know what it is to have the Body
besmeared with dirt, and have Clothes bespotted with filth and dirt; look how
it is with your Bodies besmeared with dirt, or your Clothes, so it is with the
Face of your Soul in the Presence of God, when sin is upon you; It Is a
defiling-spot.

Secondly, Sin it is a spreading-spot, it is like the spot of the Leprosy, that
spreads more and more; and let a sinner live never so long, this spot will
bespread him more and more. If you had a spot upon your Flesh, that were but
little at the first, it may be you would neglect it; but if you saw it spread
more and more then you would think there were something in it: It is so with
thy sin, when you are young, the spot it but small in comparison; but as you
grow, the spot spreads more and more until you are all over blains and spots:
So are old sinners; sin is a spreading-spot, it spreads in a soul, in a family,
in any society where sinners live.

Thirdly, It is an infecting-spot, a spot that of itself infects; a Plague
spot, that does infect the soul, and infects every thing you meddle with, and
does infect the company you converse with; that is the nature of this spot.

And then Fourthly, It Is a staining-spot, It does pain the soul, so as all the
created power in Heaven and Earth is not able to wash it away; thou may
think little of the sin that thou committest, thou committest it, and have
pleasure and delight in such a sinful way, for a quarter of an hour; it may be
thy pleasure lasts no longer; well, but when this pleasure is done, there is a
stain left upon thy soul that does mark thee out to Eternal Death; such a stain
left, that will abide to all Eternity upon the Soul, if only, that one means
be not applied, the Blood of Jesus Christ. Let all the Angels in Heaven, and
Men in the World, put to their wisdom and strength, to get out the stain that
is in thy Soul, and it is too little; only the Blood of the Son of God, can
cleanse and take out that stain that is in thy soul; such a spot is sin! a
staining spot! In Jer. 2. 22 Though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take thee
much Soap; yet thine Iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord: Ye may use
many means to get away your sin, perhaps you may cover it over, or there may be
some kind of slight sorrow; But it is not all the sorrow in the World, if thou
were able to shed as many tears as there are Drops of Water in the Sea, to wash
away thy sin, if their were nothing else to do it, all thy tears will not do
it; It must be only the blood of the Son of God. Many people think to wash
away their sin swith their sorrow; But they must know, there is something
beyond sorrow, it is only the blood of Jesus Christ, can cleanse and take away
this stain.

Use. Now, If sin be such a stain, such a spot; hence then, let us learn to
look into Gods Glass, to see out own spots, how we are bespotted by our sin; if
it is such a Foul, such a Spreading, such a Staining spot, How is it that Men
and Women see it not? they see not their own faces; Oh! they never were
acquainted with Gods Glass; What Is that, you will say? why, James 1. 23. will
show you what the Glass of God is, in which you may see your Faces, in which
you may see your spots; If any man be a hearer of the word, and not a deer, he
is like unto a man beholding his natural Face in a Glass; for he beboldeth
himself, and goes his way, and straightway for^etteth what manner a man he
was. But who (...) looks into the perfect Law of liberty, and continues
therein, etc. And the Law of God is ^^e Glass that God would have thee to look
^^to, to see thy face in; thou can not know ^^y heart, but by holding the Law
of God before thee. Paul thought himself beautiful e^ough, until the Law came.
That Scripture (...) notable for it, in Romans 7. 9. For I was ^^^ive without the
Law once; But when the Comandment came, Sin revived, and I died: (...) was
alive, I was jollie, and thought my ^^lf well enough; but when the Command^ent
came, when God did but take the Glass (...) the Law, and hold it before my
face, I (...) my self a most ugly Monster: I remem^er I have read of an old
strumpet that had ^^ed a false Glass continually to look in, and (...)
presented her beautiful unto her self, and (...) would never look upon any
other: But ^^ce there being a Glass by, she chanced to ^^ok into it, wherein
she beheld her face, ^^d being told her that it was a true Glass, ^^e ran mad
upon the sight of her ugly face: ^ertainly the generality of men have no other
Glasses to look into, and to behold the face of their souls, but their own
carnal conceits, and the ways of other men, and the like: But if God should
but hold the Glass of his Law to some of your faces, to behold how loathsome you
are in the Eyes of God) for so they are in Gods eye as this Glass presents them
if they are not washed in the blood of Christ:) and it would be a dreadful
sight to many a soul: But yet better that you saw it now while there are ways
to cleanse your souls of their spots, than when you should die; for if when you
should be at the point of Death, and be ready to go to the great God to Receive
the sentence of your Eternal Doom; If conscience should hold the Glass of Gods
Law before you, and there make you see the ugly face of your soul, spotted by
sin, Oh! it would be a soul sinking sight unto you. Learn you to look now into
the Glass of the Law, and examine your soul by the holy Law of God, that you
may see your spots there; many of you spend a great deal of time every morning
in looking into the Glass, to see if all things be well in your face; Oh that
you would but spend as much time in looking into the Law of God, and examining
of your hearts by the word: There stands a Glass in the window, and there lies
a Book on the shelf; Why may not the Law of God be as well taken, to look into
your hearts, as the Glass taken to see your face in? People are little
acquainted with this Glass; and therefore know not their own souls.

Secondly, If sin be such a spot, O learn we to be humbled for our spots, if we
have seen them, and to be ashured of them: if we have seen our faces besmea^'d,
it does deject us, especially if we be in Company that are our Superiors: Know
that you are always before the Infinite God, and his blessed Angels, and they
behold your spots; O therefore be humbled and be ashamed for your spots. An
Ingenuous disposition of heart, is ashamed if either flesh or garments
bespotted; but now, one of a so did disposition, that is all the week raking in
Kennels, or Dust-heaps, though they be besp^ted, they care not, because many
times the very temper of their spirits, is like to their employment; but now
one that is of an Ingenuous disposition, if he be defiled, he is ashamed and
troubled for it: O labor to purge your spots and stains; know, that this is
the work that you have to do, To get vour souls cleansed and purged; The Lord
has set open a Fountain for sin, and for uncleanness, for Judah, and for
Jerusalem to wash in, O wash your hearts, O Jerusalem. So I may say to every
soul, wash thy heart from thy spots; thou will wash thy face and hands daily, O
that daily there might be washing of thy heart! If thou have committed sin, let
it not lie and soak in; if there should any spots happen upon your cloeths, you
presently lay salt upon it, to keep it from staining; so, so soon as thou have
committed sin, lay the salt tears of thy Repentance, though that be not all,
the blood of Christ is the main thing, to keep thy soul clean from this
staining-spot; and to do it presently will be a great ^eal more ease than to
stay long: as a sport of Ink, as soon as it falls, if youseek to get it away,
it will be done with a little t^^ble; but if you let it soak in, you cannot get
it out after wards. And so it is with sin that lies long upon the soul: O! many
of your sins are old stains that have been many years upon you; and as it is in
your cloeths that have old slains, washing will not serve, all the Soap you can
use will not get them out, but you must lay them a frosting in a winter night;
O! so your old sins; you must not think that those old spots and stains upon
your soul, that you shall get them off so easily, you must be willing to lie a
soaking, and frosting, to endure what hardship God calls you to, so be it that
you may be cleansed from them: It Is an expression that I remember Austin has:
says he, You would have all things good and clean in your house; all the
furniture in your house; yea your shoes if they be bespotted. you will have
them clean: And have thou more care of thy very shoes, then of thy soul that is
spotted and defiled: O! there is little care for the cleansing of that: But now
my Brethren, these things especially should be applied, when we are to go more
immediately and solemnly into the presence of God. We must look into the Glass
of the Law every day, be humbled, be ashamed; and labor to purge the spots of
our souls, and that continnually; But I say, when we are to go into Gods
presence in a more immediate manner, as when we are to go to prefer a petition
to God, and that, such a petition as concerns our souls and Eternal estates,
when we are to go to hear his word, and worship him: When we are to go to his
Table, at the Lords Supper, we had need then prepare by looking into that
Glass, and by being humbled for our sins, and laboring to cleanse: Though you
care act so much for spots upon your face and clothes when you are at home, yet
when you are to go before your Betters, then what looking is there in the Glass
to be trim, and to have clothes that are clean washed. Remember now, that every
time thou art to go to worship God, thou art to set thy self as in his
immediate presence, to have to deal with that infinite holy God whose pure eyes
cannot endure to behold least iniquity; that God that is so Holy that the very
Angels cover their faces as not being able to behold him, thou art to go before
this God, and will thou go bespotted and be^ smeared, and never look into the
glass o^ the Law to see how thou art there, that tho^ may labor to cleanse
thy soul? wilt tho^ come into Gods presence in thy filth? O^ bold sinner that
know not what it is to dea(...) with the Infinite Holy God: Those that kno^
what God is, what his Infinite Holiness means, when they come into Gods
presence they make it the great part of their work i^ preparing their hearts
before they come; and indeed the spiritual part of Godliness does a^ much
consist in this one thing, as in any, i^ the preparation of the heart for the
presence of God in Holy duties; and that man or woman that is careful and
conscionable in this thing, may have good comfort to them selves that they are
acquainted with the spiritual part of Godliness; that wherein the power of i^
consists: But for such that can go into Gods presence, and no such sear and
reverence o^ God is in their hearts, certainly these neither know God, nor have
any thing of the power of Godliness in their hearts -- Now no matter my
Brethren, what we endure in this World^ so be it we may get our souls cleansed
from the filth and the spots that are upon them that when there shall be a
farther Presence of God, which we shall have, than that we have now in Holy
Duties; that then we may stand before him without spot; so says the Apostle in
2 Pet. 3. 14. Wherefore (Beloved) seeing ye look for such things, be diligent,
that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and blameless -- You look for
new Heavens and new Earth; when all the world shall be on fire about your ears,
and the Elements melting with servent heat; and the Heavens departing like a
Screwl, and the like: do you look for such things? do you look for the
appearing of the Holy God? and dare you stand in the Presence of that Holy God,
when he comes to pass the Sentence of your Eternal Estate upon your ^ouls? dare
you stand before him with such defiled, stained souls, as you have? Oh no!
Says the Apostle, Wherefore, Beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be
diligent, that you may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameness --
If those spots that are upon many of your Spirits shall abide upon you at that
say, Woe be to you that ever you were born; you cannot be found in peace before
God, except you be found without spot, and blameness --

Yet, let me say farther, Woe to that soul that shall have one spot upon it at
that day.

If this should be means of the Great Day of Judgment, as many Divines take it;
though there may be some doubt about some other time: But suppose that it be
meant of that day, as it is ordinarily taken; Then, woe to that man or woman
that ever they have been, that shall have but one spot upon them: For, then we
must be delivered from every spot, or otherwise our souls will perish for ever:
But ye may be without spot, and blameless before him -- Thus much for that
point.

2. Doct. The Second Point is. That God^ Children have their spots; the best of
all, have their spots.

The Church is compared to the Moon; Christ he is the Sun of Righteousness but
he Church, in Rev. 12, is compared to the Moon, and the Moon has her spots,
the Sun none. No godly man or woman, in regard o^ their souls, is like Absalom,
as he was in regard of his body; his body was without any ble^ mith, from the
crown of the head, to the sol^ of the foot; but it can be said of no body's
sou^ so; you re clean, but not all: The best Garden has its worms; and the
best Soul has i^ spots; for while we live here, there is that Corruption
remaining, that will breed defilement of it self: But considering that we liv^
in a wicked world here, and converse with wicked men, it is as impossible to
live in the world, and to converse with men, without an^ spots, as for a
company of people to ride together in soul way, in the midst of Winter, and to
keep their Garments so, that none should have a spot. The Condition of this
world is such, as indeed, it is not fit to have a Saint in it without sp^ts.
God has reserved the time of full-^^^^nsing of his people, to another world.
Christ could cleanse his people presently from all their spots; I, but because
they are to live (...) this world, Christ sees it is not so suitable for this
vile world.

This world is not worthy of the Saints, take them with all their infirmities;
but it is not for the world to have the Saints live without spot; and if the
world be offended at it, let them be offended; let them be stumbling blocks
unto them; and I make no question, but it is so to many souls: The world they
rejoice when they behold the sins that are in the Saints; but thou have little
cause to rejoice in the sins of others, if thou knew all; for it may be
intended for thy ruin: I know no greater stumbling block to wicked men, than
the sins of those that do profess Godliness; ^ut woe to those by whom offenses
come: The Lord by continuing of spots in his own people, does exercise Faith,
and Humility, and ^atience, and other Graces, in such a way, as ^e takes
pleasure and delight to see the exercise of them.

But this is not the Point that I do intend. Yet, O thou godly heart, thou
know this to be a truth, That there are spots in thee; yea, sometimes those
that are Godly, think there is nothing else but spots in them; but be of good
comfort in this, though thy Condition be sad in this world, so long as thou art
spotted, yet be of good comfort here, Jesus Christ is without any spots, Christ
thy Savior has no spots. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ,
who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, cleanse
your Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living God? Christ offered
himself without spot; and this is the comfort of the Saints while they have
their many spots in this world -- And so in 1 Pet. 1. 19 there is the same
expression: We are redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb,
without blemish, and without spot You will say, What comfort is it to me in the
midst of my spots, that Jesus Christ my Savior has no spots? -- What? This is
comfort, Because God looks upon thee not as thou art in thy self, but in his
Son; and reckons thee as a member of his Son, and deal with thee according to
the Relation thou ha^ to him -- And the Righteousness of h^^ Son is made over
to thee. Christ is a Covenent-Head, the Head of the Covenant; and in that
regard, being without spot, it is of unspeak able comfort unto a gracious
heart, when it sees it self defiled and bespotted by sin.

And then yet further, know, That through the righteousness of Christ, thou art
looked upon thy self, in the point of Justification, without spot too. The
Saints have their spots that is, they have their weaknesses, and some sins,
their Sanctification is imperfect; I, but in regard of Justification, so, they
are altogether without spot: So you have it in Cant. 4. 7. Where Christ speaks
of his Spouse, Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee -- You will
say, This seems to be against this text: No, not at all; for we may be without
any spot, in regard of our Justification, and yet we may be spotted and
defiled, and God may see that we are defiled with spots in our sanctification.
It Is true, the Lord will not charge these spors upon thy soul that art in
Christ; yet he does expect that thou should be humbled for them.

And so in Ephesians. 5. 27. there we have both together, there is a Scripture that
shows that thou shall one day be without any spot in regard of thy
sanctification too; though thou be'st spotted now, yet the time is coming when
thou shall be delivered from all these spots in regard of thy sanctification;
says the Apostle there, Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word: That
be might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle,
or any such thing; But that it should be holy, and without b^m^^. Mark, what
^eaps of words here are; here is sanctifying, cle nsing washing, presenting a
glorious Church, not having spor, not having wrinckle, or any such thing; ^ut
that it should be holy and with us blemish: All these ^^pressions are to show
the state the Saints should be brought unto, and to uphold thy spirit in the
sight of all thy spots: -- Let me speak to thee who art sensible of the many
spots that are in thy ^^ul: What is it that does uph^ld thy heart? O^e would
wonder that any soul that knows what it is to deal with such an infinite holy
God as the Lord is, one would wonder what should uph^ld the soul, seeing it is
so defiled, and nothing but spots in every thing! What can uphold it here from
sinking? It may be that that upholds you, is this, We have all our sins, and we
are all sinners. If there were nothing else to uphold a gracious heart but
that, it could no^ but sink even in despair, notwithstanding that^ But now
these three things uphold a gracious heart: I have my spots indeed, and am
defiled, woe to me, for the defilements of m^soul, my life: This is indeed the
burden that I have in this World, the great affliction that is upon me, that my
soul is so defiled: O! but blessed be God, I have to deal with God through
Jesus Christ, who has offered up himself to the Father without any spot; I
have to deal with God through the Lamb that was sacrificed, that had no spot;
and it was for me that he was slain, and God looks upon me through him, and he
is made of God sanctification -- I am indeed imperfect, and have many spots;
yet, blessed be God he has revealed, that justification is perfect in this
life: That the Lord through the righteousness of his Son, looks upon me as
without spot; that is, will not lay any of these spots to my charge -- Yea, and
further, This is the comfort of my soul, that though I have many spots now, yet
there is a way revealed to cleanse my soul from all spots, through the blood of
Christ; and through the word of God, to cleanse and wash me: Yea, I find in the
word, that Jesus Christ had such a desire to cleanse my soul from spots, as he
gave himself to that very end: And there is a time when all these spots must be
washed away, and when this defiled, polluted soul of mine shall be before the
Lord and his Christ, and live for ever with them, without any spot o^ wrinckle,
or any defilement whatsoever; but shall be made fully perfect in my
sanctification, as now I am in my justification: And it is this that upholds my
soul -- That Is somewhat indeed; that in this life of thine, wherein there is so
much corruption, if thy soul be upheld from sinking with such considerations as
these are, surely thou art gone beyond a carnal heart, and I may even fay, That
thy spot is the spot of Gods Children, from this, and not the spot of the
wicked and ungodly: Remember that one expression in Ephesians. 5. which is very
remarkable, and of great use; Christ ^ved us, and gave himself, that he might
sanctify and wash us, and the like: Mark, it is made the great fruit of the
love of Jesus Christ, to sanctify a soul, therefore it is matter of great
consequence; for Christ shows his love in a special manner in sanctifying and
cleansing the soul -- This is from the peculiar and electing love of God -- And
it shows, when Christ comes to cleanse the soul from spots and defilements,
that he had loved from all eternity, that foul. But on the contrary, if the
Lord do let thee lie in the filth of thy sin, it is an Argument that he never
set his heart upon thee. As for instance, suppose a man were riding on the high
way, and sees a Child there lie all in the filth, ready to be choked with the
dirt and mire, and to perish there; well, as he is riding by, he looks upon the
Child, and sees it ready to perish; and when he has looked upon it, away he
goes and leaves it there; would not every one say, Certainly this is not the
Father of the Child that rides so away. But now if the Father or Mother should
come by, and see the Child, the Mother would screek out, O my Child! and
snatches it up, and carries it away, and gets water and washes it, and so
cleanses the Child. And herein does the Mother or Father show their love they
have to the Child. Thus it is (for all the World) in the love of Christ;
Christ, he sees all your filthiness and pollution; he sees Men and Women
wallowing up and down in the dirt; Christ looks upon them, and goes by, leaves
them still, and lets them wallow in their corruptions more and more, and passes
by; surely the heart of Christ is not much toward them, there is little
relation that Christ or God has to such as these are: But now, when as there
is one that belongs to Jesus Christ, and that Christ has set his love upon
from eternity, Christ sees such a one wallowing in the filth of sin; O! the
very bowels of Christ do earn, O! Christ takes them, and with his own blood
cleanses them: and will never leave washing and cleansing of the soul, till he
has cleansed it from all its spots, and presented it before the Father.

And mark, in the second place; Christ loved us; and this is a fruit of Christ's
love, to cleanse us from our spots -- And then he gave himself, that he might
cleanse us, perhaps you think it is of little moment to be cleansed from the
filth of your sin; but Christ accounted it such a matter, that he would give
his life for it: I account the cleansing of these souls from the filth of their
sins, worth my life; I will give my life for it; so that it cost more then Ten
Thousand Worlds to cleanse a soul from the filth of its sin, as well as from
the guilt: I beseech you consider of this, that the cleansing of a soul from
the silth of sin, did cost Christ that which was more worth than Ten thousand
World; but, O! how many is there that can wallow in sin, and take delight in
it? But I say, it is of so great consequence to be cleansed from sin, as Christ
is content to give his very life to cleanse his Church from sin -- Now if thy
heart be thus, that thou account the love of Christ to consist in this, and
that thou can prise Christ upon This, That he gave himself, to the end that
he might cleanse thy soul from the sin; surely thou do prise cleansing from
sin indeed; and if thou do prise it at so high a rate, this is a good
Argument that thou art one of Gods Children: Therefore daily exercise thy Faith
upon this Christ, by the applying of the blood of Jesus Christ to thy soul, and
the renewing of the work of thy repentance, seeing, as long as thou live,
their will be spots.

The Second SERMON. July the 20th, 1645.
3. Doct. BUt now comes in the Third Point: It Is true, the people of God have
all their spots; I, but know, There Is a great deal of difference between the
spots of the godly, and the spots of the wicked.

And this Scripture I chose for the handlling of this point, to take away that
vain plea that hardens the hearts of most men in their sin; Why it is true, we
have sin, and who has not? the best of all have their sins. I appeal to you,
whether you do not know that this is the great hardening conceit of most people
in the World? Thou have thy sins, and the best have their sins; but there is a
great deal of difference between the sins of the one, and the sins of the
other; you will see a great deal of difference, however, whatever thou say;
Psalm. 22. 18. sa^^ih David, I have not wickedly departed from my God: David
would not say but that he had sometimes departed from God; I, but I have not
wickedly departed from him, says David, I can appeal to God in that: There is
still remaining in the Saints, corruptions; in their understandings there is
some dimness, though there be light; But I may say of that, as in Isa. 11. The
dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation; It shall not be such dimness;
It Is spoken there in case of affliction and misery: We may apply it thus, by
way of allution, in case of the remaining corruptions: There is in the
understanding a dimness, but not like that that was before, and is in natural
men: There is not that dimness of darkness in the weakest Man or Woman in the
World that is converted, that has the least natural parts as in the greatest
learned Man or Woman in the World that is unconverted: And though, perhaps, a
Child of God may have some security in his heart for a while, yet in 1 These. 5.
6. Let us not sleep as do others, lest perhaps we should sleep and he
overtaken: yet says the Apostle, God forbid we should sleep as do others:
There Is a great deal of difference between the sleep of Gods people, and the
sleeep of others; that is, between the security of their hearts, and the
security of other men's hearts: It was the special work of the Priest in the
time of the Law, to discern between spot and spot; to show which was the spot
of Leprosy, and which was not.

When there was a spot in the bodies of men, they were to come to the Priest to
discern whether their spot were the spot of Leprosy, or no.

And it is a special work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to show the difference
of spots, between the spots of the wicked, and the spots of the Children of
God. And here indeed does consist the spiritualness of their Ministry, and a
great deal of efficacy of it is in this thing; and without this, our Ministry
is like to do little good; and therefore, though I had thoughts of some other
things, yet I thought always, except there were something laid down about this,
I might preach many Arguments, open many points of Religion to you, and the
want of the knowledge of this, might hinder the efficacy of all. Jer. 15. 18. If
thou shall separate between the precious and the vile (says he to Jeremiah)
then shall thou be as my mouth: So that, that is the work that God looks for
from his Ministers; and indeed it is the work of a soul saving Ministry, to
separate between the precious and the vile; and then indeed when they speak,
they are as the mouth of God to a people: God makes men in this point, to be as
his mouth, for it is a point that does separate between the precious and the
vile: Therefore, as Moses said of the whole So^g in the 46 v. of this Chap. Set
your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you, etc. For it is not a
vain thing for you, because it is your life: (...) I may say of this part of
the Song, I beseech you brethren, set your hearts to it, and mind it, for
certanly it is not a vain thing, it is your life; It Is as much as your souls
are worth, the understanding of this point rightly; and thousands of souls do
perish eternally for want of the understanding this point rightly -- Then let us
fall upon it.

There Is much difference between the sins that are in wicked men, and the sins
that are in the Saints. It must be granted,

First, that in some particular acts, a wicked man may do something better then
the godly; and not sin so much in some acts; as we have famous examples of this.

As in the example of Abimelech; compare him with David: Abimilech in respect
of Abraham's wife, and David in respect of Vriab's; Abimilech did carry himself
like a Saint, and David rather like a wicked man, in comparison.

And, Secondly, If we compare Rehoboam and Amaziah, with Asa; Rehoboam and
Amaziah were both wicked men, but yet they, in some acts, did better then Asa
that was a godly man; it is very remarkable, the comparing the stories of them:
For, Rehoboam he was a wicked man, and yet in 1 Kings 12. 24. when ten tribes
of his Kingdom did rebel against him, and he got an Army to reduce them again
to their obedience, there comes but a poor Prophet of God to him, and says,
Thus says the Lord, ye shall not go up nor fight against your Brethren the
Children of Israel: Return every man to his house, for this thing is from me:
The Text says, they hearkened to the word of the Lord, and return to depart
according to the word of the Lord: A very strange thing, that a King, a wicked
man, exasperated to the uttermo^^, that had an Army ready, whose cause could
not but be justified before all the World; for who would have said what the
Prophet did, That this was from the Lord: Yet that one poor man coming to him,
and telling of him that it was from the Lord, though he must lose ten parts of
his Kingdom, ten of twelve, yet Rehoboam hearkens to God, lets go his Army,
lets go the ten parts of his Kingdom, hearing but a Prophet say. It was from
the Lord! one would think that this were a Saint! what an obedient man was this
to the word of God? and yet this was a wicked man, an unregenerate man.

Again, Amaziah, that was a man whose heart was not upright with God, 2 Chronicles.
25. he had likewise hired an Army, and there comes a man of God to him, in v.
7. saying, O King, let not the Army of Israel go with thee, for the Lord is not
with Israel, to wit, with all the Children of Ephralm -- But says Amaziah,
what shall we do for the hundred talents, which I have given to the Army of
Israel? They had their pay aforehand, why, says the Prophet, the Lord is able
to give thee much more then this: and Amaziah was content not only to part with
his Army, but to lose the pay that he had given them beforehand, merely at the
word of God, by one poor Prophet of his: Now one would think, a wicked man that
was a Soldier, should have contemned such a message from a poor weak man, and
bad him go and meddle with what he had to do with; yet these two men did not:
But now, you shall find Asa that was a godly, man he did not do so well: These
two the Scripture brands for wicked men at this time when they did so, and so
for ought appears, continued and perished in their wickedness: But now, I say,
Asa, that the Scripture notes for a godly man, you find him quite owise, 2 Chronicles. 16. there a Prophet did but come to Asa, and rebuke him for relying upon
wicked men, for so much correspondency with those who were ungodly, the Text
notes in the 10. v. Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a
Prisonhouse, for he was in a rage with him, because of this thing; and Asa
oppressed some of the people the same time: This was a godly man, and the other
wicked -- You will say, here now the spot of Asa was worse than the spot of
Rehoboam, or Amaziah, that were wicked men; sometimes, therefore, for some acts
of sin, wicked men may do better than the Saints -- And therefore, by the way,
you should learn not to bless your selves in this, that you in some particular
acts do good things; you may do good things, in particular acts, better than
others that are godly, and yet you may perish eternally, and they may be saved
in the day of Jesus Christ.

And it must be acknowledged likewise, that in regard of the excellency of the
souls of ^^e Saints, any spot in them, is worse than ^he spots of wicked men:
As a Fly in a box ^f Ointment, is worse than a thousand in a ^arrel of Beer;
why, because the Ointment (...) more precious than that and, in diverse
circum^^ances likewise, the spots of the Saints may be ^orse than the spots of
wicked men: Which I have had some occasion to speak to, out of another
Scripture: But, for all this, in respect of some particular acts, and in
respect of the excellency of their souls above others, and in respect of some
circumstances, one may be worse than another: But take all together, and the
spots or sins of wicked men, are far worse than the sins of the godly; and
that I shall show in these Three regards, the difference between the sins of
wicked men, and the godly; and show, that one is far worse than the other.

First, In respect of the nature of their sin.

Secondly, In respect of the behavours of their hearts about them.

And, Thirdly, In respect of the present dealings of God with them for their
sin -- Their spots are different in these three regards.

For the First, In regard of the nature of their spots, and that in diverse
regards, (except indeed in some extraordinary cases, one of which we spoke of
before in those example^ I say) the spots of the wicked are far worse than the
spots of the godly; yea, the truth is take them at any time, if you consider
all things together, they are worse.

First, The sin of a godly man is rather (...) Scar, then a Wound that is
healed, or almost healed: And the sin of the ungodly is a rotten putrefying
sore in the flesh. Look what the difference is between the Scar of a wound that
is almost healed, and a filthy putrified sore in the flesh; that difference
there is between the sin of the Saints, and the sins of other men.

You will say, that, that is but a similitude; what do you mean by that of the
scar, and a rotten sore? --

Why, the plain meaning of it is this, That the sin of a godly man, it is but
the hinderance of his soul in the making of God to be his last End; the frame
of a godly man's soul is always for God as his last End; and his sin comes in
but as an impediment and hinderence unto him in this work of his, in making God
to be his last End -- But now the ^in of a wicked man, it is the departing from
God, and closing with some other thing as his ^ast End; and chief good. Now
here lies a ^road difference: When the heart of a man that is godly, makes God
to be his End, and ^^e scope and aim of it, is at God; now in ^^me particular
acts it is put off and hindered (...) this work of his. But now a man that is
^^cked, does decline from God, and depart ^^m him, to some other good, for his
End, ^^d closes with it as his chief good: Now this exceedidg vile and
abominable -- So that the sin of a godly man is the hinderance of thy soul
that is making after God as thy last End: But on, the other side, it is the
declining of thy soul to some base contentment, as thy chief good, that thou
make to be as thy God.

Secondly, The spot of the Children of God, it is not such a contagious, such
an infectious spot as the spot of the wicked is. It is true, there is an
infection in all sin, some contagion; but there is a great deal of difference
between the contagion and infection of the remainer of sin that is in the
Saints, and that that is in the hearts of unregenerate men.

You will say, What difference?

Difference? First, In this: The contagion and infection of sin in a wicked
man, makes his very person to be abominable, and is loathsome, through his sin:
The sins of the Saints, have no such infection in them; they have not such a
contagion in them, as to make their persons to be abominable and hateful before
God: God hates the workers of iniquity; but he hates not the Saints, that have
iniquity in them; and this is a wide difference, in their contagion and
infection.

Yea, Secondly, That sin that is in a wicked man, it does defile all his
actions, so as i^ makes his very actions, the best of his actions, to be turned
into sin: While thou art an unregenerate man, thy sin is of such a contagious
nature, that it makes all thy actions sin, thy best actions it turns them even
unto sin: In Psalm. 109. 7. Let his prayer become sin: All thine actions before
God are sinful, thy best actions, while thou art an unregenerate man: There is
not only sin in them, but that sin has so defiled them, as they are even
turned into sin to thee: Out of an unclean thing there cannot proceed that
which is clean; out of a corrupt Tree there cannot be good fruit. Now, there is
nothing but the fruits of sin, that comes from an unregenerate heart -- But
now, the Saints, though they have sin in them, yea, they have some sin cleaving
to every one of their actions; there is no action that a Child of God does, but
has some sin cleaves to it: But yet there is not that infection in it, as to
turn his actions into sin; no, God looks upon his action as a holy action for
all that: The work that he does, is looked upon as the work of the spirit of
God in him, though there be evil cleaves to it, as it comes through him: And
therefore there is not such an infection in their sin, as in thine.

And then, Secondly, The infection and contagion of the sin of wicked men is
such, as it defiles all they meddle with, and makes every thing that they
meddle with, to be unclean to them: You know what the Scripture says in 1 Tit.
1. 5. Unto the pure all things are pure; but to the unbelieving and undefiled,
is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled: The^e is that
uncleanness and filthiness in thee, while thou art unregenerate, as every thing
is made unclean: All the Mercies of God are unclean to thee, thou have no
sanctified use of them; all the Ordinances, the use of them to thee are
polluted and unclean: As in the Law, the uncleanness of the Leprosy was such,
as whatever the Leprosy did touch, it was unclean; so it is with thee,
whatever thou medlest with, thy meat, thy drink, thy clothes, thy estate, and
every thing is made to be unclean to thee. We account the disease of the Plague
a very grievous disease, because they who have it, can meddle with nothing, but
it is in danger to be infected; any clothes that they put on, and the meat and
drink that they take into them: So it is in the sins of unregenerate men, all
things that they meddle with, are spiritually infected to them, and they have
no sanctified use of any thing. But it is not so with the Saints: They have sin
in them, but you never read that their sin makes every thing unclean: No, to
the pure all things are pure; God looks upon them as pure, and they have a holy
use of Estate, they do enjoy Gods Ordinances, Gods Works, Gods Mercy: The
wicked therefore, are not only spotted, but you find in Scripture, they are
called spots, in the abstract; because of the impression of their sin: 2 Pet.
2. 13. and in Jude 12. They are spots in your Feasts: Not spotted, but spots;
as if they were all turned into pollution

Thirdly, The spots of the Saints are not like the spots of wicked men; nor
their sin, the spots of the Saints in this, they are not such deadly spots; the
spots of wicked men, they are deadly spots: Wicked men, therefore, being
defiled with their sin, they lie in their sin as a Carrion lies in a
Common-shore; That Is the similitude that the Holy Ghost uses to express the
wickedness, and wicked men and women in the World by; 1 John 5. 19, The whole
World lies in wickedness; the meaning of that Text cannot be expressed better
than thus; Look, as you see a filthy Carrion, lying dead and rotten in the
Common-shore, so does the World lie in wickedness: Surely their wickedness is
another manner of wickedness, than the wickedness of the Saints: There Is a
great deal of difference between a sickly countenance of a weak man, and the
ghastly countenance of a dead carkase: a great deal of difference between the
stiffness in a man's joints, or in his flesh, by reason of some cold; and the
stiffness in a body that lies by the walls; a great deal of difference between
some breakings out of your Children, breakings out of heat, or other humors;
and the filthy corruption that is in a dead carkase, that breaks out there: The
Saints, though they have sin in them, yet they have a principle of life that
works out that sin that is in them: Now the ungodly, they have sin, but they
have no principle of life to work it out: Hence, in Prove. 25. 26. the Righteous
when they fall, they are said to be like a troubled Fountain: Now, you know, a
Fountain that is troubled, or if there be dirt and filth put into a Fountain,
it is all in a soil, and all looks filthy and dirty as any puddle does; for the
present you can see no difference between that, and any filthy puddle: But do
but stay a while, and you will see, that the Fountain having a living spring in
it, will work out all that filth. But now, if you cast dirt into a plash of
water in the highway, there it lies, and there it putrifies. Just thus is the
difference between the sin of the wicked and ungodly, and the sin of the godly;
The sin of the godly is as the troubled Fountain; I, but there is a principle
of life to work out that sin, and will work it out in time; but the sin of the
wicked is like the dirt that is cast into the p^sh in the highway, and there
it lies and putrifies, and (...) is filthy: There is no Spring to work out that
filth: Hence in 1 Pet. 1. The hopes of the Saints are said to be living hopes,
that is, such hopes as is working out that filth that is in their souls: The
wicked, therefore, their spot is a deadly spot; but the Saints, they have a
principle of life. Take the Saints of God in their worst condition, when they
are most overcome by temptation, and yet there is some symptoms of life; life
will appear in them.

You will say, What symptoms of life will appear in a godly man or woman, when
they are overcome with sin and corruption? Yes, you shall find Four, that will
act in them when they are most overcom with their corruptions.

The First is this, If they sin, if possibly they can, they labor to recall
themselves: You shall find that their judgments are yet for holiness and
strictness in the ways of God: perhaps they are overcome by a particular
temptation, and they are troubled and afraid that there is no grace, and that
there is no difference between them and wicked men: I, but you shall find that
even at that time when they are overcome with temptations, yet their judgments
remain for God, and for his truth, and for his way, for the strictness of
holiness; and they account the Law of God to be good, and holy, and righteous
at that very time. We read of Saint Paul in Romans 7. he ^ad as great a conflict
with his corruptions, as you shall find almost in any; so that he was even led
Captive, and that he was sold under sin: But yet mark, in v. 12. though he had
such a conflict with his corruptions, yet the Law was holy, and just, and good;
I think he gives there some three Epatnites to the Law of God, when his
corruptions did most strive against the Law of God; wherefore the Law is holy,
and the Commandment is holy, and just, and good: So you shall find gracious
hearts, though they be under temptation, and may be overcome with an act of
sin, Well, though I be base and vile, though I have a filthy, and carnal, and
base heart, yet Gods ways are good ways, and his Commandments are good
Commandments, they are holy and blessed Commandments, only my heart cannot get
up to them; I, but though I cannot, yet I would not have the Commandment come
down to me, I would not have i^le(...)ly and good than it is: This symptom of
life you shall find: I, but if a man comes to fall into sin, and he begins to
think that he was a fool to make so much conscience of sin, and to live so
strictly, and holily, and it was but when he was young, and silly, and foolish*
why, the man's judgment is altered: O! when did you ever know such a man, that
having so apostatis'd, ever returned again, if once his judgment were gone
against the ways of God; though he may be overcome in an act, or there may be
many distempers of heart, and passions, and the like, out if once he be taken
in his judgment against the ways of God, the goodness, and strictness, and the
holiness of them, it is to be feared, that this Man is quite gone, and that his
spot is not the spot of Gods Children: In Lev. 13. 44. you have a notable
Scripture there; and the reading of that Scripture, did hint to me this notion
about the difference of the sins of the one and the other: Now the Leprosy was
butas a tipe of the uncleanness of sin: The whole Chapter, you shall find, is
spent in the discerning of Leprosy, what is the spot of Leprosy, and what
not: Now mark, all a long you shall find that the Priest looking upon the spot,
and seeing it to be thus and thus, says the Text, he shall pronounce him
unclean; but now in the 44. v. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean,
his Plague is in his head: If a man had it in other parts, then the Priest was
only to pronounce him unclean: But now, when the Priest comes and looks upon a
man, and sees the Plague to be in his head, then says the Text, the Priest
shall pronounce him utterly unclean: So here in the Leprosy of sin, if there
be Leprosy of sin in a man's affections, it is very ill, he may be unclean by
it; if it be got into his will, or got into his thoughts, there is a great deal
of evil, but if it be got into the upper part of all, if it be got in the
senses, the body, the actions, it may make him unclean; but if it be got into
his judgment, if a man has such a corrupt judgment, that he gives a judgment
against Gods ways, against the goodness and strictness of them, he gives a
judgment against the holiness of the word, and says, What need men be so
precise and strict? and, the Law of God is not so strict with men. Now I say,
when it comes to the judgments of men and women, such a Man or Woman is to be
pronounced not unclean only, but utterly unclean, for the Plague is got into
his head: But there is (...) symptom of life that is in the Saints, though they
be over taken with corruptions, yet their judgments are for God, and the
strictness of the ways of God, whereas the others are not.

Secondly, They do not yet forsake their lest End; that that is their ultimate
scope and end, their heart is not taken off from that, (though as I said in the
opening, they are hindered) I shall give you a Scripture for that, as coming in
more fully, in Psalm. 18. 21. This Scripture was quoted before, to show that
there is a great deal of difference between the sins of wicked men, and the
sins of the godly; in that act of David, says David there, I have kept the
ways of the Lord; and have not wickedly departed from my God: But now, David,
how do you prove that? thou did sin against thy God very grossly, why then
do thou say thou had not wickedly departed from thy God? why, he proves it
in the 22 v. For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his
statutes from me: That is, as if he should say, Why Lord, though I was
overtaken with this corruption, yet I made thee to be my end and my scope, my
heart was yet toward thee; I did not put away thy statutes from me, but I was
willing that thy statutes and judgments should stand before me; and herein he
proves that he had not wickedly departed from God. Can you say so now? you say
you have sin as others; but you hope your sin is not like the sin of wicked
men; but, can you say as in the presence of God, Lord, thou know that I have
not wickedly departed from thee; For all thy judgments are before me, and I do
not ^ut away thy statutes from me; O Lord, thou ^nowest there is none of thy
statutes that I would put away from me?

Thirdly, And then a Third symptom of ^^fe in the worst condition, is this,
That though (...) man be fallen into great sins himself, yet ^or all this, he
will have his heart prising other godly men that are not fallen into such great
sins; when did you ever know any one godly man fall to be such an Apostate, as
to hate the Saints, and yet to turn again to God? for thereby you may know
whether he were godly or no; if it were a temptation in one that is godly,
though he does Apostatise very far, yet he will return back again: But for my
part, I never knew it, nor heard of any man, that was a professor of Religion,
and fell fo far, as to hate the Saints, to hate other godly men, and to
persecute them, I never knew any example that came again: But now you shall
have many godly men, that fall foully; I, but yet their hearts are toward the
Saints, and they think that they are in a blessed condition; Though I have a
wicked and vile heart, and I cannot prevail against such and such corruptions,
yet there are those that are able to prevail against their corruptions, there
are those that are godly, O! they are in a happy condition; O! happy is such a
man, such a woman, they are not overcome with such corruptions as I am overcome
with: So that, though they be overcome with sin, yet they will still have their
heart toward the Saints, and prising those that are not overcome with such
corruptions as they are. But now it is not so with the wicked.

Fourthly, The last symptom of spiritual life that is in the Saints, is this:
Though they be overcome with much corruptions, yet you shall find this ever in
them, They do not lose the savor and relish of the most spiritual Ministry,
and the Word, as others do: Wicked men they are so defiled with their
corruptions, that that takes away all their relish and taste of spiritual
things: They cannot relish a spiritual Ministry more than a filthy one; but,
now take one that ever had any true godliness in him, though he be very foully
fallen, perhaps into some gross sins, yet he is able to taste the word in some
degree, he can taste a difference between Ministry and Ministry; yea, between
Company and Company, between the spirit of one Man, and the spirit of another;
I say, he does not wholly lose his savor, but still he has some kind of
savor, to taste a difference between that that is spiritual, and carnal, and
especially in the Ministry of the word; he finds some savor in that; for if
ever he was converted, it was a spiritual work of the word that did convert
him, and there is some seed of it does remain in his heart, hence is that of
the Holy Ghost by the Apostle Saint Peter, 1 Epist. C 1. ver. last. The word of
the Lord endures for ever; and ^his is the word which by the Gospel is
preached ^o you: Now this word of the Lord, he does not mean here the very Book
and Letter of the word of God; but he means the word of God upon the hearts of
the godly; for so you shall find he speaks of it in the 23. v. Being born
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which
lives and abides for ever: For all flesh is as Grass, and all the glory, that
is, all works of nature and common gifts, they vanish, but the word of God
endures forever: that is, the word of God upon the hearts ^f the Saints: There
is a spiritual seed, and efficacy of the word of God that first did beget the
soul, that does abide for ever: There is none falls off so, but has some seed
of the Spiritualness of Gods Word that does abide in their hearts, that does
enable them to savor Gods Word -- Thus you see their spot is not deadly: O!
that if any of you that have godliness, and have fallen foully from God, that
you would but consider of these things: Are there such seeds of life remaining
in you? you are those that do yet belong to him; therefore do not you fall off
more and more; if you be one that do belong to God, you will not abuse this
that I am speaking to you, but your souls will prise it, and it will draw your
hearts more to God: But now, the sickness of the wicked, that is a death: as in
John 11. 4. says Christ concerning Lazarus, This sickness is not unto death:
Two men are sick, one man he dies of it, the other is recovered; so you have
your sins, and the godly man has his sins, and outwardly the godly man's sin
appears as much as yours does; I, but yours may be to death, for all that: As
now, according to this similitude of a spot, sometimes a man has some kind of
grievous spot upon his slesh caused by some distemper; well, but yet this is
not so now as in the time of the Plague, when you see those blew tokens on you,
which they call Gods Tokens, though perhaps you have no other spots nor sores.
So many men and women may seem to live very strictly, and not break out into
such scandalous sins as others do, and their spots seem not to be so full of
corruption as other men's are; I, but there ^^e the blew spots of a Plague upon
them ^^at be unto death: And you know, a Father ^^d Mother would rather a great
deal, see the ^odies of their Children to be all blistered, and ^potted, and
run with filth, then to see but one ^f those blew spots upon them, though their
^kin should be never so whole.

You will say now, What sign may we give ^f the sickness of a soul to be unto
death, see^ng that godly men may by their sin be sick as ^ell as others? I will
give you these:

First, As in the distemper of the body, if be constant, though it be small, it
may prove deadly: As, if a man has a Cough, yet if it continues constant, it
may prove deadly: Take heed of constant sins, though they be small sins; for if
thou go on in a constant way of sin, it may prove deadly.

And then, Secondly, If the disease reach to the heart, it proves deadly. In
time of infection, if you can keep it from the heart, you are well enough:
Physicians, though they give Medicines to keep the infection from the heart,
yet they have never a Medicine to cure the heart, if once the disease get into
it: They can keep it out of the heart, but not get it out of the heart: Jer. 4.
v. 1. O! thy sin (...) evil and bitter, for it reaches unto thy heart, says
the Text: O! that is an evil and bitter corruption that reaches to thy heart,
that is, so comes to thy heart, as it finds thy heart to close with that
distemper and corruption of thine.

Thirdly, When the sickness is an increasing sickness. Lev. 13. 8. When the
spot spreads, then the Priest must say, it is a spot of Leprosie^ So when thou
have some distemper and corruption, and it increases more and more; As it may
be thou were but a little vain, thou growest more vain, etc. Where the diseas^
grows more and more upon thee, take heed it is a spot of Leprosy, and may prove
to b^ thy ruin.

Fourthly, A sickness: is then deadly, when Nature is overcome with it, so as
the party is not sensible of his sickness; a Man when he lies sick, so long as
Nature is stri^ing with it, there is good hopes; But one that comes to a man in
a strong Fever, and asks him how he does; why, well, I thank God; he is not
sensible of it; O! that makes his wife and all about him turn their heads, and
fall a weeping; It were better he did feel pain: So when men through the custom
of sin, grow senseless of sin, that is a sign that it is unto death: perhaps when
thou did first commit sin, O, thy consience did trouble thee; But thou have
used thy self so to it, that thou art not sensible of it; O it is a sickness to
death, and thou art like to dye by it, when by use of a sin, thou come to be
senseless of it.

Fifthly, When a man in a sickness cannot take any thing that will stay with
him: So I may say of the sin of wicked men, though thy sin does endanger thy
soul, yet there is hope if so be that, that that is given thee might stay with
thee, that is, the Word, that is as the Physic for thy soul: When some
seasonable truth comes, and is applied to thy soul against thy ^^in, if thou
can receive in that ingrafted word, that is like to save thy soul; But, if as
soon as ever thou hear a truth that comes ^ear to thee, presently thy heart
casts it up, and it will not abide with thee at all, it is a dangerous sign
that thy sickness is a sickness unto death.

Lastly, That Is a sickness to death, that, when a man does take that that might
help him, yet if it does not work, then I say, it is dangerous too: So, it may
be you do remember the Word, and it does abide with you a while; but there is no
good at all comes of it; it works mighty changes upon others, but nothing at
all upon thee: If you come to a physicia in that case, and say, Sir, you did
prescribe such or such a thing, I, but it works not; why, I wonder says he, I
have known it has wrought upon such men and women, that I thought was in as
desperate a condition as one could be, it wrought upon them, I, and did recover
them: -- So I may say to some that sit under the word, their souls are sick,
and the word works not upon them; I, but it has wrought upon others that have
been as dangerously sick, why it is an Argument that their sickness was not unto
death; God did not intend they should die. But if thou can sit under the
word, and it works not upon thee, it is a sign that thy sickness is unto death.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The suitablenes that there is in the sin of one, to the
nature of those that have their sin in them: One man's spot is like the spot of
a Leprosy, that is, his spot is that that is suitable to the disposition of
his soul: But now the spot of another, it is that that is a spot indeed; I, but
it does not arise from his natural disposition, but merely an accidental
distemper: The spot of one rises from the very natural temper of the heart; but
the spot of theother rises from some accidental distemper that comes to him:
When a Man or Woman, therefore, sins, and it is suitable to his nature, take
him when he is most himself; I beseech you consider this note, for it is as
discerning as any: If so be, that thou be'st most thy self, then thou be'st
most free for thy sin; know, that thy sin is that that comes from thy natural
distemper, and not from any accidental distemper: I shall show you what I
intend, by this: There is Poison in a Toad, and there is Poison got into a man's
body: Now the Poison that is in the Toad, is suitable to the nature of the Toad,
and therefore the Toad likes well enough of it: But now let but a drop of
Poison be in a man's body, O, it presently makes a great deal of stir, and makes
him deadly sick; why, because there is that got in, that is contrary to his
nature: -- Here Is the difference between the sin of a wicked man, and the sin
of a Child of God: The wicked man's sin is like Poison in a Toad, that is
suitable to his nature; But the sin of a Child of God is like Poison in a man's
stomach that is contrary to his nature; when a wicked man sins, he sins of
himself, as it is said of the Devil, he is a liar, and when he lies, he lies of
himself, it comes from his own nature; so is the sin of a wicked man; sin is in
it is proper Element in him, and that is the reason that wicked men are so
unsensible of sin, because it is in its proper Element; But now the sin of the
Child of God is out of his place, and that is the reason that makes him feel it
so much.

Now you will say, How may a man make use of this Note to know the nature of
his sin? There are five or six particulars that I shall name about this.

First, When a Man or Woman is alone in secret, that no eye takes notice of
them, then to examine themselves; how does thy heart stand then, when thou art
in secret, alone? thou can not discern what the temper of thy heart is when
thou art in company; thou arr most thy self when thou art in secret, alone;
and, O what hearts of wickedness are there when thou art alone! whereas a godly
Man, though he may be overcome with sin in Company, yet when he is alone, his
heart is more for God, and set against his sin.

Secondly, That may be said to be a man's self, that is the First spring of his
soul: As now, the thoughts and affections in the first rise of them, how are
they, how is the guise, as I may so say, or the temper and disposition of thy
thoughts and thine affections in the first rise of them? As now you may know
what is the proper nature of the Fountain, by that that is next to the Spring:
Perhaps if the Fountain runs a Mile or two off, then there may come that that
may alter the stream, that it may not be of the nature of the Fountain: So thou
may know what thy nature is, by examining what the first working of thy
thoughts and thine affections are, when thou art alone.

And Thirdly, Thou may know thy self in this, how thou stand when thou
art got abroad from those that know thee not: You shall have many men, that
when they are at home, and among their neighbors, they live very fairly and
civilly; But let them go a journey abroad among some strangers, there they will
be roaring, and filthy and unclean, there they all discover themselves:
Therefore examine your selves in that.

Fourthly, You may know when you are your self, by examining your heart, how it
works most naturally when you are from under government: Young people, many of
them, they live fairly and civilly all the while they are under Government, but
let them be once themselves, that they are freemen, from under any Government,
then will be the most natural workings of their hearts: O! then presently you
find that they fly out into wicked Company, why, that was the natural temper of
their hearts before.

Fifthly, You may kn^w when you are yourself, by what you are in time of
prosperity and peace; in time of affliction, then you are, as it were, in Gods
Fetters and Irons, and then you will speak very well, and promise very fair;
but when you are at most peace in your own spirits, when you have the World at
^ill, how do your hearts work then? the natural temper and pulse of your hearts
is then when you are in the most peace, and the most prosperity; when you have
all things about you according as you do desire, then is the most natural
working of your hearts: It may be you think your hearts is good; why, because
you have many good moods in times of sickness; O no, your heart may be very bad
for all that: But look how your heart does work when you are most in peace, and
free from danger, that is the most natural working of a man's heart.

And then Sixthly, That Is the most natural working of a man's heart, when he is
himself, which he does with most deliberation; a man may do otherwise then the
natural temper of his heart would carry him on to, on a sudden; But it cannot
be said, a man's self, as Paul said, It Is not I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me: But now when a man upon deliberation and examination, will do a
thing, then he does it when he is most himself: So that by this you know the
difference between the sins of one, and the sins of another: -- The sins of
wicked men are such as comes from their natural temper, that their hearts do
close withal when they are most themselves: But, the sins of the Saints are
such, that let them come but to be themselves, and then their hearts will not
close with them so much: When temptations rise, it may draw awaytheir hearts:
I, but when they are themselves, and are abroad, they keep godly and gracious;
and likewise, when they are from under Government, they are rather better; one
that was a servant, and gracious then, when he comes to be for himself, he is
better then, then he was before, for when he was a servant, he was much
hindered; But when they come to be for themselves, then they appear to be more
gracious: And though upon a suddein, they are overcome, yet let them come to
deliberate, and then they are most for God; so that their sin comes not from
their natural dispositions -- Wicked men when they are most themselves, they
sin most; but the Saints, when they are most themselves, they serve God most:
And here is the difference between the spot of the wicked, and the spot of Gods
Children: --

The Third SERMON. August the 10th, 1645.
WE are now to come to show the differences between the spots of wicked men,
and godly men, in the different behavior of their souls about their sin: You
shall find that the carriage and behavior of a godly man about sin, is a great
deal different from that that there is in a wicked man; which will appear in
many things: As in the first place,

First, A godly man, at least in his course and way, he does not make provision
for the flesh, he does not make provision for sin, he ^oth not lay in before
hand for his sin, as the wicked does: The making provision for the flesh, it is
made in Scripture to be opposite to the putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, in
Romans 13. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, make no provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the l^sts thereof: You cannot put on the Lord Jesus (...) yet
make provision for the flesh, both together. Now a wicked carnal heart, he
think (...) apply Christ, and make provision for the flesh, both at once: It Is
hard to say what possibly may befall a godly man in a temptation; but
certainly, when a godly man (...) (...) acquainted with the ways of Christ,
and knows Christ, shall come to put on Jesus Christ, and apply Christ by Faith,
he cannot but see, that the making provision for the flesh, and the putting on
Christ at the same time, must needs be incompetible together: The way of the
ungodly it is to be plotting and contriving for sin; O^ does thy conscience
tell thee that this is thy way, to be in thy thoughts when thou art alone,
contriving, plotting, advising, meditating, considering how to accomplish the
satisfying of the lusts of thy flesh? thou art the man that know not what it
is to put on Christ, and thy (...) is not the spot of Gods Children: The
Apostle speaking of the sins of the Saints, in Gal. 6. says he, If any man be
overtaken with a ^ault, ye that are spiritual, restore such a man: As if there
were no faults that the Saints were guilty of, but such as they are overtaken
with: But now, wicked men, they do overtake their sins, rather than their sins
over take them: When a man shall be contriving and plotting, he will have such
satisfaction to a sinful lust, I say he seeks to overtake his sin, rather than
his sin overtakes him: That Is the first thing.

Secondly, Suppose the sin has in some measure overtaken a Saint: Yet in the
second place, it is not easily entertained: Suppose sin did come and present it
self, and follow a Child of God, I say, sin is not easily entertained, it is
not admitted upon easy terms; a wicked man will admit of his sin upon very
easy terms, some sin at least. If your servants shall leave the door by the
latch, you will suspect them to be in covenant with the Thief, that they are
one plotting with the other; So when any man shall admit of a sin upon easy
terms, that sin shall get in easily into the soul, it is a sign there is a
^eague between the soul and sin. A gracious heart is watchful against sin, and
is careful to keep it out, to lock and bolt it out: It will ^^t leave the door
at latch, so as to admit of sin upon easy terms.

Thirdly, Yet, suppose sin has got in, a gracious heart is easily convinced of
his sin, a little matter will convince him, after his sin has overcome him; he
will not stand pleading for his sin, he will not stand in defense of his sin,
so as a wicked man does: we find David, though a King, and a man of a notable
Spirit, yet in 2 Samuel (...) when Nathan came to him to tell him of his sin,
presently says David to Nathan, in the 13. v. I have sinned against the Lord:
Nathan told him that he was the man, he did not stand out, Why, prove it if you
can; who is able to say that I did this and this wickedness? No, I have sinned
against the Lord: He falls down before the word of the Prophet, and
acknowledges his sin, he is easily convinced of his sin, if he be godly:
Whereas a wicked man will stand pleading for his sin, pleading against it, that
he has not committed it, except that you find him out by some apparent hand;
he will be pleading for his sin, either that he is not guilty, or if he be
guilty, that it is not so great, it is but his nature* O! a godly man pleads
not after this manner* Nature! he looks upon his sin as so much the more vile
because it proceeds from such a wicked and cursed nature of his, and therefore
David, in Psalm. 51. when he was acknowledging the act of sin that he had been
guilty of, when ^e comes to consider of hi^ nature, O! I was conceived in sin
(says he) and brought forth in iniquity: He makes tha^ to be a great
aggravation of his sin, because i^ did flow from such a wicked nature: It is an
Argument of gross ignorance, of a man or woman that knows not the things of
God, and is not acquainted with Scripture, to plead for a sin, That it is their
nature; It is the worse because of that: If a Thief should come to the bar,
and plead before the Judge, Indeed I have committed this theft, but it is my
nature; would this be a plea before a Judge? and certainly this plea will not go
before the great Judge of all the World, to say, it is thy nature; No, the
Saints know their sin is aggravated by that -- Secondly, Neither will a Child
of God ordinarily plead that it is a temptation; O! I, it is a temptation that
has prevaild against me, I was tempted to it, and such and such were the cause
of it; I, but a gracious heart will rather charge the wickedness that is within
it, then charge a temptation; for the truth is, temptation could never prevail
against us, were it not for the wickedness of our hearts; temptations came to
Christ, but the Devil finding nothing in him, as the Scripture speaks,
therefore could they not prevail over him: And ^vere it not for the baseness of
thy heart, temptations would not prevail; therefore for thee to put it off, It
is thy temptation, O this is a carnal plea: I, but a gracious heart will charge
himself before the Lord, O! it is

Thirdly, Much less will a gracious heart put of his sin to God himself, and
say, When God gives me more grace, I shall do better; but I cannot do any thing
of my self; and therefore because God gives me no grace, that is the reason I
fell into such sins: This is the boldness of the hearts of men and women, to
think to put off all their sins upon God himself, as if there were no other
reason why they commit sin, but because God is the cause of it: As for their
part, they would do better, but only God denies them his grace, and so they
think to put off all from themselves, even to God. But know, the Lord will find
thee out one day, and he will charge thy sin upon thy self, and thy destruction
and thy wickedness it is from thy self; a gracious heart will not plead for sin
after such away as this is: It Is very dangerous when you hear of any that make
profession of Religion, to plead for their looseness after such a manner as this
is. We have cause to fear that their spot is not the spot of Gods Children.

Fourthly, When sin has preveil'd in some measure against a Child of God, yet
he is quickly stopped in sin; he is easily convinced of it, pleads not for it,
and is ready to be stopped; a little thing will stop the course of his sin. O^
any truths of God that come to him, his heart having a principle within it,
suitable to the truths of God, his heart closes with those truths, and so comes
to be stopped in his course: A wicked man sins, and having no principle of grace
suitable to any truth of God, when any thing opposes his sin: his heart opposes
that that would oppose sin, But a Child of God, though he be overcome with a
sin, yet when the truth of God comes, it meets with something within the heart
that is suitable to the truth, and it presently closes together: You have a
notable example for that in the Prophet David, 1 Samuel 25. 32. For the
understanding of it, you may cast your eye upon some verses before; you shall
find that David was in a way of sin; That his choler had got up and prevailed
against him, and he was ^^out a very wicked act, to avenge himself, ^^d be
guilty of blood: But Abigal meets ^ith David in his way, when he was in the
^^ay of sin, and shows him in a very fair manner, the evil of his course, if he
should ac^^mplish what he did intend; And mark, ^avid, though his blood was up,
yet when ^bigal came and spoke but reason to him, to ^^ew to him what the evil
of his sin was like to (...), David's spirit falls, and David said to ^^igal,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel ^^ich sent thee this day to meet me: And
^^^ssed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, ^^^ch have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood -- When David was in a mighty heat, in a way of sin: O! if
a man should come to some of you when your passion is up, and you are resolved
to do such and such a thing, if a man should come and plead the case fairly
with you, that such a thing is evil, it is a sin against God; You will presently
answer, I will, and I will, I care not, and let come of it what will come, I
will do it; thus when the lust is up, there is no gainsaying of it, and no
truth can stand against it; But now if the heart were gracious, though
corruptions may be stirring for a while, yet let any truth of God come and be
suggested to such a soul, it meets with something within that is suitable to it,
and presently the hear^ will be ready to fall down, Oh blessed b^ God, and
blessed be your Counsel, and blessed be God that has hindered me from such a
way of sin! O my retched nature w^^ stirring and working, and I was resolved t^
have done such and such a thing; if the Lo^^ had not in mercy sent you to have
stopped me i^ such a way, O what might I have done! he^^ now is the spirit of
David. O consider (...) this you that will plead sometimes for Davi^ sin; and
did not David commit such a sin, y^^ will say? I, but then take notice how
qui^^ly David was convinced, and how soon was stopped in his sin.

Fifthly, There Is no godly man what ever, though he has many sins in him, yet
there is no sin that reigns over him: This is a certain truth, that there is no
man or woman in the World that has the least degree of grace, that is under
the power of any reigning sin: Sin may dwell, but not reign in them, and the
Scripture is so express in this, that there can be no gainsaying of it: Romans 6.
14. For sin shall not have dominion over you; why? for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace; That soul that is under the dominion of any sin, is under
the Law, that is, it is under the curse of the Law, it is in the state of
nature, it has no interest in Christ: But now if the soul come once to be
under grace, either sin must not have domminion over you, or God must not be
faithful, one of them; for this is the promise of the Holy Ghost, If you be
under grace, sin shall have no more dominion over you: He does not say, that if
you be under grace, then you shall commit no more sin; but sin shall have no
dominion over you; therefore that man or woman over whom any one sin has
dominion, certainly is not under grace; This is the word of God, and O that God
would carry it unto the consciences of whom it does concern this day, that
whosoever is under the dominion and reign of any sin, that soul for the present
is not under grace, he has no interest in the grace of Jesus Christ.

Now you will say, for the reign and dominion of sin, What Is that?

What the reign and dominion of sin is:
First, It Is apparent in a great many, that they are under the reign of sin,
that is, such men can go on constantly in a way of known-sins, merely for
contentment unto the flesh; why these are under the power and reign of sin:
Yea, sometimes a sin that is a secret sin, may be a reigning sin: A man may be
the subject of a King that he never saw in all his life: Perhaps he knows not
where the King is, and yet he may be his Subject, and he may reign over him: So
a secret sin may be a reigning sin: That Is a reigning sin that a man gives
himself up to, though it be in never so secret a way: There Is a difference
between a Tyrant that co meth violently to force men to submit to him, or one
that comes with a sudden surprise, or with any cunning ways to persuade men to
come in to submit to him, and a Prince that is upon his Throne reigning, and
having his Subjects acknowledging themselves to be as Subjects to him: Now the
sins of the wicked they are reigning, tha^ is, their sins command them, and
they yeel^ up their very wills unto their sins; the wi^^ and the affections, it
is in the sin; There is nothing more in the will of a natural man, then his
sin: And therefore the Scripture makes these to be all one, the will of man,
and the will of the flesh: Now when the will yields up to the ways of sin,
then sin may be said to be in the Throne: But now in a godly man there is a
universal, spiritual, and irreconcilable opposition unto sin; though there be
sin abiding in him, yet I say, there is a universal, spiritual, irreconcilable
opposition unto his sin; sin does not reign in a soul: so long as there is an
opposition in a kingdom to any man, certainly he cannot be said to reign: I
say, if there be a universal opposition. Now in the soul of a Child of God
there is an opposition to sin, a universal one, a spiritual one, and I may put
a fourth, a powerful, universal, spiritual, irreconcilable opposition: I Will
open these.

First, A powerful opposition: That is, he does not only wish that he could
not sin, and wish that he might be otherwise, but he makes it to be the great
work of his life above all things in the World, to set himself against his sin;
so as if God would speak from Heaven and say unto him, Poor creature! what
would thou that I should do for thee? this soul would answer to God, Lord,
thou that know all things, know this is the unfeigned desire of my soul
above all things, O giveme but power against my sin, and especially against
those special sins that my nature is most inclinable to. O! this is that that
my heart is most against. Many people extremely deceive themselves in this, in
thinking that they oppose their sins, because they have some wishes, and
desires, they would be glad that things were better with them then they are: I,
but do thou look upon it as a matter of life and death, and thereupon thy
soul does more strongly work in its opposition against thy sin, then against
any thing in the World besides? many men and women have strong spirits in
following their sins, but their spirits are not strong in the opposing of their
sins: But he that is gracious, makes it to be his greatest and chiefest work.

And then the Second thing, It is a universal opposition; and that in these Two
regards.

First, All the faculties in the soul do rise up against sin: There is some
kind of opposition in a wicked man against sin, that is, his conscience
sometimes does oppose the lusts that there is in his affections: It may be, a
wicked man has a convinced conscience; and his conscience will not let him to
be at quiet; but in his affections there is a liking of sin, only his
conscience will not let him be at quiet: -- You will say, how shall a man
discern this? You may discern it thus; If the opposition be merely in your
conscience and not in your heart and affections, then, though indeed you dare
not for the present commit such a sin, yet you could wish with all your heart
that you might have liberty to do it; you could wish that there were not such a
Law to forbid it; you could be glad that that Law were more loose: And you
would fain have such a thing not to be a sin; and if you could commit it
quietly without any danger, you would do it: Now the opposition is not in your
will, it is only in your conscience: This is an opposition to sin that a
carnal heart may have; that is, he may have his conscience so fly in his face,
as that he shall not dare for the present to commit his sin, no not in secret;
a man may come so far: You will say, Indeed, many hypocrites may go thus far,
as not to commit sin before others, but yet if it be in secret, then they will
do it; No, a natural conscience may be able to carry a man to this height, that
is, not only to abstain from sin because of others, but from the acts of sin
in secret, that he dares not for his life (though there be none but God and
himself together) give way to his sin, and yet no saving-grace all this while:
-- You will say, how can that be? because though his conscience will not let
him be quiet, yet he would be glad to have his sin if he might; here is no
change of nature that is the evidence, that there is no grace; for if a man
abstain from sin out of a principle of grace, it is from the change of his
nature; and certainly here is no change of nature in this: so that it is not a
universal opposition, it is but only in one part of his soul: But now the
opposition of a gracious heart it is in the whole soul; not only my conscience
is against my sin, but my will, and my asfections; I have a principle in my
will and affections, as well as in my conscience; all the faculties of the soul
do oppose the sin.

And then Secondly, It Is universal, that is, there is the opposition of all sin:
not only of some particular sin, but of every sin; what ever the sin be, yet
the heart does oppose it: So as it can appeal to God, Lord, thou that know
all things, know there is not one way of wickedness in me, there is not one
sin that my soul gives way to, but there is in my heart an opposition against
every sin.

And then I say, It Is a spiritual opposition; by that I mean this, that it is an
opposition, not from arguments only without that, because of the danger, or
shame, or prejudice that will come by it; but the opposition is from a contrary
stream of grace that there is in the heart: There Is such a temptation to sin;
but a carnal heart may think if I commit it, then there may come this ill, and
the other evil of it, and so I will not commit it: But a gracious heart does
not oppose only from such arguments, but from a contrary stream of grace that
there is in the soul; now when the opposition to sin comes from a contrary
stream of grace, then the opposition is not only to keep sin from acting, but
indeed it does decreass the habits of sin: And this should be the care of a
godly man or woman, not merely to keep in, that is, to restrain sin, but let me
oppose the habits of sin: Let me find the habits of my sin to be weakened and
mortified in me: Let me follow my corruption to the very root of it, and there
labor to get the very root of my corruption to be deaded: O here is the work of
a Child of God!

As now in the opposition of a stream of water, water that runs in such a
stream, there may be two ways to oppose it: Either you may make a damm, and so
damm it up: -- Or otherwise, if there could be gotten a contrary stream, and so
by that to overpower it; this would be another manner of opposition then merely
the damming of it up: If you damm up a stream, it rises up higher and higher,
and seeks to get vent one way or other; but if there were a contrary stream
that would carry it smoothly away: -- So it is when the sins of wicked men are
opposed, not only when they are opposed by their friends, that these will not
let them commit such a sin; but when their very consciences oppose their sin,
their sin swells up the more, and they seek all evasions how they can get to
have liberty to the commission of their sin; and if once they have but broken
over the damm, they run with more violence; as many young people, when they are
under government, their sin is but damm'd up, and their sins are swelling, and
their hearts would fain have vent for their sin, but they dare not: But then
afterward when they come to be for themselves, their sin breaks out so much
the more: But a gracious heart has a new nature which God has put into the
soul, which is contrary to the nature of sin: That Is the spiritual way of
opposition of sin.

And then it is an irrecocinlable opposition; that is, such a soul that has any
truth of grace, will never be reconciled with any one sin: It resolves with it
self, what ever becomes of me, yea though I should perish eternally, yet I am
resolved to fight against my sin eternally: Yea, at such a time as a soul is
afraid that God will cast it away for ever, yet at that time such a soul would
be loath to sin against God -- You shall have some men that have horrors of
conscience, and they are afraid that God will ^ast them off; why then upon
that, then I ^ad as good leave of all, say they; and if I must be damned, I had
as good be damned for somewhat; O this is a sign that grace has not got unto
thy heart: But there is another now, that ^ath some principles of grace got into
his soul, and it may be such a one may have terrors of ^onscience too, and may
be afraid that at (...) it shall be cast away: But yet it concludes ^hus; Well,
whatsoever becomes of me, let God do with me what he will, yet I will do that I
can to honor him: The name of God (...) blessed for ever, what ever becomes of
me: and therefore that evil of mine that is in my ^eart, I am resolved to set
my self against to ^^e uttermost for ever -- Now this is a ^^gn that there is
grace, though much cor^uption does very much prevail,

You may see now as I go along, thus much, that there may be spots in one, and
spots in the ^ther; But here is a great deal of difference be^^een the sins of
the one, and the sins of the ^^her.

Further, Consider the grounds upon which ^icked men do ordinarily sin: Godly
men (...) rarely be found to commit sin upon such ^ounds as wicked men do! --
There are ^any grounds upon which wicked men go, (...) the commission of sin:
-- I shall but ^ame them, and yet in the naming of them, I do verily persuade
my self I may speak to many of your hearts.

As thus: Commit a sin, why it is but one, and I will not live in many sins:
It Is but one sin that I would live in; and in that I hope God may favor me:
What, not in one! -- Why, Godly men will not do so; where was there ever a
godly man on the face of the Earth that would allow himself in a sin because it
was but one? --

Secondly, Says a carnal heart, It Is but one, and it is a little one: I will
not commit such gross sins as others do, I will not swear, and openly profane
the Sabbath, and be drunk, and a Whore-master: But sins in thought, and of a
lesser nature, I hope they may be born withal? And what need a man be so
strict and precise? I, but know, that a gracious heart would never reason after
such a manner; O no, such a one knows, that the least sin is a greater evil
then the greatest affliction; that there is more evil in the least sin, then
there is in all the torments of Hell besides: And a godly man that understands
the ways of God, does know, that the least sin must have the blood of Jesus
Christ to purge it out, that is more worth then ten Thousand worlds; and
therefore he will no^ allow himself in the least, because it is a little one.

The Third ground is this:

Why, the best of all have their sins as well as we: Those that we read of in
Scripture, have they not fallen into foul sins: But I beseech you mark, though
godly men have their infirmities, yet show me any example that ever there was
since the beginning of the World, any one godly man that did plead for his sin
upon this account, because another godly man had committed it: O! he does not
commit sin upon such a ground as this is: He will not venture upon the practice
of sin, because he sees others are guilty of it as well as himself; Oh no, If
God has dishonor by another, let me take heed how I add to this dishonor,
says a gracious heart.

Fourthly, Another ground is, because their sin is not so bad as the sins of
others; mine is not the worst: Come and rebuke them for a sin, why, God grant
you never do any worse -- Indeed in matters of affliction we may reason from a
less to a greater, and take up a less to prevent a greater; but in matters of
sin we should never make such comparisons; there is a kind of infiniteness in
sin, and the least sin is enough to be my eternal ruin: What Is that to me
because others do worse? I beseech you consider of it, as we name these things,
for I do not stand to enlarge every one: For the truth is, there is never a one
of these but might be enlarged into a Sermon, and might be a great use to take
away these grounds of sin upon which ungodly men do commit their sin.

Fifthly, Another is this: A wicked heart will venture upon sin, why, because
he heart that God is merciful, and God's not so strict as many make him: This
is a sign thy spot is not the spot of Gods Children: Where do we ever find that
a gracious heart would ever reason thus, there is mercy with the Lord and
therefore let me sin? O no, the reasonings of a gracious heart are, There is
mercies with thee, O Lord, that then may be feared, and therefore thou shall
be feared: Not, there are mercies with thee and therefore thou shall be
dishonored; If there be such kind of reasonings in thy heart, that thou
venturest upon sin upon this ground, because God is merciful, know, that the
Lord speaks to thy soul this day, that thy spot is not the spot of Gods
Children.

Sixthly, And farther, Not only because God is merciful, but God has been
already merciful; Indeed I hear that there is a great deal of danger in sin,
but I have lived all this while, and nothing has come of it; O! for men to sin
upon reasoning of Gods patience! because the Lord has been patient and
suffered them all this while: O this is wicked boldness in thy heart, thou
know not with whom it is thou have to deal: Thou have escaped all this
while, O but a sinner a hundred years old shall be accursed: Thy spot is not
the spot of Gods Child, that dare venture upon thy sin because thou have
escaped so long a time as thou have done.

Seventhly, And then yet farther; There Is another ground that is worse then all
these, that some will venture upon sin, why, because Jesus Christ has died for
sinners, because there is a purchase for the pardon of sin: Oh this is a most
desperate turning the grace of God into wantoness, to dare to venture upon the
commission of thy sin because Christ came to purchase the pardon of sin! why,
did not Jesus Christ come into the World to dissolve the works of the Devil,
and do thou make Jesus Christ to be a means to strengthen the works of the
Devil: Bold and presumptuous heart! the Lord rebuke thee, that do account the
blood of Jesus Christ not only as a common thing, but as a polluted thing, as
an unclean thing; surely thy spot is not the spot of Gods Children.

Eighthly, Another ground is this: A temptation comes to sin, and they will
venture upon it: Why? they hope they shall repent afterward; and though I do
sin, it is but repenting afterward; and if I do repent afterward, then my sin
shall be for given me, and not laid to my charge: But have you any thing in
Scripture, That any Child of God committed sin upon such a ground as this is?
and if thou do so, thy spot likewise is not the spot of Gods Children: O
foolish and base heart, thou will do that now, that thou do know thou may
wish thou had never done: This is in finite folly; and surely God does not
leave his Children to such wickedness as this is, to venture upon sin upon such
grounds as these are.

Ninethly, Another ground may be this: They will venture upon it; why? because
it may possibly stand with grace: You shall hear sometimes, many that make some
kind of profession, to be reasoning after this manner: They will not indeed
commit such things as they think cannot possibly stand with grace; but if they
think it may possibly stand with grace, they will make that to be the ground of
their venturing upon it: O wretched and vile heart, that shall thus reason to
commit sin because it may possibly stand with grace! Suppose it should be so,
that many a man that commits such a sin should go to Heaven; but is it possible
that a man commiting sin upon such a ground, may go to Heaven: There Is a great
deal of difference between a thing done, and a thing done upon such a ground.

Tenthly, Lastly, (though many others might be named) for a man to venture upon
a sin, why, because he has done much good: This likewise is not the spot of
Gods Child, for one to sin upon such a ground: I have done some good, and
therefore I may venture upon some sin: This is the wickedness of a man's heart,
that if he has (as they use to say) kept his Church, he thinks he may have
liberty in the weekday the more; if he be devout upon the Lords day, he may
take liberty so much the more upon the weekday: O this is an Argument of a
base and carnal heart, that knows not the ways of God: To take liberty upon
sin at one time, because they have been devout, and done good at another time:
That Is the next head, the different grounds.

I shall name but one thing more:

That a godly man in the commission of sin, he makes his falling into one sin,
to be a means to help him against that sin, and against many others: If the
Lord shall let him fall into some one sin, I say, he will make that to be a
means to cleanse many others; but especially, to take heed against that sin:
The bespotting of himself in some one spot, will be a means for the cleansing
of many spots: Though he dare not commit sin upon that ground, yet it falls out
so in the effect: As sometimes, if there be a few small spots in a Child's Coat,
you regard not them; but if there be some great spot, it causes you to wash the
whole Coat: So it is with one that has any grace, if the Lord (notwithstanding
his watchfulness and care) shall let him fall into some great spot, he makes
this use, To be cleansing and washing of his soul, not only from that spot,
but from all other spots he knows in himself; but especially, to set himself
against that particular sin, he will take heed of ever falling into that again:

And therefore give me an example in all the book of God, where any one man
that was godly, committed the same sin twice: I say, after an act of
repentance: It Is true Peter denied his Master thrice, I, but that was as a
continued thing, it was not after Peter's heart was smitten and humbled, after
his conviction and repentance -- And for my part, I know no example from
Genesis to the Revelation, of any one Child of God that fe^^ twice into an
outward Act; I do not say, the sins of thought, they may be repented of, an
fallen into again, though the heart do labor and strive against them; but for
an outward a^^ of sin that any Child of God did ever fall into after God had
shown him the evil, and h^ had tepented of it: -- And therefore the condition
must needs be sad, when it is such as there can be no example in all the
Scriptur to parallel it: For I appeal to thee, thou the make any Profession
of Religion, and thou fallest into some act of sin; Either thy Conscience does
accuse thee, and thou do repent, or it does not accuse thee, and thou do
not repent: If thy Conscience does not accuse thee, and thou do not repent,
that is a sign thy heart is not troubled: -- Well, if thy heart be troubled, and
thou have repented, give me an example of any one Child of God, that fell into
such an act of sin again -- Yea, I shall show you in diverse examples in
Scripture, that evermore those Children of God that have been overtaken with
their sin, they have been more eminent in that grace that is most contrary to
that sin, than in any other grace.

Peter he fell through cowardice, to betray his Master: But yet when the
Scripture speaks of him afterward, it notes him specially for his boldness, in
John 21. 7. Therefore the Disciple whom Jesu's loved, says unto Peter, it is
the Lord; now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fishers
Coat unto him, and did cast himself into the Sea: Oh the love of Peter toward
Christ after he had denied him! He had denied Christ; but now he was the host
forward in his love to Christ; he would not stay till Christ came to the ship,
but ^^rows himself into the Sea, that he might presently be with Christ; he had
broke his love before, and now you see how eminent he is in love above the
other Disciples! -- And so in boldness; In Acts 2. 14. When the Jews did mock
at the Apostles and Disciples, the Text says, That Peter standing up with the
eleven, lift up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea: Not any of the
other would speak, but Peter he appears the most forward; I, it was because
Peter had denied Christ, and therefore he would be the most forward in
manifesting love to Christ -- You cannot have comfort that your spot is the
spot of Gods Children, except, if you have been overcome with a sin, yet
afterward you grow not up in that grace that is most eminently contrary to
that sin.

Another example we have of Nichodemus Nichodemus he began to have some work o^
grace upon him, but the Scripture notes him for a very timorous man, and that
was him special infirmity, that he was afraid, and so would come to Christ by
night: Now afterward when the Scripture takes notice of this Nichodemas,
especially it observes him for his boldness, for that which was contrary to
that sinful distemper of his heart before This you have in John 19. 39. And
there came also Nichodemas, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and
brought a mixture of Myrrh and Alots, about One hundrd weight: Then took they
the body of Jesus: He appeared now openly.

The third is Joseph of Arimathea, v. 38. And after this, Joseph of Arimathea,
being a Disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus: He was at the first step a Disciple;
but dare not appear; but afterward he is noted for one of the most forward of
all, and would go and own him before Pilate himself, yea, and at that time when
Christ was in his lowest cond ti^r: That Is a sign indeed of grace, to own
Christ when he is in the lowest condition, when he was crucified and dead; yet
now to appear to own him, and that before Princes! O! the Scripture takes
special notice of those that had fallen into sin, that afterward they grew
more eminent in that grace that was contrary to that sin, than any other: As it
is with a bone that is set, it is more strong then before; and so it is usual
with those that are godly, if they be once overcome with their sin, they
afterward grow more strong against that sin: And thus even Acts come to
decrease Habits; and that is a Paradox in Philosophy, it is true in Divinity,
That the acts of the Saints sin, come not only to restrain them from falling
into them again, but it is used by God to decreass the habits of their sin. Now
I beseech you carry home these things to your souls; and O that the Lord would
cause you to lay your hand upon your hearts, and say, Lord have mercy upon me;
we are indeed all sinners, but we see that God will find a difference between
one sin and another; and though all have their spots, yet, as for my part, I am
afraid that my spot is not the spot of Gods Children.

The Fourth SERMON. August the 23d, 1645.
I Shall speak to one or two particulars more about this, (and then we come to
the last thing propounded in the opening of this point*)

The behavior of the heart of a Child of God toward this sin.

The sins of the Saints they drive them to Jesus Christ: If there be any truth
of grace, though weak, thy sins will drive thee to Jesus Christ, not drive thee
from him, but drive thee to him: And make thee prise Jesus Christ as the
Immaculate Lamb of God that is come into the World to take away thy sin: It
will make thee set a high price upon Christ, and cause thy heart to follow him
with all thy might: Wicked men when they sin, they turnaway from God and from
Christ; and the things of Christ are less savoury to them: But the Saints when
they sin, they are put upon the seeking after Christ, and prising of him so
much the more.

Lastly, Their very sin makes them to long for Heaven: O wretched man that I
am! says Paul, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ, etc. O! he flies to Christ, and he desires to be present
with Christ: and so the Saints they long for Heaven upon this ground above all
other grounds and reasons, namely, because they know they shall never be
delivered from the body of sin and death that they carry about with them, till
they come to Heaven, and therefore they prise the state of Heaven as a glorious
state, because they shall never sin more against God: -- I put it now, in the
name of God, to your consciences this day; you say you hope to go to Heaven,
what is that for which you prise Heaven most? why, a gracious heart would say, O
Lord, though I endure some sorrows and afflictions here, yet thou know that
the great burden of all, it is the burden of my sin; and when I shall be taken
out of this world, I know I shall never sin more, never sin more against thee.
O that day! when shall that day come that my soul shall never sin more against
that God that I do love? Thou that know all things, know, that this is my
desire after Heaven upon this ground, above all other grounds whatsoever: Are
you able to say so as in the pesence of God? this would be a good argument
indeed, that though there be some spots, yet they may be the spots of Gods
Children: And if it be so with thee, then attend to the next point, and that is
--

The different dealings of God with his Children in regard of their sin, with
his dealings with the wicked and ungodly in regard of their sins -- As the
behavior of thy soul in respect of thy sin, is different from the wicked; so
the behavior of God toward thee will be very different from that of his
toward the wicked and ungodly: They may not think to escape, so as thou may
escape.

First, As in the first place: If a Child of God sins, yet he has a pardon
laid up for his sin, yea a pardon laid up before the sin is committed; I do not
say, the pardon actually applied, but laid up; for to say the thing is actually
pardoned before committed, it is scarce English, much less Divinity: For
whatever it be in Gods account, or what God will do, yet when we say the sinner
is pardoned, it notes some work of God upon the Creation actual in being: As
when we say the World was created, it was not created from eternity, why, it is
a work of God upon the creation, therefore it has a Time: And so, what is a work
of God in Himself? that is from eternity. But what is a work of God upon the
creature, that is in time; without any change in Gods nature, any more-then the
creating of the World did change his nature; there are for givnesses with thee
that thou may be feared; they lie up with thee: there are Pardons that lie
up with God, there is an Atonement made for the sins of Gods Children, for the
sins that they have committed, and sins that they shall commit: I say, an
Atonement is made even for them, and a ransom is paid: Jesus Christ did tender
up himself to the Father for a ransom for all the sins of the elect, it is laid
up there: So says the Apostle 1 John 2, 2. I write unto you, little Children,
that ye sin not, and if any man sin, (that I shall take notice of by and by) we
have an Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for our sins: So
that when an ungodly man sins, there the sentence of death comes out against
him; But the Lord says concerning his Children. Let their souls be pardoned,
for I have found a ransom: Thou say, the best have their sin; True, but one
man has a ransom, has a price paid for his sin, and thou have none, none for
ought thou know: In that condition wherein thou art, thou can not know
that thou have any: Here Is the difference between Gods dealing with his
Children and others, one sins, and the Lord acknowledges a propitiation
presently, a ransom, a price, a pardon that is laid in; but he acknowledges it
not for thee.

Secondly, Yea, in the Second place, the Children of God when they sin, their
condition is far different from the sin of the wicked; they have not only a
price paid, and a pardon laid up; But you will say, how in case they do not sue
out their pardon? I confess if they sue it not out, they have not the comfort
of it: But yet the Scripture tells us, they have an Advocate with the Fathe --
If they through ignorance do not know their sin, how can they sue out their
pardon? yet they have an advocate with the Father continually, and it is the
work of Jesus Christ at the right hand of the Father, to be an Advocate to
plead for believers, with the Father; when ever they sin against the Father,
there stands Christ their Advocate pleading, he watches if there come in any
accusations against them; if the Law, or the Devil, or conscience shall send up
an accusation, Christ stands as an Advocate to plead their cause: you know I
suppose what an Advocate in Law does mean; he stands to plead the cause of his
Client; and whatsoever comes in against him, he is made acquainted withal,
that he may stand to plead: This is the case of the Children of God;
notwithstanding their sin, they have an Advocate with the Father: In 1 John 2.
1. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; ye ought
not to sin, take heed of sinning; But if ye do, you have an advoc te with he
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: -- These things that I am speaking, I
confess may prove dangerous to wicked carnal hearts, that are ready to turn the
Grace of God into wantonness; but by that they may know, what I say belongs not
to them, that their spots are not the spots of Gods Children: Those that shall
hear of this, and be hardened, or emb^ldned in sin the more, there need no
other Argument to prove that their spots a^^ n^ne ^f the spots of Gods
Children, than that: And therefore that what I say does not at all belong to
such: but how ever, it does belong to many of the Children of God, and
therefore they must have their portion, though such as it belongs not to will
be ^eady to snatch at it: And that is the second thing, in the different way of
Gods dealing with his Children when they sin, and with the ungodly: Thou
sinnest as others do: Thy sin for the Act may be the same; but when thou have
sinned, who stands before the Father to plead thy cause? what has Christ to do
with thee? or thee to do with him? but rather thy Conscience, and Law, and
Devil stands pleading against thee, and none to answer for thee.

But, Thirdly, When a godly Man sins, God deals with him not according to the
Law of Justice, but according to the Law of Grace; We are not under the Law
(says the Apostle concerning believers) but under grace; when another sins,
the Law passes presently upon him; but says the Apostle in Romans 8. 1. There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The Law cannot pass upon them
to condemn them: They are not to be dealt withal according to the Law, but
according to Grace: Now the ungodly when they sin, they are dealt withal
according to the Law, God will do them no wrong, but the Law must pass upon
them.

Yea, not only so, but they are delivered from the Law, and from all the curse
of the Law; I, the Lord has promised that he will spare them as a Man does his
only Son that serves him: In Mal. 3. last. If thou be'st a Child, this is thy
portion; And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I
make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a Man spares his only Son that
serves him: This is a Text that has a treasury of comfort in it to those that
are Gods Children, that can by those former notes of the difference of sin, and
their different behaviors toward their sin, approve themselves that they
belong to God; here is the promise, That the Lord will spare them as a Father
spares his own Son that serves him: A Father will not cast cut his Son from
his House, and disinherit him for every offense that he does commit; neither
will God deal so with his Children, though they have spots, though they have
infimities: And hence we find that God takes advantage against some for a
little sin, and spares another though he be guilty of a greater sin: Gods mercy
is his own, he may deal with his mercy as he pleases; he will do justly with
all, but he will be merciful to whom he pleases; and hence it is the Scripture
holds forth this, that some men the Lord has taken advantage against for some
smaller sin, and other men the Lord has spa^'d when they have been guilty of
some greater sin; As that notable example of Saul, comparing that with David:
David was one of Gods Children, and had spots, I, foul ones; Saul he was none
of Gods Child, and he had his spots, and some of them was not so foul in regard
of the nature of them, as David's were, and yet see the different dealing of God
with Saul and David; for Saul, you shall find that God rejects him utterly, and
what for? In 1 Samuel 13. 13. You may see wherefore God would reject Saul: And
Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the
commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee; for now would the
Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever; But now thy kingdom
shall not continue: -- As if Samuel should have said, Well, this is the thing
for which God will cut thee off, and cut off thy kingdom: -- Why, what was it?
if you examine the thing what it was, it was nothing but this, That there was
an agreement between Saul and Samuel, that Samuel should come to him at such a
time: Well, Samuel did not come just at the time, or staid, as Saul thought,
somewhat too long: Saul was brought into great straits, the Philistines came
upon him (his enemies:) Now upon this, being in such great straits, Saul had
not sought to God for Gods presence with him in the battle; now thought Saul, I
have staid for Samuel all this time, and he comes not, and rather then I will
go out to battle without making supplication to God, and offering sacrifice, I
will for this once venture upon it my self, for so he says in the 12 ver. It
was a burnt ^ffering: It was to the Lord, it was in the time of my straits, and
I forced my self to it too: I was not so ready and forward to do it, it was in
an absolute necessity, as I thought; and yet this is the sin for which Saul
must be cut off and rejected, and his kingdom not to continue -- You will say
now, what was this to the sin of David, of Murder, and Adulterry? Those were
sins of another nature; well, what if they were, yet David was a Child, and
Saul was not, and therefore he will pardon one, and condemn the other; and who
can say to God, what do thou?

And again, another sin of Saul you shall find in 1 Samuel 15. God required of
Saul to go against Amalek, and utterly to destroy him. Well, Saul did do
according to Gods command, and made a great slaughter, but he kept only some
of the Cattle and the fat ones; but he professed he kept them not for his own
advantage. it was that he might offer for sacrifice to God: Now Samuel comes to
him, though Saul had thought he had done nothing but that which God was pleased
withal, for he stands to justify himself in the 20 v. And Saul said unto
Samuel, yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which
the Lord sent me, and have brought Agag the King of Amalek, and have utterly
destroyed the Amalakites: I have done what God sent me about. Now Samuel he
comes and convinces him, that he had not done what God had sent him to do; why?
because he had spared some of the Cattle -- Now Saul excuses himself afterward
to Samuel in v. 12. The people took of the spoil, Sheep and Oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord
thy God is Gilgal: But mark what Samuel says in the 22 v. Has the Lord as
great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the
Lord? behold, to obey is better then sacrifice; and to hearken, then the fat of
Rams; for Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity
and idolatry; because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord has
also rejected thee from being King: -- These Scriptures might make any man's
heart to tremble, and not to dare to venture upon sins that he thinks to be
smaller sins; one would think that upon the consideration of these Scriptures,
that no man ever living should be heard to plead this, and say, Why, godly
people commit as great sins as they do: Why, David committed as great sins as
I, and so others. But what if they did? They may be pardoned for their greater,
and thou may be damned eternally for thy less: God will deal as a Father
with his Children, ^o spare those that are his: And that is another particular
in the different way of Gods dealings with his people.

Fourthly, The Children of God when they ^in, yet they have the robes of the
righteousness of the Son of God to cover them, even from God himself; not to
cover them so but God knows them; for that is either simplicity or blasphemy,
one of the two, to say that God sees them not: But to cover, that is, that they
shall be taken so far from the eye of God, that he shall never look upon them
to charge them with them, but that they shall appear before him through the
Robes of the righteousness of Christ as spotless, being justified through him.
So in Psalm. 32. Blessed is the Man whose sin is forgiven, and whose iniquity is
covered; all their spots are covered and the Lord looks upon them as amiable
and lovely in his eye: But now thou have nothine to cover thy spots, but thy
excuses. See the different condition of a believer, and another man. One man
sins against God, and what has he to cover his sins? Excuses, deny als, or
lies, and there is all. I, but now the of there he sins against God, and by Faith
apply the precious robe of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and so covers
himself before God Which do you think is the better covering Here Is the
difference between a Child of God and you.

Fifthly, And then fastly: Gods Children though they sin, yet still they are in
covenat with God; God has taken them in to an (...)* verlasting covenant with
himself, that shall (...) ver be broken: Though they do offend, (...) God will
not charge it upon them as the breach of that great covenant of grace that God
has made with them in his Son, that is an everlasting covenant; God has made a
covenant to unire their hearts to fear his name, that he will never depart from
them; and that he will put his fear into their hearts, and they shall never
depart from him, notwithstanding all their infirmities: This must be made good,
this covenant that God has made with them, must stand. Now, O what a different
condition is one in, from the other -- Now though there may be thoughts in
wicked hearts to abuse these things, yet I name them to this end, that you may
see the exceeding difference between the state of one, and the state of the
other; and that so by this you may be restless in your own spirits, till you
come to know that you are in the state of these men that are so happy, that is,
that you are of the Number of Gods Children -- I shall not need to stand to
give further notes and evidences; for the very opening of the point about the
defferent behavior of one in respect of their sin, from the other, will be
enough to show who are in this condition; and who not, whom God will deal with
all in this gracious manner in respect of their sin, and whom not: -- However,
men of the World will deal so much the more harshly with those that do offend;
if they can take any one that makes profession of Religion tripping in any
thing, they will be more severe against them, than against others, because of
their profession. Well, God does not do so, if there be uprightness in the
heart -- No, you will say, it is not because of that, but because of cloaking
wickedness with their profession: Well, if you be sure your hearts be right in
that, that profession your souls do love, and therefore it is the great grief
of your souls that any one that makes profession of Religion should dishonor
it by wicked courses; then (I say) can you approve your hearts before God, that
your hearts are grieved and troubled, and not rejoice at it, that you can sind
any advantage against profession, as some do? -- Then I confess, if the thing
be vile and foul, and such a thing as you cannot in charity see that it may
stand with truth of grace, to be a mere infirmity, but a wickedness: then you
may follow it to the very foot and bottom; and those that shall trouble the
people of God with gross and vile sins, and think to color them over with
profession of Religion, it is just with God they should be troubled: But if we
have time, we shall speak somewhat to that in the close of all* We come now to
the Application of the point, only this caution about this thing.

Cau. Take heed that you deceive not your hearts about this thing: If a Man
have two Children, one is godly, and the other is proeen; if they can have an
advantage over one that is the more godly, they will be more bitter to him than
the other; and if they have two Servants, one godly the other profane, why, the
profane one shall fare better then the godly, if they can have but the least
advantage against them: Well, howsoever thou deal'st with Children or Servants
when thou have taken them in a fault, that the wicked find more favor from
thee, yet God deals otherwise, his Children shall find favor from him: Only
let them take heed that they do not turn their hands to wickedness, or their
hearts to folly, because of this.

APPLICATION.
By way of Application.

In the first place, Hence then by all that has been said in the opening of
this difference, we may see full ground for the answering of the foolish carnal
plea's of the men of the World for their sin; which was, I told you, the main
reason I pitched upon this Subject: This it is hardens men in their sin, why,
Because all have their sins; methinks by what has been said, one would think
that this plea should never be heard any more, among any that profess any
knowledge in the Scripture, that it should never come out of your mouths, that
do but understand any thing of Scripture: -- What, will thou that art a wicked
vile wretch, plead for thy wickedness, that the best have their sins? Thou that
go on in a constant way and course of ungodliness, will thou plead that all
have their sins? thou can not be provoked, but thou swearest and flyest in
the face of God; thou that have a heart not savouring any thing of God, nor
never found any work of the Holy Ghost upon thy soul, do thou say that all
have their sins? God will find out a difference of sin. Rev. 1. 14. It Is said
of Christ, that his eyes were like a flame of fire: O! Christ has fiery eyes
that will pierce through and through thee, will see a great deal of difference
between the sin of one, and the sin of the other: -- I hou think it enough
to plead this, That the best have their faults, I beseech you let me reason it
a little with you about this -- The best, say you, have their faults; So say I
too; but the worst have some good in them, materially good: Why may not this be
as good a reason as thine? -- There are some that are saved, and yet committed
sin as well as I; so say I, there are some in Hell, and yet have done as much
good perhaps as ever thou. Why is not the reasoning of one side as good as the
other? -- Thou tellest me, that thou sinnest sometimes, and so did David and
Peter -- I Will tell thee of Saul, I Will tell thee of Ahab, I Will tell thee of
Herod; thou think that David and Peter committed as great sins as thou-Why,
Saul and Ahab, and Herod, and it may be Judas has done as much good as ever
thou, and yet they in Hell; as Saul that I spoke before of, he sinned, yet it
was not greater than thine; yet he did many good things, I have obeyed the
Commandment of the Lord -- And Ahab when the Prophet reproved him, he went and
humbled himself in sackcloth for his sin: When have thou ever done so for thy
sin? -- And Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and reformed many things: Surely
the Argument will hold as well, That such as are in Hell have done as much good
as I have, as some that are in Heaven have committed as great sins as I have:
O! it is not enough for thee that others do sin; they may be saved, and yet thou
may eternally be destroyed: This will not be a plea to a man's Conscience, if
it be enlightened, when he comes upon his sickbed, and deathbed: Though now
thou can put off thy Conscience with this, that every one has their sin, but
when thou come upon thy sickbed, and deathbed, if God inlighten thy
Conscience, O, it will not be answer enough for thee, when thou feast thou art
going before the great God, to receive the sentence of thy eternal doom, then
thou will have such miss-givings in thy Conscience; O! but what if it prove
that my sins be of another nature different from the sins of the godly, if it
prove so, I am undone, I am cut off for ever.

Wherefore, in the second place, what you have heard from this point, should
teach you to be very careful in the examining of your sins, and in laboring to
find out of what nature your sins are: As we read in the Law, they were shut up
when there was but a suspicion that their disease was Lepotous: They were to be
shut up for seven days upon mere suspicion: O that God would but give thee a
heart, even to shut up thy self, that is, to be thinking in thy reured
Meditations, of what nature thy sin is: It is usual with those that are godly;
with the Children of God, to be afraid (upon any sin they commit) that their
sin is not the sin of Gods Children, you shall have them ready to say, Lord,
did ever any of Gods Children do thus? is this such an evil as can belong to a
Child of God? is it possible that one that has so much ^^ears as I, so many
mercies as I, such enlightnings as I, such workings of the spirit as I; is it
possible that there can be true grace, and yet that I should again fall into
such and such a sin? One that is a Child of God; is afraid of every sin, lest
it be of that nature as cannot stand with the truth of grace -- Thou art ready
to think that any thing may stand with the truth of grace, and with the state
of grace; but one that knows what sin is, will be afraid of every thing; but
most people are so confident, that they give satisfaction to themselves in any
way of wickedness: We have all our infirmities and there is an end; as if there
were no difference between one and another. O that God would cause this point
to ring in thine ears, when thy Conscience tells thee of thy sin, that there is
a great deal of difference between tho one and the other; and the truth is,
till thou have upon examination found this out, that thou can with comfort,
as in the presence of God, say, that though I have infirmities and sins, yet
upon the examination of my heart, and upon those rules that have been given out
in thy word, I see hope that my sin is no other but the spot of Gods Children;
and if it be so, then the

Third Use is a Use of consolation to all those that have many infirmities, and
are burdened with them: Thou have spots upon thee, and do thou find the
behavior of thy soul toward them, as heretofore thou have heard? be of good
comfort in this, that there is no cause that thou should raze the foundation
upon every failing that thou see to be in thy self; this is a wrong to Jesus
Christ; and to the Covenant of grace, for one that has approved himself to God
upon examination, and has found the work of grace, upon every failing to raze
the very foundation, and think, Surely all that I have done is naught, it is all
nothing, it is all but hypocrisy: It Is fit indeed for thee upon thy sin, to
examine, and to be humbled; let thy sin be matter for thy humilation, but not
matter for thy discouragement, not for the razing of the Foundation; to say,
Well, I shall at length one day perish by the hands of Saul; God will cast me
off at length, such a wretched creature as I am; Take heed of that: Those that
are acquainted with the way of the Gospel, they know how to be deeply humbled
for their sin, and yet not to be discouraged by their sin.

And further, As thou should not raze the Foundation, so thou should not
be afraid to come into Gods presence. Thou have failed indeed, thou must come
into Gods presence, only take heed of coming boldly, and impudently, as many
there are that abuse the Grace of God, and think because of Christ, they may
come with impudence; no, the grace of Christ does not at all hinder
humiliation, but furthers humiliation, makes it Evangellical indeed; and so
thou being humbled for thy sin, thou may then come with an holy boldness
into Gods presence; do not think to fly the presence of God, because thou have
sinned and offended ^im. As a loving Father, it were a dishonor ^o him if upon
every failing of his Child, his ^hild should shake and tremble so, as not to
^are to come into the room where he were; do ^ou think this were a commendation
for a Father? If you inquire what this Child has done, ^t may be he has
failed in some petty thing; ^e has perhaps tarried half a quarter of an ^our
longer than his Father would have him ^n such a business, or not managed such
or such (...) business to the full, as his Father required of ^im; and upon
this he dared not come into his ^resence; surely we would conclude that this
Man had not the bowels of a Father in him: Now if you would conclude so
concerning men, then why will thou put this dishonor upon God himself, that
has the affections of (...) Father in him? And if there be any compassion in
Fathers toward their Children, yet it ^s not so much as one drop of that
infinite ocean that is in God; and therefore let not every failing of thine
make the afraid to come unto the presence of God, come to him yet as (...)
Father, being humbled before him, and ap^lying the righteousness of his Son.

And then further, Let the consideration of ^his be of comfort to thee (when
thou have committed sin against God, if thou be'st such a oneas has been
spoken of) in remembering the Covenant that God has made with thee, and bless
God for the Covenant that he has made with thee in Christ, and the difference
that God has made between thee and others in this thing; magnify his free
grace in the Govenant of grace, for from thence is it that thy spot shall not
be a deadly spot; and God will not deal with thee as with the wicked: certainly
this is not from the nature of thy sin, for that may be as heinous as the sins
of the other, but that that makes the difference is the free grace of God in
Christ. O blessed be God for the Covenant of grace that has made the
difference. I remember I have read of Luther, he indeed says when he was a
Monk, though he were Conscientious then, yet then whenever he committed any
sin against God, his Conscience did so fly in his face, that he thought he was
rejected utterly of God, til God made him know that Covenant of his grace in
Christ; and then he thought he heard such a voice speaking to him, Oh Martin,
do not despair, for thou shall, as long as thou live here in the flesh, sin
against God; only do thou lustily oppose thy sin, and resist thy sin, and then
know, that thou art not under the Law, but under grace: It is from hence that
there is this difference, therefore bless God that ever he revealed this
Covenant of grace to thy soul.

And then likewise, let this comfort thee; le^ it be a means to set thy heart
so much the more against sin, to take heed of sin: O take heed of abusing this
grace of God: Here will be the sign whether all this comfort belong to thee or
no: If the more thou hear it, the more thy heart does loathe sin, and thou
art the more afraid of sin because of this, thou do the more labor to
bleanse thy flesh and spirit from all the polutions of it. Can thou say thus
as in the presence of God: Lord, when I hear of these things, of that blessed
grace of thine in the Gospel, what a difference thou art pleased to make
between one and the other; why, Lord, it breaks my heart, and it makes me more
afraid of sin than any thing in the World: Then thou may freely apply the
comfort that is here, out of this Scripture.

And lastly, Let me speak to those to whom this Consolation does belong, That
thou had heed take heed to thy self, that thou preservest this thy
consolation; for without great care it will hardly be preserved -- I mean by
that, this: Thou had need take heed that thou keep thy Conscience as clean
as may be, that thou may have a clear discerning of the difference of Gods
dealing between one and the other.

And therefore, take, heed first of any sins against light; has ever God given
thee that comfort to thy soul, that though thou have many failings, yet that
God looks upon thee with another eye than upon the wicked? I say take heed ever
after of any sin against conscience: Take heed of repeating that same sin again
and again -- Take heed of lying in sin a long time: And take heed of being
hardened in sin: For if ever thou should fall to sin against Light, against
thy Conscience, thou will hardly be able to discern any difference between thy
sin and the sin of the wicked: And therefore look to thy self in this thing: Oh
let those that are godly, take heed that they bring not themselves, in regard
of their own sense. in to as lamentable a condition as the wicked are, to have
as much horrors of Conscience in their own seeling, as thewicked and ungodly
have O how great a pity is it that those between whom and the wicked, God has
made so great a difference, yet that through their negligence they shall bring
themselves into as great a horror as the wicked and ungodly are in!

And lastly, That this may not be abused, let those that pretend unto God, and
say they are his Children, and they are in the Covenant of grace, and speak
much of fr^e-grace, and yet by their wicked scandalous lives do manifest that
indeed they are not Gods Children; let them know, that their spots are the
worst spots of all, they are not only the spots of wicked men, but even have
the spots of Devils upon them: If any spot be a loathsome, an accursed, an
abominable spot, it is the spot of a Man or Woman that makes much profession of
the Gospel, and yet lives a scandalous, wicked, and ungodly life: -- And
especially, there are some whose spots are such as the heart of a man cannot
but tremble at the very thoughts of them; Those that will put off their sin
even to God himself: They take liberty to sin, and say they can do nothing
without him: and so give way to wickedness, and think if God would give them
more grace, then they should do better; but till then they can not be better;
and so what blame there is, they lay it upon God himself: O what a spot is
this, that thou will cast thy sin upon the infinite pure God! It Is very
observable in this Text: They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the
spot of Gods Children. Oh do not think to cast it upon God; as if Moses should
have said, Do not you think to cast your sin upon God, for you have corrupted
your selves, and your spot is not the spot of Gods Children.

And then for others that take liberty in sin; they think that all their sin is
done away by the blood of Jesus Christ, and therefore they may take liberty;
and though they dare not say, That therefore they may, yet this is the language
of their hearts and lives, many that in these latter days has spoken much
about the Covenant of free grace, yet they have made the blood of Christ that
is appointed by God to cleanse us from our iniquities, they have made this
blood an occasion of defiling their souls by their iniquity. O what an horrible
spot is this, that thou shall make the blood of Christ to be the cause of it,
as far as thou can! that must be an abominable defilement when thou
contractest filthiness from the blood of Christ, and from the grace of God in
the Gospel. O this is the most dreadful spot of all spots whatsoever! the Lord
rebuke thy wicked and cursed heart that shall contract wickedness from hearing
the Doctrine of free grace: Is there not reason of speaking these things? for
do not you see some that speak more of free grace then ever they did, and yet
more loose then ever they were before? O these are spots in our Feasts indeed,
and in our converse and communion; they are spots to a Christian profession,
such men and women as these are: for thy spots do not only defile the own
soul, but the name of God, and profession of Jesus Christ. Thou do what in
the lie, to defile the very blood of Christ, and to defile the Covenant of
grace; in the Epistle of Jude 4. They were before of old ordained to this
condemnation, says the Text: Ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
Lasciviousness; There are two black brands of a reprobate: We have indeed no
absolute notes and signs of a reprobate, but these are the two blackest. One
is, God gives a man up to his hearts desire in wicked ways -- And the other,
is to turn the grace of God into wantoness. How vile are those spots likewise,
that men come now through the knowledge that they say they have of the Covenant
of grace, to have no kind of work of conscience upon them fortheir sin? Now
their Consciences do not at all trouble them for their sin, there is no kind of
sense at all upon them upon that account, and all because of grace (as they
say:) Well, that spot must needs be an irrecoverable spot, that there is no
sense at all of. -- And if it come to that, now thou can take liberty to sin
freely, and have no conscience at all of this thy sin, I say, thy spot is a
most dreadful spot, and it is to be feared an irrecoverable spot; all the mercy
of God that serves to help to ease others when they have committed their sins,
does but plead against thee, to aggravate thy sin --

I Will conclude all with that one Text that we have in Jer. 23. that shows the
difference of the sins of those that are nearer to God in way of profession, is
they be wicked and ungodly; v. 13. 14. (...) have seen folly, says the
Prophet, in the Prophets of Samaria, they prophesied in Baal, and caused my
people Israel to sin. In v. 14. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem,
an horrible thing* That that is but folly in the Prophets of Samaria, in the
Prophets of Jerusalem, is an horrible thing: The more near we are to God in the
way of our profession, the more horrible are our sins if we make Religion to be
a color of our wickedness; if we seek to cover our wickedness by profession of
Religion, that that is but folly in others, comes to be horrible in them*
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhust, at the Golden Bible, on London-bridg.
MR. Sedgewick's Bowels of Mercy. fol.

Tho. Taylor's Works, the 1st vol. fol.

2. An Exposition of Temptation on Matthew 4. v. 1, to the end of the Eleventh.

3. A Commentary on Titus.

4. Davia's Learning: a Comment upon Psalm. 32.

5. The Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed, upon Luke 8. and 4.

Divine Characters, in two Parts, ^istinguishing the Hypocrite in his ^est
dress, by Sam. Crook, B. D.

A Learned Commentary or Expo^^ion on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, by ^ichard Sibbs D. D. fol.

A Commentary on the whole E^^stle of St. Paul to the Ephesians, by ^r. Paul
Baine. fol.

A Practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice on Psalm the 4th. ver. 6. 7, 8.
by Anthony Burgess. fol.

The dead Saint speaking to Saints and sinners living; in several treatises.
The first on 2 Samuel 24. 10. The second on Canticles 4. 9. The third on John
1. 50. The fourth on Isaiah 58. 2. The Fifth on Exodus 15. 11. by Samuel Bolton
D. D. fol.

Coloquia Mensalia, or Dr. Martin Luthers Divine Discourses at his Table with
Melancton, and several others: Translated by Henry Bell. fol.

The view of the Holy Scriptures, by Hugh Broughton. fol.

The English Gentleman, and the English Gentlewoman, Directing every Gentleman
and Woman of selecter rank and quality, how to demea^ themselves, by R.
Brathwait, Esquire. fo^^

Christianographie, or a Description of the multitude and sundry sorts o^
Christians in the World, not subject to the Pope, by Ephesians. Pagitt. fol.

These six Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.

1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion one's
business, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his
Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first part.

2. Likewise a second part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their
duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the conditions of prosperity and adversity.

3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling; wherein the
Christian is directed how to make Religion his business; in his dealings with
all Men, in the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good company, in
bad company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a weekday from morning
to night, in visiting the sick, on a dying-Bed; as also the means how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it.

4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True Christian Characterized.

6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: or, One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well; all these by George Swinnock. M.
A. Large Octavo's.

A Learned Commentary on the Fourth Chapter of the Second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, to which is added, First, a conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, the spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles,
by Richard Sibbs. D. D. quarto.

An Exposition on the Five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by William Greenhill. quarto.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
by Peter Bulkeley, quarto.

Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in Ten words, or
Ten Commandments; also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B.
D. quarto.

A Plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by John Dod. quarto.

Horologiographia Oplica; Dialing Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method:
by Sylvanus Morgan quarto.

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
diseases from the head to the foot, by Walter Bruell.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing directions and Instructions for the guide and government of Man's
Life. quarto.

7. A Wedding-Ring fit for the Finger; together with the Non-such Professor; by
W. Secker.

Christ and the Covenant, the work and way of Meditation; Delivered in Ten
Sermons, L. Octavo's. By Will. Bridge, late of Great Yarmouth.

Heart-treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with a soulinriching treasure of truths, graces,
experiences and comforts, to help him in Meditation, Conference, Religious
Performances, Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions, and to fit him for all
conditions, that he may live Holily, dye Happily, and go to Heaven
Triumphantly, by O. H. with an Epistle Prefixed, by John Chestter. Large
Octavo's.

Books in Small Octavo.

The burning of London in the year 1666 in 110. Meditations, in 4. Parts.

1. The Sins procuring that Judgment. 2. The natural causes of Fire. 3. The
most remarkable passage of that dreadful Fire. 4. Comfort and counsel to such a
are sufferers by the said Judgment by Sam. Roll.
A Glimpse of Eternity, by A. Caley

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of
Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16. 26. by James Livesey. Small Octavo's.

Moses unvailed, by William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists, by Charles Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death, by Z. Crofton.

God's Sovereignty Displayed, by W. Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer.

Joh. Am. Comenii schola, Ludus, scu Encuclo paedia viva, i. e. Januae
Linguarum praxis Comica.

The Godly Man's Ark, or City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mris. M^ores Evidences for Heaven; by Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered; or, the false Professor tried and cast, by M.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against temptation, by M. Mead.

A divine Cordial.

A Word of comfort for the Church of God.

A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spirtle.

The godly Man's Picture, drawn with a Scripture-pencil. These four lastt, were
written by Tho. Watson.

The True Bounds of Christian freedom, or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted; out of John 8. ver. 36.

A Treatise of the Sacrament, showing a Christians Privilege in approaching to
God in Ordinances, duty in his Sacramental approaches, danger, if he do not
sanctify God in them; both by Sam. Bolton. D. D.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath, by Philip Goodwin.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons; by W. Bridge.

A Serious Exhortation to a Holy Life, by Tho. Wadsworth.

A Relation of the fearful Estate of F. Spira.

Ovids Metamorphosis Translated Grammatically, by J. Brinsley.

Small Poems of diverse sorts, by Sir AstonCokain

Spiritual Experiences of sundry believers, by Vavasor Powel.

Comfortable Crumbs of Refreshment, by Prayers, Meditations, Consolations and
Ejaculations; with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

Aurifodina Linguae Gallicae, or the Golden Mine of the French Language opened,
by Ed. Gostlin. Gent.


