THE CONSOLATION OF DEATH.

As it was Presented to Her Highness, the Princess Ann of Denmark: On the
immature Loss of William, late Duke of Gloucester.

By Richard Burridge.

LONDON, Printed for William Pinnocke, at the Black Dog and Ball over against
Bride-Lane in Fleetstreet. 1700.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To Her Royal Highness THE PRINCESS ANN Of Denmark.
MADAM,
ALthough Death may be styled the summum bonum of Mankind, yet now has he
proved fatal to mortality, by depriving three Kingdoms of that Jewel, which
promised Posterity eternal happiness; the many virtues of your royal Child,
which outstript his tender years, made Heaven take notice of his early piety,
and thought him a blessing too great for Mortals to enjoy: the immature
dissolution of the late hopeful Branch has caused weeping grief to fly over
this Island, for which unexpressible loss can not we be happy till Death
transports us to the Celestial Regions, where we may eternally be admiring that
object, which the whole Nation so much adored whilst surviving: the absence of
such a sacred Child (without whose conversation the joys of Angels could not
be complete) must needs cut to the heart: the greatest Orators, that ere the
World produced, cannot sufficiently ^ndole the royal Family 's sorrow,
therefore I do not presume to comfort such an insupportable affliction: I only
attempt to lay this Tractate of the Consolation of Death on the shrine of your
benign favor, because it was occasionally written on the too late unhappy
misfortune of England, for I am highly sensible that any thing of devotion
finds grace in your sight, whose dazzling beams of unparelleld godliness strike
your admiring beholders with as much stupefaction, as the brightness of the
overshadowing Cloud did the amazed Disciples on Mount Tabor; Matchless Lady of
Piety! your royal self being the only hopes great Britain has now left to make
her happy, I pray the Almighty King of Kings may lengthen your life with a
Nestorian age, that by your resplendent Virtues we may be guided to those
evelrasting Mansions, where the blessed Duke now sits crowned with immortality,
so (divine Princess) I rest

Your most humble and obedient Servant Richard Burridge.

THE Consolation of Death.
DEATH! what is it? it is the only recess of the Soul from the Body into the
eternal Mansions of celestial joys; where we shall be clothed with the
glorious robes of immortality, and triumphantly rejoice in the peaceful Shades
of undisturbed Rest.

As our days increase, life decreases, so that we are hourly dying; and as it
is appointed unto all Men once to die, what need we be desirous of that which
is always flying from us? if Man would but seriously meditate on the clogs of
humane life, he would not (though many years younger than that Emperor who
joyfully writ to his Nephew Caius, that he had escaped the Climacterical year)
desire to live in the miseries thereof: if rich, he is envyed; if poor, he is
slighted; various scenes of sorrows are daily set before the eyes of mortality,
as Sickness, War, Fire, Famine, Pestilence, Losses, Crosses, and a thousand
other calamities which attend the wretched state of Mankind, where then can we
fly from this Bochim or Valley of Tears for shelter? no where, but in the
Regions of Death: when Israel thought his beloved Joseph had been slain, he
refused to be comforted by his Sons and Daughters, saying, I will go down into
the Grave unto my son, mourning: by which mournful expression, he pathetically
intimated, that no comfort could mitigate his grief till he had seen Death:
likewise that most patient Man who dwelt in Vz the metropolis of Chaldean
superstition, in his great distress and unparalleld afflictions cried out, Why
died I not in the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the
belly? For now should I have lien still, and been quiet, I should have slept;
then had I been at rest; thus we are plainly showed Man is not at peace till in
his Tomb: there Kings are quiet from the seditions of their Subjects, Courtiers
from the emulation of their rivals in Honor, Favorites from the disgrace of
their Princes displeasure, Prisoners from their Oppressors, and Slaves from
miserable Bondage.

Amazed at Death! no; the comforts of it are such, that it delivers Infants
from running into actual sin, Youth from filling the Catalogue of abominable
vices, Mankind from the encumbrances of worldly affairs, and Old Age from
supporting his tottering frailty on the Crutch: Death gives ease to the
diseased, and health to sickness; wherefore if you find him any time visiting
you, be not surprised, be not daunted at his alarm, but cling to him as the
Moabitess did to Naomi, crying whither thou go, I will go; and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge: struggle with him for thy Soul's enlargment, as Jacob
did with the Angel at Peniel; be not faint hearted, for to die is gain; seeing
Death stand before your Face, do not timerously say (as Ahab did to Elijah)
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? for he is no enemy, he is a friend to all
flesh, and to show you entertain him as such, courageously (like Saint Paul)
cry, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Every Man endued with true Christian courage wishes to be acquainted with
Death, the Harbinger of bliss; he would willingly sit the Saddle of his pale
horse; for instance, when it was revealed to Simeon, that he should not see
death before he had seen the Lords Christ, as soon as he had took Jesus up in
his arms and blessed God, he claimed (being sensible of the inequality between
humane nature and immortal blessings) his dissolution; in a charming ecstacy,
he sang, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word; in fine, those who seriously weigh the difference between Earth and
Heaven, they would not with Hezekiah pray to have the thread of life spun
longer, but impatiently wish the golden Planet may hasten his course on the
Dial of Ahaz, that their pure Souls might follow the Shadow of his reflecting
Beams to the all-glorious Habitations of an indulgent God: none startle at
Death, but such whose Conscience is not passport sufficient through the Shadows
of an eternal Change: it is such, who dread any Distemper they feel to be the
Messenger of Death, and by the advice of able Physicians would countermand the
decree of Nature, if Gold and temporal Presents were admitted ransomes at such
a time; but as it is written in the Gospel, whosoever will save his life shall
lose it: therefore by a godly life make a preparative against Death brings your
summons, and then Christ tells you, whosoever will lose his life for my sake,
shall find it.

Nay so greatly have the Ethnicks been ravished with the glory of a future
being, that Cleombrotus and others (if we may believe Plutarch) reading a
Treatise of the immortality of the Soul, killed themselves, so eager were they
of their Souls happiness before their times came: shall we then, who are
directed by God himself the ready path to immortality, and the glorious
Chambers of eternal pleasures, be outbrav'd by such who had the glympse of an
after happiness but upon trust? no, when the time of our dissolution comes, and
the last sand of our great change is dropping, like David, have confidence in
God's grace, and with him ery, though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy stafe,
they comfort me: bravely cry out in defiance, O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? in so doing you are more then conquerours, and
will triumphantly shoot the Gulf of eternity in spite of all efforts that
shall tempt your carnal desire to tarry here.

Why should Man be so unwilling to change for Heaven that life, which from its
soon extinguishing, is compared to the similitudes of Grass, Smoke, a Flower, a
Shadow, a Tale, a Hand-breadth, an Hireling, a Vapor, a Tent, a Weaver's
Shuttle, all Emblems of short and swift celerity? suppose a Man might ever live
upon Earth, and was never to taste Death, his days would be but miserable: Nam
vita, si moriendi virtus abest, servitus est, was the saying of an Heathen
Philosopher, Life without Death would be a perpetual servitude, who would
hinder then his own happiness so much, as not to be acquainted with Death? ah!
for the great benefits which he brings with him, look for him every day, invite
him to release your Soul from its carnal Prison, I am sure it is better to be
invested with the Robes of righteousness in Heaven, than to reside on Earth,
and have ones flesh clothed with worms and clods of dust.

So many are the miseries that attend this flitting life, that we may with
Seneca truly cry out, Lachrynae nobis deerunt, antequam causae dolendi: we
sooner want tears than causes of sorrow: so which way can we travail to the
great Jubilee of perpetual rest, but by contracting a firm friendship with
Death, who is Mortals chief friend in changing our weak frailty for strength
that never will decay, what greater comforts or consolation can we request of
Death, than his releasing the laborious Labourer from his toil? the poor Man
from his penury? the stranger from a hard hearted People? the holy Man from a
second Sodom to a peaceful Zoar? and no Man (I think) that reflects on the
various afflictions of unsteddy Fate, but what would, like afflicted Job, wish
he might be cut off; with him acknowledge then should I yet have comfort; in
Death 's Territories of profound silence, the comfortless Mortal is sure of
finding that opium, which may translate his eternal substance to everlasting
rest.

Like Joh, argue with your self, what is my strength, that I should hope? and
what is my end, that I should prolong my life? by no shifts evade the welcome
news of Death, nor by using Pastimes and keeping Company divert not your
thoughts from contemplating your latter end; Death should never be out of your
mind, but always meditated on: diurnally think on your own mortality, as well
as on the mortality of those you love: I remember it is recorded, that Phillip
King of Macedonia, nightly caused one to strike at his chamber door, putting
him in remembrance that he was a mortal Man, this example is a precedent for us
to have an eye always on Death, that we may be ready to entertain so good a
Guest, who brings nothing with him that is unprofitable: be so far from
trembling at the sight of the harmless Skeleton, that cheerfully embrace you
him in your arms, and with the royal Psalmist divinely sing, as the heart
pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God.

Behold! our Redeemer how he by the mystery of an hypostatical Union felt the
miseries of humane nature; to make Death easy to us: wherefore think it a crime
unpardonable to desert from under the Banner of such a glorious Conqueror, who
came to make Death lie couchant at our feet: now if we design to follow such a
Leader, let us with a noble resolution serve him: not with a cold indifferency,
for that is but a sorry Soldier who follows his Emperor groaning: alas! if
you would cope with Death, you must (as the great Apostle of the Gentiles
exhorts Timothy,) endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ: you that
are signed with the Cross, the sacred badge of Christianity, challenge Death
for your deliverance from this terrestrial imprisonment, for when he has given
you a Pass from the miseries of this life to enter the Verge of eternity, and
you can positively assure Christ you have fought a good fight, then may you
claim your reward for faithful service in these words of the Apostle,
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing.

Rejoice when Death comes to shut up the last day of your life, from the moment
of your bidding it adieu, begins the minute of an eternal birth day: O the
comforts of Death? it is an introduction from woe to w^^l, from grief to joy,
from sorrow to pleasure, from thirst to the Fountains of life, from hunger to a
plentiful Table, from sickness to health, from misery to redundant happiness,
and to the presence of Christ, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Death is the chiefest gift which God has to bestow
on his Children here: I remember to have read that the Priestess of Bacchus
riding up an Hill toward his Fane to sacrifice, the Beasts tired, whereupon
her two Sons relieved them and drew her up to her journey's end; for this
dutiful piece of service, she begged of the Gods, that they would be pleased,
to give her Children the best thing they could bestow on Man, they told her
they would reward her Sons the next day, with the best gift Heaven could give
Mortality: the next morning going to see her Sons, she found them dead: by this
fiction we may see the Theology of the Heathens did allow Death to be the best
reward Heaven could bestow on Mankind.

Who is it can refuse being familiar with Death? seeing he is the best Company
God can recommend to us; no Christian (in my opinion) would desire his absence,
since the benefits that do accrue to us by our conversation with him, return to
so good an account, as to bring us to be acquainted with him whom the Preacher
calls the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys: if any are loath to
meet Death, it is the Fool who has said in his heart there is no God.

Death is the mitigation of God's wrath; out of the Fountain of his mercies
sprung mortality, that over the calm streams thereof Death might wast us to a
Blessed state of immortality again; let us boldly launch out into the Ocean of
Eternity, to sail to the Port where none but Angels harbor; with Saint
Augustine cry out to God, quaeram te, ut vivat anima, I will seek thee that my
Soul may live: despising according to your baptismal Vow, all the pomps and
vanities of this wicked World, take care you have your wedding garment on
against Death comes to give you notice, that Jesus is coming to see how your
Lamps are plied with Oil, and and being thus prepared for your Savior's
reception, he leads you to the presence of his Father, where is fullness of joy,
and pleasures ever turning on the axel of eternal years: thus Death to the
Righteous is but the change of a bad life for a better, and Saint John the
Divine assures us, that he heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

No Man is out of the reach of Fate, so knowing he must die, and every man
shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him, embrace Death as a
bosom friend; besides what Man is so unwise to shun it, when he might have an
immortal life, for a life of pain and misery? for a life that gives nothing
without trouble as the Poet hints, -- Nil sine magno
Vita labor dedit mortalitas --


Ah! if we would but weigh Death in an even Balance, we should soon find the
great difference between living and dying, by an utter detestation of
mortality; we should be so far from soliciting to reside in the weak frailty
of humane nature, that we should be ever wishing Death would break the chain of
brittle life to release the Soul from the imprisonment of a corporeal Goal; the
Greeks very significantly call the Body soma quasi sema, that is, the Sepulcher
of the Soul, for so long as Man was surviving, so long they reckoned the Soul
contrary to its immortal nature confined in the frail Mansion of a carnal Grave
consider then this confinement of the Soul, and by how much the more we should
be in love with life, by so much the more we should rejoice at the news of its
dissolution; Death bringing the tidings of translating us to immortality, would
be more harmonious to our ears, than the sweet harmony the Spears join to the
melodious notes of ever rejoicing Angels; the echo of the tidings would
parallize the ravishing concord of those charming lays which filled the
etherial Palaces of Heaven when the Morning Stars sang together, and all the
Sons of God shouted for joy: commenting seriously on the perplexities of this
life, what can we count the rich man's riches? Death; what can we count the
poor man's happiness? Death: what can we count the sick man's case? Death: what
can we count the melancholy man's mirth? Death: or what can we count the
healthy Man's best health? Death: all this and much more is Death: Death gives
us a total discharge from all miseries whatsoever on Earth.

I have read of a sort of People called the Drausie, who at the birth of their
Children weep; but at their death rejoice, and with their Friends make merry:
thus if we would reflect on the miseries mankind is born to as well as them, we
should not much deviate from their custom: alas! how great and many are the
sorrows which a man runs through from the Womb to the Tomb: the poor Babe comes
weeping into the World, as if by an instinct of Nature, it was sensible of the
calamities it was to undergo in the sorrowful pilgrimage of this instable life.

Alas! who would desire to live upon Earth, where such imperfections of Nature
is daily presented to our sight? some lame, some blind, some deaf, some dumb,
some lunatic, some possessed, some bewitched, some leprous, some sick, so that
we may properly call the World an Hospital crammed with all the maladies of Gods
displeasure, or a House of mourning, where Parents are daily weeping for the
loss of Children; Children for Parents, Widows for Husbands; Friends for
Friends; some for losses by fire; some for losses by debts; some for losses by
Robbers; some for losses by Sea; some for one loss, and some another: insomuch
that if they would rightly apply these grievances to practical considerations
of Death, he would be oftener called upon than he is, to relieve their
afflictions: dear Death! it is the Compass by which we must steer our course to
the Haven of everlasting safety; of Death is born immortality, of immortality a
celestial Empire, and of a celestial Empire eternal rest: for so great benefits
and comforts shall we not love Death? not admire him? not think on him? we are
then ungrateful to our selves, and envy our own happiness; of which were we but
sensible, we should scarce, was a destroying Angel to fly over our Houses now,
as he did over the Egyptians, to slay our firstborn or our selves either,
sprinkle the lintels of the doors, as the Israelites did, unless it was a
command of God as that was, to escape the wrath of the Heavenly slaughterer:
yet Man is so enveloped with the deceiving pleasures of this life, that though
he sees so many miserable spectacles daily before his Eyes, yet he desires to
live; does he desire to live? yes, though ten thousand times as many miseries
more were thrown from Heaven, to afflict him for his darling sin.

That Man should be afraid of a thing that is no Creature! Death is no
substance; therefore when Adrian the Emperor asked a Philosopher what Death
was, he answered, an eternal sleep, the dissolution of Bodies, the rich Man's
fear, the poor Man's wish, an inevitable event, an uncertain pilgrimage, a
robber of life, the father of sleep, the flight of life, the departure of the
living, and resolution of all things.

As Death and diseases know no faces, but will compel all to pay the debt that
is due to Nature, pay it without pining, and when all comes to all you will
find Death no Death, but a going to God, and God's coming to us; if a Man dies
he shall live again, The brightest days have gloomy dawnings,
But rise again in splended mornings.


Had man been capable of knowing the misery of life, before he received it, he
would have been very loath to accept it; and again if Death were not in our
power how willingly should we desire it more than we fear it, but Man is always
of a cross nature, the Mariner sails through all weathers to gain the Port, but
when Death comes to put us into our safe Port, we shun it as a Rock or
Quicksand; alas! if we are so loath to go to God, it is a manifest token of
little love to God, who only sends Death to free us from all worldly injuries,
to put a period to misery, to free us from corporal infirmities, to free us
from bodily labors, and ease us of all cares and troubles: God sends Death to
invite us to the fullness of Grace, perfection of glory, inseparable fellowship
with Christ, and to settle us in our own Country of Paradise.

True Christians should fear Sin, and not Death: for that Soul that is afraid
of dying is but in a bad case for Heaven: the fears of Death multiply evils,
but Faith diminishes them: the good man durst dye, and desires to dye: it shows
a true Christian courage to desire Death, through which he is spying at
immortal glory, beholding life that never dies, and sees the glorious beams of
that morning spreading over the spacious Chambers of Heaven that has no eve
nor ending: compare this life with Death, and you will clearly see, how Death,
which seems to dispossess us of all we esteem dear in this World, put us in
possession of more than we deserve: alas! here we covet to be cottaged up in a
house of clay, whose foundation is dust, when Death would bring us to an
habitation of everlasting joys: so mistake not the term of happiness by calling
that Death which is life for ever more.

Death is the regeneration of the Soul, it is new born when man dies: for this
new birth let no trepidations or qualms of fear breed on your heart, Death only
comes to revive you in his arms of serenity, joy, and peace, alas! had death
been evil, Cain had been slain for his barbarous fratricide, his pardon of
life, not his punishment of marking made him to cry out My punishment is
greater than I can bear: he had rather have been seated in the house of Death,
than have been a vagabond as he was upon Earth, for all motions stirring
toward the end of life, tend to rest: call then for Death to release your
heaven born soul from this earthly confinement: be not daunted like Atheists
for fear of a non esse, nor startled like Libertines for fear of a male esse,
for there is certainly an endless futerity which the Soul shall dwell in after
this life, and whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved:
as soon as Death has discoursed with you, your Soul shall sup that night with
Christ in Paradise: this is the true transmigration of souls from misery to
joy, and not from body to body as Pythagoras vainly thought: how consolatory
then might we make Death to us by thinking on his arreption of souls to Heaven?
Death only comes to give a superhumane Being to Man, and to let us no more seek
the Benedictions of God, but eternally to enjoy the GOD of Benedictions.

Nothing is so profitable as Death, therefore no misery can be more capital to
Man then the frailty of humane life; from whence all crosses, discords, and
perturbations of mind are derived; how many feeling extremities a man goes
through before his life reaches the winter of hoary age, which makes a strange
transformation of his weak nature, his head shaking, his sight dimn, his jaws
fallen, his gums toothless, his veins withered, his marrow dried, his bones
sapless, his stomach phlegmatic, his joints feeble, his limbs numbed, his
blood cold, in a word the whole Machine of his feeble body out of order, so if
it may be said without offense to Heaven, it is better for that Man that must
be born, to meet his Grave as soon as he enters the Verge of this troublesome,
and always perplexed life.

There remains a rest to the people of God, who then would be so besotted
with a lethargick drowsiness of mind, as not to leave Father, leave Mother,
leave Brother, leave Sister, leave Relarions, leave Friends, and all things
whatsoever we esteem most dear in this World, to enter into the rest of God?
For he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works,
as God did from his; O! let us who are in love with our precious Souls labor
therefore to enter into that rest, where peace redounds for ever more.

Through the House appointed for all living, we pass to Heaven, the glorious
Kingdom where the Elect and faithful Servants of God shall for ever Reign with
him; Death transports us to sit under the Canopy of that Throne where is joy
without sorrow, rest without labor, dignity without fear, riches without loss,
health without sickness, abundance without defection, perpetuity without
corruption, and bliss without calamity; Heaven is the Region where no
bitterness takes place; a Region where no Thunders, Lightnings, Tempest, Hail,
extreme cold, nor excessive heat shall annoy us more; there Prodigies shall not
fright us with the dire aspects of jarring Planets; there the harsh language of
sorrow shall no more invade our ears with terrors; the dialect in the bright
Empyrean, where is erected on the supreamest loft of Eternity the Throne of
God, is all ecstatical joy: once Death conveys us to those Regions of never
deficient happiness, there shall we be in communion with Seraphins, and
Cherubins, Archangels, and Angels; there shall we be familiar with blessed
Michael, who cast proud Lucifer and his rebellious associates from Heaven;
there shall we be correspondent with Gabriel, who on the happy Day of Man's
Salvation with Legions of the Heavenly Hosts sang to admiring Shepherds the
sweet Carol of gloria in excelsis; Death brings our Souls to be spectators of
the glorious Cavelcade of blessed Confessors, triumphantly holding the Cross
over the immaculate Lamb, changing then the Motto in hoc signo vinces for in
hoc signo obtinuimus coelum, by this sign have we won Heaven.

Death having separated the pure substance of our Souls from these clods of
dirt, then Adam shall see all his Grandchildren the Sons of Enos together:
Abraham all his faithful seed: Job shall see his Children: then shall John the
Baptist see his Penitents: Peter his Converts: Paul his Followers: the Prophets
of the Lord see all the Lord's People: then shall God see all his Sons, and
Christ all his Members: when Death has brought all Mankind to Heaven, what a
glorious appearance will there be, what a ravishing Heavenly Quire, what an
Anthem shall there harmoniously be sung, and we be made welcome by the mutual,
admirable, and ineffable embracements of God and Christ; methinks I see Jesus
and his believers like Joseph and Benjamin, falling upon each others Necks, not
weeping but shouting for joy; how will the whole Hierarchy of shining Spirits
rejoice to see the Saints, Apostles, the whole Army of Martyrs, and the holy
Church throughout all the World meet in Heaven with Palms in their hands, and
Crowns on their Heads, to sing hallelujah, hallelujah to the King of Kings for
ever and ever.

Ah! Death is welcome to a good Man at any time, he is sensible he sends Souls
to enjoy themselves to eternity with the knowledge of one another; Death guides
us to the Land where the Father shall find his Children, the Children their
Parents, Kindred know Kindred, and Friend his Friend; for if Dives in the state
of Damnation knew Lazarus, when he lifted up his Eyes from Hell and saw him in
Abraham's bosom, no doubt but those in a state of happiness, shall know one
another, to make the greatness of celestial bliss perfect: O! what bliss will
this be that mortals shall hereafter meet, and know one another in a Kingdom
that is all love without falsehood; in what solid joys will they greet one
another in the regions of endless pleasures; O! how the indulgent Father, and
as indulgent Mother will rejoice for finding again their Children, for the loss
of whom they had shedded night and day many tears, who, like Rachel, would not
be comforted, because they were not; how the poor Orphans will cling to their
Parents, since whose privation they had suffered many miseries on Earth;
Husbands enjoy their Wives company with an inseparable Union; how lovingly will
long parted Kindred embrace one another, and friends rejoice at friends eternal
welfare.

Since Death is the Harbinger of Felicity, let us be as desirous of appearing
before God as Job was, when he fervently cried, O that I knew where I might
find him! that I might come even to his seat! to claim the inestimable promise
that he has promised us, even eternal life: what Mortal will let his knowledge
be so intoxicated as to slight this kindness of never diminishing blessings,
for the allurements of those temporal temptations which King Solomon (the
wisest of Men) styles vanity of vanities, and emphatically backs it with all is
vanity; so that there is nothing in this World that can indulge our affections
with the love of it, as Riches, Honor, Preferment, Crowns, Scepters, Diadems,
Palaces, Attendance, or the like, but what is vanity and vexation of Spirit.

O! the depth of the goodness and love of God to Man, in extending his mercy so
far as to make us mortal; though the Ambition of our first Parents in Eden
aspired to be Gods, a crime so great, that it could not be expiated but by the
sacrifice of a bleeding Jesus, yet amidst his curses for their grand
disobedience, was he graciously pleased to make miserable Posterity happy by
the privation of life; by dying we shall retrieve the happy state of
immortality again: immortality! O the sound of it! leaves such a charming echo
on a Soul ravished for liberty, that were it not a sin against the Holy Ghost,
violence would quickly give it passage to its native Orb; violence would
quickly invade the Empire of Death, and bravely proclaim the voice of War
before his Palace gates: but God's time must be our time, a Man must rest
contented with God's pleasure, and with Job. say, all the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come: whenever it shall please the wise
disposer of all things to summon us before his Throne of grace, with a
Christian like courage shake hands with Death, and thank him for the news of
fetching you to take possession of an everlasting Patrimony in the Heavenly
Canaan, where sorrows never shall afflict you more.

As the Psalmist says, What man is he that lives and shall not see death?
shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave? no: these Interrogatories
can not be resisted by Man, The days of our years are threescore years and ten:
and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength
labor and sorrow: why then should we be afraid of the comfortable news of
Death, which brings us the Express of our Coronation in Heaven? alas? Death is
no such bugbear as we take it to be, he is tame as a young Lion brought up by
hand; and where the armor of godliness glitters in his eyes, he comes upon
terms of capitulation, and admits you with Colors flying to march through his
Territories without the least molestation or let as may be.

What tongue is able to express! pen to write! or soul to conceive the joys
which Death brings us to? we cannot from the unfathomed depth of fancy
retrieve thoughts high enough to describe them; there will our ears be
entertained with the ecstatical charms of Angels, singing their most melodious
lays, and unanimously celebrating the triumphs of their eternal King: in
charming notes exceeding the harmonious concords of the sweet influences of
Pleiades, or other the concurring Constellations tuning to the sweet Music of
their revolving orbs: Death! it is the Pilot that brings Men to the Harbor
where God shall wipe all tears from their eyes, and make us eternally happy.

If Orpheus and Amphion (as the Poets sing) by the harmony of their Lutes could
incite Stones and Trees to dance after them, how much more should the harmony
of Death invite us to follow him, to a City, whose builder and maker is God?
alas! Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble, why
then should we covet to remain in sorrow? and beg of Heaven to avert that
stroke, which only cuts us off from the miseries of a burdensome life? alas!
what is life in this World? it is full of labor, corruptible, full of
bitterness, the Mistress of evils, and Maid to Hell: here griefs perplex us,
thirsts make faint, air blast us, heats tire us, high feeding inflames the
blood, fasting macerates age makes you crooked, and infirmity breaks us; who
then must deliver us from these discomforts of humane frailties? Death; it is
Death that will bring you under the protection of that God, who will feed us
with unheard of blessings: alas! will Death bring us to such happiness! who
then would be shy of him? but enterrain him as kindly as Lot did the Messengers
of Sodom's destruction; let us now prepare our selves against Death comes, and
as soon as we are blessed with his presence, joyfully cry out in the words of
the royal Psalmist, O God, thou art my God, my Soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is: to see thy
power and thy glory, Because thy loving kindness is better than life: cast your
eye on Death with a smiling countenance, for once he visits you in earnest, it
is with Orders from the King of immortal Subjects, to guard your Soul to that
Kingdom where bliss abounds for evermore.

FINIS.

