A Seasonable Word of ADVICE Unto all that are or may through the subtlety of
the Enemy, backslide from the Truth.
WHen the life in you all does arise, it shall witness me, and answer the word
of the Lord unto life, or unto death: Friends, all you to whom the word of the
Lord came, and unto whom the way of truth was made manifest, hear and consider
how great has the love of the Father been unto you, how many and ^nfinite has
been his mercies from day to day; often visiting you ^^th his power, and with
his presence, yea when you sat in darkness (...) in the shadow of death, his
merveilous light appeared unto you; ^^d when you were held captive in the
Covenant of sin and death, he stretched forth his hand to redeem you, he
loved you while you ^^ew him not; and he brought deliverance out of a strange
Land, wh^^^ ye were strayed among devourers, and scattered as sheep with^^t a
Shepherd, yea when ye were dead in transgressions, he sa^^ unto you live, and
he bound you up, when no eye pitied you, ^^en when you were enemies to him;
walking in the vanities of yo^^ own hearts, and knew not him that lives for
ever, who had (...) sought of you, but not found, in the very day he sent to
visi^ ^ou, with his everlasting Gospel of Peace and Truth, to ga^^er you unto
himself (I am a witness) and he caused his powerful voice to be heard, and his
name to be published among you, ^^d his truth was declared in the demonstration
of the Spirit, and the Power of the Lord was made manifest in you, to the
bringing ^f you from darkness to light, and from death, which had reigned ^^er
you, to know a measure of the life of God; yea the way ^f Life eternal was set
before you, that you might not perish, but (...), and his witness in you all,
which is but one, the Word of ^he Lord reached unto, by the mouth of his
servants, to the reveal^^^ sin, and judging it by his righteous Law set up in
your ^earts, causing his terror to be known among you, and his judgem^nts
reached your hearts; and in that day beautiful was his pre^ence unto you, and
precious was his truth among you, in your first ^^ve, and his light and power;
and the knowledge of his ways ^ere pleasant to you, and the seed of the
Kingdom of God you rec^^ved with joy, grew up in you, and you prospered at
that day, and the Lord loved you, and his presence was with you, as among h^^
own children, whom he begat by his everlasting word, that ^ou should be a
praise unto him for ever; and then the fear of the (...), and his judgments
were placed among you, and your ^earts were broken, and while you were of a
hungering soul, and thirsty after the Lord, then was it well with you, and the
day of peace dawned unto you, and the word of the Lord was swe^t unto you, and
he was gladly received, that comes in the name of the Lord: But, oh! how have
some of you lost your first love, and are again darkened, and ready to faint,
and to turn aside for a thing of naught, and how does such grieve the Spirit of
the Lord, and vex his righteous soul, and are become a burden to him, in
dishonouring his name, the envious man having entered and sown his seed in some
of you, and brought forth strife, and divisions, and disorders among you, which
is not of the Father, nor of the truth; and prejudice, and evil surmisings, and
secret jealousies one against another is risen in you all, which is to be
condemned with the light, for the fire: I judge it all under my feet in the
power of the Lord God, and is in that which reigns over it all; and through
these things unity is decayed, and love is waxen cold, and there is a fainting
in the way, and that zeal for the Name of the Lord perishes, which ought to be
among you, and rendings, and tearings, backbiting, and devouring one another;
and striving for Mastery, there is which ought not to be, which the wrath of
God is against; all this is out of the light, out of the Wisdom and Counsel of
God: My Spirit is vexed, and my heart is troubled within me, because of these
things (not for my self but for you, and for the glory of the Lord) over whom I
am jealous with a godly Jealousy, that you may not perish, nor his glory be
despised among the Heathen. What mean you thus to deal against the Lord, in
dishonouring his Name in the sight of the enemy, even to the wounding of your
own souls, and to the piercing the heart of the faithful, who has watched over
you, and been Messengers of glad tidings unto you from the Lord; every one of
you in particular be awakened and stirred up, and fear before the Lord, and
come to the light which the Son of God has lighted you with all, and search
your own hearts, and try your selves, that the ground of these things may be
seen, and condemned, and removed, and love may yet spring amongst you to the
Lord, and one to another: Oh friends consider, it was one Father that begat
you into the Truth, which is but one, by one word of Life, which is not
divided; and you were begotten to live unto him, and not unto your selves; and
Christ Jesus which is but one, the same to day, yesterday, and for ever; who is
the foundation of God, and abides for ever, was preached unto you all, to be
the Way, the Truth, the Life and Salvation, and there is none besides him; Why
then are these divisions among you, and some for one, and some for another, and
herein are you carnal, and your minds abroad, and not stayed upon him that
gives the increase, and all this is to be judged with the life of God:
Wherefore I beseech you in the fear of the Lord, as you love him and his glory,
yea as you love your own souls, come to the light which lets you see all this,
and condemn it, and strive not one with another, nor exalt not your selves
above another; but let all this be condemned, and all your evil surmisings, and
foolish jealousies, and secret whisperings, and back-bitings, be brought to
judgment, and let condemnation pass upon it all, never more to appear, to
hinder the fellowship of the Lord, and know the life of God in you all, which
is but one, which is not at strife, nor divided; and let that arise, that all
vails may be taken off, and hardness of heart judged, and the countenance of
the Lord may shine upon you; when that exalted spirit which has appeared in
some, is brought down; of which I charge you all to be aware; lest there be a
total departing from the Lord, and his Name be reproached through you among the
Heathen, and it had been better for such that they had never been born.
Therefore I say unto all, lay it to heart* till the judgments of the Lord take
it away, and purify your hearts from all these things, which arises out of
that which is not of the Father; that my joy may be renewed, who have been in
travel for you, till Christ be formed; that he alone may rule in you, over all
these things which is at enmity against your life, and hinders your growth; and
if you yet harden your hearts against reproof, who are stubborn: Well the Lord
will ease himself of his Adversaries, and break you as a Potters Vessel, and
though you oppress the life of God for a moment, yet my peace with him shall
these things never take away; but over all these things I tread, and am not
offended in him, who is my peace for evermore; and though these things cause
sadness of heart, yet the Lord gives no cause of sorrow to them that are
faithful to him; but will arise to confound all deceit, and deceitful workers,
who erreth from his way, and counts the knowledge of his way as a burden; and
of you all, though you perish, I am clear, who is not hated of the Lord, though
falsely judged by his enemies, over whom I trample as the dust, and the living
God gives victory over them all.

I am not of this World. EDWARD BUROUGHS.


