THE CASE OF FREE Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of FAITH and RELIGION,
Presented unto the KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT. And also Proved absolute
needful and requisite for them to grant and allow in these Kingdoms, By many
Considerations and Reasons unfolding the woeful effects and ill consequence
which will infallably follow upon the contrary, To the misery and destruction
of these Nations, if the free exercise of Conscience to Godward, be limited
and violently restrained. By a Lover of Truth and Just Government, EDWARD
BVRROVGHS.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1661.

TO THE KING And both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, (who is mighty
and powerful, and brings to pass whatsoever he will in the Kingdoms of this
World,) so to suffer it to be accomplished, that power and authority is given
unto you, to exercise over these Kingdoms; And whereas the people of these
Nations (over whom your Authority is extended) are divided in their Judgments
in matters Spiritual, and are of different Principles and ways in Relation to
Faith and Worship and practices of Religion, and yet are all of them freeborn
people, and Natives of these Kingdoms, and as such ought to possess and enjoy
their Lives, Liberties and Estates by the just Laws of God and man; And may
not justly any of them be destroyed by you, nor one sort of another, in their
Persons and Estates, by Death, Banishment or other Persecutions, for and
because only of their differences in matters of opinion and judgment, nor
though they are contrary minded in profession of Faith and Worship and
Religion, while they do walk peaceably and justly in their Conversations, under
the Kings Authority, and do not make practice of their Religion, to the
violating of the Government, nor to the injury of other men's Persons or
Estates, but ought rather to be defended and Protected by you in all their
rights both as men and Christians, both in things Civil and Spiritual,
Notwithstanding their difference in matters Religious as aforesaid, they giving
proof of their peaceable and honest deportment toward the King and his
Government, and the people of these Kingdoms.

And therefore that due care may be had, as justly it ought to be by you, for
the Peace and Prosperity and happiness of these Kingdoms, and that the just
Liberties both civil and Spiritual of all people therein, may be allowed and
maintained in all the Kings Dominions, and that unity and peace may be fully
established, and justice and Righteousness only brought forth in the Land, and
all Persecution, Hatred, Contention and Rebellion may die and perish and never
more appear; And that all Christian people (though different in judgment and
practices in matters of Faith and worship) may be protected to live a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty under this Government, and that
indignation and vengeance may he diverted from these Lands, which seems to
threaten because of the contrary, and that blessings and peace may come, and
rest upon this people forever.

Therefore for these ends and causes, and in the Name of the Lord I do propound
unto you, and lay before you on the behalf of all the divided people of these
Kingdoms, That free Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Faith, Worship and
Religion to God-wards, may be allowed and maintained unto all, without any
imposition, violence or persecution exercised about the same, on the persons,
Estates, or consciences of any in any relation of Religion, the Worship of God,
Church Government and Ministry; But that all Christian People may be left free
in all these Kingdoms, in the exercise of Conscience without being restrained
from, or compelled to any way of Worship and practice of Relig^on, upon any
pains and penalties, and that every one may be admitted to worship God in that
way as his spirit persuades the heart, and may be defended in such their
profession of Religion, while they make not use of their Liberty to the
detrement of any other men's persons or Estates as aforesaid.

And let it not seem strange to you, why I appear in this manner and matter, at
such a season as this; for your very happiness, prosperity and establishment,
or the contrary, depends hereupon, even in allowing and maintaining liberty
of Conscience in the exercise of Religion, or in limiting and forcing and
persecuting about the same, and this may appear if ye justly consider these
things following.

1. The Lordship in and over conscience, and the exercise thereof in all
matters of Faith, and worship and duty to Godwards, is Gods alone only and
proper right and privilege, and he has reserved this power and Authority in
himself, and not committed the Lordship over Conscience, nor the exercise
thereof, in the cases of faith and worship, to any upon Earth, not to prescribe
and impose principles and Practices of Faith and worship and Religion, by force
and violence on the persons and Consciences of men, but this belongs only to
God, even to work faith in the heart, and to convert to holiness, and to lead
and teach people by his Spirit in his worship, and to exercise their
Consciences in all his ways; For the Apostles themselves said, they had not
Dominion over the Faith of the Saints, 2 Cor. 1. 24. but the Lord alone* And
King Charles the first, said in his Meditations, page 91. of that Edition
Printed for R. Royston; I have often declared how little I desire my Laws and
Scepter should entrench on Gods Soveraignity which is the only King of men's
Consciences, etc So that to be Lord in Conscience and exerciser thereof in all
the matters of Gods Kingdom, is his only proper right, and to him alone it
appertains.

2. And therefore consider if ye do not allow free liberty of Conscience, and
give unto God the Lordship and exercise thereof in all matters of Faith and
Worship to him-wards, but do impose by violence in forcing to, and restraining
from such and such ways of Religion, then ye take Dominion over men's faith,
which ye ought not to do, and ye entrench on Gods Soveraignity, and usurps his
Authority in exercising Lordship over the Conscience, in and over which Christ
is only King as before recited, and ye ought not to take his right from him,
nor to exercise that Authority over men's faith and Cons^iences which only
appertains unto him, as his proper privilege; for in so doing how dangerous
effects may it bring forth, even ye may easily provoke the Lord to wrath
against you, and bring upon your selves sorrow and misery, if ye excise
violence upon men's Consciences in and concerning Religious matters, contrary to
the Scriptures and the example of Primitive Christians who were persecuted for
their Conscience sake, but did never persecute nor punish any for that cause,
nor ever used violence about their Religion, as Charles the I. in his
meditations page 82. nothing (said he) violent nor injurious can be religious,
etc.

3. Consider, if ye allow not the free exercise of Conscience in Spiritual
matters, but do take Dominion over men's faith, and impose by violence in the
cases of Conscience about Religion, and do not suffer the Lord to enjoy his
only right to be King, in the matters of his own Kingdom, then ye divert the
end of just rule and government among men, and perverts the end of Gods great
love and favor showed unto you in restoring of you to the place of Authority
and Judgment; for the end of just Government upon earth by Kings and Rulers is
to exercise Justice, Truth, and Righteousness among men, and over the outward
man, and to be a praise to all that do well, and walks uprightly, and to be a
terror to all transgressors and them that do evil in their outward man, and to
keep the outward man in good order by just Judgment in all cases between man
and man; This is only the extent of your Authority over the outward man, and to
your Jurisdiction only this belongs, to judge in Truth and Righteousness, to
make Laws and execute them between man and man, to preserve men's persons and
estates from the wrong one of another, but not at all to make Laws and execute
them between God and men's Consciences in the cases of his Spiritual Kingdom,
this power belongs to God, and he has not committed it to you to exercise; and
therefore, let justice, equity and mercy be exercised by you among men, and
over the outward man, and in all cases between man and man; but meddle not in
the cases of men's faith to God, and their Consciences to him, but leave that
unto him alone whose right it is, for it is dangerous, and will bring woeful
effects if ye entrench on Gods Soveraignity, and if ye divert the proper end of
just Government, and of the Love of God in restoring you into Authority and
Power.

4. Consider, if ye allow not free Liberty of Conscience in the profession and
practice of spiritual things, but will compel by violence about Religion, then
this will inavoidably produce and bring forth cruel persecution in the
Kingdoms, imprisonment, banishment, and death, and all the evil effects of
persecution will fill the Nations; for though never so forceable impositions be
laid on the persons, estates, and consciences of men, for the cause of
difference in Judgment, and practices of Religion, and to compel into
Conformity, yet it cannot be supposed that all will bow and conform to the
denying of that way which they are persuaded in Conscience to be right, and to
the embracing of what they cannot in Conscience believe is of God, but will
rather suffer the cruelest death, then conform to any thing contrary to light
and knowledge; and if free Liberty of Conscience be denied, many such must
needs be exposed to persecution, even to death, though they may be peaceable
people, and profitable inhabitants of the Kingdoms, and in the things between
man and man, and in all matters temporal pertaining to the King, may be just,
and righteous, and unreprovable, yet because of difference in judgment and
opinion, exposed to be destroyed in person and estate; and such effects will
not be of honor nor safety to these Nations if innocent and just men be
destroyed, and their relations ruined, only for their Conscience and Religion
sake, by persecution.

5. Consider, if ye do impose one way of worship by force, and persecute all
that are contrary-minded, to prison and death, then how shall your Names and
memorial be left a reproach to generations after you, in days to come, who
shall repute you cruel men and persecutors, and such as destroyed your people
for difference in matters of Religion, and without just cause, and thus will
your names be a curse and not a blessing to your Children and their Children to
all ages, if that ye make Laws and execute them to the persecution and
destruction of people for Conscience sake, and for difference in Religion; for
persecution was never of God, nor ever justified in succeeding ages, but
persecutors always were rendered Tyrants, and cruel in the ages succeeding
them; for do not you condemn the Papists as oppressors and cruel persecutors in
Queen Mary's days, for their persecuting your Forefathers? And King James
said it was usually the condition of Christians to be persecuted, but never to
persecute, etc. in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, page 4, And indeed,
they are no true Christians that persecutes for matters of Conscience, and
difference in Opinion, but the false Christians that have a form of godliness
but are without the power, and out of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, who
says, love your enemies, and render to no man evil for evil, but over come
evil with good.

6. Consider, If ye do impose upon the Conscience, and persecute about
Religion, ye can never effect your end thereby, as to force all into a
conformity and uniformity to your Church and Religion; but though death, and
banishment, and the loss of all be inflicted, yet such a thing cannot be
effected, neither is it the way of Christ to promote his Church, and to convert
the contrary-minded by such means as force and violence exercised on men's
persons and estates; As K. James said in his speech in Parliament, 1609. That
it is a sure rule in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church with
violence and blood, and if ye do persecute to the height in the case of
Religion, ye will weaken your selves, and cause the love and good affection of
people to die toward you, and the persecuted will grow, and their cause be
made honorable, and many will be increased unto it, for it is usual in ages
that the way and Religion which has been most persecuted has most grown, and
thus it must infallibly be at this day, and ye can never effect your end by
persecution, nor promote your own Church, nor destroy all the contrary-minded;
As a Privy Counselor to K. James the 5th. of Scotland, advised in counsel
about the year 1539. upon the occasion of diversities of opinions then in that
Kingdom, said he, It is an error of State in a Prince for an opinion of piety
to condemn to death the adherers to new Doctrines; for the constancy and
patience of those who voluntarily suffer all temporal miseries for matters of
faith, stir up numbers who at first and before they had suffered were ignorant
of their faith and doctrine, not only to favor their cause, but to embrace
their opinions, pity and commiseration opening the gates, and thus their faith
is spread, and their number daily increases, etc.

7. Consider, If that ye do not allow Liberty of Conscience but do impose and
persecute as aforesaid, though some for your fear, and terror, and force
against their Consciences should deny their Principles, and conform to your
Church, such ye cause to sin; for whatsoever is performed by force and not of
faith is sin, as it is written, and such their sin will be laid to your charge;
and such who cannot deny their Principles and conform, will be destroyed, and
their death will be accounted against you in the day of the Lord; and therefore
if ye do not allow Liberty of Conscience, many grievous evils will infallibly
follow, both to your selves and your people And what advantage of honor will
such be to God and your; Church, that are against their Consciences and light
forced into a conformity for fear and terror of men; it makes them manifold
more the Children of the Devil, and time-servers, and Hypocrites, and destroys
their souls, and such can be no true members of the true Church of Christ, but
are Reprobates, and a dishonor to God and your Church.

8. Consider, if ye constrain and compel in matters of Religion, and do not
allow liberty of Conscience, it is unreasonable and unequal, and downright
contrary to the Holy and pure Law of God, which says, ye shall do unto all
men, as ye would that men should do unto you, and thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self, and this is the fulfilling of the Law; But to be imposed upon and
persecuted for the cases of Consciences, and for the matters of Worship of God,
your selves would not willing be against your light and knowledge, and then it
is unequal and unjust, and contrary to the Law of God, for ye to do the same to
others, which your selves would not be done unto; And do not you to this day
cry out against the Papists in Queen Mary's days, and at this day in other
Nations, and condemn them as Tyrants and Oppressors, for Persecuting, Killing,
and Destroying the Protestants, for the matters of their Conscience and
difference in Opinion and Judgment? And will you do the same at this day as
they do to others, and follow their example of cruelty and persecution, and
break the Law of God, and walk contrary to it, in doing to others what you
would not be done unto? And seeing you condemn the late foregoing Powers in
these Kingdoms for Tyrants and Usurpers, and Oppressors, for prohibiting your
way of worship, and commanding the contrary, and disanulling so much as they
could your service Book and Ministry; how can you justly do the like to others,
as to force ways of Religion upon them, and prohibit theirs and command the
contrary? if you do it, ye condemn your selves by judging of others in the like
case.

9. Consider, if ye do not allow liberty of Conscience, but impose Church
Government and Religion by pains and penalties, then ye will fill the land
with Hypocrites, and force people into time-serving obedience, and into formal
ways of worship, some against their Consciences, and some in the ignorance
thereof, which is great abomination unto the Lord, and such will neither be
true and faithful in Church nor State, but will seek advantages against you (if
they are forced by violence in the cases of their Consciences) and it will
beget great contentions and hatred in the minds of men, and divide them into
heart-burnings one against another, and against you and your Government; for if
men become Hypocrites for your fear and terror, and deny their professed
principles and conform, they will be false-hearted, and envious, and malicious,
and attempt any thing to be freed from bondage and impositions of Conscience,
and their hearts will be disengaged in love and affection to you-wards; and
this will be infallibly the effect of persecution for Conscience sake, as King
Charles the I. says in his Meditat. A charitable connivance and Christian
toleration often issi pates their strength whom rougher opposition fortifies,
and puts the despised and oppressed party into such combinations, as may most
enable them to get a full revenge on those they count their persecutors, etc.

10. Consider, if ye force Worship, and Religion, and cause men to conform
against their Judgments, how dangerous is this to destroy men's souls, and to
lead them even to destruction; For seeing ye affirm not the Infalibility of
your Worship and Religion, and yet will impose them, and so engage men's souls
in dependancy for Salvation upon things and ways uncertain, and which God
gives not the Faith to believe in; I say how dangerous is this to ruin souls;
for in no way can the soul be secure but in the faith which God works in the
heart, in the Obedience of infallible Truth; So ye run men's souls upon a Rock,
and it is unreasonable as before mentioned, that men should be forced into the
profession and practice of uncertain and fallible Religion, and that they
should be forced by you into that which may be evil, for which not you
altogether, but themselves must bear the punishment in the day of the Lord; and
except ye could affirm and prove the Infalibility of your Church (which is
impossible) there is no equity nor right reason for it, that you should impose
upon others any more then others should impose upon you; for as King Charles
the I. said in his Medit. He desired not any should be further subject unto
him, then he and all of them might be subject unto God, etc.

11. Consider, if ye allow not liberty of Conscience, but persecute about the
same, ye walk in the way and after the example of some of the Heathen Rulers,
and of the false Christians, and shows that ye allow of the cruel persecutions
by the Church of Rome, and ye follow their example, who persecutes unto death
such as they call Heretics, and if ye do persecute for matters of Conscience,
then ye allow the very deeds of the Heathens, who persecuted the Christians for
their Religion sake, and ye justify the Papists in persecuting the
Protestants; and ye plainly demonstrate unto all the World by your works and
fruits, that ye are of Antichrist, if ye impose on men's Consciences by force in
the matters of Religion, and persecute good Conscience about the same; for it
was the Antichrist and the Beast, that first forced all to worship, and
violently engaged all into a conformity, and killed and persecuted all that
would not worship according to the Image, Rev. 13. as ye may read. And it was
not Christ's way, nor the practice of any his Primitive Churches to impose and
force on the persons and Consciences of men concerning their Church and
Religion, to cause all into a conformity thereunto, and destroy and persecute
all that would not; This was not the way of Christ and his Apostles in their
days, but they left Religion free, and said, they were not lords over men's
faith, nor lords over Gods Heritage, neither did impose upon any in doubtful
cases of conscience, much less compel against men's Consciences; for the
Apostle left the practice of doubtful things, as every one was persuaded in his
own mind, to do or not to do, without imposing by force or directions of
persecution about the same; Therefore if ye do not allow free liberty of
Conscience, ye are out of the Doctrine and Example of Christ and his Apostles,
and follows the way and example of Antichrist, Heathen Rulers, and cruel
Papists, to your great dishonor.

12. Consider, if ye allow not liberty of Conscience in the exercise of
Religion, but impose and persecute about the same; It must inavoidable tend to
destroy and expel Trading, Husbandry, and Merchandise in these Kingdoms, for a
great part of Trading and Husbandry, depends upon such kind of persons, whose
principles are for toleration in Religion, and hates persecution and violence
in that case, this ye will find true on examination; and if liberty of
Conscience be not allowed, such will (...) exposed to great afflictions, some to
imprisonment, and some to poverty, and some to fly into other Countries, to the
destruction of their Callings and Trading, and the hands and industriousnes of
such people will be weakened in these Kingdoms, if they cannot enjoy their just
liberties in temporal and spiritual cases, and the effects thereof will work
woefully in this very respect, even to disenable both the hearts and hands of
Husbandmen and Trades, and expose these Nations to want and poverty, and to
enrich their enemies.

13. Consider, if liberty of Conscience be denied, and persecution be
introduced about the same; all these and many more woeful Consequencies and
effects will follow infallably to the ruin of these Kingdoms, even Wars, and
Bloodsheds, and discontents, and Murmurings, and all evil things will be the
product of the aforesaid cause, ( viz.) of denying liberty of Conscience in
Religious matters, for in a word it will tend to and may effect the overthrow
of you, and ruin your Government and Authority; for the great and mighty God of
Heaven and Earth will be provoked against you, and his wrath will go out like a
devouring flame upon you, if that ye limit the Holy One, and will not suffer
him to exercise his proper right, in being King in men's Consciences, to
exercise them in all the ways of his Worship, and matters of his Kingdom, but
do oppress, impose and persecute about the same; This I say will infallibly
work the Kingdoms ruin, and expose You and your Government to the indignation
of the Holy Lord God, who is tender of his Honor, and will not give it to
another, and he loves and affects the cause of such, whose Consciences are
truly tender toward him, and though ye persecute such and seek to destroy
them, and for a time exercise great afflictions and oppressions upon them, for
the matters of their Conscience, yet the God of Heaven will appear for such in
his season, and deliver them, and avenge their persecutors; And therefore all
ye Rulers consider, and lay these things to heart, least ye provoke the Lord
against you, by destroying the People whom he regards, and that not for evil
doing, but for the cases of Conscience, and because they cannot relinquish
their profession and principles of their Religion, and bow and conform in
things against their light and knowledge.

14. Consider, If ye allow not Liberty of Conscience, what exceeding danger ye
run your selves into, even to dest roy just men and righteous, as Heriticks and
erroneous, and may promote Heretics as Church Members, both which are great
abominations in the sight of God, and this danger ye bring upon your selves,
for ye are not infallible Judges, who are Heretics, and who are not; and
therefore may easily proceed in that way to punish such as Heretics that are
not truly so, and except ye could affirm and prove your possession of the
infallible Spirit, ye can no way proceed justly and reasonably to deny Liberty
of Conscience in the exercise of Religion, nor punish and persecute any in that
case; but if ye do, ye do it in ignorance, and knows not what ye do, and may as
soon destroy true Christians and Saints, as Heretics, for want of infallible
judgment to discern who are, and who are not; and this is a danger ye ought to
avoid by allowing the free exercise of Conscience, as the Lord persuades every
man's heart.

15. And lastly also consider what a reproach you are under, If such whom ye
call Heretics, (and yet does not infallibly know that they are such) be
punished, and persecuted, and destroyed for their Religion sake, who are just
and upright men, in their conversing between man and man, and unreprovable in
their dealings among men; (whether they err in judgment in spiritual
knowledge, or not err) and such as are drunkards and profane persons go at
liberty, in their stage-playing and gaming, and the like, even tolerated, and
unpunished, and not prohibited, whom all do know and can distinguish who such
are when they appear, this will render your Government to evil reputation, both
in this present time and in ages to come; and therefore consider it, if
Drunkards, Gamesters, and profane persons have more toleration and liberty in
their ways of open vanity, then sober temperate persons in the exercise of
their Consciences in Religion, which if any such do err in principle (which is
not infallibly known to you) it is only to their own hurt in the sight of God,
and he only and not you ought to punish them in that case; but profane
persons as aforementioned are easily judged by all to be such, and their
error in practice is hurtful to the whole Kingdoms and pertains to you to
punish; as Dr. Tailor now a Bishop in Ireland has said, his words in this case
are worth observing, why are we so zealous, says he, against those we call
Heretics, and yet great friends with Drunkards, and Swearers, and Fornicators,
and intemperate and idle persons; I am certain a Drunkard is as contrary to
God, and lives as contrary to the Laws of Christianity as a Heretic, and I am
also sure that I know what Drunkenness is, but I am not sure that such an
opinion is heresy, etc.

And these things I do in all meekness and due respect both to your places and
persons, present to your serious considerations, that ye may prevent these evil
effects that are so destructive unto you and these Kingdoms, which absolutely
must follow, upon not allowing free Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of
Religion; and if any shall object, That to tolerate and allow Liberty of
Conscience in Religion is inconsistent with the safety and peace of the King
and these Kingdoms; I shall be desirous to hear from wise men what such
objections are, stated by them, and wherein they say it is not Congruous with
the happiness and peace of these Nations, to grant and allow the premises; And
on such occasion, I should make clearly to appear the contrary, and that it is
only consistant with the peace and prosperity of these Kingdoms (considering
them in their present estate) to grant and allow free liberty of Conscience as
aforesaid, in the exercise of Religion unto all Christian people.

O! remember ye mighty men of the Kingdom, that the Great and Mighty God takes
notice of all your doings, and accordingly will he reward you in his dreadful
day, which is near to come upon all the World; and woe unto the wicked in that
day. O! remember that ye your selves not long since were a suffering people,
and now you are raised up again; And therefore be not too zealous to afflict
others, especially for the cases of their Consciences, in reference to their
faith and persuasions about Religion; but be gentle, meek, and long-suffering
toward all, for that is the way to make peace and preserve it with all men,
that will gain the affections of the contrary minded; but force and rigor will
exasperate the more, and never truly reconcile differences among men; and make
no Laws contrary or different to the pure Law of God, but let pure Conscience
go free without force or restraint in the exercises of Religion, and let God
have his Prerogative, and Lordship, in the exercise of Conscience; but let your
Authority be extended over the outward man, in the matters between man and man,
to preserve peace and right in all outward relation; and be Wise and Learned ye
Rulers of the Earth, and kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish, and if
his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are they that trust in him. This is
your time and day, happy are ye, if it be given to you to do the work that God
requires of you only.

The 26 th. of the third Month, 1661.
THE END.

