A DISCOVERY OF Divine Mysteries; Wherein is Unfoulded SECRET THINGS of the
KINGDOM of GOD: BEING A TESTIMONY I. Concerning Life and Death, with their
several Fruits and Effects distinguished. II. Concerning the Mystery of GOD and
Godliness; and concerning the Mystery of the Devil, and Iniquity. III.
Concerning true Liberty of Conscience, what it is in it self, and how obtained;
And what the true Guide and Rule is of the Exercise of Conscience. IV.
Concerning the Diversity of Judgments in Religion; the Cause and the Effect
thereof, and the Means to bring to Unity.


All which are Published for the Edification of such as desire to know the
Truth: By a Servant of Truth, Edward Buroughs.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

THE PREFACE.
THE Light of the Day of GOD Almighty, is arisen upon us in our day; and the
shinings forth thereof, is with great clearness and force, even as the Sun at
noonday, and many are come to the glorious Appearance thereof, and to walk in
its Light with much joyfulness: for, as the Wise man said, The Light is sweet,
and a pleasant thing it is for the Eye to behold the Sun: And so fully is our
Morning-Sun now appeared, that the Upright in heart may walk and not stumble,
and the poor in spirit may run in the path of Life, and not fall; for, indeed
we may say the Night is spent, and the Day is come; therefore let us walk in
the Day, and put on the Armor of Light, as many as are made the Children
thereof.

And where the Light of this Sun is arisen, and in whose hearts it shines, it
cannot but give some Testimony through such an one, of its own Glory, Virtues
and Excellency, to them that sit yet in darkness and in the bondage of
Corruption, that they also may see the same Light and Glory arise on their
Tabernacle: for it is the property of this spiritual heavenly Light, to shine
forth out of darkness, and to give light to such as have long sat in darkness,
that their souls may live, and be refreshed with the Light of the Living; And
for this cause do we labor and spend, and are spent, accounting nothing too
dear for us, that the Light of Truth may shine abroad and guide the Upright in
the perfect way, till the Elect be gathered into the pasture of Eternal Life,
and the Sun so elivated on the Firmament of Joy and Praises, never to go down,
but the saying fulfilled, There shall be no night, but the light of the Sun
shall be as the light of seven days.

These following Testimonies were written at diverse times, as the Lord drew
forth my spirit through the motions of his Life in me; some of them, some years
since; and being cast by among bundels of Manuscripts, and now lately come to
my sight, and looking them over, I have thought good to send them abroad, as
being of service to many: And this is the Occasion and End of my present
publishing these things. And to the Judgment of the Spirit of God in all the
Saints, do I commend my Labors, and may self to be approved;

Who am a Friend to all men. E. B.
Westmoreland, the 25th of the 7th Month, 1661.
CHAP. I.
A TESTIMONY concerning LIFE AND DEATH, with their several Fruits and Effects
distinguished.
THere is only Life and Death, and there is but only Life and Death in the
whole Creation, that rules and reigns, in, and among, and over all the
Children of men; and all the Children of men upon the face of the Harth are
under the Government and Dominion of Life, or of Death, in whatsoever they are,
and in whatsoever they do; and Life or Death has the Rule and Government in
every Creature, in every Exercise, whether of Works or Words; and all People
upon the Earth are subject to the Government of one, or the other, and bring
forth the Fruits and Works in obedience to Life or to Death, and shows them
forth in visible appearance. Now these two, (to wit) Life and Death, are
contrary one to the other, in being, in nature, in works and fruits; and each
of these are known and distinguished the one from the other, in being, in
nature, in fruits and effects, which diversely they bring forth in this World;
and each of them has a Kingdom and Government in himself, distinct from, and
contrary each to other; and each of them have their several Subjects, which
also are contrary in birth and generation, in quality and kind; over which they
rule and govern, and to whom they give distinct Portions and Heirships in this
World, and hereafter: And where Life rules and reigns, Death is held in
captivity and bondage; and where Death lives, the Life dies; and where one of
these brings forth fruit, the other is barren; for they agree not in one, but
are in all things contrary: and the Subjects of the one are always opposing and
striving against the Subjects of the other: And between Life and Death there is
continual war and strife among the Creatures, who are the Subjects of the one
of them, in whatsoever man is, and in what he does.

First, concerning Life I will speak. Life was in the beginning with God, and
is without descent, and God is Life in himself, without beginning or ending of
time, place, or matter; and Life put forth it self out of its invisible being,
into work and action in the beginning of the World, and appeared in visible
operations and works, and brought forth all Creatures, and all things, into
visible appearances; and Life was the Author of all, the Beginning and
Foundation of all; and Life was and is that Being and Virtue of all things that
are, and it was the Joy and Delight of all things that it self brought forth;
for all (...) through it, and it gave breath and (...) all Creatures; and Life
blessed them all, and in it were all Creatures at Unity, being framed and
brought into visibility, and for the pleasure of Life, which was all in all in
the beginning; and there was a sweet concurrance and harmony in the whole
Creation through the power and being of Life in the midst of all Creatures,
through which the whole Creation was made and framed by the Eternal Word of
Life, and through which they stood and did remain in blessedness; and Life
ruled and reigned in every Creature that was brought forth, and was the glory
and substance thereof: for Life was and is that only begotten of the Father,
the Son and the Heir of the Everlasting Father, his express Image and
Brightness; being one with the Father, not separated or divided from him.

And as for Death, it was not yet known, nor had it any place in the Creation;
if had yet received no Power, nor Kingdom, nor Government, neither was it in
being: But Life was all, over all, through all, and in all, in the beginning,
before disobedience and transgression entered to war against Life; But Life was
Prince, Ruler and Governor, in and over all the works of the Creator. And Life
in its Being is God, and God is Life; and in its Government, and Fruits, and
Effects, is Purity, Righteousness, Truth, Holiness, Meekness, and all the works
that are just and equal according to God, and like Him, and which shows him
forth in the Creation; and this was, and it was thus in the beginning, before
Death entered into the World, or had a Kingdom; But it is written, the Devil
abode not in the Truth, but went out of the Truth; and he is the king of Death,
and has the power of it; he went out of the Power of God, and out of the Life,
by which all things was made and created, and abode not in the Truth, nor in
the Life, to live, and act, and speak in that, but desired to be, and became to
be something of himself without God; and he spoke of himself, and acted of
himself, without the Power and Life, and also contrary to the Power and Life of
the Creator, being separated from it, and become a distinct being of himself;
and then having lost his state and first condition, thus became an Enemy to
Life and Truth, and became the King of Death; and he was the first of Death's
race, and he holds the Power of it upon this day; he being gone out of the
Truth, and out of the Power and Life of God, and become a distinct being of
himself, having a Kingdom of his own to promote in opposition to the Kingdom of
God. Then he drew mankind out of the Power and Truth, and Life; beguiled Eve
and Adam, as you read in the Scriptures, and they lost the Life and Power (even
all feeling of it, and comfort in it) by which they were created and made; and
they also transgressed and acted contrary to the Life and Power, and acted of
themselves, and spoke of themselves, without the Power and Life of their
Creator, being separated from it; and were and did something of themselves
without God the Creator: and then the Power and Life cast them out of all
Peace, Joy, and Happiness, into the Earth, and into Death; and Death became
King and Prince over mankind: And they had no more possession of Life, nor
blessedness by it in their separated estate, neither did it any longer reign in
them; but they having transgressed against the Life, and acted of themselves,
and spoken of themselves, without the leadings and movings of the Life, this
was their transgression; They went out of the Power and Life in all motions and
actions, and them Life drove them forth of its Good Pleasure into the Earth,
separate from its virtues and peace, and into Death, which is contrary to it
self, to live in anguish and sorrow: and so when the Devil was gone out of the
Truth, and had led Mankind out of the Truth, and out of Life, and thereby they
were all separated from Life, and drove out from God, out of his pleasure, into
his wrath; Then became Death to have a being in Mankind, and great authority,
and not before; and then Death began his Kingdom in the World, and over it,
and he set up his Rule and Government in, and among, and over all the Children
of men.

And so from Transgression came Death, that was its beginning, Man having
transgressed against the Life that brought him forth; and being separated from
Life, then Death took place, and its Kingdom was established over the World,
and in all the Children of men, in opposition to Life, and its Government and
Kingdom; and Death reigns, from Adam, so says the Scripture* and the Life was
transgressed against, and so provoked into an absence, and to withdraw it self
into invisibility from the enjoyment of Mankind, that it should not be self nor
perceived of Him to comfort him; and then the whole body of Death came upon
Man, to lead his Conscience and vex his Soul: and Death, and only Death has a
Pre-eminence over all in Transgression, and is established into a Kingdom, over
sinful Subjects, who are under its Command; and has its Rule and Government,
and brings forth its Works and Fruits in Mankind, contrary to Life, and in
opposition to it, and to its Kingdom and Power, and opposes the Kingdom and
Power of Life (the Creator;) and in its Nature, and all its Fruits and Works,
it is contrary and opposite to Life, and its Works and Fruits; and through
Death is the whole Creation in its exercise by Man perverted from the right use
and end ordained of God; and out of Death proceeds all Evil, as Lying,
Swearing, Drunkenness and Whoredom, Pride, Strife, and every evil work and
word: These things are the Fruits and Works of Death; and Death governs the
Children of men in the practice of all these things; and in transgression Death
lives, and acts, and speaks through Men and Women; and Death rules in them,
and has perverted them in all their ways; for they have given their Power to
it, and it wholly captivates them, and is established over them, and has the
dominion in them, and Life is swallowed up of it: And this Kingdom of Death
opposes God, and the Kingdom of Life, and exalts it self against Life, and
has its operation in the Creature, in all manner of unrighteousness, bringing
forth daily such words, works, fruits and effects, as does oppress and is a
burden unto the Life, and unto the God of Life and Death; and its Kingdom does
continually war and strive against Life and its Kingdom, and the one opposes
the other through all Generations since the beginning: for the Devil is the
King of Death, and has the power of it, and he is King in its Government, and
Ruler in its Dominion; and this is the state of all the Children of men in
Transgression, Death rules, and the kingdom of Death reigns in them, and it
brings forth cursed fruits through them, and they are subjects thereof, and in
obedience thereunto in all things: And through Death, which has power over
them, are they separated from Life, and have no part nor portion therein,
because of Death, that has separated them, and veiled and clouded them, and
loads their Consciences.

But now the Promise of the God of Life, is, to restore Mankind out of Death
and Darkness, and that Life shall reign again, and subdue Death, and destroy it
and its Kingdom, and swallow it up; and this is the Promise of the Father: For,
in transgression Death has subdued Life, and overcome it in Mankind; But in
the Restoration, Life shall swallow up Death, and subdue it, and overcome it:
and this comes to pass through the rising again of Life from under Death,
which has held it in bondage; and Life that made the World in the beginning,
and gave to all things life and substance, as I have said; which Life, in its
measure in Mankind, has been overcome and swallowed up in Transgression: That
Life shall appear, though in another manner of appearance than it did in the
beginning; for then it appeared freely of it self without opposition, and
brought forth the first Creation; But now it does appear through great
opposition, and through all that does oppose it in this second Creation, when
Life comes again to reign over Death, and swallow it up, and overcome and
subdue it; and who comes to witness this (the new Creation) they know Life
appearing through opposition, and through the destroying of Death, and all its
works and fruits: for CHRIST is the Life, and he is the Seed of the Woman,
which bruiseth the Serpents head, who has the power of Death; Life bruiseth
his Head, breaks his Government, and destroys his Works, as it appears and
rises in the Creature; and Death and its works opposes Life and its
manifestation and appearance, and gainsayes it, and often quenches it in its
appearances.

Now the first appearance of Life in the Creature, it convinces and reproves
the works of Death, and the words that proceed from Death, which are
unrighteous words, and unrighteous works; and Life when it rises, reproves them
and condemns them: and th^^^gh Death does oppose and gainsay the Operation of
(...); yet Life works through, and overcomes, subdueth, and swalloweth up
Death, and destroys all its works in the second Creation: and Life again comes
to take possession of the Creature, which it made in the beginning; and Life
comes to reign again, (...) Right it is to reign; for, by it the Creature
Mankind, and all Creatures were in the beginning formed and brought forth, and
therefore it is its Right to reign, and to have the dominion over the works of
its (...) is, whom since the beginning in Transgression, the Devil and Death,
and his seat of Government* has had they possession of: and CHRIST the Power
of God, and the Life, has been as it were dispossessed: and thus the first
Creation has been defaced, and lost its Glory; and it has been corrupted and
degenerated quite from the perfect state as it was created in, and Mankind has
been servent to another Power, and led captive by another Power than the Power
that made him, and another Government has been established over him, and
another Law has exercised him than the Government and Law of the Creator, (to
wit) the Power and Government, and Law of Death have had the Rule, Government
and Exercise of man, and of the old Creation, and hereby all things have been
diverted from their proper and perfect place and service, to which they were
ordained in the beginning, by reason. Transgression and the reigning of Death;
and Man (...) been held in Captivity, and in sore Bondage, and (...) all (...)
and distress, deprived of unity with his (...), and deprived of the comfortable
use and benefit of the Creation; (...) that of all Creatures he has been the
most (...), being held in Bondage and Captivity under the (...), which has
ruled and reigned over him, and in (...) always subject to Death, and subject
to the Curse and Anger of the LORD* and subject to (...) and fears, (...) and
sorrow; and all this is, because Death has reigned and had dominion; even that
which (...) in the beginning of Transgression, betrayed him of the (...), that
got possession it self to reign, and to have the Power, which ever since has
reigned, and always does, till the appearance of the Life again, which does
appear in the Creature for this end, to overcome and subdue Death, and destroy
his works, that it self may reign and free the Creation from its degeneration
and corruption, and free Mankind from his bondage and captivity, and from his
misery and all his trouble, which is come upon him by reason of Death.

And this comes to pass in the New Creation when Life is born again, to rule
and reign again, and to swallow up Death, and to subdue it wholly, and its
Kingdom and Government. And then Man again is become a Son of GOD, an Heir of
Salvation, and no more Death reigns in him, nor has power over him, when he is
restored out of Transgression; then, as Death has reigned and had power in
Transgression, Life shall so reign in and over the Creature, in the
New Creation, when that is brought forth, as Death has reigned in the
Old-Creation in Transgression and Disobedience: And Life will arise to reign
and rule over all, and in all, though it be through great opposition; the Body
of Death shall be put off, and the Government of Death shall be subdued, and
all the Works, Fruits and Effects of Death shall be destroyed and done away,
and its place shall no more be found, so as to bring forth Fruit; for its sting
shall be taken away, and shall no more wound, nor pierce, nor hurt the
Creature: For the sting of Death is Sin, and that has wounded and hurt the
Creature; and when this comes to pass, then there is glory and rejoicing over
all, for Life has swallowed up Death, and overcome it, and the cause of Sorrow
is removed and taken away, and the Kingdom of Life is established in the
Creature, and is set upon the Top of Death's Kingdom, and keeps it under, and
if there be but a motion of Death that would spring up, or appear in the
Creature, Life judges it down, and condemns it. And this Kingdom, is
Righteousness, Joy, and Peace, full of Justice, Righteousness and Equity, and
there is nothing in it that does defile or destry, or bring sorrow or misery;
but Life rules over all that, and subdues the Cause thereof, and removes every
thing that would imbondage or captivate the Creature in evil: And this Kingdom
is not of this World, but from Heaven and heavenly; and the Birth immortal is
Heir thereof, which receives the Crown and the Kingdom of Eternal Life.

Now the Kingdom of Death is of this World, which is defiled and degenerated:
Cain was a Subject of this Kingdom, and Esau that was a Reprobate, and Judas
that betrayed the Life, and all the Ungodly and Generation of the Wicked since
the beginning, they were all of the Kingdom of Death, and the Kingdom of Death
ruled in them, and brought forth its works through them, and its exercise in
their hearts and in their lives; And though its power they opposed and
gainsayed the Life, and they fought against the Kingdom of Life and
Righteousness, and such were the Pharisces who put Christ to death, who is the
Life. Death reigned over all these, and they were of the Stock of Death, and
they were of this World, and had their Conversation below in the earthly
things; and knew not the Life, not its Government, but were strangers to it,
and enemies to it, as all are at this day, who are transgressors against the
Life, and all such are subject to the Curse, to Sorrow and Misery, and the
Anger of the LORD; but who comes to feel the Life, and the obedience to it
again, Death is destroyed through Death; for, through the death of Death, Death
comes to be destroyed, and no otherway: which the Life works, and the Life
works through Death, and overcomes it, and swallows it up; and this is the
second Creation, and the new Creation, where Life reigns over all, and does
possess the Creature, as it did before Transgression. The Life is the Light,
and the Life is the Law, and Life lives, moves, and acts the Creature; and
CHRIST who is the Life, becomes all in all; and blessed are they who wait for
this, and do witness it: to such am I known in these things, where the Kingdom
of Death is overcome and swallowed up of Life.

CHAP. II.
A Testimony concerning the Mystery of GOD and Godliness; and, concerning the
Mystery of the Devil and Iniquity.
THere are two great Mysteries in their invisible being, and in manifestation
to us in the world, (that is to say) the Mystery of GOD and Godliness, and the
Mystery of the Devil and Iniquity. These are two great Mysteries, which do
discover and act themselves forth in, and among, and through the children of
men in this Creation; and these two Mysteries are contrary one to the other, in
being, in nature, in works, in fruits and effects; and they are in strife one
against the other, the one continually opposing the other, and striving for the
Creature, Mankind, to be the Instrument to display themselves through, in
visible appearance; for the Creature Man and Woman is a Vessel wherein these
Mysteries are contained, and whereby these Mysteries do show themselves forth
in the world; and all the sons of Adam upon the face of the Earth are possessed
with, and of, one of these, (that is to say) The Mystery of GOD, or the Mystery
of the Devil do manifest themselves forth through every Man and Woman; and
through all the sons of Adam upon the face of the Earth, the works, fruits and
effects of one of these are brought forth.

And as for the Mystery of GOD, it is infinite and eternal in being, and which
was, and is, and is to come, without beginning or end: and this Mystery
reaches it self forth more or less in every creature upon the face of the
whole Earth, and is the Life, and Being, and Substance of all Things; and all
Creatures upon the face of the Earth, whether movable or immovable, is a
partaker of this Mystery; and this Mystery is veiled and hidden secretly in and
under all things that have a being, and whatsoever the Creature brought forth,
even in the greatest appearance thereof; and its goodness and virtue, in what
form or appearance soever, is but the production, or the manifestation of the
Mystery [ GOD] for the life of every Creature, and the virtue of every Creature
is a Mystery, and proceeds out of the great Mystery of GOD, who is Life it
self, Virtue it self, (...) it self, and Being it self; and is the Goodness,
and the Virtue, and the Life and Being of all Things and Creatures upon the
(...) of the Earth; (...) every thing that has a being, even the Wicked and
(...), are not without this Mystery (...) manner (...) other; for by Him every
Creature is, an (...) first being.

But now more perfectly does the Mystery of GOD appear in his Servants, and in
his Children who are born of Him, and begotten by Him, and they have the sense
and feeling, and understanding of this Mystery more than any other Creatures;
and this is their Glory and Crown above all other Creatures upon the face of
the whole Earth; for they only, I say, who are redeemed to God, and born of the
Spirit, they are them that have the sense, and feeling, and understanding of
this Mystery, even of the Mystery of GOD, infinite, endless and eternal. And
though this Mystery be hid in all other Creatures, and manifesting it self
through them, yet this Mystery is not known to them, nor understood of them,
nor of any other Creature (I say) besides the Children of the Lord, in whom
this Mystery is only revealed; for they are them through whom more manifestly
and plainly this Mystery is made manifest, and to them revealed, and known, and
felt in their Understandings; and they have the enjoyment thereof who know God,
and are known of him, and are entered into Covenant with him, into Everlasting
Covenant of Joy and Peace; and through them does this Mystery display it self,
even in the sight of all Creatures, in works of Righteousness, and works of
Purity, and works of Goodness, of Mercy, of Truth, of Peace, and of Wisdom, in
their exercise of all things; and in this manner, and by these fruits and
effects does the Mystery of GOD show it self forth through his Children, in
whom the Mystery is opened, that is hid in all other Creatures: And this is the
Crown of the Children of the Lord, that are born from Heaven, and from above,
that the Mystery of GOD is felt and enjoyed by them, and more manifest to them
than in any other Creatures: And to know this Mystery of GOD, is Life Eternal;
and to have the understanding of his Leadings, of his Judgment, of his Mercy,
and of his Counsel, and of the operation of his Power; to feel this in the
Understanding, this is Joy, and a Crown of Glory, where the Mystery of GOD is
revealed in Spirit.

And as for the Mystery of the Devil, it is darkness, and in darkness; and it
shows it self forth in the Ungodly, and in the sons of Adam in transgression,
and in such only does this Mystery of Iniquity, and of Sin, and of the Devil
display it self forth in all unrighteousness and sin; and that which is
contrary to the Creator in works, words and thoughts; All these things are the
manifestation of the Mystery of the Devil, and its fruits and effects, who is
out of the Truth, who is veiled and covered, and hidden in the hearts of the
Ungodly, and in the hearts of the sons of Adam in the Fall: This Mystery was
not from the beginning, as the other, but when the Devil went out of the Truth,
and had led Man's mind out of the Truth, and taken possession of the heart of
Man, and become ruler and lord there, having gained authority over Man through
Man's obedience to him, then began this Mystery to discover it self, and act it
self through the Creature; and this was since the beginning: And though no
other creature be an Agent to manifest forth this Mystery but Man, yet Man in
his exercise of all Creatures, or all Creatures through the exercise of Man in
transgression, there is showed forth this Mystery of Iniquity, that secretly
lurks in the spirits of ungodly men; which spirit of unrighteousness, the
Mystery of the Devil, leads Man into all sinfulness, of drunkenness and
uncleanness, and such like, and has polluted the Earth, and defiled all
Creatures through Man's exercise in them: and this is truly an appearance of
the Mystery of the Devil; yet he has other appearances, and other makings-out
of his Mystery (to wit) in a way of seeming Righteousness, and seeming
Holiness, and seeming Purity; and these show the Mystery of Unrighteousness,
the Mystery of the Devil, who deceives the soul that is immortal of the
enjoyment of the Creator, who is the desire of the Immortal Soul; and so
through a form, and likeness, and appearance of a thing is the Soul Immortal
deceived, and beguiled with that which has appearances in it, but no life nor
substance.

And though the Mystery of Iniquity be but one in it self, yet it manifests it
self diverse ways; sometimes in open profaneness and wickedness, and sometime
in seeming righteousness and holiness, and in a form of Religion without power:
But the Lord is arisen to confound the Mystery of the Devil and Iniquity, and
will discover it, and destroy it; for it is the Mystery of Iniquity that
works in the Children of Disobedience, that are strangers to God; and through
the operation of this Mystery are people kept at a distance from the Lord, and
out of Unity and Covenant with Him: and this Mystery of Iniquity works
hiddenly, not known but in the Eternal Eye, which sees through the spirit of
Creatures, and comprehends and fathometh over the nature of things, and can
judge beyond the appearance, even in the ground, before action appears: for
while people are professing and acting Holiness and Righteousness visibly, and
yet not changed by the Power of the Lord, nor renewed in nature, mind, and
spirit, from the first Adam to the second, the Righteousness and Holiness
brought forth in that state, is but the acting of the Mystery of Iniquity, and
the Wolf putting on the Sheeps clothing; And this God will judge, and all
appearances without life, and all shows without substance, All this will the
Lord judge and confound, and bring to naught; for it is but the working of the
Mystery of the Devil, who is out of the Truth.

And this Mystery has more abounded since the days of the Apostles, than in
Ages since the beginning, in as much as this Mystery has operated and
displayed it self forth in a higher appearance and fairer show than ever it did
before; for this Mystery has sat in the Temple of God, and showed it self to
be God, and been worshipped above all that is called God: This Mystery of
Iniquity, the Man of Sin, which has put on the Sheeps clothing, and shows it
self as the Sheep of Christ, and as Christians and Churches; all which has
been for many Ages the manifestation of this Mystery, while that the Mystery of
the Devil has not been destroyed: but now is the Lord arisen, who will
discover and destroy this Mystery, and save the Creature; and in the
destruction of this Mystery, is the other Mystery revealed, (to wit) The
Mystery of God and of Christ, and that is the Mystery of Christ, that destroys
the Mystery of Antichrist and of the Devil: And now the Sons and Daughters of
the Lord Almighty are coming into this Mystery of God Eternal, who is blessed
for ever; and all that is coming to be overthrown which does oppose it, and
gainsay it; and there is nothing that can destroy or discover this Mystery, but
the appearance of Christ the Son of God; for it is he that does discover and
destroy the Mystery of Iniquity, by the Spirit of his Mouth, and by the
Brightness of his Coming; and this are people coming to: The Man of Sin is to
be thrown down, and the Man of Righteousness, the Man of God is revealed, and
Sons and Daughters shall show him forth in the World, and the Mystery of God
shall show it self forth over the World, and in Nations; and blessed are all
they that come to the opening of this Mystery of God, which is the Mystery of
Life and Eternal Salvation.

CHAP. III.
A Testimony concerning true Liberty of Conscience, what it is in it self, and
how it is obtained; and what the true Guide and Rule is of the Exercise of
Conscience.
THis is my Testimony, as I have received from the Lord: True Liberty of
Conscience, is, Liberty and Freedom of the Conscience from the bondage of Sin,
and all Transgression past and present; and from whatsoever has been, or is a
Burden or Oppression upon the Conscience, whether inward or outward: the
Conscience, I say, is at liberty when it is freed from the burden of the guilt
of Sin past, and from the present temptation unto Sin: And till this is
witnessed, there is no true Liberty of Conscience; For every thing whatsoever,
which is Sin and Transgression against God, in works or words, brought forth by
the Creature, is bondage and a burden, and oppresses the pure Conscience: and
therefore perfect freedom from all Sin and Transgression, is, where the body of
Sin and Death is put off, and where the Evil is crucified, and the guilt of it
taken away, and where the Conscience is truly exercised by the Spirit of
Christ, which leads into all Truth, and preserves from all Evil; Then is
the Conscience at liberty, and this is true Liberty of Conscience, when this is
brought forth in the Creature: For where Sin is brought forth, and
Transgression lived in, there the Conscience is bound, and the Cord of Iniquity
imbondageth the Conscience, and it has not its liberty in the Service of God,
nor from the service of the Devil, because the Spirit of God does not exercise
it; but the spirit of unrighteousness leads the mind into the lusts of this
world, into Lying, Swearing, Pride, Drunkenness, Hypocrisy, and Idolatry; and
the guilt of these things burdeneth and presses down, and is a bondage upon
the Conscience: and where the Conscience is bound by unrighteousness within,
and by the spirit of the world, which leads contrary to the Lord, there is no
power of man without can set that Conscience free, or give liberty to it;
because the Cord of Iniquity has bound it within, and the burden of guilt is
upon it, and Conscience lies under bondage, unexercised with the Spirit of God,
which is free, and sets free the Conscience in the practice of all Good, and
from the power and captivity of all Evil.

Therefore, before true Liberty of Conscience be witnessed, or any have true
Liberty in Conscience, Iniquity must be purged out, and Sin crucified, and the
body of Death put off, and Guilt washed away, and the Anointing received that
leads into all Truth, and the Blood of Christ (the Seed) felt, that
sprinkleth the Conscience from all sin, and works of the flesh, and washes
away all that which stains and defiles the Conscience, and then the pure
Conscience has its true liberty from the bondage of all Evil, and from the
guilt thereof, and in the exercise of all Good; and this is true Liberty of
Conscience; and thus it is attained, and by no other way nor means, than by the
sword of the Spirit of God, which cutteth down the contrary: and where
Conscience is thus freed within by the Power of the Lord, and delivered from
the bondage of Evil, and from the burden of all guilt, and exercised in all
good by the Spirit of God; Then nothing without, nor any Power of Man, which
may work against such by Persecution, and act in opposition to such whose
Consciences are thus freed, can imbondage the Conscience to Godwards, or bring
it under a burden to Godwards, I say: for it is not altogether bondage of
Conscience, or the burden or oppression upon his Conscience, that is set free,
as aforesaid, though he is outwardly persecuted by Men; for that does but
hinder the exercise of his Conscience to manwards, but not to Godwards; for
there his Conscience is free, in Joy and Peace, though, by reason of
Persecution, he cannot have the exercise of it to men: I say, though such be
put in Prison, banished, or whatsoever suffering be laid upon them, by any men,
or Laws without; yet their pure Conscience is free and at liberty in it self to
Godwards, through all this, and over it all; for he Lord has set them free
from all that bondage and guilt of Iniquity, which has been a bondage upon
their Consciences within: and whether they do suffer, or have freedom or
captivity in their persons from men, yet is their pure Conscience at liberty to
Godward, and in perfect freedom in it self, and to themselves, though for the
Name of Christ, and his Truth, they be persecuted, and all evil done against
them by evil men, and the exercise of their pure Consciences prevented, as to
manwards.

For that which defiles the Conscience, does bring it under bondage; but that
which keeps it pure, and free from pollution, that keeps it in liberty, and in
perfect freedom to God, over all Persecution and evil men, and unjust Laws,
which would exercise dominion in and over the Conscience of the Saints, and
bring them into captivity; as sometimes their persons are by evil Laws and
Persecutors.

But who stands in the Power of the Lord, and in the exercise of the Spirit
of God, which freeth the Conscience in their own particulars (as I have said)
does not come into bondage in Conscience to Godwards, by Laws, or Men, but
enjoys freedom and liberty therein; as much in Sufferings and in Persecutions
under all the Cruelty of men, as in doing and practices when they are not
persecuted; for in Sufferings the Conscience is exercised, and has its liberty
in patience and forbearance; And at liberty of persons, in practice it is
exercised, and has its Liberty, in doing and performing whatsoever the Spirit
of the Father moves and leads unto. And thus, where God has freed the
Conscience, and it is free, and at liberty in Him, and to Him; nothing without
can bring it into bondage or captivity; but in all conditions, and in all
exercises, whether doing or suffering, the pure Conscience is in liberty in it
self, and in perfect freedom in God, through all, over all, and beyond all.

But now, there has been a great Cry among many (that have professed
Righteousness and Religion) for Freedom of Conscience, and begging and craving
from the Powers of the Earth to tolerate Liberty of Conscience, and that they
might have the Liberty of their Conscience in Religion: and thus some have been
looking too much without for Liberty of Conscience from Men, and from Powers
without them, before their Consciences were set free by the Lord within, and
the bond of Iniquity broken, and that burden of Iniquity and Guilt done away,
which has been a burden and bondage upon the Conscience: For, as I said, no
Man, nor Powers of the Earth can truly free or give liberty to the Conscience,
which is bound by the Cord of Iniquity within; But it is evident, the cry for
Liberty has not been so much for the Exercise of Conscience truly so, as for
the Freedom each one of their Sect, and for the Liberty in practice of their
own Worship and Conformity; and thereupon have diverse men, of diverse Sects,
sought to the Powers of Men, and of the Earth, to grant them Liberty of their
Consciences; when as it has been rather, for the freedom to, and defense of,
their Sect, and of their practices in their Worship, than for Liberty of
Conscience truly so; for while they have cried for Liberty from without, yet
Sin, and Iniquity, and Transgression have lain upon their Conscience within,
and they have sought from Men for the Liberty of their Sect, to practice their
own Worship, which they have called Liberty of Conscience: And to this intent
by some has been the Cry for Liberty of Conscience, that their Sect, and their
own Ways of Worship, might be defended from the violence of others, who have
opposed their Practices and Worships: for people of diverse ways of Worship, and
of diverse Sects, have all been at strife one with another, and divided one
against another; and yet all professed good Conscience, and cried for Liberty
thereof from the Powers of the Earth; not but that the Powers of the Earth
ought to grant free Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of every Sect of
Religion, and to suffer all to profess and practice their Religion, while they
walk justly and peaceably in a Land: But here has lodged the deceit and
deceivableness of the spirit of Satan, in the hearts of men, from the least to
the greatest of all those diverse false Sects and Worshippers; they have therein
zealously gone on, and pleaded for their Sects and Worship, though never so
gross or dark, and contrary to Truth, under the denomination of Freedom and
Liberty of good Conscience; and the very Title and Name has been the Color,
and deceived many, while a false Worship, and false Practices of false Sects,
have gone under the name of Liberty of good Conscience; and thousands have been
deceived, and blindly led into such a false Sect, and into such a Profession,
to act and perform with great Zeal, false Practices in a false Worship, falsely
supposing it to be out of a good Conscience, and that they have acted in the
liberty thereof: yea, and many may suffer great and grievous things, and some
the loss of their Lives, for the very practice of false things, and false
Worships, in a false Sect, and yet under the name of good Conscience, and for
Liberty of Conscience, as they may profess and believe.

But this may seem strange to be spoken to some, who may enquire how it comes
to pass, and how this may be, that many may suffer great and grievous
Cruelties; and some the loss of their Lives, for the practice of false things,
and the exercise of false Worships, which they may suppose to be out of a good
Conscience, and for good Conscience sake; whereas it is not truly so, nor
rightly so: But how happens this, may some say?

I answer. This comes to pass after this manner: Because Conscience is made
of that, and of the things and performances which God requires not; and so
there is a great zeal in the doing and performing of such a Practice, and such
a Worship, when as the Lord has not required these things at their hands; and
this is, because the Mind, and Heart, and Conscience is dark, and not truly
informed, nor guided with the Spirit of Truth, and of the Father; but a false
Spirit rules and leads the Conscience, and it is not exercised with the
Spirit of the Father that leads into all Truth: So I do acknowledge that
Conscience may be misled, and mis-guided, and misinformed; and Conscience may
be made of doing such and such things which the Lord does not require, and
there may be a fear not taught of the Lord, not received by the sense of his
Presence, but only received into the heart by the Precepts of men, Example of
others, Custom of times, or the like; and here the Conscience being not truly
informed, nor guided by the Spirit of the Lord, there is a false fear and
zealousness in the performing of such things which the Lord does not require,
nor his Spirit lead into the practice of; but only the Tradition and Precepts
of men, has placed a false Law and Commandment, which requires a false
obedience; which many, whose understandings are blinded, and being without true
knowledge, they zealously perform and practice as the Worship of God, thinking
themselves bound in Conscience to practice such things, and not to leave them
undone; when as the Lord, and his righteous Spirit leads not to them, nor yet
his just Law does require the doing thereof; but only a false Law and
Commandment is received by Precepts and Traditions of men, or from looking upon
the Practice of others: By such means as this, there is a false fear in a blind
mis-guided Conscience, and a zeal without true knowledge.

And thus it was amongst the Jews in the Prophets days, they sacrificed their
Children, and cut themselves, and caused their Children to pass through the
fire, and did many things zealously; when as says the Lord, Who has required
these things at your hands? for they come not into my heart. And Paul
witnesses the same of the Jews in his days, and bore them record, that they
had a Zeal, but it was not according to True Knowledge. And thus the Jews were
zealously performing that, as their Duty, and as out of a good Conscience,
which the Lord required not at their hands; and so they made Conscience to do
that, which the Lord required not, and their Consciences were misled, and not
rightly informed; and, as it was amongst the Jews in this case in the days of
old, so now is it amongst the Christians in the Apostasy, their Conscience
being mis-guided by a false spirit, they are doing and performing the things in
great Zeal, and for the exercise of their Consciences, which the Lord does not
require of them: Thus do the Papists; they do and practice the things in great
Zeal, and through a false Fear in their blind Consciences, which things are in
themselves Idolatry, and not commanded nor required (...) the Lord; as in many
particulars I might show, even in many parts of their Worship and Religion,
which out of a Fear, and blind Zeal, and mis-guided Conscience, they practice;
which is in it self but Idolatry, and not required nor accepted of the Lord.
And many things in relation to the Protestants Worship, and amongst all the
several false Sects upon Earth; which are done and practiced in great Zeal, and
out of a false Fear, and as in pretense of a good Conscience, and yet are
things in themselves Idolatrous, as done and practiced by them: And this comes
to pass, as I have said, because the Conscience is misinformed, and a false
spirit guides and rules in the exercise of Conscience, and the understanding of
the People is blinded, and they know not but they do well, though their minds
are captivated, and their minds and judgments in error; and though there be a
sincerity to Godwards, and a desire of Him in the bottom, among some People of
all Forms and Sects, and some of all are zealous toward God in their
practices, in their Religion and Worships; yet among all People, and the
Churches that have been for many Generations, there has been great Error in
Judgment, and much blindness in mind, and the Conscience falsely exercised
toward God, and the Superscription has been, To the Unknown God; and He has
been ignorantly worshipped, and the Spirit of the Lord has not truly exercised
Peoples Consciences, nor guided their Zeal, nor been Ruler in the Judgment; And
by this means the sincerity and humility toward God has been eaten out, and
always quenched, and the bare practice of things and profession of Religion in
the outward appearance, has been more looked at, than the Presence of God felt
in the Practices: and the Zeal has been more for the performance of such
things, than for God purely enjoyed through them: And thus it has been through
Christ^^^^ in the Apostasy since the days of the Apostles and true Churches;
Many have erred in their Judgments, and the Zeal for God (...) proceeded our of
the error of Judgments, and out of misinformation of Conscience, and some other
thing* man only the Spirit of God, has ruled in the Judgment, and been the
exercise of peoples Consciences. And this is (...) of things about true Liberty
of Conscience; and about the Error in Judgment; and the blind Zeal in
captivated sincerity.

Now it may be objected, What is the only absolute Rule of the right Exercise
of Conscience; and when are Men's Consciences truly guided?

To this I answer, The only chief and perfect Rule of the right Exercise of
Conscience, both to God and all men, is, The SPIRIT of CHRIST: for it is only
that which can truly guide the Conscience, in Faith, Doctrine and Worship, and
in all things toward God; even the Spirit of CHRIST, which is the gift of the
Father, it only leads into all Truth, as it is written; and all, whose
Consciences are guided and exercised by it, are in Unity and Peace in their
Worship, Doctrine, and Religion; for the Spirit of CHRIST is but one in it
self, and guides the Conscience into the exercise of one Truth and Faith; and
in this same Spirit is the true Union and Communion of Saints in Religion and
Worship, and this is manifest through the Scriptures; for the Apostle exhorted
to walk in the Spirit, and by it; and as many as walked by the Rule of the
Spirit, peace was upon them: and it is the Spirit of CHRIST, the Everlasting
Comforter, that teaches all Truth; and the Holy Anointing of the Spirit that
dwelt in the Saints, taught them all things; and they needed no man to teach
them, but as the Anointing that dwelt in them. And then are Men's Consciences
truly guided in all the ways of Righteousness, when the Spirit of God guides
the Conscience, and is the Rule of all Faith, Doctrine and Practices.

So that Traditions of Men, Prescriptions of Councils, Antiquity of Time,
Commandments of Men, nor Example of others, without the Spirit of Christ,
cannot be the only true Rule of the Exercise of Conscience: for all these
things are changeable, alterable, and subject to variations, and therefore
cannot infallibly guide the Conscience in the Duty toward God, nor rightly
exercise the Conscience in Unity and Peace; but while a Nation, or Kingdom, or
People walk by the Rule of Traditions, Prescriptions, Commandments of Men,
Example of others, or the like, they err in Judgment, in Faith, Doctrine and
Worship, and are all divided, and in Contentions about these matters, because
their Rule of Conscience and Judgment is doubtful and alterable, and not
infallible; and therefore they have no perfect assurance of God's acceptance
to them in their Faith and Religion, nor perfect Peace and Unity in their Faith
and Worship; But as the Rule of their Consciences in their Duty toward God is
diverse, some makes one thing and some another their Rule; so are they diverse
and divided, in what they hold, profess and practice, and are but of great
Babylon in their Religion: And because that something besides the Spirit of God
exercises the Conscience; therefore is it, that here are so many ways and
Sects of Religion and kinds of Worship in Christendom, and among Christians,
while the Spirit of Christ only is not the Rule of Judgment, and Exercise of
Conscience to God and Man; for the only perfect Rule of Conscience in the
exercise to God, is the Spirit of Christ, and not any other thing.

And now, whosoever shall persecute the Exercise of Conscience, when guided by
the Spirit of Christ, such persecute Christ Jesus: And this is Persecution for
the Name of Christ, when Sufferings are inflicted, as Reproaches, Imprisonment,
or whatsoever, for the exercise of Conscience toward God by his Spirit: but,
and if any are persecuted for Religion-sake, only so, if that in such their
Exercise of Religion they are not guided by the Spirit of Christ, yet that
suffering is a kind of Persecution also: If, I say, the suffering be only for,
and because of their Religion-sake, and they walk justly and righteously as
men; so that (as is signified about the middle of this Chapter) though some may
profess good Conscience, and cry for Liberty thereof in their false Sect and
Religion, not taught them by the Spirit of Christ; yet the Civil Magistrate
ought not to punish and use violence to such for their Religion; but if they
do, they persecute, and the Lord will lay it to their charge. But yet this is
safe for all, first to obtain true Liberty of Conscience to Godwards, and to
receive the Spirit of Christ, to be taught only by it, in the Exercise of
Conscience and Religion, that they may not err in Conscience and Judgment in
Spiritual matters, nor suffer wrongfully under pretense of Righteousnesse-sake,
when as it is not truly so.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Diversity of Judgments in RELIGION.
TO all ye that are of diverse Judgments and Opinions in, and concerning
Spiritual matters; who are divided about matters of Faith, Doctrine, Worship,
and Church Government; some of you holding one thing, and some another
different and contrary to that; being diversely divided in mind and heart,
concerning the matters that are one in themselves, and to which you all assent,
as to the things in themselves, and yet are different and contrary-minded about
the self-same things: To you all I am moved to write, that so ye may be
informed perfectly; first, What the Cause is of your Divisions, and why it is
thus amongst you: And secondly, Of the bad Effects and Fruits such Divisions
have brought forth: And lastly, the means and way of Reconciliation, that ye
may come into Love, and Peace, and Unity with God, and one with another, in all
things pertaining to his Kingdom.

First, The Cause of your Divisions, and of the Diversities of Judgments and
Opinions that are amongst you concerning the things and matters of God's
Kingdom, is, Because you want the Spirit of God to guide you, and it is not the
Rule of your Knowledge and Judgment; and you wanting the Spirit of God, in
which is Unity among Saints, therefore is it you are so divided, and diverse,
and different, and contrary one to another in these things; it is, because ye
want the Spirit of God, I say, which only teaches the true Knowledge of God,
and gives an Understanding in all his Ways and Matters; It is the Spirit of
God that teaches true Faith, true Doctrine, and true Worship, and all things
about Church, Ministry, and Religion; and if that you had the Spirit of God in
you, and were taught and guided by it, it would teach you into one Faith, and
one Truth, and into the true Worship, and into the true Church Government, and
you would be in unity and peace; And if you all had the Spirit of God that gave
forth the Scriptures, and by which Spirit the Saints of God were guided in
days past, it would teach you into Unity, and to be of one mind, one heart,
and one soul in all the matters pertaining to God's Kingdom, in Faith, Worship,
Doctrine, and all things else; if you had the Spirit of God, I say, and were
taught by it, then you would have Unity with God, and one with another, in all
his ways, and there would have been no Division nor Contention amongst you
about Spiritual matters; but because you want that, therefore you have strife
and division amongst you, even throughout all Christendom; Here Is a Nation and
a Kingdom holding such a Faith and Worship, and there is another People holding
Faith and Worship contrary to that; and here is one Sect of people, and there is
another, different in Faith, Judgment, and Opinion; and this is a shame to
whole Christendom, that all should profess Christ Jesus, and Faith in him, and
Salvation by him, and his Doctrine and Worship, and yet be in strife and
division, and in great contentions concerning the same; some holding and
practizing one manner of Faith, Worship and Doctrine, and others holding
contrary and different; and this shows that ye are all fallen from the Life of
Christianity, as it was held in the Apostles days amongst the true Churches;
for they were of one heart, mind, soul and spirit, as it is written; they were
of one Faith, of one Worship, of one Doctrine, and hand one Way of
Church Government; and this continued amongst the Churches of Christ, till
there were some that had erred from the Spirit of God in their own Consciences,
and then they also erred in Faith, in Doctrine, and in all other things
relating to God: And these were the Apostate Christians that had erred from the
Spirit, and divided themselves from the true Church, and differed in Judgment
amongst themselves; and this was, because they had erred from the Spirit of
God, which would have kept them in unity with God, and one with another: for
the Spirit is the Bond of Peace, and the Seal of the Covenant of Love among the
Saints. So now all ye who are divided in your Knowledge and Judgment, and are
in contention one with another about the matters pertaining to God's Kingdom,
you are the Apostate Christians, and you are without the Spirit of Christ: The
first Apostate Christians erred from the Spirit, and so became divided from the
true Faith, and from the true Worship, and also among themselves; and you never
yet received the Spirit of Christ that you might come into Unity and Fellowship
with God, and one with another; and that is the reason of all your Divisions in
Religious matters, because you have not received the Spirit of Christ, to teach
you, and to unite your hearts to God, and one to another; but you having the
Scriptures, traditionally, by descent through Ages, which do describe and
declare of that Faith and Doctrine, and of the Worship and Church Government,
which were among the Saints of old, which they held and practiced, and from the
Scriptures which declare of the things, from thence you take up a Conceit and
false Judgment, and an Imitation, and a false Conformity; and then each sort of
you call that your Faith and Church Government, and some after one manner of
form, and some after another; and thus you are divided, because you want the
Spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures; which Spirit did work true Faith
in the hearts of them that gave them forth in days of old, and it taught them
Worship, Faith, Doctrine, and all things concerning Gods Kingdom, for the
Spirit led them into all Truth; and now you wanting the same Spirit that
wrought in them, and taught them; and you having but their words (to wit, the
Scriptures) from thence, in the Wisdom which is below, and in the carnal
Reason, and in the first man's understanding, each Nation takes up a conceit,
that it is so and so, and takes up an Imitation of Worship and
Church Government according to their own sensual wisdom, and according to the
breadth and depth of their Conceits; and then imitates, and that severally and
diversely, and in a divided manner; and this is amongst Kingdoms, and amongst
Neighbors and Brethren, this Division in matters of Faith, Worship and
Doctrine, and Church Government; and yet all these have had the name of
Christians, and Church Members, and Worshippers of God, but yet are of many
ways of Worship, holding different and contrary Principles of Faith and
Doctrine, and also of Worship and Church Government; and thus have Nations,
Cities and Countries been for many Ages; and thus has it been, and is at this
day amongst the Apostate Christians, that want the Spirit of Christ to be their
Rule, of Knowledge, of Judgment, and Worship, and of their Faith and Practices
in Religion. And this is a shame to whole Christendom, amongst whom the spirit
of Antichrist has entered, which has thus divided Nations, Cities, Neighbors
and Brothers; for all these Divisions about Religion amongst the Apostate
Christians, are of Antichrist, and not of God; it is that spirit of Antichrist
that has wrought all these Divisions, and planted them in the minds of People.

Secondly: Concerning the bad Effects of these Divisions in matters of Faith
and Worship, as I have said: This Division in Religion has begotten and
brought forth very much Evil throughout the World, much heart-burning, envy,
hard-heartedness, strife and contention between Kings and Rulers, and between
Nations, between Cities, between Neighbors, and between Brothers; this
Division has wrought bad Effects amongst all these; so that it has brought
forth much War and Bloodshed between Kings, and great Persecutions between
Rulers and their People, and great Debate and Strife amongst Neighbors and
Friends; so that great Murders and loss of many Lives have been produced and
brought forth upon this Quarrel, about Difference in matters of Faith and
Religion; and Antichrist has not only divided people in Judgment, but has
also provoked people into rage and envy, to the killing and destroying of one
another; and even that Division about Spiritual things, begotten by Antichrist
amongst false Christians, has been turned into personal enmity, and brought
forth in the end, murdering and killing the bodies of Thousands, when the
original debate has arisen about Church Government, or Points of Religion; and
this is the woeful Effect that Division of Religion has brought forth in all
Christendom. And all this Fruit and Effects, as well as the Cause of it, has
been of Antichrist, and of the Dragon and the Devil throughout the World; all
this Persecution and spoiling of Goods, Imprisoning of Persons, taking away of
Lives, and Banishment; and whatsoever Persecution otherwise that has risen and
been inflicted upon any, for and because of Differences in Religion, and about
Faith and Worship, all this has been of Antichrist; and even all Laws made for
that end, and all Executors of such Laws, and all Penalties of such Laws; and
all Wars and Bloodshed whatsoever, that have ensued only and upon the account
of Differences in Religion; that being the first, and the only ground of the
Quarrel; All this has been of Antichrist, and it came out of the bottomless
Pit; and never rose from the Spirit of God, but from the Antichristian spirit
of Envy and Wickedness, that has first divided people about matters of Faith
and Religion, and then provoked them to envy and malice, stirring up Kings to
fight one against another, that was not of their Religion, but different and
contrary to it: And so the hearts of Rulers have been stirred up to persecute
all under them, that were different and contrary in matters of Faith, Worship,
and Religion; and this the spirit of Antichrist has effected throughout
Christendom: and so each King that has been strongest, would maintain the
Principles of his Faith, and the Practice of Religion, according to his own
Conceit, in his Dominions: And thus has Religion, Worships, and
Church Government been set up and stood amongst Apostate Christians throughout
the World, by Force and Power, and by violent Laws, and through Persecutions
and Murders; and all this has been by the spirit of Antichrist: and the Spirit
of God has had no hand in those matters, for the setting up and contriving of
false Faith, false Worship, and false Church Government; all this has depended
upon the Powers and Authorities of the Earth, through many Ages: and what
Religion, and Church Government, or Way of Worship, that Kings or Queens have
set up, that only has been promoted; but all the rest persecuted and
restrained by force and violence; and all this has been of Antichrist.

And now to all ye that are of diverse Judgments in matters of Faith and Worship
in Religion, this is a Caution to you all; and I do warn you all in the
presence of the living God, that though ye be divided in the belief and
practice of Spiritual things, yet live in peace and unity with all men, in all
outward relations, and do not envy nor hurt one another Persons; though you
are in difference about Religion, yet suffer not that Difference to grow into
persecuting or envying one another persons, but seek to inform one another,
and instruct one another in the Spirit of Meekness, and persuade one another
out of that which is evil, to that which is good, by patience, gentleness, and
long-suffering; and do not force one another by violence, nor persecute one
another, neither by words, evil-deeds, nor actions, but live in love to the
persons every one of another; and fight not with Persons, nor kill one another
Persons with carnal weapons about Religion, but take the spiritual weapons, and
war with the Spirit against the evil one in one another; and love persons
though they are enemies, and this is Christ's Doctrine; and never hereafter let
your divisions about Spiritual things grow into personal quarrels, to the
envying or killing one another. And this is a Charge to you all in the presence
of the living God.

Lastly, The Means and Way to be reconciled and to come out of all Division and
Strife, and to come into Peace with God, and one with another, about Faith and
Church Government, is by the Spirit of God; and every one of you in particular
must receive the Spirit of Christ, that it may work in every one of your
hearts, true Faith, and teach every one of you the true Worship of God, and the
way of Doctrine, and true Church Government; it is the Spirit of Christ in
every one both male and female, that must reconcile and bring into unity with
God, and one with another, in all Spiritual things; for it is that which is the
bond of Peace and Love among true Christians; and it is that which reconciles
peoples hearts into oneness: And if you receive that Spirit, every particular
person of you, it will bring you to be of one Faith, of one Worship, and then
your Doctrine and Church Government will agree: if you receive the Spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures, it will work in you the same Faith, and lead you in
the same way of Worship which the Scriptures speak of, and then you will cease
taking up Conceits, and making Imitations of Church-Governments from the
Letter, but the same Spirit will work in your hearts Faith and Knowledge in the
fulfilling of the Scriptures; and this is true Christianity, and the other is
the way of all Apostate Christians, all Imitations from the Letter without the
Spirit as gave it forth: for there is a great deal of difference between making
a Conformity in the Imitation of a Worship, and Church Government, from the
Scriptures without the Spirit, and between the Spirits teaching and leading
into the same Truth, and same Worship and Church Government, which the
Scriptures speak of; the one is of Christ, and is in unity, peace, and
everlasting fellowship; the other is of Antichrist, and is in division, strife
and contention: so you must all wait for the Spirit of Truth, that you may
receive it, to work in your hearts, to teach you, and lead you, or else you
will never come to true Union and everlasting Fellowship with God, and one with
another; neither can you be of one true Faith, in one true way of Worship, nor
in one way of Church Government, except you receive the Spirit, and walk in the
Spirit. And these be the words of the Lord God unto you all.

Now as concerning the way of Uniformity in Faith and Church Government,
imposed upon Nations, and Countries and Cities, by cruel Laws of Kings and
Rulers, as has been the practice through Christendom, to cause a whole Nation
and Kingdom to bow and conform to such Principles of Faith, and Worship, and
Church Government, according to the will and pleasure of a King, or a Ruler,
such Uniformity and Union and Fellowship among Christians has not been of
Christ, where people have walked by Imitation, and conformed to the Commands of
Men in such a Faith, or to such a Worship or Church Government; this has not
been of God, neither could this Unity stand or remain for ever, but it has
perished, and will perish where ever it is; and that Faith and Worship, and
Church Government which is so set up, and so held, will never save the Soul,
nor comfort it; but it is blasted of God: whilst a Nation, or a Kingdom, or a
People have Uniformity, or hold Faith, Worship, or Religion, either in the
ignorance of their Consciences, or contrary to their Consciences, by the force
of Men's Commandments, and not by the persuasion of the Spirit of God in their
own Consciences; such Conformity, I say, is of Antichrist, and not of the
Father, neither can it stand in the Day of the Lord; but the fire of his Wrath
will consume it: All the Apostate Christians in their Uniformity of Faith,
Worship, and Church Government, which is some other way, or by some other
means, than only by the Spirit of God, is of Antichrist, and will be
confounded: for there is no true Unity and Fellowship in the Ways of God, and
his Truth and Worship, but what is in the Spirit, and that Unity will stand for
ever, for it is in GOD; not feigned, neither because of the love and fear of
this world, as the other is. That Uniformity in Faith and Worship which is
forced upon People, is all but hypocrisy and deceit, both to God and man, and
God will judge it in the Imposers, and Imposed: Therefore no true Unity in
Faith, nor Worship, nor in Religion but what is in and by the Spirit of God:
for as (...) come to divide themselves into many ways, and into diverse Sects
when they went from the Spirit of God, and lost it, and whilst they have been
without the Spirit they have remained in Division, Strife, and Contention about
Religion; so now the means and way of true Union and Fellowship, and Faith, is
by receiving the Spirit of God again, and not any otherwise: and as Christians
are brought again to receive this Spirit, and walk therein, all division and
strife about Religion will cease, and the cursed fruits and effects thereof
will also wither and be no more; but then Unity, Peace, Blessedness,
Everlasting Fellowship and Comfort with the Lord, and one with another, in all
his Ways, will be witnessed amongst all People.

THE END.

