A JUST and RIGHTEOUS PLEA, Presented unto the King of England, AND HIS
COUNCIL, etc.

BEING

The true State of the present Case of the People, called QVAKERS, Truly
demonstrated, and Justly pleaded on their behalf; For the True Information of
the KING and his COUNCIL, That they may well understand the Truth and Verity of
Doubtful Cases, and may show Just Judgment and Mercy.

And this is laid down in Six Particulars.

Viz
1. Concerning Swearing at all, and particularly of the Oath of Allegiance. 2.
Concerning Meeting together to Worship God. 3. Concerning Tithes among the
Jews, and among the Christians, and why we Refuse to pay them at this day. 4.
Concerning giving Security by Bond, to live Peaceably, or, to Answer
Accusations then and there, etc. 5. Concerning Government it self, and
particularly of this present Government. 6. Concerning Persecution, what it is
in it self, and how great an Enemy it is to the King and his Government; laid
down in Ten Particulars.
All which Cases are truly stated and pleaded, And the Cause of the Innocent
vindicated: And this for the benefit of the King and his Government, that they
may be Just and Righteous, and perfectly according to God.

By a Friend to Just Authority, Edw. Borroughs.

The Epistle to the King, and his Council.
OH Friends! this is your Day, that God has given you to try you, and to prove
you what you will do, and whether you will rule and judge, and exercise your
Power for God, or against him; and this is the hour of your trial, and the
living God that made Heaven and Earth beholds you, and his Eye is upon you, and
he waits for Justice, true Judgment, Mercy, Righteousness and Truth, to be
brought forth by you in the Land, that he might bless you and prosper you; but
and if the contrary be abounding, and brought forth and exercised through you,
Blessings shall be turned into a Curse, and the Just God will deal with you
after your deserts; for the Reward of the Almighty is Just and Equal unto all
the sons of men, even according to their ways and works; and the Judgment of
you nor of any, is determined by Him, but accordingly as He is served, obeyed
and feared, or the contrary.

And seeing you have a day to do good, and to forsake all evil, to do Justice,
Mercy and Truth in the Earth, and to subdue the contrary; if that you do the
things you ought not, and leave undone what God requires of you to do, and
trifle away your time in matters of less value, and spend your days in
Pleasures and Vanities, and neglect Mercy and Judgment in the Earth, and have
no regard to the Cry of the Poor and the Oppressed, to deliver them from their
cruel Persecutions; if it be thus with you in this your day, Who shall stand in
the Gap to prevent the Anger of the Lord from breaking out? or, who shall plead
for you in the day of your reward, when God himself arises unto Just Judgment,
to judge all flesh, and to deliver the Innocent? Oh Friends! is this nothing to
you? Is there no cause unto you of Consideration in this matter? Ought you not
to lay these things to heart? Why, surely you are but men, and your breath is
in your nostrils, and your substance but dissolvable clay, and the God of
Heaven and Earth can do what he will with you, and concerning you; if ye please
him, it might be well with you, but if the contrary, he can answer you doings
with an equal reward, and none can prevent him.

And here is a Cry, and a very great Cry of Persecution under your Authority,
the Prisons filled with Upright and Innocent persons, to the ruin of Persons,
Wives and Families, if the great Mercy of the Lord did not prevent more than
the Justice of men; Thousands within these few months have been cast into Goals
and Dungeons and nasty holes; and diverse have finished their lives, and dyed in
Prisons; many being taken out of their houses, and from their lawful Callings;
and many taken out of Meetings, where they have been waiting upon God, and
cruel Sufferings inflicted upon them, and all this for Truth and Righteousness
sake, and for their profession and Practice in Religion; when as no Plotting or
evil-dealing toward the King nor any of his Subjects, could be justly charged
and proved against them. And thus the Innocent have been made a Prey to
Profane Persons, and their Sufferings have been woeful, and all this under and
by your Authority; And, are these things nothing to you? or, do you judge this
is well doing? Is this Justice and true Judgment? Is this for your Happiness
and Prosperity? Let the God of Heaven and Earth judge in this matter between
this People and You, for the Cry of their Sufferings are very Loud in the Ears
of God, and they have been laid before you, and you ought to have relieved
them, and eased their heavy burdens, and showed Justice, Pity and Love, and
this would have made for your Happiness; But if that you always neglect to
hear the Cry of the Poor, and of the Oppressed, yet God hears, and takes
notice; and though this People should have no Helper in the Earth, yet He is
their Helper, and their Cause is committed unto Him.

Can these things stand? and, can you be happy in these proceedings, while the
Innocent suffer under you? Is it in your hearts to destroy the Heritage of God?
do you think to extinguish an Innocent People from off the Earth? Must none
wait upon God, and worship Him, and pray to Him, but after your Prescriptions
and Limitations? And will you kill and destroy all such as do not? who cannot
for good Conscience sake conform to every way of Worship and Religion imposed,
but must wait upon God, and worship Him and pray to Him according as his Spirit
teaches and guides; will you, I say, destroy all such? Is it in your hearts
to effect it? if it be, the God of Heaven will not prosper you in such
purposes; Will ye force men to forsake the Way of their God, wherein they have
found his Presence? will ye persecute men for their Religion-sake, while yet
they walk uprightly in their Conversations among men? Oh Friends! it is not
Justice and true Judgment thus to do, it pleases not God, neither does it
unite the hearts of Subjects in true Love and Unity, but it has contrary
effects, and that you may find.

Indeed, according to my judgment, such proceedings are not good Policy nor
humane Wisdom, for you to seek to establish one particular Persuasion and kind
of Religion, and impose that by force, and persecute and seek to destroy all
the rest that are otherwise minded, if they will not deny their Principles and
Consciences, and conform: this seems, I say, no good Policy among men; for if
it does gratify one sort of men in their desires, it discontenteth and
dissatisfieth many more, and it breaks Love and Unity amongst Subjects; and
your safety is in the uniting of Peoples hearts to you, and one to another in
Love and Liberty, and not in the Divisions and Distractions of people; surely
this cannot be for your safety. When as if you did give Liberty to all, that
were peaceable in their Lives and Conversations, in the exercise of their
Religion in Faith and Worship to Godwards; this would cause all to love you,
and none to be discontented with you in good reason: If one sort of People had
as much Liberty as others (in the way of their Religion I mean) and none more
than others, this doubtless would increase Content among Subjects, and be a
blessing to you and your Authority; and to proceed in that way which may keep
the people in Love and Unity one with another, and to youwards, this were good
Policy for your Establishment to perpetuity; and there seems to be no other
way, than in showing Justice, Mercy, and Liberty to all in all right ways, and
in the exercise of their Consciences toward God. And this is my Judgment, the
way for you to prosper, is, to leave the prescribing the way of Worship unto
God, as his Spirit shall teach and persuade the Conscience, and to leave the
Judgment in all Cases of Conscience about Spiritual things, unto Him, and not
to meddle about imposing Religion, nor persecuting men for that cause, for it
is not your place to do it; but you are to rule well over the outward man, and
to judge in the Cases of wrong between man and man, but not at all in the Cases
between God and men's Consciences.

But you may say, Who art thou, inferior man, that seem to advise us that
are high and potent, and wise enough for our selves? Well, though it be thus,
though I am so, and not much acquainted with the State Affairs, nor do I
profess Policy in the Governments of this World, yet this I say, What soever my
Birth or quality be, and whether I live or dye, yet these things you must find
true one day; (for I speak not as a Politician, but as a Servant of God) that
your Prosperity and Happiness in this World, and hereafter, stands, in
showing and executing true Justice and Judgment, and Mercy and equal Liberty
toward all, without respect of their Title in the Profession and Practice of
Religion, and in allowing Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Faith and
Worship and Duty to God-wards, to all Christian People, equally in your
Dominions, and not to persecute or destroy any in their Persons and Estates,
for the exercise of their Religion to God-wards: This is the way of your
Prosperity, and the contrary is the way of your Destruction, if that ye
persecute men for their Conscience sake, and exercise Lordship and Authority
over men's Conscience in Spiritual things; and if ye prescribe a way of Worship,
and seek to destroy all that cannot conform thereunto: if ye do thus, this is
not good Policy to establish you. Well, I shall say little further, but that
these things I write not as your Enemy, but as your Friend, who would have you
saved both soul and body, and not as in any kind of harshness in my spirit
toward you do I write, but in love and compassionateness to you and these
Kingdoms.

And I have here in brief stated and pleaded the Case of the Innocent People,
called Quakers, who are at this time under great Afflictions and Tribulations
by your Authority; and it has been in my heart diverse times to declare the
substance of these things unto you, but at the last I have chosen to write my
mind to present to you concerning the matters very needful for you to be
informed in, and it is for your sakes as well as theirs, that I have done it,
that you may not run on to act any thing against them upon Suspicions and
Accusations of others, without hearing our Defense; And therefore it is for the
avoiding and stopping of Persecution in the Land, for this cause have I taken
in hand submissively, and not presumptuously, to state this Plea before you,
and I must leave it to your Considerations; and cannot impose my Faith upon
you, to believe as I believe, but having laid the Truth before you, I shall
leave it to the Lord to work Faith and Love, and Justice, Mercy, and all good
things in your hearts, that you may bring them forth in the exercise of them in
the World.

I am a lover of Justice and Mercy, Truth and Right^^usness. ^. B.
London, the10 th day of the second month, 1661.
CHAP. I. The Case Stated and Pleaded concerning Swearing at all, and
particularly concerning the Oath of Allegiance.
I. WE do acknowledge our selves to be Freeborn People of this Kingdom of
England, the Land of our Nativity, and we do assert, that we have just and
lawful Right and Title, as such, to possess and enjoy our Lives, Liberties and
Estates, both by the Laws of God and Man; having never unto this day, since we
were a People, Forfeited our Birthright as men, by any Rebellion, Sedition,
Contempt, or otherwise; but have always been and are a People exercised in the
Law of our God, by walking justly toward all Men, and doing to others as we
would be done unto, and have been and are a peaceable People under every
Government and Authority that has been over us since the Lord raised us up;
And I do hereby declare, that we now are, and shall be Faithful, Innocent, and
Peaceable, in our several Stations and Conditions, under this present
Government of King Charles the Second, whom we acknowledge Supreme Magistrate
and Governor over this Kingdom, and for Conscience sake we are obedient and
submissive to him, as such, in all his Commands, either by doing and performing
of what he justly requires, or by patient suffering under, whatsoever is
inflicted upon us in the matters for which we cannot be obedient for Conscience
sake, when any thing is required of us different from the just Law of God: And
to this subjection, to the King and his Government, we are bound by the Law of
Righteousness, and such has ever been our Principle and Practice, and is unto
this day, even to be quiet, and peaceable, and patient under every Authority
that is set over us, and not in unrighteousness, to Plot, or Contrive, or Rebel
against any Governors or Government, nor to seek our own Deliverance from
Injustice and Oppression, in such a way. And we are persuaded to seek the
preservation of the King's Person and Authority, by all just and lawful means,
and not to Rebel against him with Carnal Weapons; and so far as his Government
is in Justice, Mercy, and Righteousness, we declare true and faithful
subjection, and obedience thereunto, and wherein it is otherwise, we shall be
subject by Patient suffering, what is unequally imposed upon us, and yet not
Rebel in any Turbulent way of Conspiracies, and Insurrections; For our
Principles are not for War, but for Peace with all men, so much as in us lies;
neither may we render evil for evil to any, but are to be subject to the King
and his Government actively or passively, upon the Conditions aforementioned.
And we renounce all Foreign Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction, of the Pope or
any else, from having any Supremacy whatsoever over the King, or any the good
Subjects of England: And this we Declare, Acknowledge, and Testify, in the
Fear and Presence of God (to whom we and all mankind must give an account) and
that without secret Equivocation, or any deceitful mental Reservation.

II But as for all Oaths and Swearing, we utterly deny, for Conscience sake
toward God, because Christ Jesus has Commanded us not to Swear at all, Mat.
5. And the Apostle says, Above all things, my brethren, Swear not, Jam. 5. and
it was the Principle and Practice of diverse Holy Martyrs, even some of the
Protestant Church, since the Apostles days, in all Ages, not to Swear at all in
any Case: So for Conscience sake, and according to the Example of Saints in
former Ages, we do refuse to Swear, in this Case of Allegiance to the King, and
in all other Cases whatsoever, and we cannot Swear at all; Though the truth and
verity, of all Things in all Cases, so far as known to us, and as occasion
requires, we can acknowledge and testify, with Yea and Nay, as in the Fear
and Presence of God, and with true intent and meaning, to discover the Truth,
as is needful to be known; And in this manner we acknowledge just Allegiance to
the King, and his Government; (that we shall live peaceably, and not Plot, nor
Rebel against Him) according to the Law of God and a safe Conscience; But
without any Oath or Swearing at all, for we may not break the Command of
Christ, nor walk contrary to the Example of the Apostles and Saints by
Swearing, though we suffer the loss of all because thereof; And it is our known
Principle and Practice, ever since we were a People, that in no Case
whatsoever, though of great dependancy oft-times to our selves, both in respect
of Advantage to us, and also in avoiding of Sufferings, we have not taken any
Oath, nor Sworn at all; whereby it is manifest that our refusing chiefly to
take the Oath of Allegiance, is not because it is that Oath, but because it is
an Oath, and for Conscience sake we cannot Swear at all.

III. And thus the state of our present Case about this Oath of Allegiance, is
different from some others, from all such who can Swear and take Oaths in
other Cases, to whom taking of an Oath in it self is not matter of Conscience;
but as for us, we make Conscience of an Oath in it self, and that upon just
ground, as we are able to demonstrate, and therefore our refusal of this Oath
of Allegiance, gives no ground at all, of doubt or suspicion, concerning us, as
if we would not live peaceably and quietly under this Government, or as if we
would Rebel against, or plot to destroy the King's Person or Authority, and so
deny to take this Oath, as if we would leave our selves clear to proceed in
such ways; this Judgment cannot justly be given of us, because we deny to
Swear at all, in all Cases, which if it were not so, but that we could Swear in
other Cases, and not in this, then we might be the more justly suspected that
we had a reserve against the King's Person and Government, and our living
Peaceable, might be the more doubted of; but being our known Principle and
practice always, not to Swear at all in any Case whatsoever, this removes all
ground of Jealousy, or cause of Suspicion of us in this Case, and also we
being ready to confess, all just Authority and Power to the King, to declare
Obedience thereunto solemnly and sincerely, and that we shall live peaceable
and quietly under his Government, and not to Plot or Rebel against him, and
this to Confirm by Yea and Nay: Our Testimony of this kind, may as justly be
taken, and stand as effectual, and be as faithfully performed, as the Oaths of
any others; for we make Conscience to perform what we say in Yea and Nay, as
much as any do to perform what they Swear, and this is known of us in the
Consciences of our Enemies; So that in good Conscience and just Reason, and
equal Justice, we are excusable from all Penalties and Forfeitures in that
behalf, of denying the Oath of Allegiance.

IV. And the King and his Government is not the less safe and secure, though we
refuse to swear Obedience to them, nor could they be any safer or securer, if
we, contrary to our Principles and Consciences were forced by Penalties to
Swear Allegiance; for by the same Principle which keeps us from Swearing, and
by which we deny it, we must be preserved to live peaceably, and not to Plot
nor Rebel against the King; and if we renounce our Principle and our good
Conscience, and be induced to Swear against our Consciences; what likelihood is
there to perform such a forced Oath, taken contrary to our Consciences and
Principles? For if we Swear to the King and his Government, because of the fear
of men and to save our Estates, etc. and this contrary to our Conscience, it
might well be suspected of us, that at opportunity we would break such Oaths,
for fear of men or some self end: On the other hand, if we had already
renounced our good Consciences, so that it more appears, we shall perform good
Obedience to the King and his Government acknowledged by Yea, without an Oath,
and in good Conscience; then by swearing forced on us, contrary to our
Consciences; therefore our Yea may better be accepted in this Case, then
Swearing can be demanded of us: And also if we should change with the Times,
and renounce our Principles and Consciences, and Swear, we should make our
selves ridiculous and a scorn to all men, and bring our selves into a capacity
not ever to be trusted in any Case, if we should bow and bend to Times and
Powers, and for terror of men, deny our Religion, as other Hypocrites, And I
very well believe that the King would not trust us in our Albegiance any whit
the better, but rather the worse, though we did swear, fawn and flatter with
him, contrary to our Principles; neither could he reasonably judge himself the
safer, not more happy, not that we would be truly subject the more to his
Authority, if we swote and conformed in things by force, contrary to our
Consciences and Principles; for himself knows, that Oaths and Engagements made
and taken by force, and for fear, in straits, are seldom or never truly
performed, but always broken. And of the like case there are large Testimonies
in the Kingdom, of many that have sworn, promised, and engaged, and sometimes
by force and fear, to this kind of Government and another; and yet at
opportunies, and for their own self ends, have broken all Oaths and
Engagements, and rebelled against the very Persons and Authority to which they
have sworn and engaged Fidelity and Allegiance; so that many are not the more
to be trusted, though they swear Allegiance: for, the Proverb says, He that
will Swear, will Lie: and he that is forced to swear against his Conscience,
will hardly perform his Oath: And we are no less to be trusted, though we swear
not, for we never yet engaged our selves by Oath, to any Governors or
Government, and yet we never rebelled or plotted against any, but have lived
peaceably, and in a patient suffering condition under all, that have sitten on
the Throne since we were a People: And therefore out living peaceably under the
King's Government cannot justly be doubted of, though we cannot engage the same
by swearing: But yet if we do not live quietly and in good obedience, as
peaceable People, but do rebel, plot, etc. then we refuse not to suffer the
Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as such that Swear and do not perform their
Oaths; I say, if we do not live peaceably, but plot and rebel against the King
and his Government, then let us suffer the same in every particular, as if we
had sworn; and not performed our Oath.

V. All these things rightly considered, it does fully appear, 1. That we are
not Enemies, neither in present Action, nor future Intent, to the King's Person
or Authority. 2. Nor that we refuse to acknowledge Just Authority to King
Charles the Second, as Supreme Magistrate over these Kingdoms. 3. Nor does it
appear, that we are otherwise than Peaceable and Quiet People under the King's
Government. 4. Nor is it manifest, but that we are ready to acknowledge so to
continue, in all good Conscience and Righteousness: And therefore we do appeal
to the God of Heaven, and to King Charles, and to all People whatsoever, That
our present Sufferings by Imprisonment, and whatsoever else we may suffer in
this Case, for Refusing to take the Oath of Alleagiance, it is not for Plotting
against the King, nor for refusing to acknowledge Just Authority to the King,
nor for denying Just Obedience to him and the Good Laws of the Land, nor for
denying to live peaceably in the Kingdom under the King's Authority; Because to
all this we acknowledge solemnly in Yea and Nay: Neither are our Sufferings in
this case, for any Evil-doing toward God nor Men; but our Sufferings are for
keeping the Commands of Christ, which to us is matter of Conscience to perform,
more than to save our own Lives or Estates; and our Sufferings are, because we
cannot Swear at all, and not because we are Rebellious, or that we deny Just
Allegiance to the King: and such our Sufferings are not as Evildoers, nor
justly and righteously as Offenders; because we are not guilty of Evil in this
case, toward God nor Man, and our Sufferings are Cruel Persecution for our
Tender Conscience sake, and for the Name of Christ Jesus: And we call God and
Just Men to witness between Us and our Prosecutors, that as Saints and
Servants of God we suffer in this Case, and for our Faithfulness and Obedience
to the King of Heaven, and not for Evil-doing or Disobedience to King Charles
and his Authority: And if any be persecuted in this case, for Refusing to take
the Oath of Allegiance, to the Ruin of Persons, Wives and Families in this
World; then we shall have cause to say, Occasion is wrongfully taken against
us, to destroy us, and we are proceeded against, contrary to the End of Just
Government, which is, to preserve the Peaceable, and not to destroy them; and
contrary to the King's former Promises, who has said, We should not suffer
for matters of our Religion and Conscience, living peaceably in the Land; And
if we suffer, because we cannot swear at all, such our Suffering is for our
Conscience sake, and we are therein persecuted unrighteously, as Innocent
People, and without just cause; And we must commit this our Cause to God, who
regards the Oppressions of his People, and will avenge their Cause in his
season. And for the present this is all I have to say, and present, concerning
this Case of Swearing, and concerning the Oath of Allegiance.

CHAP. II. The Case stated and pleaded, concerning our Meeting together to
Worship God.
I. WE do meet together in the Name of Jesus Christ, and in his Power and
Spirit; and we do Come together in the Fear of God, to wait upon Him, and to
receive the Teachings of his Holy Spirit, and his Counsel to direct us in all
our ways, how to walk righteously toward God and Men; and in our Meetings we
practice our hearts and minds in Godliness, and speak of the things of the
Kingdom of God, in Preaching the Word of God, and in Prayer to Him, according
as His holy Spirit guides us, which is given us of God, to lead us into all
Truth, according to his Promise, Ioh. 16. 13. and that we may edify one
another in the ways of Holiness and Truth, for the benefit of our Souls: and
this is according to the Scriptures: For they that feared the Lord met often
together, and spoke one to another, and edified one another: And this is our
Principle, That it is our Duty to Godwards, to meet together, and that he
requires it of us, and for the exercise of our Consciences to Him, it has been
always and is our practice, to meet together in the exercise of the Worship of
God, as aforesaid, and not for any other end; as in Contempt of Authority, or
to plot, or contrive, or to meditate Evil toward the King or his Government,
or any of his Subjects; We have no such e^^l (I say) in meeting together; but
our alone, only, and absolute End in our Meeting, is to worship the Lord our
God, and to serve Him, and to wait upon Him, in Obedience to his Will, and for
good Conscience sake, as our Duty toward Him.

II. And this our practice of Meeting together, for the End and Cause
mentioned, if it be in Public Houses, or more private in Upper Chambers, or in
the Open Fields on what day soever, is lawful and just in the sight of God, and
is according to the Example of the Primitive Saints, and provable by the
Scriptures, As in Acts 1. 13, 14. And when the Disciples and Saints returned
from Jerusalem, they went up into an Upper Chamber, both Men and Women, and
waited upon the Lord, and continued with one accord, in Prayer and in
Supplication. And in Acts 20. 7, 8. The first day of the week the Saints met
together, and Paul preached unto them, and continued his Sermon till midnight;
holding forth the matters of the Kingdom of God; and they were met an an Upper.
Chamber, from whence Eutychus fell down. And Acts 28. 30, 31. And Paul remained
two fall years, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, in his own hired
house in Rome; and he exhorted the Saints, not to neglect meeting together, as
the manner of some was, whom he reproved, Heb. 10. 25. By which Testimonies,
with diverse others that might be given, it is manifest, that the Saints of God
in former Ages, did meet together to worship God, and to wait upon Him in
Prayer and Preaching, as the Spirit of the Father taught them, that dwelt in
them: And sometime they met publicly, and sometime more private; and sometime
on the daytime, and sometime in the night-season, (and they met separate from
the Synagogues and ways of public Worship of the Jews) according to the Will
of God, and as it was ordered among them: And thus it is manifest, that our
Meetings for the Worship of God at this day (though they are separate from the
way of public Worship of the Kingdom, and are in more private houses) are
justifiable, being after the Example of the Saints, and according to the
Scriptures of Truth; and therefore out Meetings are according to the Law of
God, just and lawful.

III. And forasmuch as by reason of the late Insurrection of some few persons
in London, our lawful Assembling of our selves together in the Worship of God,
is under present restraint and prohibition, and by Proclamation forbidden,
under the denomination of Seditious and Unlawful Meetings, and our Friends
Imprisoned and Persecuted for that cause of Assembling themselves to wait upon
God. Now in this Case, this I plead unto the King, That we are no manner of way
guilty of that Insurrection, upon which the Proclamatian of forbidding our
Meetings was grounded; and therefore ought not to suffer with the guilty, being
innocent from the very occasion of that Proclamation; and for the King to
prohibit our Meetings, for and because of the ill use that others made of
theirs, this seems a Condemning of the Innocent with the Guilty, which is no
way just in the sight of God nor Men, but altogether unequal that we should
suffer for other ments faults; though such did abuse their Liberty, and pervert
the end of their Meetings into rising up with Carnal Weapons against the King;
so did not we, neither in intent nor action; and therefore our Meetings ought
not to be prohibited, for the cause of other men's faults and miscarriages in
that case; And also we have the King's Promise, diverse times, That we should
not suffer for our Religion, while we aded nothing against the Peace of the
Kingdom and Government; which yet we never have done, nor made any ill use of
our Meetings, nor of the King's Promises, nor forfeited them, and therefore,
according to his own Promises, we ought to have our Meetings, and enjoy them
without restraint, because we have not farfeited the benefit of his former
Promises in that behalf, nor ever made use of our Meetings, to plot or conspire
against the Government, to its harm or detriment; and because of our innocence
herein, the benefit of his former Promises, are yet in force unto us, to
protect our lawful Meetings, and not to prohibit them; and though upon
suspicion only out Meetings have been Restrained, and our Friends Imprisoned by
the late Proclamation; yet we being proved innocent, and without guilt of that
which occasioned it, the King and Council may and ought in Justice and good
Reason, to Reverse and Revoke that part of the Proclamation related to us, as
being innocent, that we may enjoy our lawful Meetings, according to the
Scriptures and Example of Saints, and according to the King's own former
Promises.

IV. All these things considered and rightly understood by the King and his
Council, it will appear unto them, in good reason, 1. That our Meetings are
just and lawful in themselves, because they are for the Worship of the Lord
God, and to wait upon Him. 2. They are according to the Example of the
Apostles, because the Scriptures prove the like Meetings. 3. And they are not
contrary to his own Promises, and Toleration that he gave for six Months after
his coming in, Because he said, We should not suffer for our Religion, if we
lived peaceably; and we were not disturbed by Authority from him (that we know
of) in our Meetings, till this occasion. 4. It will appear, That we ought in
Justice and Equity to have our lawful Meetings protected and preserved by the
King's Authority, and not prohibited; because we are not guilty of that which
occasioned this present Restraint: but what we have suffered in this case, it
has been upon suspicion, and without any just cause on our part: And for these
Ends and Causes I plead on the behalf of the Innocent, that we may enjoy
peaceably our Meetings for the exercise of God's Worship, and not be prohibited
in the King's Dominions under his Authority.

V. But and if we are persecuted and imprisoned, and made to suffer for this
Cause of Meeting together, to worship God and wait upon Him, in Conscience and
Duty toward Him; and for following the Scriptures Example, as the Saints of
old, as aforementioned; we must only commit our Cause to the God of Heaven,
and in patience suffer under whatsoever is unequally inflicted upon us for this
matter, if men show the height of Oppression toward us; and we must put on the
spirit of Long-suffering and Forbearance, and leave Vengeance to the Lord, who
will in his season redress our Cause, if that we are persecuted for meeting
together, and for worshipping of the Lord, according as his Spirit persuades
our Consciences; and such our Sufferings are, not for evil-doing, not as
Transgressors against God nor the King, but as Servants of God we suffer, and
for holding the Testimony of JESUS, and a good Conscience. And thus I have
brought the state of our Case, as concerning our Meetings, unto the Kings
knowledge, and must leave it to his serious view; and happy will he be if he
has regard to the Afflicted; but if he stop his Ear from the Cry of the Poor,
and suffer them to be destroyed, who shall plead for him, or excuse him in the
Day of the Lord, when He comes to Judgment, to reward every man according to
his deeds.

CHAP. III. The Case stated and pleaded concerning Tithes, as paid among the
Jews, and also among the Christians; and the Cause why we refuse to pay them at
this day.
I. WE do acknowledge that Tithes, as instituted, given, and received in the
Law of Moses, amongst the Jews, and according to the Commandment of God, were
of Heavenly Ordination, and were for that Holy Use and End, of maintaining the
Levitical Priesthood, and the Poor, the Widows, and the Strangers in Israel:
and we know that whilst that Livitical Priesthood of Signs, and Types, and
Figures was yet unfinished and unfulfilled by Christ Jesus the Everlasting
Priest, That Law that gave and received Tithes was in force, and it was sinful
against God, and contrary to his Law, in any of Israel to withhold their
Tithes, and not to pay them, and such as did, robbed God and the Poor, and the
Prophet complained against them; for then the Ordination of Tithes was of God,
and the Practice and End of them was good and blessed; But that Law and
Priesthood, that gave and received them, is finished and ended, with all the
Types and Shadows of the first Covenant, Heb. 7. 12. and Christ Jesus the
everlasting Priest of God, is come, in whom is ended the first Priesthood that
took Tithes, and that Law that gave them, and he has put an end to Tithes,
Temple, Priests-Office, under the Law among the Jews, and all outward Types and
Figures, and first Covenant, and is an High Priest for ever, and the
everlasting Substance of all Shadows pertaining to the first Covenant, and has
finished them, and ended them; even that Law and Ordinance that gave and
received Tithes, and that Priesthood to whom Tithes pertained, so that though
it was unlawful in the first Covenant to withhold the payment of Tithes, yet
that Covenant being ended, and that Law and Priesthood, and another Covenant
and Priesthood established, to whom the Law of God allows not the Tithes of
men's estates, it seems now to be unlawful to pay, receive, or demand Tithes,
and for good Conscience sake we cannot do it.

II.We cannot now pay Tithes according to the first Covenant, nor uphold any
part of the first Priesthood, that stood in Types and Shadows, nor submit to
that Law, by any obedience to it, which one gave and received Tithes; Seeing
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, who has ended all that Covenant, with every
thing that pertained thereunto; and we believe in Jesus Christ as the
everlasting substance, and receive the Law, by which we walk, in all things
from him, and not from Abraham, nor Moses: For he is with us, who is greater
then they, whose Law and Example we must follow, in the Administration of the
Gospel, and not the Law and Example of Abraham and Moses, in the first
Covenant, who did but prophecy of Christ, and did not witness him fully come,
but died in the Faith; Now if we should pay Tithes according to the first
Covenant, and so uphold any part of that Priesthood which took Tithes, which
was but a Type of Christ the everlasting Priest, then we should deny Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, and turn back again to the Law, and to the
Jews Ordinances, and prove our selves Unbelievers and Antichristian; for he
that denies Christ to be come in the Flesh, is of Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3. and
we may as well turn back to Circumcision, Sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings, as
to pay Tithes, being all pertaining to the first Covenant, and Priesthood,
which whomsoever does uphold, denies Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, and
so are of Antichrist; but we believe Christ is come, and we have received him,
as the end and finishing of the first Priesthood, and we believe in him, as the
everlasting Sustance, who has put an end to Tithes, Temples, Burnt-offerings,
etc. And we confess unto him as our Judge and Lawgiver, and have renounced all
shadows pertaining to the first Covenant, whereof one was Tithes, and for
Conscience sake, and that we may continue in the Faith of Christ, the
Substance, and not deny him, therefore it is that we refuse, and cannot pay
Tithes, for we are Christians and Believers, and not Jews, nor Children of the
first Covenant.

III. And there is no Example by any of the Apostles or Saints, in all the new
Testament, that ever any of the Christians that believed in Jesus Christ, gave,
paid, or received Tithes; I say, there is no Example at all, by either Precept
or Practice, left us on record, that any of the Ministers of the Gospel, in the
Apostles days, did pay or receive Tithes, for any Ministerial Office nor
otherwise; But we do believe, that none of the Christians in the first nor
second Age after Christ, since his Resurrection, did Institute, Pay, or Receive
Tithes as Maintenance of Gospel Ministry; but we believe that the Ministers of
Christ whom he sent forth to preach the Gospel after his Ascension, did bear
witness to the new Covenant, and to Jesus Christ the Substance, and against
Temple, Sacrifices, Tithes, and first Priesthood, and the worship of the first
Covenant, and said, that Covenant was found faulty and none could attain
perfection, as pertaining to the Conscience, in it, and therefore God took that
Covenant away, that he might establish a better, Heb. 8. 6, 7. Heb. 6. 19. And
also diverse of the Holy Martyrs since the Apostles days, as William Thorpe, and
others, did Preach down Tithes, and denied the Payment of them, and for
Conscience sake to God, could neither give nor receive Tithes, but fully
witnessed against them, though they suffered for it in their days; So that,

1. We have no Example from the Apostles nor Christians in their days, to pay
Tithes, but rather the Contrary; for we have Testimony from them, that the
first Covenant and Priesthood, with all Shadows and Ordinances thereunto
belonging (whereof Tithes was one) were disanulled, finished, and ended by the
coming of Christ; and a new Covenant established, in which nothing is signified
of paying Tithes: From whence it may appear to all, that Tithes are ended, and
not to be paid in the new Covenant.

2. We have clear Example from the Martyrs since the Apostles days, not to pay
Tithes; for diverse of the Protestant Martyrs, (called the Fathers of their
Church) did witness against Tithes, and refused to pay any.

3. We believe in our own Consciences, That Tithes, as received, and paid in
these days, are not of any Institution of God, nor exercised to any good use
and end, but that they are of Antichrist, and Oppression, and unjust Exactions,
and Impositions upon the poor People of these Kingdoms; and therefore we do
refuse to pay Tithes, and we cannot for good Conscience sake; and the exercise
of our Consciences herein in denying to pay Tithes, is well and lawfully
grounded upon the Coming of Christ, and upon the Example of the Apostles and
Martyrs. And thus in brief I have showed concerning Tithes, and why we refuse
to pay them, and the matter of our Consciences in that Case.

IV. As for Tithes, as now demanded, paid, and received, in these Kingdoms, we
know they are not of heavenly Institution, nor for a good use and end ordained
and practiced, but as they are now paid, both in these Kingdoms, and through
Christendom, they are of Popish Institution, and were first ordained, paid, and
received by the Authority of the Church of Rome, and were unequally imposed
upon the Nations through her Authority, for the use and end to maintain her
Priests, and Clergy, and Church; and the Instituiion, and payment of Tithes
among Christians, was not till near 400 Years after Christ, as Historians say;
and for diverse Ages after that, there were no Laws enjoining and forcing the
payment of them, not till about the Year 786. that Pope Adrian the first, sent
two Legates into England, to make a Decree, that the People of two Kingdoms (to
wit) Merc-land and Northumberland, should pay Tithes. By these and other
Testimonies it is manifest, that the Payment of Tithes amongst Christians, had
their first Original from the Church of Rome and by Succession from thence, and
not from the Apostles are Tithes paid, given, and received at this day in these
Kingdoms; and the Institution, payment, and use, and end of them is not
according to the Law of Moses at all: for Tithes, as then amongst the Jews,
ordained, and paid, were for the happy use, to feed the Poor, the Widows and
the Fatherless in Israel, that there should not be a Beggar amongst them: But
the use and end of the payment of them now in these days, is for the
maintaining a company of Priests, in their pride and fullness, and the poor and
the strangers may starve, and lie begging up and down at the corners of the
streets; So that we cannot for conscience sake at this day pay Tithes.

1. Because the first Institution of them among Christians, was not from
Heaven, nor from Christ Jesus, nor his Apostles, but from the Pope and Church
of Rome.

2. Because the use and end of Tithes is not according to God, nor
Righteousness, but for the maintaining the Priests in pride, and fullness, and
their Families; and in the mean time the Poor want.

3. Because the continued payment of them, is exaction and imposition, contrary
to the Gospel of liberty and peace, upon the persons, estates, and consciences,
of many good People in these Kingdoms.

V. All these things rightly and justly considered, it is manifest, and plainly
apparent to all good men, that this matter of denying to pay Tithes, is a clear
case of Conscience with us, and that we have sufficient ground to make
conscience hereof, and for good conscience sake we may justly refuse and deny
to pay Tithes; and the exercise of our Consciences herein, is bottomed upon a
right foundation, as I have made appear, and it is not for Covetousness to our
selves, nor in contempt of Authority, nor in willfulness to wrong any man of
his Just right, nor for any other evil end, that we do refuse to pay Tithes;
but it is for Conscience sake, only and alone for that end, that we may keep
our Consciences clear in the sight of God, by our Faithfulness in denying of
what we are convinced of to be evil and not of God, as I have showed, we are in
this case of Tithes; and we dare not sin against God by disobedience to him,
nor uphold the payment of Tithes in these Kingdoms, which are so evil, both in
their Ordination, and in their Use and End, as paid in these days, as I have
showed; for if we should, we might offend his Spirit, and our own Consciences,
and bring anguish upon our Souls, and be guilty of denying of Christ and his
Coming, and of making void the New Covenant; and of walking contrary to the
Examples of the Apostles and holy Martyrs, and of upholding Antichrist and his
Kingdom: These, with many other Evils, we run our selves into, if we should pay
Tithes in these days, and after the Romish Institution; and therefore it is
for Conscience sake that we do refuse to pay Tithes; And whatsoever we do
suffer because thereof, it is Persecution, and for, and because we cannot sin
against our God: and it is not for Evil doing, for Rebellion, nor for
Transgression against the Law of God, nor the Just Laws of Men; but it is for
holding the Testimony of Jesus and a Good Conscience; and in such our
Sufferings, we commit our Cause to the God of Heaven, patiently bearing what is
unequally inflicted upon us for this matter; and our Cause is Just and Innocent
for which we suffer, and we have more respect to keep our Faith and Conscience
toward God, than to save our Estates or Liberties; for could we transgress
against God, and pay Tithes, we might preserve our Liberties and Estates, which
we have endangered and lost often, because we could not; which may show that it
is not for Covetousness nor self ends, that we refuse to do it; And this our
Case about Tithes, and the reason why we cannot pay them, is in brief stated
and pleaded, before the King and his Council, and I leave it to their
Considerations in the sight of God, only to warm them, that they persecute not
any for the Cases of Conscience, neither in this nor in any other thing, lest
the effect of it be sad upon them, in a day when God visits them with Judgments.

CHAP. IV. The Case stated and pleaded, concerning giving Security by Bond, to
live peaceably, or to answer Cases then and there, etc. as is often required of
us.
I. FOrasmuch as we are often demanded, to give Bond of One or two hundred
Pounds (or the like) for Security (so called) That we will live peaceably; or,
that we will appear and answer such Cases objected against us, or supposed of
us. Now we cannot give such kind of formal Engagements out of the Counsel of
God, to be or do, or to appear, or answer, this, or the other Case, when as we
are no Transgressors in the things objected against us, and supposed of us; and
when we are suspected by prejudiced minds, of such and such matters, of which
we are no ways guilty in the sight of God nor men; and then it is demanded of
us, to bind our selves, to find Sureties, and to answer this and the other
Objection and Supposition, only falsely supposed and suspected against us, by
men that seek occasion against us. This Demand we cannot fulfill for
Conscience Sake; because we are clear, and not guilty of such Suspicions; nor
can we bind our selves (out of the Counsel of God) upon Penalties and
Forfeitures, to appear and answer such and such groundless Objections; for if
we should in that manner bind and engage our selves not to do so, or answer
this and the other Objection against us, when we know our selves innocent of
that Accusation, to which we are to answer, and that it is not in our hearts to
do the thing whereof we are doubted, but contrary to our Faith and Principles;
then this were a betraying of our own Innocence in that behalf, and a rendering
of us guilty to all men, when as we are clear; and by binding our selves, as
aforementioned, we should be reputed Transgressors: for Bonds and Engagements
by Forfeitures and Sums of Money, are for the Guilty, and not for the Innocent;
and we may not betray our guiltless Cause, and bring it under false reputation
amongst men, by giving such binding Engagements. And again, when as we are
clear of any such Suspicions as are made against us, if we should bind our
selves, as aforesaid; it many times does appear, that occasion is more taken
against us, in answering or appearing, and we made to be greater Offenders than
before; and there again our Innocence is betrayed, when as innocent of the fact
supposed against us, yet made Offenders in answering through formalities and
tricks in the course of Law practiced at the time of Answering; and therefore
we do in good Reason and Equity, deny to bind our selves in that manner, and to
give such Security (so called) lest we should betray our own Innocence, and
render our Cause to false Reputations in that behalf; and lest we should fall
into a Remedy, to clear us of false Suspicions, worse than the Suspicions
themselves, by laying our selves liable to greater suffering in answering to
our Accusations, falsely objected, than our suffering can be by the Accusations
themselves; and evil-minded men, do often take greater occasion against us in
answering false Charges and groundless Suppositions laid against us, than they
can take by the false Charges and Suspicions themselves; and so we cannot bind
our selves, as aforesaid, to fulfill the Wills of men, and thereby expose our
selves to a far greater suffering (to be taken in it) for to escape a less.

II. But as for living peaceably in the Land, and being subject in all just and
good things to the King and his Government; and not to plot against them, nor
to harm any person whatsoever, but to be in love with all, and in good
behavior toward all, and to answer to any thing justly required of us: This
is our Principle to do, and has ever been our Practice, and we are bound by
the Law of God to perform this in every particular; and we can fully make
Confession hereof, and testify it in Yea and Nay, according to the New
Covenant and Christ's Command, who has said, Let your Yea, be Yea, and your
Nay, Nay, but not by an Oath, nor binding our selves upon such Penalties and
Forfeitures in Engagements by sums of Money, out of the Counsel of God; and our
Yea and Nay, in this and all other cases, is more binding to us, than all the
formal Engagements of others; and we make as much Conscience to perform our Yea
and Nay, as any others do their Oaths or Bonds; and if we do not, but do plot
and rebel, and be of evil behavior toward any, then let us suffer the same,
as if we had bound our selves in Forfeitures of great sums of Money, and broken
such our Engagements: and no man need in any case bind himself upon such Pains
and Forfeitures, not to break the Laws of the Land; when as the Justice of the
Law will be executed upon him if he transgress it, whether he bind himself, or
not, beforehand, not to break it; and this is the thing we always offer: here
we are, if we bave broken any Law, let us suffer according to the Law; and if
at any time we are found guilty of transgressing the Law, let us then suffer
accordingly, whether Death or Bonds; we crave no favor, but the Execution of
just Law: And in the mean time, being we are clear of Rebellion and other
Transgression; Who shall accuse us? or, who can reasonably require such or such
Engagements of us to do, or not to do, or answer so or so; seeing we must in
Justice suffer the punishment of the Law when we transgress it; which we must
do, if we are at any time guilty, whether we beforehand bind our selves to the
contrary or not? And also, if we should bind our selves, by the Engagements of
such and such Sums of Money, to live quietly and not to rebel: yet we should be
no better trusted because thereof, for that would not slay the principle of
Strife and Wars in us, but rather cause us to murmur because of our bondage,
and strive for liberty; and also if we were men of dispositions to war and
plot, etc. it cannot be supposed by reasonable men, that any Engagement by any
sum of Money, would bind us from it, upon occasion, seeing we might hope in
such attempts to save our Sums of Money, and to gain far more advantage, or
else we hazarded to lose all; and to gain a greater advantage (if we were men
of strife) we would not doubt to attempt to lose a less; and we being men not
of strife, we cannot bind our selves as aforesaid, in this or any case; neither
can any in good reason desire the same of us, if they rightly consider the case.

III. These things considered, it is fully manifest, That upon good Reason and
a clear Conscience, we do refuse and deny to give Bond, and make such and such
Engagements by Forfeitures of Sums of Money; It is, I say, in good Reason and
Conscience, and not in any wilfulness, or stubornness, or contempt of Authority
that we do it, nor as though we were guilty in such matter suspected, and durst
not answer the Law; but we do it to keep our Innocence clear, and not to betray
it into real cause of doubt that we are guilty. 2. That we may not lay our
selves liable to a greater suffering, by answering false Suspicions and
Accusations, as it often happens in the proceedings in course of Law.

3. That we may not come under men of evil prejudiced minds, that seek more
occasion against us than they have; and we may not fulfill their wills, and to
give them occasion against us, when as in the Accusations they have justly
none. 4. That we may not expose our selves to be entrapted and ensnared into
greater Sufferings, to avoid a less. 5. That we may walk in the Doctrine and
Command of Christ Jesus, who has commanded to let our Yea be Yea, and our Nay
be Nay; and whatsoever Oath or Engagement (out of the Counsel of God) is more,
comes of the Evil, which we may not do.

These, with some others, are Reasons and Causes why we cannot for Conscience
sake bind our selves in such kind of formal Engagements (out of the Will of
God) to do, or not to do; to answer this false Suspicion or the other; but we
do deny it out of good Reason and Conscience. And also there is no Example for
it, that we know, among the Saints in former Ages, that any of them ever bound
themselves to any Kings or Rulers in any such kind of Engagements, neither can
we at this day; but as I said, If we transgress the Law, let us suffer by it;
if we are already, or hereafter be found guilty, we desire nothing but the just
execution of just Laws, and in patience we shall bear it; but beforehand we may
not bind our selves in formal Engagements out of the Will of God, to promise
upon Forfeitures and Penalties what we will do or say, or what we will not do
or say; for at the Will and Disposure of the Almighty we are, in all things and
cases; and it is our Principle and Belief, That we abiding in the Fear and
Counsel of God, can be no other than peaceable, just, righteous and innocent in
the Land; So that whatsoever we may or do suffer for this case, of denying to
give Bond, or engage our selves so and so, as aforesaid, it is for Truths sake,
and such our Sufferings are Persecution and unequal; and we must commit our
Cause to God, who will plead it in his season, if that we are persecuted for
the cause of groundless Suspicion, and because we cannot engage to answer
causeless Objections. And thus I have sought out this matter, and laid it
before the King, and I leave it to him to consider; and to show Justice,
Equity, Mercy and Long-suffering, and in so doing he will be blessed; but if
the contrary be brought forth, the effect thereof will be more miserable.

CHAP. V. The Case stated and pleaded, concerning Government it self, and
particularly of this present Authority, and our Obedience to it.
I. WE do acknowledge Government, and Rule, and Magistracy to be an Ordinance
of God, ordained and instituted of him, to be exercised among the Children of
Men, for to be a Praise and a Defense to all that do well, and to be a Terror
and Correction to all that do evil. And we believe there ought to be Rule, and
Government and Authority exercised and executed in every Kingdom, Nation, City
and Country, for the end aforesaid (to wit) That Evildoers may be made afraid
and corrected, limited, restrained and subdued; and that Sin and Transgression
may be suppressed; and Truth and Righteousness promoted; and them that do well,
praised and strengthened: And this is the very end of outward Government of
Kings, Princes, or others, amongst Men upon the Earth, Even that the Outward
man may be kept in good order and subjection in his conversation in the World;
and may be limited and restrained from all wrong doing or speaking against his
Neighbors Person or Estate; and if he do, he is punishable by such Just
Authority. This is the very end of outward Government in the Kingdoms of the
World; but it extends not over the Inward Man, to rule, govern, or exercise
Authority over the Consciences of any in Spiritual matters and cases between
God and a man's Conscience; This Dominion and Authority only pertains to the
Inward Government and Rule of Jesus Christ by his Eternal Spirit, but not to
any Outward Government of Kings, Princes, Parliaments, or any others; They, I
say, ought only to exercise Authority over the Persons and Estates of People in
all just and lawful things and matters, but not over the Consciences of any in
the exercise of Duty toward God, or in the Cases and Matters of Worship and
Religion.

II. The Exercise and Execution of this Just Government over the Outward Man,
as before described, ought to be committed into the hands of faithful, just and
upright men, such as fear the Lord, and hate Covetousness, and every evil way,
in all Kingdoms of the World; The Execution of the Government in all Just Laws,
onght (I say) to be committed to such men, and not to Drunkards, Liars,
Covetous or Evil-minded persons, Ambitious or Vainglorious persons in any
Nation; such as these ought not to be entrusted with the Execution of the
Government, and the good Laws of any Kingdom; for such will not be a Blessing
unto the Land, nor unto any People, but a Curse, and the cause of provoking God
to Vengeance and Wrath against themselves, the People and the Governments, if
such men, whom God chooses not, be chosen to make Laws and execute them, and
to exercise Government in any Kingdoms of this World; But men that fear God,
and delight in Justice, Mercy and Truth, that are humble and meek and lowly
persons, ought to be called to the place of Government, and only such are fit
to exercise Rule and Authority, and to make and execute Laws in these Kingdoms,
and in all the Kingdoms of the World; and such would be a Blessing in the
Earth, and the Governments under such, and in the execution of their hands,
would be blessed and prosperous; and all good men would have cause to rejoice
therein, and all evil doers and transgressors would be limited and made afraid,
if so be the Laws be just, holy and righteous, and according to Equity and the
holy Law of God in all things, and the due Execution of such Laws committed to
just and righteous and meek men, that love Judgment, Mercy and Truth, and would
execute them in the Earth; Then the happy and blessed Government will be
exalted, and Truth and Righteousness would reign as Judge on the Throne; and in
this shall all Nations and Kingdoms be prosperous and blessed when in comes to
pass.

III. And as for this present Authority and Government now in being, under the
name of King Charles the Second, we do believe and acknowledge, That according
to the Purpose and Will of God, and of his bringing to pass, this present
Government and Authority is set up, and into its present being, established;
The Lord, I say, has suffered it to be effected, for the Cause, and End, and
Time, and Purpose, known to Himself, and not to mortal man: And thus this
Government and Authority is of God, being brought in and set up, in opposition
to, and for the reproof and correction of, such as went before, who had
neglected Mercy, Truth, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, till it was
time for the Lord to cast them out, and reprove them, and make them a
Desolation before their Enemies; and this Authority was judged of the Lord fit
for that use and end, and reserved to be brought in, as a Rod of God in his
hand, to correct and smite many people; And it is right in the sight of the
Lord, that this Authority should have this time and season to be exercised in
these Kingdoms, to try and prove, both it self, and all under it, if so be that
Truth, Justice and Righteousness, Mercy and Peace, may be brought forth in
these Kingdoms through it, that God may establish it for long continuance; and
it is now a trying and proving, to make it self happy and blessed, or otherwise
to bring it self into contempt and dishonor; and accordingly, as Truth,
Justice, Mercy, Judgment and Peace is brought forth by it, or the contrary
brought forth by it; so must the just and equal effects and reward of it be
from the Hand of God; and it is only Just Judgment, Mercy and Truth,
Righteousness, Relieving the Oppressed, and the doing thereof, that can alone
make the Person and Government of the King Happy, Blessed and Honorable in
this World, and hereafter; and the contrary, if it be brought forth, must needs
bring Confusion, Discontents, and all miserable Judgments; and, to say no more
of it, this is my present Judgment of the King and his Authority, both in
respect of their Coming in, and the Cause thereof, and the Fruits and Effects
that must follow, which is not otherwise determined of God, but according to
desert and merit, of walking in Truth, Justice, and Righteousness, or in
walking otherwise.

IV. Our Obedience to this Authority, must be according, as before declared, in
the Plea of the first Case concerning Allegiance (to wit) for Conscience sake
to God, we are bound by his Just Law in our hearts to yield Obedience to it, in
all matters and cases actively or passively; that is to say, in all just and
good Commands of the King, and the good Laws of the Land, relating to our
outward man, we must be obedient by doing, and not withhold our Just Obedience;
but in the Cases of Conscience (to wit) in the matters of Duty to God, and of
Worship, Faith and Religion toward him, we must only be obedient to God; for
it is he that teaches and requires obedience in all those things: and if any
thing be commanded of us by the present Authority, which is not according to
Equity, Justice, and a good Conscience toward God, to be done by us, we must
in such Cases, obey God only, and deny active Obedience for Conscience sake,
and patiently suffer what is inflicted upon us for such our disobedience to
men; and we must choose Obedience to God rather than man, though we suffer
because thereof: And this is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, to
obey Authority, by doing, or suffering, not disputing whether the Authority in
it self be absolute of God, or not; yet being an Authority over us, we are to
obey it, either by doing, or suffering, because it is an Authority; and not to
plot, rebel, or rise up with carnal weapons against it: and thus must our
Obedience be to the King and his Government. And if that in any thing of the
Commands of the King, we cannot be obedient for Conscience sake, in the Cases
of Conscience, and when ought is required different or contrary to the Law of
God, we have Example hereof in the Scriptures, of many of the Servants of God
that could not in all things, yield Obedience to the Laws of Nations and
Commandments of Kings, when they required ought to be obeyed, contrary to their
pure Consciences; as in the Case of the Three Children, Dan. 3. they could not
obey the Law and Command of the King, though it was absolute, but refused
Obedience, and suffered for it; and Daniel also himself disobeyed the Kings Law
and Commands, Dan. 6. and the Apostles the same, when they were commanded by
the Authority of that City and Country, To preach no more in the Name of JESUS,
Act. 4. 17, 18. They did not obey the Command of the Rulers in that case, but
went on and preached Jesus, in disobedience and contrary to the Command of the
Rulers. And by these, and many other Exumples, it is apparent, that it is
justifiable in the sight of God, and that it was practiced by the Servants of
God in former Ages, even Disobedience to Kings and Authorities, in the Matters
and Cases commanded contrary to the Law of God and a good Conscience; and their
Example may justify such now in the same Practice, in the same Case, if they
walk therein by the same Principle.

V. And thus it is manifest, That if we at any time be found not in full
obedience by doing, in all Cases and Things, to the Laws and Authority of this
Kingdom; it is not out of Contempt unto, or Rebellion against the Kings Person
or Government; It is not, I say, on that account, but for good Conscience sake,
and because we must obey God rather than man, when and where their Commands
stand in opposition the one to the other; and this is, that we may keep our
Consciences clear in the sight of God, from disobedience against him, which is
our care and endeavor by all means: and when any thing is required of us to be
done, which we cannot do with a clear Conscience in the sight of God, such
Commands we cannot yield Obedience unto; and yet it is not out of Wilfulness,
Stubornness, Contempt, or Rebellion against the Authority; but it is for this
End and Cause, that we may not sin against God, nor against our own
Consciences, by doing any thing which is contrary thereunto, lest we should
bring the Wrath of God upon our own Consciences: So that all these things
rightly considered, it does appear, 1. That we acknowledge Magistracy and
Authority to be the Ordinance of God, to be exercised and executed in the
Kingdoms of the World among men. 2. That Just and Righteous men, are the only
persons fit to execute Just Laws and Authorities in the Earth. 3. That we
acknowledge this present Government of King Charles; and that according to the
Purpose of God it is now set up. 4. That we are to be obedient by doing, or
suffering in all things, to the Authority of the King, as the Supreme
Authority. 5. That if in any case we are disobedient thereunto, and cannot
wholly perform every Command, by doing, yet it is for Conscience sake to God,
and that we may not sin against him, and not out of Rebellion or Contempt of
the King or his Power. And all these things truly considered, if we do suffer
Tribulations, Afflictions and Imprisonments, under and by this present
Authority, for and because of our Profession and Practice of Religion, without
evil or wrong doing to our Neighbors Persons or Estates, though we do not in
the things contrary to our Consciences obey actively this present Authority,
yet we are persecuted for the Name of Christ; and as so, we receive our
Sufferings, and not as for Contempt or Denial of Authority, or as Rebellious
against it; but for Conscience sake to God, our Sufferings are, and our unjust
Persecution will be upon our Enemies in the effect and reward thereof, with
great Indignation and Wrath from the Lord God, that rewards all according to
their works. Thus much about Government.

And now I shall show what Persecution is in it self.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Persecution, what it is in it self, and how great an
Enemy it is to the Kings Person and Authority.
1. PErsecution is, when a Person, or a People, do suffer Tribulation,
Affliction, Imprisonment, Bonds, or Death, whether by a Law or without the Law,
for, and because of his or their Principle and Practice in Religion; As when a
Person or a People are reproached, falsely accused, imprisoned or put to death,
only for and because of their Religion sake; when as no evil-dealing in the
things between man and man, can be justly, charged and proved against them, but
only because they are righteous, and walk in the ways of the Lord, and cannot
conform to the ways and vanities of this world, but are separated from it in
its Profaneness, and in its formal Profession also of Religion; and because
thereof Sufferings are imposed upon them, while yet they walk justly,
innocently and harmlesly toward all men: This is Persecution for Conscience
sake, and such are persecuted, if so be they suffer for and because of
Righteonsness sake, and because they will not deny their Principles nor
Profession of Religion, nor conform to Times, nor Laws, contrary to a good
Conscience, and yet suffer because hereof; this is Persecution.

2. Persecution is, when a Person or a People is afflicted, and any kind of
Sufferings imposed upon them, whether by any Authority, or without Authority,
and only because they are of such a Profession and Practice in Religion; though
yet their Profession and Practice in their Religion is not perfectly according
to God, nor by the exercise of that Spirit of God ruling in their Consciences
in such their Religion, yet if they suffer only for their Religion sake, while
yet they walk uprightly as men, in all outward affairs relating to the outward
man, This also is Persecution, and such are persecuted for their Religion sake,
though not wholly for Righteousness sake; and none ought to suffer as such,
under the Authority of any King, Prince, or Power; but if such do suffer, as I
have said, and that for their Religion sake only so, though yet their Religion
is not perfectly according to God, yet they are persecuted, and this is
Persecution. And thus I have in short described and defined what Persecution is
in it self, and who it is that are persecuted, and I shall now show how great
an Enemy Persecution for Conscience and Religion sake is unto the King's Person
and Authority.

Persecution for Conscience sake, and for difference in Matters of Religion, is
a great Enemy to the Person and Government of the King; it is, I say, a
destroying and devouring Enemy, and the fruits and effects thereof may work
terrible destruction, yea, this Enemy [ Persecution] has often wrought
overthrow in Kingdoms: Let the King strive to be delivered speedily from this
great Enemy, which is fierce and cruel, and may work woeful effects in this
Kingdom also, and the King may be more blessed in his Person and Government if
he remove far from him this Enemy, Persecution.

I. It is his Enemy, because its effect is, to eat out the Affections of many
good and sober people from the King, and may make their Love and Affections dye
to the King's Government, when they behold and consider the Persecution of many
good and peaceable People for Righteousness and good Conscience sake, when as
no evil doing between man and man can justly be laid to their charge, but only
for the matter of their Religion and the exercise of their Consciences toward
God; and if such suffer cruel Imprisonment, unjust Fines, and grievous
Vexations for such cause, it may weaken and eat out the Affections of good
People, and divert their Love and good Desires from the King and his
Government, in which such Persecution is brought forth: and that which diverts
the Peoples Love from the King, is his great Enemy, and such is Persecution.

II. Persecution is the King's great Enemy; because it may kindle
Heart-burnings, Envyings, Strifes, and Murmurings among his Subjects, while
some are tolerated in the Profession and Practice of their Religion, and others
persecuted and imprisoned for the same cause; and this kind of dealing
exercises the King's Subjects in harsh dealing one toward another, and gives
great occasions for Quarrelling, Envyes, Debate and Malice one against another,
even when some execute Persecution upon others, haling them to Prison, spoiling
their Goods, and the like; and this kind of dealing, I say, whilst the
Authority of the Land persecutes one sort of the King's Subjects by the hands
of others, it tends much to great Division and Distractions amongst the
People; and it is not for the King's safety, but for his great dishonor and
disadvantage every way, to have the People divided into heart-burnings and
quarrellings against one another; and therefore Persecution is the King's great
Enemy, because it works such evil effects.

III. It is his great Enemy, because it is contrary to the Trust which God has
reposed in him, in promoting him to be King over these People; for God has not
committed Power to him, to judge in the Cases of Men's Consciences, and to
persecute any because of the exercise thereof, whether they be of this
Profession and Practice in Religion, or the other, yet living peaceably and
uprightly as Men, he ought not to persecute any, nor to suffer them to be
persecuted by, nor under his Authority; but he ought to defend and preserve all
men's Persons and Estates in their Just Rights, from the violence each of
others, without respect to what their Profession and Practice of Religion is;
but if the contrary be brought forth, it is contrary, and not answerable to the
end of God's Restoring Him to these Kingdoms; and if He do not what God has
justly called him unto, but otherwise, this is his Enemy; and such is
Persecution for Conscience sake, it is contrary to the end of Just Government,
and wherefore God has Restored him; and therefore this Persecution is an utter
Enemy both to the King's Person and Authority.

IV. It is his Enemy, because it provokes the God of Heaven and Earth over all,
to be offended with him; for He is provoked and vexed because of the
Persecution of his People in this Age, as ever He was in all Ages; and if the
King be guilty thereof, it incurreth God's great Displeasure against him: for
God was ever offended with Kings, Rulers, and whomsoever that were Persecuters,
and he is the same at this day; and whatsoever it is that provokes God to Anger
against the King, that is his Enemy: And such is Persecution of People for the
Profession and Practice of their Religion, when as no Evil can be charged upon
them in things between Man and Man: and therefore let the King beware of this
woeful Enemy that waits to wound him; for if the God of Heaven be provoked
against him, How great is that Enemy which brings it to pass?

V. It is the King's Enemy, because it not only provokes the Lord to Anger, but
to Judgment; Persecution is the cause wherefore God brings grievous Judgments
and Vengeance upon whomsoever are guilty thereof; and the effect of Persecution
is Plagues and Misery; and it incenseth God to Anger, and also to Destroy: and
therefore let the King beware of such a deadly Enemy, as should cause God to
destroy him: and such an Enemy is Persecution of Gods People for Conscience
sake, it draws down the Wrath of God upon Kings and Kingdoms, upon Rich and
Poor, upon High and Low, that are guilty of it, for it is the fulfilling of all
other sins, and it hastens to bring destruction upon all that are guilty; and
this effect it will work upon the King, even this his Enemy Persecution, if he
turn not from it, and overcome it, and banish it from him; for it is the cause
of both inward and outward, of both internal and external Plagues and Judgments
of God.

VI. Persecution it is an Enemy to the King, because it will work to weaken the
hands of Just and Sober and Righteous Men, it will weaken their Love and
Affections, and it makes their hearts sad; and Woe is unto them that make sad
their hearts, whom God does not make sad: and this does Persecution; and it
does not only weaken the hearts and the hands of the Righteous and Sober
Persons, but it strengthens the hands of the Rude, Ungodly, and Profane
through the Land, and that which strengthens the Wicked and the Rude Multitude
in Wantonness, Scorning and Profaneness, that is the King's Enemy; but such is
Persecution for a good Conscience sake; and because it weakens the Righteous in
their good and upright ways, and strengthens the Wicked in their evil ways,
therefore it is an Enemy unto the King.

VII. Persecution is an Enemy unto him, because it tends to render him
dishonorable both in the sight of God, and all good Men through the World; for
it will show, that he is cruel and bitter, and perverse, and that he wants
Humility, Meekness, Forbearance and Patience, if he be guilty; and this is
dishonorable, to have and profess evil qualities and properties, and to be
without the good; and by Persecution this will be made manifest to all the
World, and ever was in all Ages, that the Persecutors of good Conscience gained
unto themselves, Dishonor and Reproach of all good men in all Ages after them:
for they were men full of Rage and Malice and Passionatness, and wanted
Patience and Humility, and this made them Dishonorable: And the case will be
the same with the King, if he be a Persecutor for Conscience sake, and he will
be dishonorable both in this present time, and in Ages to come, and this by
Persecution, and therefore it is his Enemy, that will work many Mischiefs and
Evils upon him, if he be not wholly delivered from it.

VIII. Persecution is an Enemy to the King's Person and Authority, because
Persecution for Conscience sake is of the Devil, it is of his spirit, and not
of the Spirit of God, to persecute, imprison, kill and destroy men's Persons and
Estates, because of their Religion-sake, when as no unjust dealing, nor
unrighteous conversation can be justly laid to their charge, but only for, and
because of such Profession and Practice in Religion, to persecute any, because
hereof, this is of the Devil; and that which is of the Devil, is the King's
Enemy, and an Enemy to all Mankind, and such is Persecution; and therefore it
is a deadly mortal Enemy, which wounds Kings, Princes and Rulers that ever have
had friendship with it; and therefore let the King avoid this great Enemy, lest
its effects prove miserable.

IX. It is the King's Enemy, because it is according to the Example of all the
wicked Kings and Rulers that ever have been through Ages and Generations, as of
Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, Nero, and many more, who were Persecutors of People for
Conscience sake, who gained unto themselves thereby Reproach, Infamy and Misery
from God and men; and to follow their Example, is the King's Enemy, and such is
Persecution, if he should persecute for Conscience sake, and about Religion and
the Worship of God; then he follows the Example of wicked Kings, and this will
be his Enemy, and will work woeful effects, if so be he walk in the steps of the
Persecutors of old, and love that which is his Enemy.

X. Persecution is the King's Enemy, because the end and effects of it is
Misery and Destruction upon all that persecute the Heritage of God: What was
Pharaaoh's end, and Herod's end, and Nero's end? was not their end woeful and
miserable to God and shameful to men? And Persecution for Conscience sake will
bring the same effects at this day; the end of all Persecutors will be Misery
and Shame even in the Day of the Lord, when He comes with Judgment and
Vengeance, and to reward every man according to his deeds, then will He reward
Persecution and Persecutors with his fierce Wrath, and they shall know the
Justice of God's Judgments executed upon them: And therefore happy will the
King be if he keep himself clear, and put far from him this Enemy Persecution.

Three CONSIDERATIONS I have to present unto the KING for Conclusion.
I. THe Strength, and Safety and Prosperity of the King and his Government,
stands in the Union, good Affection and Love of his Subjects, and the People of
these Kingdoms, one to another, and to the King; and the more that the People
of the Kingdoms are in Love and Union and good Affection, one with another and
to the King, the more strong and safe, and prosperous thereby is the King and
his Government, and the more like for a long and happy Continuance and
Establishment: And it is the Love and Union and Affection of the sober and
grave, and just and upright People, and of the Meek of the Land, that is the
Kings Strength and Safety, and will much tend to his Prosperity, and to the
establishment of his Government and Authority; and the Kings Safety and
Strength and Prosperity, does not depend upon the Affection and Acclamations of
the Ruder sort, and of the Wild Multitude, though such profess great
subjection, and cry up the King and his Government, and drink his Healths, and
swear the Destruction of all his Enemies; and have much love and great Union
for the King, and are for him to serve him, and swear Fidelity, and engage
themselves very highly in words and gestures for the King; yet the King and his
Government is no whit the safer, nor more strong nor prosperous, because
hereof, for his Prosperity and Establishment depends upon the Love and good
Affection of the Just and Upright, and Temperate and Meek Men of the Kingdoms,
and not upon the love of the Rude Multitude; such cannot be a blessing to him
in their Vaunting and Boasting, and Rudeness; nor can be stand by them, but
must stand in the Establishment of his Government, by the Love of such as fear
the Lord, and depart from all Iniquity; by the good Affection of such, and
their Faithfulness and Love may the King be happy and blessed: Therefore let
him strive to please such, and to gain their good Affections to be united to
him; and this may add to his long Continuance.

II. It is the doing of Justice and Truth, and allowing all just and equal
Liberty to all People under his Authority, that will gain upon the hearts of
all just and good People; and as Righteousness, Mercy, true Judgment and Truth
is brought forth in the Land, and all the contrary limited in the King's
Government; this will gain much upon the Hearts and Affections of all good
People, to be united in Love one to another, and to the King; And this is the
way of the King's Prosperity, and to make his Government established, if so be
that he exercise his Rule and Authority in Love and Meekness and equal Justice
and Mercy, and love Righteousness and Truth, and hate and deny all the
contrary, and limit it; then the spirits of all People in the Kingdoms would be
subjected and subdued under his Power, and he should rule over them, and his
Kingdoms be established prosperously; and this is the way of an happy
Government: But if so be the King put on Rigor, and be fierce and cruel, and
think to subdue all under him by Will and Force, without showing Justice and
Reason, to answer the Consciences of his Subjects in all his proceedings: This
way can never be prosperous, nor establish him in his Authority; but it will
work the contrary effect: For, if Oppression be brought forth, and heavy Yoaks
laid upon the back of the Poor; then will the Wrath of God and of men, be
kindled against him, and Murmurings, Strifes and Contentions will arise in the
minds of men against him; and the Oppressions of the Poor will reach unto
Heaven, and God will hear and revenge their Cause: So that it is ruling and
exercising Authority in these Kingdoms in Justice, Righteousness, Love and good
Reason that must gain the hearts of People unto right Subjection, to make the
King and his Government happy and established; and Rigor, Force and Cruelty
will never make the King happy, but will work contrary: For the People are
wise, and Understanding will not long bear any degree of the yoke of slavery.

III.In as much as the People of these Kingdoms are diverse and divided, and
contrary in Judgment one to another in many things, and so are dis-united into
several Opinions and Parties; the King ought to rate in Wisdom and Love over
them all, and to show equal Justice and Liberty, and to exercise Righteousness
toward them all alike, notwithstanding their Difference in Religion and
Judgments; for if he shall give Liberty to some, and oppress others; if he do
join with one way, and promote that, and the men of one Judgment be tolerated,
and all other ways, and all others that are different in Judgment, be
persecuted and oppressed, and sought to be destroyed; this is not the way for
the King to prosper, nor to be established to perpetuity; for there seems to be
no one way so strong, or any one sort of People so many for the King to cleave
to and allow, and seek to destroy all the rest; because there is of other sorts
of people that balance that sort in opposition; and so the King and his
Government seems not secure, if he take hold of any one sort of People, only to
stand thereby, in opposition to all the rest, persecuting of them; because
there are many of other Sects that will be discontented and murmur, if not
more: So that the King's Safety is, and the Prosperity of his Government, and
the Establishment of it seems to be, by giving Equal Liberty and Justice, and
showing Love and Tenderness to all of all Judgments; and then he may stand by
all, and none will oppose him, but all will be ready to defend and preserve
him: for he may stand established, and be happy in his Government, by engaging
all Sorts to him through Love and Righteousness, and Liberty toward all; but
he cannot (according to my Judgment) be established nor prosperous, if he
choose only the men of one Judgment to stand by, and cleave only to that, and
persecute and seek to destroy all the rest that are different, and so only make
one Party his Friends, and disengage all others in Love and Affection; This
seems, I say, not the way of Prosperity. Let the King consider it; and the Lord
give him a right understanding.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins l' Grand, 1661.


