THE CASE OF Sir Bouchier Wrey Baronet, an Infant, By JOHN BURRINGTON Esquire his
Guardian; And of Charles Allanson Esquire John Evans and Hugh Evans Gentlemen:
Lately Referred to the Committee of Privileges and Elections of the Honorable
House of Commons.
SIr Bouchier Wrey Petitioned the Honorable House of Commons, complaining of
several forcible Entries, Riots, and other exorbitant Proceedings of Arthur
Owen Esquire a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, and about 50 other
Persons* his Servants and Dependants, praying, That he might be admitted to
take his Remedy at Law and in Equity against the said Member, Mr. Arthur Owen,
to have the Benefit of a Recovery had at Law against him in the Interval of the
Sitting of Parliament, for the House and Demesne of Vaynol, lately forcibly
wrested from him, and other Matters mentioned in the Petition: And that Mr.
Owen's Privilege, as a Member of the said Honorable House, may be waved as to
him, and all Persons concerned with and for him, in the Matters complained of
by the said Petition.

Since the exhibiting of the Petition abovementioned, there has been another
Petition presented to the said Honorable House by Dame Jane Salusbury, by
which she suggests, that she is a Coparcener, and entitled to Vaynol and
Demesne thereof, (being the Lands in Controversy) by the same Title as the
Member Mr. Arthur Owen, and prays, That she may not be prejudiced in her
Possession and Right by any Proceeding upon the Petition abovementioned
against Mr. Owen, and prayed, that she might be be heard in the Premises as to
the Matter in her Petition; and at the very Day that the latter Petition was
presented, a Complaint was made to the said Honorable House against the said
Charles Allanson, and John and Hugh Evans; and against Cadwallader Win, and
Thomas Bulkeley Esquires, (against which two last-mentioned Persons the said
Member has let fall his Prosecutions) for a Breach of the Privilege of
Parliament, for Challenging and Menacing the Member, proceeding against him at
Law, entering upon his Possession, distreining his Tenants, rescuing Distresses
by force, and assaulting and wounding his Servants. All which Matters of the
several Petitions and Complaints were referred to the Committee abovementioned
to Examine and Report the same; and accordingly the Committee have examined the
Matters, and are to report the same upon Wednesday next to the House.

The Matter of Sir Bouchier Wrey's Petition was proved before the Committee,
and the Committee came to these Resolutions, as follows.

That Sir William Williams deceased, who died at London, gave it in Charge to
Mr. Allanson and John Evans, his Executors, to bury him from his House at
Vaynal, in his Parish Church of Bangor in Wales; and John Evans, who was his
Steward, made Provision of Meat, Drink, and Necessaries, at Vaynol-Hall for
that purpose.

Upon the Fifth Day of March last, 1696. Mr. Arthur Owen, the Member,
accompanied with about 50 other Persons, his Domestic Servants, Tenants, and
Dependants, forcibly and riotously entered into and upon Vaynol-Hall and
Demesne, and afterward turned out all the late Servants of Sir William
Williams deceased, (and then of Sir Bouchier Wrey's) then in Possession, by
force out of the Possession, and all the Cattle late of Sir William Williams
deceased thereupon into the Highway, when the Ground was covered with a very
deep Snow, without allowing any Necessary Provision for the Men or Beasts, and
worried to Death one or more of the said Cattle, and refused the Corpse of Sir
William Williams deceased admission there, by reason whereof he was buried out
of Bishop's House.

Mr. Owen the Member, and his Retinue, did break open the Doors of and within
Vaynol House and Outhouses, and did eat and drink all the Provisions of Meat
and Drink (of great Value) made for the Deceased's Burial, and broke open many
Scrutores, Cabinets, Chests and Trunks at Vaynol, and in another House of the
said Deceased at Carnarvon, and carried away Writings and other things found
therein, and eat up and consumed the Fodder of Hay and Straw, and the Corn at
Vaynol; and used and imbezzeled Linen, Bedding, Plate, and other part of the
Deceased's Houshold-Goods at Vaynol, and conveyed away Firearms to the value
of 250 l. a large Cedar Table, and other part of the Deceased's Personal Estate
from Vaynol-Hall, and the Deceased's House at Carnarvon, against the Consent of
Mr. John Evans, the Executor.

Mr. Owen the Member, and his Servants and Attendants, did spoil and waste
Vaynol-House and Demesne, by eradicating many Walnut, Lime, and other young
Trees planted as Ornaments to the said House, and the Roots and Plants in the
best Garden; and did fall many Timber and other Trees upon Vaynol Demesne, and
worked and disposed of many of them; and pulled down two Bays of the Loft over
one of the Stables at Vaynol, and all the Boards and Joyces thereof; and
drained three Fish Ponds well stored with Carp and other Fish upon Vaynol
Demesne, and carried away the Fish thereof to Bodeon, Mr. Owen the Member's
Habitation in Anglesey, and to Mr. William Win one other of the Rioter's
House, and to Mr. Owen's Friends elsewhere.

Mr. Owen the Member, with the said William Win and many other his Adherents,
did forcibly enter upon the Farms of several of the Tenants of the Decedant Sir
William Williams, even those by ancient Leases for long Terms in being, made
for Valuable Considerations, and by Force and the Menaces of the Breach of the
Privilege of Parliament, in case they Resisted, turned the Tenants, Families
and Cattle, out of their Possessions, and particularly forcibly broke and
entered into the several Farms of the said John Evans and Ellin Evans his
Mother, being Tenants for long Terms yet to come, made for valuable
Considerations, and turned their Goods and Cattle out of Possession and
dispossessed them thereof, and by Menaces, and by such Unwarrantable Practices
forced some of the Tenants to Attorn Tenants to Mr. Owen in tears against their
Will.

That in Easter Term, in the Interval of the Sitting of the Parliament, Sir
Bouchier Wrey by his Lessee brought his Ejectment in the Exchequer against Mr.
Owen and William Win (Tenants in Possession of Vaynol and Demesne) and after
several motions and other regular Proceedings at Law the 17th of November last,
before the Sitting of the Parliament, that Cause came to be tried at the
Exchequer-Bar by a Shropshire Jury, but Mr. Owen the Member, (though Sir
William Williams the Lawyer and others of his Council were then present) made
no Defense therein, but menaced that Court with the Privilege of Parliament,
and therefore Sir Bouchier Wrey by his Less had Judgment at a very great
Expense, upon which Judgment, Possession was delivered to Sir Bouchier Wrey's
Lessee the First day of December last, and after that he had been forced to
Gratify the Sheriff with Twenty Guinea's, and to give him a Bond of 500 l. to
Indemnifie him against the Privilege of Parliament, he by his Servants had and
continued the Possession thereof till about Five of the Clock in the Morning of
the Last Day of the same Month of December, when Nine of Mr. Owen's Dmesticks,
accompanied with about 30 or 40 other Persons forcibly Entered Vaynol House,
and Assaulted and Beat Sir Bouchier Wrey's Servants, and turned them out of
Possession, alleging that they did so, and took Possession for Mr. Arthur Owen
the Member, and by Authority of Parliament, which was a far Better Authority
than the Sheriff had, when he gave Possession thereof, and ever since continued
in Possession in an Hostile manner, and Mr. Owen's Cattle have ever since
Grazed upon the Demesne: All which was proved before the Committee by the
Petitioner, Sir Bouchier.

Mr. Owen the Member, produced as Witnesses, William Win and Thomas Davies,
who were concerned in most of the Riots abovementioned, and proceeded against
by Information, and Indictments found for the same: Wherefore (being two of the
Criminals) their Evidence was rejected, and then the Committee came to a
Resolution that it was their Opinion, That the Servants of Mr. Owen the Member,
were Guilty of the Forcible Entry on the 31st of December last, and that Mr.
Owen the Member, in the matter of forcible Entry and Detainer, ought to have no
Privilege of Parliament.

As to the Lady Salusbury's Petition, no Council or Witnesses attended for her
to make good her Allegation when called in, though the Respondent's Counsel
attended, and therefore, and upon reading the said Petition, the Committee were
of Opinion, That there was no matter of Privilege in her Petition.

As to the Complaint concerning Mr. Allanson, John Evans and Hugh Evans, The
Persons produced against them were Hugh Morgan, Richard Owen, and the said
William Win, all concerned in the Riots abovementioned, and Hugh Morgan,
after having prevaricated with the Committee, by refusing to Answer in English,
averring he could speak none, till after that it was proved upon him, that he
could speak English, Declared that the sald Hugh Evans (one of Sir Bouchier
Wrey's Tenants and Agents) after that several of his Neighbors had been
harassed and disturbed in their Possessions, uttered some Menaces of Mr. Owen
and Sir William Williams the Members, in Case they invaded his Possession, and
that upon the last Riot at Vaynol, he did at a distance assault one of the
Rioters, who was a Tenant, and a Day-Labourer to Mr. Owen, and the said William
Win Deposed, that Mr. Allanson had menaced him in the Interval of the Sitting
of the Parliament, being Mr. Owen's Attorney at Law; and it appearing that Mr.
Allanson and John Evans were the Deceased's Executors, and Mr. John and Hugh
Evans, Sir Bouchier Wray's Agents and Tenants, and all concerned to Vindicate
his and their Rights and his Possession, and the Witnesses produced, being
Criminals, upon these and other Considerations, the Committee have resolved,
That they are of Opinion, Mr. Allanson, John Evans and Hugh Evans, are not
Guilty of any breach of Privilege.

The Matters of Sir Bouchier Wrey's Petition, and the Complaints against Mr.
Allanson, and John and Hugh Evans have been solemnly examined, and the Lady
Salusbury's Petition, not supported by any Proof, and we conceive the same
impracticable; For if Mr. Owen the Member shall have no Privilege for himself,
we hope that he shall have none to protect her, who ought to pay Sir Bouchier
Wrey's Costs; and Sir Bouchier Wrey having been at a very great Expense, has
sent his Witnesses home.

If Sir Bouchier Wrey, the Infant, after all his Expensive and Just Prosecution
shall only be admitted to proceed Criminally for the said forcibly Entry and
Detainer, then he reaps no Benefit by these Proceedings: It is therefore humbly
Hoped that he may be admitted to Prosecute Mr. Owen the Member and his
Adherents, by Civil Actions at Law and in Equity, for all the Matters
complained of in his Petition.


