The MEMORABLE WORKS Of a SON of THUNDER AND CONSOLATION: Namely, That True
Prophet, and Faithful Servant of God, and Sufferer for the Testimony of JESUS,
Edward Buroughs Who Dyed a Prisoner for the WORD of GOD, in the City of
LONDON, the Fourteenth of the Twelfth Month, 1662.

The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance,

Psa. 112. 6. And they that be Wise, shall shine as the Firmament; and they
that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars; forever and ever,

Dan. 12. 3. In the sight of the Unwise they seemed to dye; and their Departure
was taken for Misery, and their going from us to be utter Destruction: but they
are in Peace. For, though they be Punished in the sight of Men, yet is their
Hope full of Immortality,

Wisd. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. and 5. 4, 5. Being Dead, yet speaks,

Heb. 11. 4. Printed and Published for the good and benefit of Generations to
come, in the Year, 1672.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY To the People of God In Derision called, QUAKERS, The
Publisher of this Volumn wishes all Peace and Prosperity in the Lord.
Dear Friends,
I Having had much Exercise and care upon me in Collecting, and for the
Publishing these Books in this Volumn; at length, after much Travel and
Diligence, for the effecting this Impression, they are through the Assistance
and Providence of God (as I may well say) brought forth and finished for you
and your Children, and such as are moderate and well-affected, who shall desire
any of them. The reason why this Work has been so long unfinished, was partly
the difficulty of Printing, and partly it being also thus voluminous and
weighty, and partly since I began the Printing of this, many other things of
Truth's Concernment intervened, which required expedition in the publication:
howbeit, this Work has long lain as a matter of weight upon my spirit, to use
my utmost endeavors for its accomplishment; and greater desires thereof could
not be in any of you, then in my own particular; I having Traveled both to
answer and serve Truth, as also the desires of many Friends herein, whom also I
have been willing and desirous to serve in that true Love which stands in the
Life and Truth of our God, who requires faithfulness of us all, that we may
remain living Witnesses in our several Places this short time of our
Pilgrimage; and in the end, lay down our Heads in Peace, and Assurance of a
Crown of Life and Glory, as our Everlasting Reward; for this is the End that
crowns all, The Diligence and Works of the Faithful.

And I having been an Eye and Ear Witness of the Faithfulness, Valor and
Courage of this Faithful Servant and Prophet of the Lord E. B. in his powerful
Testimony, and effectual Ministry, which the Lord did bless with a very
Glorious Success unto me, and many more; have found my self the more obliged
for the divulging of these his Works, which, though many of them were given
forth in the time of his Youth, soon after the Lord first raised him up, and
when the discovery of Truth was in its infancy, both New, Strange and a
Wonderment to many in our Age (it being after such a long time of Darkness, and
Night of Apostasy) yet the Power of the Lord, which then broke forth, was very
Mighty, both in him, and his dear Companion in the Gospel Fr. Howgill, who were
sent in the beginning amongst us, in this City of London; where, though they
met with much Opposition and Gainsaying by perverse spirits, and formal
Professors of all sorts, who denied and resisted the Power of Codliness; yet
the Lord so accompained these his two faithful Servants and Ministers of
Righteousness, as to the confounding the wisdom of the Wise, and stoping the
Mouths of many contentious Opposers, and convincing of Gainsayers; yea, the
Lord did manifest 1 Cor. 12. 9.
and perfect his Strength through Weakness, even through Instruments despised
and coutemptable in the Eyes of the Proud and Exalted of the 1 Cor. 1. 27
World; out of the Mouths of Babes did the Lord ordain Strength; and Psalm. 8.
2.
through Simplicity did his wisdom speak, both in this his faithful Witness E.
B. and diverse other in the beginning: So that let none contemn, the honest
Plainness, and harmless Simplicity of any of his first Writtings or Books here
inserted; for many are living Witnesses, that the Power and Wisdom of God, did
then (even while he was young and tender every way) appear, and show it self in
him, through such plainness and Simplicity, to the confounding, and overturning
the wisdom of many that were high and lofty, who conceited themselves wise with
their opposition of science (falsely so called.)

And it may not be unnecessary for Friends, and their Children to read and
peruse these Testimonies, Informations and Vindication of Truth, where they are
in way of Controversy (with many others of like nature) given forth by the
Servants of the Lord, in Truth's Vindication, the Perusal and Reading thereof
may be of Service both to you and yours, you being in the Light and Inspiration
of the Almighty, which gives Understanding, from which all Scriptures or
Writings that are given, are profitable to the Man of God for his
Accommodation, and ought not to be slighted, whether they be in plain
Testimonies, or in Vindications and Answers: For though many are come to a
particular Satisfaction in the true Light, which is the Rule of the
Understanding, and know so much of Christ, as to die for him, yet cannot so
well dispute for him, though that be necessary, and few given up and
accomplished for that Service; and therefore there may be need for more to
apply their hearts to Wisdom, as to be furnished in every respect, to stand up
for the Truth against its Opposers, to convince Gainsayers, and stop the Mouth
of Iniquity, where ever it opens it self against the Righteous, to pervert the
right Ways of God and his Truth; since the Labors and Works of this valiant
Soldier of Christ are here manifest to your view, and to continue on Record,
as permanent Monuments of his Service for the Lord, and as Tokens of God's Love
to many; it being also apparently manifest, how plainly and eminently many of
his Prophesies came to pass, and were fulfilled upon the Heads of the
persecuting Powers, Rulers and Government of O. C. and others of that Affinity,
who trod in the same Path; who resisted God's Power, in not removing Oppression
from off the Innocent.

It is not my place much to endeavor E. B's applause in many words, because I
cannot add to him, or what he has done, thereby; nor yet to his Faithful
Companion Francis Howgill, or his Works, which many do also desire might be
Collected and Published, as these are; for indeed he also wrote many weighty
things, and of much Service to the Truth, which would be a very conderable
Volmun, that will require both much Care, Charge, and Industry to publish in
Print; and therefore it would be of much Service to Truth, if Friends would so
consider the weight thereof, as to encourage such a Work of value and worth;
for many know what a great Sufferer F. H. was; and how he lay many years in a
bad Prison at Appleby in Westmoreland, for the Testimony of Jesus, and of a
good Conscience, for that he could not Swear; so that in the same Prison, under
the Hands of his Persecutors, he cheerfully, and with much Satifaction and
Peace, gave up his Life, and ended his Days in Peace. Oh! the remembrance of
these two Faithful Witnesses, who both died Sufferers, being Prisoners for
Truth, is never to be forgotten.

And thus, Dear Friends, as the Salutation of our dear Brother E. B. according
to his desire, while in the Body, I recommend unto you this Volumn of his
Books, with my Love in the Truth to you all, being therein

The Truth's and your Servant and Friend, Ellis Hooks.
London, the 1st of the 2d Month, 1672.
THE EPISTLE TO The Reader.
TO all the World to whom this may come to be Read, that they read with a good
understanding, and hereby they may come to the perfect knowledge of the ground
of difference between the Priests, and Professors, and all Sects in these
Nations, and Us, who are in scorn called Quakers, showing that the Controversy
on our part is just and equal against them all, and that we have sufficient
cause to cry against them, and to deny their Ministry, their Church, their
Worship, and their whole Religion, as being not in the Power, and by the Spirit
of the Living God, as commanded of him, or ever practiced by his Saints; But
this declares the ground and Foundation thereof to be another thing, and not
the same on which the true Church, and Ministry, and Practice, and Worship, and
true Religion was builded in the days of the Apostles; And also this is an
Invitation to all Sects, and Professions of People, to come forth, and try if
what they hold and profess be according to the Scriptures of truth; and to do
this in trial, by evident and sound Arguments, and by the best spiritual
Weapons they have, and to lay aside all this Persecution and unrighteous
Dealing, and Stocking, and Whipping, and Imprisoning of us for speaking against
their Religion; and that they come forth in fair dispute, to contend in the
Spirit of meekness, for what they Profess and Practice, and to prove according
to the Scriptures, their Ministry, Church, and whole Religion, that it is in
and by the Spirit and Power of God, or otherwise to renounce and deny all their
Religion, and the Profession and Practices thereof, that every man may be
satisfied, who it is that are in the true and right Way, and of the true
Worship, and true Religion, and who it is that are not, and this is desired by
us who are called Quakers; and also a true Account of our first beginning and
coming forth in the World, and of that great Sufferings we have sustained, and
how we have been carried on, and are preserved to this day.

The Lord God everlasting, who is true and faithful, has fulfilled his promise
in us, and unto us, and we are gathered from the Mouths of all dumb Shepherds,
and out of the mouths of all Hirelings, who have made a prey upon us, and fed
themselves with the fat, and devoured souls for dishonest gain; And we are come
to the Fold of Eternal Rest, where Christ Jesus is the chief Shepherd, and he
is the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, that feeds his Flock with living
Bread, that nourishes us unto Life Eternal; he has called us by his Name, and
put us forth, and he feeds us in green Pastures, and we are fed with hidden
Manna, and lie down at Noon with his gathered Flock; and out of Nations,
Kindreds, Multitudes, and Peoples are we redeemed to God, and are come out of
the World, and out of great Babylon, and out of spiritual Sodom, and Egypt,
where the Lord Christ was, and is crucified, and lies slain to this day; and a
top of the World has the Lord set us, on the Mountain of his own House and
Dwelling; where we behold and feel the Life, and Glory, and Crown of the World
that has no end; and the world that has an end is seen over, and its crown
and glory is his Footstool that reigns amongst us: And as for all that which
this perishing world brings forth, which men seek after only, its reckoned our
temptation, though all the Sons of Adam are seeking its glory, its riches, its
crowns, its contentments; but of that Birth are we, which has no crown, no
glory, nor rest, under the Sun; and a Birth is brought forth amongst us which
is Heir of another Kingdom, and Possessor of another Crown, whose glorying is
in the Lord all the Day long; and he is our Refuge, our Rock, and our Fortress
against all our Enemies; and what though the Wicked arm themselves, and the
Ungodly bend their Bow; what though all sorts of People, from the Prince upon
his Throne, to the Beggar upon the Dunghill, exalt themselves against the
despised People of the Lord's Inheritance, who for his Name's sake are killed
all the day long: What though the Wisemen bring forth their Arguments; and
what though the Rulers bring forth unrighteous Judgments against the Seed that
God has blessed; what though the Revilers and Scorners open their mouths, and
Reproachers and Revilers cast out their bitter words, as a Flood, against the
Remnant of the Woman's Seed, that has long been fled into the Wilderness: And
what then, if the Teachers, the Prophets, and the Elders and the Heads, and
Wise men of the World set themselves to pray, and preach and print against the
chosen Seed of Jacob; yet notwithstanding all this, though this is come to
pass, and Hell open her Mouth, and her Floods break forth to overflow, and be
much more increased; yet shall the King of Righteousness rule among his People,
and his Presence will not forsake his chosen Ones: but the Lord is with us, a
Mighty and Terrible One; and the shout of a King is amongst us; and the Dread
and Terror of the Almighty covers us, and it goes before us, and compasses
us about: And the Lord is working a Work in the Earth mighty and wonderful; he
is gathering the Scattered, and binding up the Brokenhearted; and his People
shall dwell in safety, and none shall make them afraid, and no Weapon that is
formed against them shall prosper, nor no Hand that is lifted up shall prevail;
for Sion shall rise out of the Dust, her beautiful Garments shall be put on,
and Mourning and Sorrow shall flee away, and her Light is risen that is
everlasting, and the Sun shall never godown, but his day shall remain for ever,
and the Night shall not again cover her brightness, nor the Sun set upon her
habitations; the City that has long laid waste, shall again be builded; and
the dwelling that has long been without Inhabitant, shall be replenished; for
the numberless seed of Jacob is coming out of Egypt, that will replenish the
whole Earth, and the seed of Esau shall become bondmen: and wherefore are you
gathered together? and to what purpose have the wicked spent their strength to
oppose what the Lord is bringing to pass? shall not all our Enemies be broken
to pieces, and will not the Lord grind them to Powder? will he not mar their
Beauty, and stain their pride? will he not bring down their crowns, and corrupt
their glory, and stain it with his Fire of Wrath, and make them ashamed of
their Ways and Doctrines? Hear this ye Priests, and howl, and lament for the
misery that is coming upon you; the Lord has laid you naked, and made you
bare, and you are seen as you are, and the Elect is risen amongst us which ye
cannot deceive; but alas, woe is me, how have you caused the people to err! and
how have you led the blind out or the way! and how is truth fallen in your
Streets! and you have daubed falsely with untempered Mortar, and have cried
peace to the wicked, and condemned the righteous; and all this has vexed the
righteous soul, and the Lord will now arise, and is risen, and you shall not
resist, and escape the stroke of his hand, which will come upon you, and bruise
you as a Millstone; for you have caused the wicked to rejoice and the righteous
to mourn; and you have made sad his heart, whom God has not made sad: have not
you fed your selves with the fat, and clothed with the Wool? and have not the
peoples souls been starved, and leanness been upon them all, your plants are
dry, and barren trees that bring forth no good fruit; and your people are like
a Wilderness that is untilled, and unploughed, and undressed; and your flocks
are like wild Asses upon the Mountains, that are untamed; as rude as the Horse,
and Mule, that know no Bridle; and now it is seen what the end of your Ministry
is, and what fruit it has brought forth; the Lord has taken notice, and he
has beheld how you have loytered, and lain idle, and the Nations lie yet like
fallow ground, that bears no fruit; and men's hearts, are untouched with absence
of Gods Word, and there is no sound, true and perfect sense amongst your people
of the dealings of the Lord; nor of the operation of his Spirit, but they
remain in great Blindness and Ignorance, void of the Knowledge of God, for ye
have not caused them to hear his Word, but you have told your Dreams, and your
false Visions, and you have spoken Imaginations of your hearts, and not from
the Mouth of the Lord; neither have you stood in his Counsel, nor hearkened to
his Voice, and therefore people remain unprofited; but what they and you know,
its naturally, and not by the Spirit of the Father, but as dry Trees you are,
not taught of the Father, and as rough Goats in the nature of Swine that is
polluted in the silth of the World, and in the nature of Dogs, and Lions,
devouring one another, and biting one another, and killing one another, which
things were not in the Churches of Christ, and we have a great controversy
with you, and that from the Lord; we have tried you, searched you, and
discovered your Foundation, and its not sound, nor will not stand in the trial;
we have fetched your Line from the first original, and we have found out your
beginning, and we find yours of that Race, which Christ prophesied of that
should come, which should deceive many, having the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly revening, and which John saw was come, and went out from the Apostles,
and true Churches, which went from the truth, and went into the World, and had
the Form of Godliness without the Power; here began the Race, in the Apostasy
of the Churches; and when they Apostatized from the true Faith, then came your
original up, and the World went after them, and all that dwelt upon the Earth
worshipped the Beast, that has reigned through all this time of Apostasy,
which has been since the days of the Apostles; and we find your original goes
no further then to the false Brethren, and false Apostles, which went out from
the true Apostles, and run for Gifts and Rewards, and preached for filthy
Lucre, and through covetousness made merchandise of souls, seeking money and
gain to themselves; I say we find your original begins there, and your Line
goes no further, and never came your first rise so far as the true Apostles,
you were not in your beginning of their life nor birth, nor cannot be reckoned
from their original, for you succeed not them; but you truly succeed the false
Apostles, and false brethren, which Christ prophesied should come after his
days, and John saw was come, and coming in his days; and we find you of this
stock and Generation; and now you are discovered to be contrary to the true
Apostles, and agreeing with the false Apostles, in Call, in Practice, in
Maintenance, and in all things; and the Line of true judgment is laid upon you
all, and you are measured, and found too short, and weighed and sound too
light, and we will deal truly with you in judgment; first we do hold
controversy with you, as concerning your Call, your Ministry, it agrees not
with, but is contrary to what the Apostles Call was; they were called by power
from on high, and were made Ministers by the Gift of the holy Spirit, received
from God; and their Ministry was an absolute Gift from God, and not to be
bought and sold for money, and they were anointed of the Father, by his Spirit
of promise, and to Preach the Gospel; but your Call is at Schools, and
Colleges, in such, and such Orders, which are attained through natural
industry, such, and such Arts, and Sciences, and Degrees, having been so many
years brought up in studying natural Arts and natural Languages, this is your
Ordination and your Call, having no respect to receive, or to wait for the Gift
of the holy Spirit to be made Ministers thereby; and this is different from the
Apostles and true Ministers, and equal and according to the false Prophets and
Deceivers.

Secondly, Again you are not according, but contrary to the true Ministry and
Ministers of Christ in Practice; for they were led by the Spirit of the Father
which dwelt in them, and they preached the Gospel by the Spirit, and spoke as
the Spirit gave them utterance, and went up and down the World through Nations,
converting People to the Knowledge of the Truth, and what they had handled,
tasted, seen, and felt of the Word of Life in them, that they declared to
others, and preached the Gospel, which they had not received from man, nor by
man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in them; but your Practices are not
such but contrary, for the spirit of this World leads you, and it you follow in
all your Works, in your Preaching, Praying, and in your whole Worship, in Form
and Tradition, what you have studied for out of Books, and old Authors you
preach to people; and what ye have noted in a Book, that you preach by an
Hourglass, and not as the Spirit of God gives you utterance; and you seek out,
and enquire after great Benefices, and much Money by the year; and where there
is much Tithes, and Gleb-Lands, and such like; thither and to such a Place you
go, and seek after, to be Minister there; and there you remain twenty, forty,
more, or fewer years, as you can agree with the People; and while they will
give you so much as will content you, and maintain you, your Wives and Families
as you say, and respect not whether any be converted to God by your preaching;
but people remain always in blindness and ignorance, generally, and without the
Knowledge of God; for you preach other men's words, and what you have collected
in your Imaginations from the Saints words, an Hour by a Glass, leaning upon a
soft Cushion, and for Money and Hire, preaching to the people; and this is your
manner of practice, and Ministry in these Nations; but thus did not the
Apostles, nor Christ's Ministers, but the contrary; and by your Fruits and
Works it appears, that you are not Followers of that Spirit that Christ and his
Ministers were guided by, neither are lawful Successors of the Apostles, but
by your Fruits and Practice you manifest, that the Lord never sent you, nor
Christ never called you into his Service to be his Ministers; for in all your
Practices, and in your whole Performances of Worship you differ, and do not
agree, but are contrary to what the Practice and Worship of Christ's Ministers
and Churches were in the days of the Apostles; this I charge upon you, in the
Name, and by the Authority of the Lord God, and am able to prove it against
you, face to face, or otherwise to show that you are not of the same spirit,
but contrary to the Saints and Apostles of old, and so not true Succeeders of
them, nor lawful Ministers of Christ, as to all people it is, and shall be made
manifest.

Thirdly, You disagree, and are contrary altogether to the true Ministry, and
to the Apostles, in respect of your Maintenance and Wages; for the Wages which
Christ allowed his Ministers, was, into whatsoever House they entered, that was
worthy, they might eat such things as are set before them; for the Workman
(says he) is worthy of his Hire; and the Apostles eat only of the Fruit of the
Vineyard that they had planted, and of the Milk of the Flock which they kept;
by a free gift of the People, which they had begotten to the Faith, and to whom
they sowed spiritual things; it was but as a small matter if they reaped their
carnal things, yet as a free gift they would do it, and the Apostle said, he
would not make the Gospel of Christ chargeable; And in this manner were Christ
Ministers and Ministry in Wages and Gifts upheld and maintained outwardly in
the World.

But your Practice and Maintenance is not such, but contrary, as is fully made
manifest; for you will have so much by the year promised to you in Tithes,
Money, or Gleab-lands, or Stipends, and of Drunkards, and Swearers, and
profane Wordly People, who are not Sheep of Christ's Flock, nor Plants of his
Vineyard, you will have so much of each of them; and of every man, in such a
compass, as you call your Parish; and if any either out of Covetousness, or
good Conscience, cannot pay you, you sue at Law, and cast into Prison, for
Wages, and spoil their Goods, and take treble, nay sometimes Five double
damage, and through Violence and Injustice, and Cruelty are you maintained in
such a manner, and not as the true Ministers and Apostles of Christ were, but
in a way and manner quite contrary, as it is manifest; and so herein it is
proved, that you are not lawful Successors of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ.

Fourthly, Again you follow not the Apostles, and true Ministers of Christ, but
are contrary to them in Doctrine, as this following Volumn will clearly
manifest, which for this very end is collected from your own Mouths and Pens,
that all men may see what you are, and what you hold and profess; and being
truly laid down, and answered, let your selves, and all sober men compare your
doctrines and sayings with the Doctrines of the Apostles, and they may see you
agree not with them, but are contrary to them. And now Friends, to all you that
profess your selves to be Ministers of the Gospel, I do hereby declare unto
you, in the Name and Authority of the Lord, that we have a controversy with
you, and a great charge against you in all these things, in your Call, in your
Practice, and in your Maintenance, and in your Doctrines, and our Mouths has
the Lord opened, and they cannot be shut, from declaring and crying against
you, as such whom the Lord never sent, but are contrary to Christ, his
Prophets, and Apostles in all your Ways, and Practices, and the Hand of the
Lord is certainly against you, and his Power and Dread will comeover you, and
lie upon your Consciences.

Now Reader, whatsoever thou are that reads this following Volumn, if thy mind
be sober, and thy heart right toward God, thou may come to a good
understanding of the Ground and cause of this great controversy, between the
Priests and the Professors of this Nation, and us, who are in scorn called
Quakers; for it is not unknown to Nations, of this great debate and battle, now
for some years of continuance in this Nation, no man can be ignorant, what
putting in Prisons, and what Persecuting, and what Preaching, and Printing
against us, and what Reports and Fame has been through this Nation for some
years past; and the Quakers so called, have written, and spoken, and printed,
against the Priests and their Worships, and Ways, and Doctrines, and declared
against them, as Deceivers and false Prophets, and such as never were sent of
God; and on the other hand, thus have the Priests, and more abundantly cried
out against, and printed against the Quakers, as Heretics and Deceivers, and
Witches, and all what they could say that is evil, and these things being not
unknown, but publicly brought to pass; therefore it will be good to discover
unto every man, the first ground and cause of this great Strife, and the matter
of it, and its beginning, so that all may know the certainty of these things,
and know they are not without good ground, and sufficient reason on our part;
to wit, That we have just cause to do, and strive against that Generation of
Priests and Teachers, and that we do nothing rashly, and without sufficient
reason. It is now about seven years since the Lord raised us up in the North of
England, and opened our Mouths in this his Spirit; and what we were before in
our Religion, Profession, and Practices is well known to that part of the
Country, how generally we were men of the strictest Sect, and of the greatest
Zeal in the Performance of outward righteousness; and went through, and tried
all sorts of Teachers, and run from Mountain to Mountain, and from man to man,
and from one Form to another, as do many to this very day, who yet remain
ungathered to the Lord, and such we were, (to say no more of us) that sought
the Lord, and desired the knowledge of his Ways more then any thing beside;
and for one I may speak, who from a Child, even a few years old, he set his
face to seek and find the Savior, and more then Life and Treasure, or any
mortal Crown sought after with all his heart, the one thing that is needful, to
wit, the Knowledge of God: And after our long seeking, the Lord appeared to us,
and revealed his glory in us, and gave us of his Spirit from Heaven, and poured
it upon us, and gave us of his Wisdom to guide us, whereby we saw all the
World, and the true state of all things, and the true condition of the Church
in her present estate; first the Lord brought us by his Power, and Wisdom, and
the Word by which all things were made, to know and understand, and see
perfectly that God had given to us, every one of us in particular, a Light from
himself shining in our hearts and consciences, which Light, Christ his Son, the
Savior, of the World had lighted every man, and all Mankind withal; which
Light in us we found sufficient to reprove us, and convince us of every evil
deed, word and thought, and by it, in us, we come to know good from evil, right
from wrong, and whatsoever is of God, and according to him, from what is of the
Devil, and what is contrary to God in motion, word and work; and this Light
gave us to discern between truth and error, between every false and right way,
and it perfectly discovered to us the true state of all things, and we thereby
came to know man, what he was in his creation before transgression, and how he
was deceived and overcome by the Devil; and his estate in transgression, and in
disobedience, and how he is drove and banished from the presence of the Lord,
and the sorrow and anguish which he is in, and to undergo; and also by the
Light in us, we perfectly came to know the way of Restoration, and the means
to be restored; and the state of man being come out of Transgression and
restored, these things to us were revealed by the Light within us, which Christ
had given us, and lightened us withal, what man was before Transgression, and
what he is in Transgression, and what he is being redeemed out of
Transgression, and also the Light which shines in every one of us, as to it
our minds became turned, and our hearts inclined, the perfect Estate of the
Church we came to know; her Estate before the Apostles days, and in the
Apostles days, and since the days of the Apostles, and her present Estate we
found to be as a Woman who had once been clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, who brought forth him that was to rule the Nations; but she was
fled into the Wilderness, and there sitting desolate, in her place, that was
prepared of God for such a season; which season, in the very end thereof, when
the time of her sojourning was toward a full end, then were we brought forth;
if any have an Ear they may hear; so that all these things concerning man, and
concerning the times and seasons, and the changing and renewing of times, and
all things that pertain to Salvation, and Redemption, and Eternal Life,
needful for man to know; all this was revealed, discovered, and made known to
us, by the Light which was in us, which Christ had lighted us withal.

And we found this Light to be a sufficient Teacher, to lead us to Christ, from
whence this Light came, and thereby it gave us to receive Christ, and to
witness him to dwell in us; and through it the new Covenant we came to enter
into, to be made Heirs of Life and Salvation; and in all things we found the
Light which we were enlightened withal, and all Mankind (which is Christ) to be
alone and only sufficient to bring to Life and eternal Salvation, and that all
who did own the Light in them which Christ has enlightened every man withal,
they needed no man to teach them, but the Lord was their Teacher, by his Light
in their own Consciences, and they received the holy Anointing.

And so we ceased from the teachings of all men, and their words, and their
Worships, and their Temples, and all their Baptisms, and Churches, and we
ceased from our own Words, and Professions, and Practices in Religion, in times
before zealously performed by us, through diverse Forms, and we become Fools for
Christ's sake, that we might become truly wise; and by this Light of Christ in
us were we led out of all false Ways and false Preachings, and false
Ministers, and we met together often, and waited upon the Lord in pure Silence,
from our own words, and all men's words, and hearkened to the Voice of the Lord,
and felt his Word in our hearts, to burn up and beat down all that was contrary
to God, and we obeyed the Light of Christ in us, and followed the Motions of
the Lords pure Spirit, and took up the Cross to all Earthly Glories, Crowns,
and Ways, and denied our selves, our Relations, and all that stood in the way
betwixt us and the Lord, and we chose to suffer with and for the Name of
Christ, rather then all the pleasures upon Earth, or all our former zealous
Professions and Practices in Religion, without the Power and Spirit of God,
which the World yet lives in. And while waiting upon the Lord in Silence, as
often we did for many Hours together, with our minds and hearts toward him,
being stayed in the Light of Christ within us, from all thoughts, fleshly
Motions, and desires, in our diligent waiting and fear of his Name, and
harkening to his Word, we rereceived often the pouring down of the Spirit upon
us, and the Gift of God's holy eternal Spirit, as in the days of old, and our
heart were made glad, and our Tongues loosed, and our Mouths opened, and we
spoke with new Tongues, as the Lord gave us utterance, and as his Spirit led
us, which was poured down upon us, on Sons and Daughters; and to us hereby was
the deep things of God revealed, and things unutterable were known and made
manifest, and the Glory of the Father was revealed; and then begun we to sing
Praises to the Lord God Almighty, and to the Lamb for ever, who had redeemed us
to God; and brought us out of the Captivity and Bondage of the World, and put
an end to Sin and Death, and all this was by and through, and in the Light of
Christ within us; and much more might be declared hereof, that which could not
be believed, if it were spoken, of the several and particular Operations and
Manifestations of the everlasting Spirit that was given us, and revealed in us:
but this is the sum; Life and Immortality was brought to light; Power from on
High, and Wisdom was made manifest, and the Day everlasting appeared unto us,
and the joyful Sun of Righteousness did arise and shine forth unto us, and in
us; and the holy Anointing, the everlasting Comforter we received; and the Babe
of Glory was born; and the Heir of the Promise brought forth to Reign over the
Earth, and over Hell and Death, whereby we entered into everlasting Union, and
Fellowship, and Covenant with the Lord God, whose Mercies are sure, and
infinite, and his Promise never fails: and much might be spoken, but this is
the sum; we were raised from Death to Life, and are changed from Satan's power
to God, and gathered from all the dumb Shepherds, and off all the barren
Mountains, into the Fold of eternal Peace and Rest; and mighty and wonderful
things has the Lord wrought for us, and by us, by his own outstretched Arm.

And thus we became Followers of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and he has
called us to make war in righteousness, for his Name sake against Hell and
Death, and all the Powers of Darkness; and against the Beast and false Prophet,
which have deceived the Nations; and we are of the Royal Seed Elect, Chosen,
and Faithful; and we war in Truth, and just Judgment; not with Weapons that are
carnal, but by the Sword that goes out of his Mouth, which shall slay the
Wicked, and cut them to pieces; and after this manner was our Birth, and
bringing forth; and thus has the Lord chosen us, and made us an Army dreadful
and terrible, before whom the Wicked do fear and tremble; and our Standard is
Truth, Justice, Righteousness and Equity; and all that comes unto us must
cleave thereunto, and fight under that Banner without fear, and without
doubting, and they shall never be ashamed, nor put to flight, neither shall
ever they be conquered by Hell, or Death, or by the Powers of Darkness; but the
Lord shall be their Armor, Weapon, and Defense for evermore; and they that
follow the Lamb shall overcome, and get the Victory over the Beast, and over
the Dragon, and over the Gates of Hell; for the Lord is with us, and who shall
be able to make us afraid?

Then having thus armed us with Power, Strength and Wisdom, and Dominion
according to his Mind, and we having learned of him, and being taught of him in
all things; and he having chosen us into his Work, and put his Sword into our
hands, and given us perfect Commission to go forth in his Name and Authority,
having the Word from his Mouth, what to cut down, and what to preserve; and
having the everlasting Gospel to preach to the Inhabitants of the Earth; and
being commanded in spirit to leave all, and follow him, and go forth in his
Work; yea, an absolute necessity was laid upon us, and woe unto us if we preached
not the Gospel; for when we looked abroad, and beheld the World, behold it was
altogether Darkness, and even as a Wilderness, and desolate and barren of good
Fruit; and Death reigned over men, and no good Fruit was brought forth to God,
but Leaves we beheld upon every Soul; and all men and people were made drunk
with the Wine of Whoredoms, and the Whores Cup they had drunk, and was
committing Fornication with the great Whore, and she reigned over the Kings and
peoples of the Earth; and the Antichrist was set up in the Temple of God,
ruling over all, and having brought Nations under his Power, and set up his
Government over all, for many Ages; even since the days of the Apostles and
true Churches has he reigned, while the Woman has been fled into the
Wilderness, and the Man-Child caught up to God. Christ said Antichrist should
come, and put on the Sheeps clothing, and be inwardly a ravening Woolf; and
John saw that Antichrist was come in his days, and he went forth then from the
true Church, and went into the World, and deceived the World; and ever since
his Kingdom has reigned over Nations; for then he begun to exalt himself, and
it is sixteen hundred years since; all which time Antichrist that has had the
Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly a Ravener, and has ruled and reigned; and this
we saw and perceived, in the very time of our birth and bringing forth; and we
behold Nations as a Wilderness untilled, and men's Hearts as the fallow Ground
unbroken up, and not plowed nor sown with the good Seed of Gods Kingdom; so
that we saw all states and orders of men corrupted and degenerated from what
they ought to be, and from what God had once ordained them: As for the Ministry
first, we looking upon it with a single eye, in the Light of the Spirit of God
which had Anointed us, we behold it clearly (which formerly we had been
stumbling at, and much doubting of, that it was not the perfect Ministry of
Christ, for many years before) not to be of Christ nor sent of him, nor having
the Commission power and Authority of Christ, as his Ministry had in the days
of the true Churches; but in all things, as in Call, practice, maintenance, and
in every thing else in fruits and effects, we found it disagree, and be wholly
contrary to the true Ministry of Christ in the days of the Apostles, and
likewise we truly beheld it to be in Call, practice, and Maintenance, and all
things the very same in fruits and effects; with the false Ministry and false
Prophets, and false Apostles, and Deceivers of old; and this I do testify, and
am able to prove in the Spirit and Authority of the Lord, that the public
Ministry, as now it stands generally, is wholly degenerated from what the true
Ministry of Christ once was, and differs, and is contrary in all things to what
Christ's Ministers were, and agrees, and is equal in all things with what the
false Prophets and Deceivers were thoughout all Ages; and this I charge upon
it, in the face and view of all men to whom this may come; for this we saw
concerning it in the beginning, and our first assurance. And as for other
Places, and Orders of men, and Callings, we saw them also corrupted, and
degenerated, and evil and iniquity abounding among all sorts of people; and
blindness and darkness covered the face of the Earth, and of the World; and all
people were in their Transgressions, and making void the Law of God; and that
it was time for the Lord to work, and to arise to ease himself of his
Adversaries: and as for all Churches (so called) and Professions, and
Gatherings of people, we beheld you as all in the Apostasy, and degeneration
from the true Church, not being gathered by the Spirit of the Lord, nor
anointed thereby, as the true Members of Christ ever were, but to be in a Form,
and in Forms of Righteousness, without the Power; and in Immitations, without
Life and perfect Knowledge; so that all the Practices of Religion we beheld
without Power and Life, though some had a sincerity in them, and a zeal, and a
desire toward the Lord, yet all people erred in Judgment, and none were guided
in Judgment by the Eternal Spirit; and because of the error in Judgment, that
made their zeal blind, and their performances of Righteousness not accepted,
though acted in some sincerity and zeal, because they were not guided in
Practice, and led in Judgment by the Spirit of the Lord, which only leads into
all Truth; and none are in the Truth, but who are led thereby: so that we
behold all Profession, but as Coverings with Figg-leaves, while the nature of
Transgression stood uncondemned, and not crucified: and then we saw not only
the Performance and Practice in Church state, and in religious Orders were
corrupted, but also Government, and Magistracy, and all things in civil state
were not aright in the sight of the Lord, nor as the Lord required, neither as
he had ordained in the beginning; for Government we know, as ordained of God,
is to punish, and limit, and terrify all Evildoers, and to preserve and
defend all that do well; and that men's Consciences are to be left free, and to
be ruled by the Lord alone, and guided by his Spirit; and that outward Power,
and civil Magistrates and Laws (so called) ought not to be Lord or Ruler in
men's Consciences, nor over them; but we beheld how Unrighteousness and
Iniquity, and Sin and Wickedness was strengthened and encouraged in the
Government, and by such as were in Authority; and how the Fear of God, and the
exercise of a good Conscience was abused, so that it was turned backward from
what it ought to be; them that did well were punished, and limited as
Trausgressors, and the Evildoers were set free, and not made afraid; so that
we could truly cry, Truth was fallen in the Street, and Justice and true Judgment
turned backward, and Equity had no place to enter, and the Innocent were
devoured through want of true and just Judgment, and the Needy were spoiled,
and made a prey, and thus it was framed; for no sooner had we opened our
Mouths, but the Magistrates began to put us in Prison, and execute great
injustice upon us, and became Oppressors of the Innocent, and laid grievous
unjust burdens upon us; grievous to be born, and true justice and judgment was
neglected, and wrong judgment brought forth, and good Government abused, and
men in Authority not ruled by the Lord, neither ruling for the Lord among men;
and thus it came to pass upon us, through the corruption and Degeneration in
Government and Magistrates, which we saw to be, as it was fulfilled by them, to
wit, not as the Lord required, nor as he in the beginning ordained it, but
quite the contrary; and this we saw in the beginning, when the Spirit of the
Lord was poured down upon us, and power from on high was revealed to declare
against all the Abominations of the Earth, and to make War against all
Corruption, in all Orders, and Places, and Men.

Then being prepared of the Lord, and having received Power from on high, we
went forth as commanded of the Lord, leaving all Relations and all things of
the World behind us, that we might fufill the work of the Lord into which he
called us, and with Flesh and Blood, nor any Creature, we consulted not, nor
took counsel of men, but of the Lord alone, who lifted up our heads above the
World, and all fears and doubtings, and was with us in Power and Domininion,
over all that which opposed us, which was great and mighty, and gave us power
over it all, and to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and
this is the Saints honor; and the Word of the Lord we sounded, and did not
spare, and caused the Deaf to hear, the Blind to see, and the heart that was
hardened to be awakened; and the Dread of the Lord went before us, and behind
us, and teror took hold upon our Enemies; And first of all our Mouths were
opened, and our spirit filled with indignation against the Priests and
Teachers, and with them, and against them first we began to war, as being the
Causers of the people to err, and the Blind-leaders, that carried the Blind
into the Ditch, and against them, as the Fountain of all wickedness abounding
in the Nations, and as being the issue of Profaneness; for from them has
Profaneness gone forth in all Nations, and against them we cried aloud, as being
redeemed from their Mouths, who had made a prey upon us, as they do upon all
that follow their ways; and in Steeple Houses we did visit them often, and in
Markets and other Places, as the Lord moved, and made way for us, showing unto
all them, and all their people, that they were not Lawful Ministers of Christ,
sent of him, but were Deceivers and Antichrists, and such whom the Lord never
sent; and we spared not publicly, and at all seasons to utter forth the
Judgments of the Lord against them and their ways, and against their Churches,
and Worships, and Practices, as not being of God, nor commanded by him, by
which they deceived the World; and this was our first work which we entered
upon, to thresh down the Deceivers, and lay them open, that all people might
see their shame, and come to turn from them, and receive the Knowledge of the
Truth, that they might be saved; and this we did with no small Opposition nor
danger, yea oftentimes we were in danger of our lives, through bearing,
abusing, Punishing, Haling, casting over Walls, striking with Staves, and
Cudgels, and Knocking down to the Ground, besides Reproaching, Scorning,
Revilings, and Houtings at, and Scoffings, and Slanderings, and all abuses that
could be thought or acted by evil hands and Tongues, and often carried before
Magistrates, with grievous Threats, and sometimes put in the Stocks, and
Whipped, and often Imprisoned, and many hard Dealings against us, the worst of
Tongues or hands could execute, sparing Life; of this all the North-countries
may witness; and all these things are sustained and suffered from people and
Rulers, because of our faithfulness to the Lord, and for declaring against the
false Deceivers; for nothing save only the Hand of the Lord, and his Power
could have preserved us, and carried us through all this; neither for any
reward outward whatsoever, or advantage to our selves, would we have exposed
our selves to that sufferings and violence, and dangers, which befell us daily;
but the Lord was our exceeding great reward through all these things, and kept
us in the Hollow of his Hand, and under the Shadow of his Wings, and gave us
Dominion in Spirit over all our Enemies, and subdued them before us; and though
Rulers and People were combined against us, and executed their injustice and
violence upon us, yet the Lord made us to Prosper, and grow exceedingly in
Strength, Wisdom and Number, and the hearts of the people inclined unto us, and
the Witness of God in many stired for us, for to that in all Consciences in our
words and sufferings, and ways, we did commend our selves to be known and
approved.

And in the beginning we were but few in number, only a few that thus were
carried on and dealt withal, and that had received the Power from on high in
such a measure, and for such a work; and no sooner did the Lord appear to us,
and with us, but the Devil and his power rose up against us to destroy us, and
it wrought in Rulers, Priests, and People, and all the ways and means invented
by the Devil that could be executed by his Servants were brought sorth, to
quench the work of the Lord, and to stop our passage in what we were called to;
did ye but perfectly know, as we perfectly found the craftiness, and policy,
and wickedness of the Devil, how to overcome this new born Babe, and how to
root out forever this Plant, that was newly sprung sorth, it would make you
admire and wonder with admiration; all the Priests, and Rules were in an
uproar; the Priests they petitioned to the Magistrates, and run up and down
from one Sessions and Judicatory to another, and took wicked Oaths, and
slandered the Just with Lies and Reproaches, on purpose to incense all people
against us, and the Magistrates gave forth Warrants for the apprehending of
some, and made their orders to break our Meetings, and that we should not meet
in the Night season; and such men might not pass abroad; and such stir and
Opposition was made against us, it can hardly be expressed or declared; there
were uproars in Steeple Houses, and uproars in Markets, and often haling before
Magistrates, and abused, and threatened, and slandred, and all manner of evil
done, and spoken against us, and great injustice, cruelty and Oppression acted
against us, where ever we came, and all through the means of the Priests, who
spared not to enact and conceive Mischief against us, and sought daily to the
Magistrates for Persecution, preaching in their Pulpits, and praying against
us, and setting days apart to seek their God against us, crying without ceasing
in public and private, Heresy, Heresy, Error and Blasphemy; and that we were
Deceivers, Witches, and Seducers, and such like, the worst they could say and
imagine to stir up the hearts of people against us, and running often to the
Assize, and Sessions and Courts to complain, and inform upon false Oaths
against us, and through them were the whole Countries in a Rage and Madness,
Rulers and People often Imprisoning, and abusing, and resisting us with
Violence; banishing us out of Towns, and putting of us out of our Inns; and
often threatening, To burn the Houses over our Heads; the whole Company of Rude
People in a Town often gathering, and besetting a House or Inn, about where we
were entered to lodge in our Travels: We were often exposed to difficult and
hard Travels and Journeys, giving our selves to the Cross, to take it up
against all Earthly; often drinking Water, and lying in Straw in Barnes after a
hard days Journey; and yet for all these things the Power and Presence of the
Lord was with us, and we were carried on with much Boldness and Faithfulness,
in Courage, and without Fear or Doubtings, through the often hazard of our
lives many ways, in Uproars by evil men, and in Markets, and Steeple Houses,
and also in Ttavels by Robbers, and every way were we exposed to Dangers and
Perils; but through all, and over all were we carried, and are preserved to
this day.

And after this manner it came to pass concerning us, and much more might be
said; but this is in short declared, how we were entreated, and dealt withal by
Priests, Rulers and People, through all the Northern Counties of England, in
our first going forth; through which Counties we first journeyed out of
Westmoreland through Cumberland, Northumberland, and into some parts of
Scotland, and Durham, Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, etc. and in all these
Counties much Opposition we had, and exceeding Sufferings, and cruel Dealings
from men of all sorts; every Goal may witness in every County, how any of them
seldom were without some of us, or our Friends imprisoned in them this six
Years, and scarce one Steeple-house or Market in all these Counties, but may
witness what Beatings, what Bruisings, Strikings, and Halings, Abusings, and
Perils we have suffered and sustained: and not one Priest in all those Counties
can clear himself from Hatred and Malice, and from envying of us, and doing
Mischief in Words, and Works, or Thoughts, or Desires against us; nor scarce
one Justice, nor any Officer of the Peace, can be excused in all them Counties,
from plotting and acting Injustice upon us, and threatening and cnacting Cruelty
against us. And I call Heaven and Earth to record, and the Light in every man's
Conscience, and do appeal to that in all sorts and places of people, That by
all sorts of people we suffered Evil, and unjust Works, and Actions, and Words
from them; and let the Witness of God in all men's Consciences, in all the
North, give Testimony what Dealings and Cruelty we suffered, and how we have
been dealt withal, and also of our Patience; and Innocence under all what they
have done to us.

But notwithstanding, all what was acted against us, and spoken, many hundreds
of the Honest and Sober People owned us, and also many Rude and Ungodly Persons
were converted to the Truth; I say many hundreds in all these Counties in two
years time, were brought to the knowledge of the Lord, and to own us, all which
time we labored, and traveled in Patience, giving up our selves to live or to
die, and to all manner of Sufferings and Reproaches, and hard Trials, that we
might fulfill faithfully what we were called unto; Sufferings without, from open
Enemies, and from our own Kindred and Relations, and Sufferings within for the
Seeds sake; and we are well acquainted with griefs, yet in all our Trials and
Afflictions, the Lord never forsook us, but his Wisdom, Love, and Life, and
Presence increased in us, and with us.

Then in the Year 1654, as moved of the Lord, we spread our selves Southward,
and entered into these South Parts, and came the first of us into this City of
London, in the fifth month that year, and labored in the Work of the Gospel,
in continual Sufferings, and Oppressions diverse ways, and were oppressed and
gainsaid by the wise Men, and by the Learned, and had in reproach and contempt
by all the High and Lofty and Proud Professors; and we were set at naught, and
rejected by the fat Beasts of the South; and it is well known to thousands in
this City and South-Country, what opposition we have had from all sorts of
People; opposed in our own Meetings, and scorned, and slandered by envious and
reproachful Tongues; publicly and privately encountered withal by the Wisest
of the City and Country; challenged, and invited, and engaged to Disputes by
the high Priests and Church Members (so called) and written against, and
printed against by the chiefest of men, accounted wise and religious; which of
any Sect? and who of all the wisest in profession, and the most zealous in
practices of Religion (so called) have not at sometime or other beset us, and
encountered with us in high Disputes and Controversies, opposing of us to our
Faces, and gainsaying of our Doctrines, and Practices, and denying of us, and
resisting of us wholly, and crying against us to be Deceivers, Deluders, and
Heretics, and Blasphemers, and such like; and that our Doctrines were
deceivable, and error, and factious, and what not; and that our Practices were
destructive to Men, Laws, and Government: these things in the worst nature have
been spoken against us without ceasing, by the wisest and men of greatest Parts
and most religious (falsely so accounted) for this certain years in the South,
as well as in the North; besides, what loss have we sustained other ways in
the South, by Beatings, and Strikings, and Abuses, and Slanders, and false
Reproaches, and haling before Magistrates, and Imprisoning; and all the like
dealing from Priests, Rulers and People, as we did in the North: yea, the same
hard dealing and cruelty from all sorts of people we have suffered, and do
daily, as we did in the North; insomuch we are now accustomed to the Yoke, and
well acquainted with Sorrow and Griefs from all sorts of people; and were not
the Lord on our side our Enemies would swallow us up quick, and we had been
long since devoured by the Teeth of the Ungodly: so that I may call to witness
all the Goals and Prisons in the South, as in the North, and all the
Magistrates and Judges, and Rulers, and all Officers of the Law, what
sufferings we have sustained; and what cruel and hard dealing we have
undergone, and what injustice, and unequal and false Judgment has been
executed upon us in these five years time; which of the Goals may appear free,
where some of us have not suffered the loss of our Liberties unjustly? and who
of any justice of the Peace, or any other Officer, from the Judge to the
Constable, that can clear themselves from guilt in this matter, and that they
have not had a hand in our unjust sufferings? and to the Witness of God, in all
people of all Sorts, through this whole Nation, and some other, I do appeal
concerning this matter, how we have been dealt withal, and what we have
sustained in our persons, and in our names, and how many Acts and Words of
Cruelty and Injustice we have born and suffered, and these Priests have been as
the Fountain and Cause of all this, and the foremost in all this Iniquity and
Injustice by all what they could do to incense the Rulers and people against
us, by Preaching, and Praying, and Writing, and Printing, for the space of this
seven years; yet notwithstanding all this, the Mighty Power and Presence of the
Lord has been with us, and perserved us from Dangers great and many, and
carried us through Trials and Perplexities, and Sufferings, and not only so,
but he has increased us in number; so that Thousands and Ten Thousands have
and may own us, and the Truth which we give witness of, and live therein? for
the eyes of all people are beginning to be opened, and the deaf Ear is
unstopped, and the Way of Life Eternal is made manisest, and the Lord is
gathering his Flock, which has been scattered in the cloudy and dark day,
whilst these false Idle-Shepherds, (these Priests and Teachers I mean) have
fed themselves with the Fat, and clothed themselves with the Wool, and laid
down in slumber, and not gathered the Flock, nor fed them, but scattered them,
and driven them away; and with Force and with Cruelty have they ruled over the
Heritage of the Lord; woe, woe, unto these Shepherds, says the Lord God, they
shall be confounded and put to shame perpetually, and they shall be broken down
and never builded any more, and the Lord will pluck them up by the roots, and
they shall never again be planted.

And besides all their Petitioning the Magistrates against us, and preaching
and praying against us, and all the evil and wickedness in Work, Word and
Desire, brought forth against us from time to time; yet (here sober Reader)
thou have a Catalogue, and whole number of Books printed and written against
us, and abundance of their Doctrines uttered against us, and in opposition to
us, gathered up in this Volum in a sum, with our Answers to them; and if thy
heart and mind be single, thou may hereby understand, in measure, the
difference in Doctrine between them and us, and compare each of them with the
Scriptures, and see whether their Doctrines and Principles laid down as the
Subject of their Books, or our Doctrines and Principles laid down in answer to
theirs, be according, and agree with the Scriptures; and if thou be impartial
in this business, and single in this search and judgment, I doubt not but thou will in a great measure satisfy thy self, and be resolved concerning their
Priests, and Professors of England, and us who are called Quakers; and then
when thou thus have done, own and deny whether them or us, as the Lord shall
persuade thee; for thou may fully perceive we differ in Doctrines, and
Principles; and the one thou must justify, and the other thou must condemn, as
being one clean contrary to the other in our Principles: and I wish also, thou
would measure us, and compare us in Lives and Conversations, and truly judge
whom of us, whether they, or we do the more follow Christ and his Apostles in
Practice and Conversation; and in all things lay us and them to the Line of
true Judgment, and with an upright heart, judge accordingly; for know this,
there is not any Principle we hold, nor any Work which we practice in our
Religion and Worship, but we are willing, and fully desire we might be brought
to the Bar of true Justice together, and in every Particular of Principles and
Practices examined and tried to the full, and each of us judged in Truth and
Equity, whether it be they or us that are of the true Religion, and true Faith,
and true Worship of God that the Apostles were in, and which of us it is that
are in a wrong Way, and in a false Religion, and false Faith and Worship; and
in this we will join Issue with them, in the sight of the whole Nation, if they
will come forth to trial; if what already is brought forth by them against us,
and by us against them, for this seven Years in Disputes, and in Printing, and
otherwise, be not sufficient for all People to try us in, and judge us by,
whether they, or we be in the right; and whether in the wrong. And now to all
People in the Nation, I do appeal to that of God in all their Consciences, to
judge between the Priests and Professors, and all the Sects, and us; ye have
heard their Doctrines, and ye have heard something of ours; ye have seen their
Conversation, and ye have seen something of ours; ye have heard them long, and
something of us ye have heard for a little season; and now give your Evidence:
is it not with them as we have said? are not your Priests in the Steps of the
false Prophets and of the Deceivers? and do not they seek for their Gain from
their Quarter, as they did that Isaiah cried against? do not they preach for
Hire and divine for Money, as they did which Micah cried against? are not they
such by whom you have not been profited, as Jeremiah cried against? let that of
God in you answer to these things: And are they not Proud Men, and Covetous
Men, and Envious Men, and Heady High-minded Men, and given to filthy Lucre? And
are they not such as through Covetousness make Merchandise of Souls, and that
by Good Words and Fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple, such as Paul
and Peter declare against? And are they not such as the true Prophets, Christ,
and his Apostles cried against? And do they not bring forth the same Fruits, as
did the false Prophets and false Apostles? I leave it to your Consciences to be
the Judge: Compare them, and lay them to the Line of True Judgment, if you shut
not your eyes, you may see it is thus; and have we charged them falsely, or have
not we spoken the truth concerning them? we have said they are false Ministers
and Deceivers, and not true Ministers of Christ; and is it not so? let the
Light in your Consciences answer; we have said they have run, and never were
sent, and that they have not profited the people at all; and is it not so? to
the Witness of God in you I do appeal, and let that justify that we have
spoken nothing but the truth; examine and try in all things that we have
charged them with: And are they not guilty in all things that we have charged
upon them? let the Witness of God in you testify to this: And what do you
judge of them, are they not of that stock which Christ said should come, and
should be Wolves in Sheep's Clothing, and should deceive many, and which John
saw were come in his days, and which the World went after, and the whole World
run after them; are not they in the nature of Wolves, devouring and tearing the
Lambs of Christ? and do they not tear People by causing their Bodies to be
imprisoned, and their Goods to be spoiled? and do they not deceive many? and
yet they have the Sheep's Clothing, the Saints words, and their practices, but
inwardly are they not ravening? and does not the World go after them? and has
not the World run after them for many Ages? and is it not thus with them? And
have they received the gift of the holy Ghost, or are they not made Ministers
by the will of man, and not by the will of God? do they not differ, and are
contrary in Call, in Practice, in Maintenance, and in Fruits and Effects to the
true Ministers and true Apostles? and do they not agree, and are they not
according to the false Prophets, and false Ministers, and Deceivers in their
Call, Practice, Maintenance, Fruits and Effects? search the Scriptures, and lay
them to that line, and then let the witness in your Consciences judge and
answer: and do not they prepare War against such as do not put into their
mouths? and do not they feed with the Fat, and cloth with the Wool? do not
they oppress the Nation, and the Creation? and are not they such whose Call,
and Practices, and Maintenance, and whole Ministry has a dependence upon
Popery? and does it not all savor of Popery, and in the main and Principal
parts thereof, were ordained by the Pope? this may be fully made manifest: And
are not all Professors, and Sect of people such as have the form, but are
without the Power of Godliness? are not people still Covetous, and
Earthly-minded, and given to the World, and proud, and vain, even such as
profess Religion, and to be a separated people? are not Professors as covetous,
and proud, as such as do not profess? and are not they given to the World? and
does it not show that they are unchanged, nor translated, but death Reigns
among them? and is it not manifest, that they have taken up the form of the
Apostles, and Christ's words and Practices, and are without the life, and not
guided by the Spirit of Christ and the Apostles in their Praying and Preaching?
and are not your souls lean and starved? to the Witness of God in you all I
speak, which may testify that many people have a show of Religion without
Life; and therefore have not we spoken the truth of them, in what we have said?
in the Day of Judgment you shall answer this.

And as concerning the Quakers, what do you say of them? you have seen their
Conversation; few Towns, but some of them have been, and are amongst you: Do
not they fear God? and do not they walk justly and truly among their
Neighbors, and speak the truth, and do the Truth in all things; doing unto all
no otherwise then they would be done unto? and are they not Meek, and Humble,
and Sober? and do not they take much Wrong, rather then give Wrong to any? and
are they not such as delight in the Ways of the Lord? and do not they deny the
World, and its Pleasures, and forsake all Iniquity more then your selves? and
do not they take up the daily Cross of Christ, to all its ways and earthly
glories? and do not they Preach in the Power of God, and reach to your
Consciences, when you hear them? and does not the Light in you answer that they
speak the Truth? and is not their Call, and Practice, and Maintenance the same
as was the Apostles and faithful Ministers? compare them with the Scripture,
and then judge in your Consciences: and do not they suffer many hard and cruel
things, even all manner of evil spoken and done against them falsely for the
Name of Christ? Are you ignorant of their great Sufferings through this Nation?
and what do you think? is their suffering for Evil-doing, or is it not for
Righteousness sake? What Harm do they do to any, by Work or Word? Why are they
reproached, and mocked, and scorned? and why are they put in Prisons, and
whipped, and thus sorely abused? is it for any Evil-doing, or is it not because
they are the Servants of the Lord? Compare their Fruits with the Priests
fruits, their Conversation with the Priests conversation, and see whether be
liker the Apostles; and these things I leave to you that you may come to
consider and judge justly of all things, for the Lord God is risen; and his
Light in Peoples Consciences is shining forth, and it shall answer to what I
say, in this World, or in the day of Judgment, when we, and all Mankind shall
appear and come sorth to trial, and every man's work shall be tried, and all
shall receive according to their deeds.

And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the World; if that after the
reading of this Book any be unsatisfied still in this matter, And if any,
especially of the Heads and Rulers have doubts or Jealousies raised in them,
concerning us, and the Priests, and that they further would be satisfied and
resolved; for that end let any Wisemen propound for full satisfaction of all
sorts of People, that we (with the consent of the chief in Authority that have
power in this Nation who may preserve peace and safety among people, and
thereby to stop all Jealousies) may freely and cheerfully, Four, Ten, Twenty,
Thirty, more or fewer of us, give as many of the wisest and ablest of the
Priests and Professors a meeting for dispute, at any place in England, at what
place, time, and for what continuance, as they shall ascribe and consent unto,
and to dispute and controvert betwixt us and them, any such thing, and every
such particular, as shall or may be objected by any of the Heads and Rulers, or
other Grave Understanding Men, wherein they are doubtful betwixt us, and would
thereof be satisfied, that by such Dispute and opening of such causes,
objected, full, and real, and toal, satisfaction may be given to the whole
Nation, and every particular man and member therein.

Otherwise, Let the Priests or Professors, or any of them, object what they can
against us, in our Principles, Profession, Faith, and Practice, and our whole
Religion; And if they shall affirm and allege any one or more things against
us, that any Principle we hold, or Practice we profess in any part throughout
all our Religion, are false Principles, and false Practices, and not according
to Truth, nor the Scriptures, but shall affirm that our Religion is not the
true Religion, nor we of the true Church of Christ, and they shall have free
liberty, to give their best proof and reason for what they affirm, and allege;
yet by the Strength of Christ, and in the power and authority of God, and
according to the Scriptures we shall confute all their Proofs and strongest
Reasons; and on the contrary we shall join our Principles, Doctrines, and
Practices, and all our Religion, and every part and particular thereof, to be
the very truth, and agreeing with the Scriptures, and according to that shall
maintain by lawful Arguments, and plea, that our Religion and Worship, and all
that we profess and Practice is according to the mind of the Lord, and
justified of him, and that whatsoever is and may be spoken against us, upon
that account, is utterly false, and to be condemned, and upon this we will
engage with them, and with any of our Enemes, of what Sect and Profession
soever, to the intent only that Truth may be manifest and embraced, and Deceit
and Error discovered and denied.

And also, upon such an Engagement we should agree to have the liberty, freely,
and soberly to object against the Priests, concerning their Ministry, their
Call, their Practice, their Maintenance, and their Fruits and Effects, and
concerning their Church, and Principles, and Worship, and whole Religion, and
shall hear patiently all that can be said in defense thereof by any or all of
them, and shall prove by the Spirit of the Lord, and according to the
Scriptures, that their ministry is not the true Ministry of Christ, nor they
true and lawful Ministers of the Gospel, but shall manifest by evident
Arguments, that their Call, Practice, Maintenance, Fruits and Effects, are not
according, nor agreeing, but contrary and differing, to what the true Ministry
was, and its Call, Practice, Maintenance, Fruits and Effects were in the true
Apostles, and among the true Churches; and furthermore by the Grace of God we
shall prove their Church, their Worship, and their whole Religion, in all parts
thereof, to be degenerated from what the true Church was, and the true Worship,
and true Religion, in the days of the Apostles, and true Churches of old; and
these things shall we make manifest by faithful and sound Arguments, according
to the Scriptures, that all the Earth may know, and all people perceive who is
in the Truth, and of the true Worship and Religion, and who are in the
contrary; and whether the Priests, and that which they profess and practice for
Religion; or the Quakers, and that which they profess and practice for
Religion; be of God, and according to him, and whether are contrary; that the
end of this long Travel, and War, and controversy may be desided and justly
ended between, us, and all people may be resolved, and satisfied concerning us,
and them that do oppose us.

And let all the Priests and Professors lay aside and give over their Houses of
Correction, and imprisoning people, and whipping of them, and stocking of us,
and dealing in this manner of violence and cruelty, as for years bypast they
have done in defense of their Religion, and resisting of ours; and let them lay
aside their carnal Weapons, and fighting against our persons, and imprisoning
of us about our Religion; and let them come forth in sound Arguments, the best
they have, and let us see what spiritual Weapons they have to resist us, and
defend themselves; and let us try, whether their spiritual Weapons or ours be
the strongest, and the most powerful, and mighty; and let theirs that are so,
prevail against the other, be it ours, or theirs; and this is the way to try
the truth, and to make all things manifest, and to deside and end all the whole
controversies between us and them, which has been great this many years; and
let the Truth be set up and exalted, where ever it is, and all Deceit thrown
down to the Ground; and let us war with the Weapons of the Spirit, against
Error and false Religion, one in the other; but lets not hurt Creatures, nor
imprison Persons, nor stock and whip Creatures, and make them to suffer; but
let us thresh Deceit, and whip and beat that, and all false Opinions; let us
throw them down, where they are found, whether in them or in us; and let us
fight with the Weapons of the Spirit, that are spiritual; and let them fight no
longer with such cruel carnal Weapons; and then let such as get the victory,
and overcome, appear to be in the truth of the Church; and such as falls, and
is overcome, be manifest to be in the Error, and of the false Church and
Religion; and let us love one another persons, and let them act no otherwise
toward our persons, then we do upon theirs, and toward them; and let them
take the liberty to deal with us, and our persons, as we deal with them, and
their persons, and no otherwise.

And let such, whether them or us, that cannot prove our selves to be the true
Church of Christ, nor of the true Worship, and true Religion, nor in the truth,
but is found to be in the Error, and out of the Truth; let such deny their
Worship and Church, and renounce all their Religion, and confess to all the
World, under their hands, that they are, and have been deceived, and for ever
hereafter stop their Mouths, and never profess nor practice any more what they
have done in such Religion; And freely upon these Issues and Conditions we will
join trial with them; let them appoint time, place, and profer terms at their
own pleasure, and then to all the World it shall be manifest, and to all people
discovered, whether we have not good ground, and sufficient reason to war
against these Priests; and it may perfectly appear that what we have said and
written against them these diverse years, have been upon a good foundation, and
we have had sufficient cause to speak and write against them, as we have done;
and none thenceforth shall have cause to say, or doubt, that what we have
spoken and written against them has been out of malice or envy, and without
cause and good reason; but on the contrary all shall know the Ground of Quarrel
is sufficient and full of equity on our part.

And upon these or any equal terms and conditions, would we, and are we
willing to engage with these Priests, and all, or any one of these Sects, in a
lawful Trial, in Disputes, or Writings, for the Trial and searching out of the
Truth, and the true Religion; And were it not equal and reasonable, that we had
the same liberty among all these Priests, and in their Church and Assemblies
freely to declare our minds, and to let forth our selves in what we hold and
profess, without being violently haled, and beat, and whipped, and sent to
Prison, as we have been this many years? which liberty we do freely grant and
allow among us to all, to query, or declare what is upon them, without such
violent dealing, or whipping, or sending them to Prisons, and Houses of
Correction; and the same, and no other do we desire of others in this
particular of freedom to declare the Truth, and what we hold, then what we do
and would allow to others; and that no Weapon be used by them against us, nor
dealing toward us, but the Weapons of the Spirit, the best they have, or can
bring forth against us; and let them let Creatures alone, and not hurt, nor do
violence to them, and no other Weapons shall we use against them, nor deal with
them by any other thing, but the Weapons of the Spirit of God which are
powerful, and will bring down strong Holds; and as for Creatures, we shall not
hurt, nor do violence, nor imprison them; and whose Weapons are the strongest,
let such overcome.

And such as are overcome, is not the true Church; for the true Church of
Christ which is builded upon the Rock, the Gates of Hell cannot prevail
against; and who do overcome, with such let it be manifest, that God of a truth
is with them; and let them all cease to defend their Church, and Ministry, and
Religion with Prisons, and Whips, and Houses of Correction; for by such things
was never the true Church, Ministry, and Religion defended; but only the Power
and Authority of God preserved them, and resisted all their Enemies; and so it
is at this day: and let all cease to cry Deceivers, and being afraid to be
deceived; for if they be the true Church, all, or any of these Sects and
Professions of Religions; then if we be Deceivers, and come among them, they
cannot be deceived, if they be in the Election; for no Deceivers, nor the Gates
of Hell cannot prevail against the true Church of Christ, nor against them that
are elect, which the Devil has nothing in: And if we be the true Church of
Christ, and in the Election; then if all the Deceivers upon Earth come among
us, they cannot prevail against us, nor deceive us; for the Elect cannot be
deceived; and upon these terms we may engage with any people and Sect upon
Earth: Therefore come to this, and join with us; take you the Liberty to
declare in soberness what you own and prosess, and you shall not be persecuted,
nor your Bodies, nor Persons harmed by violence; and let us have that liberty
to declare in Meekness and Soberness, and in Gods Authority amongst you what we
hold and profess, and let us not be persecuted, and dealt violently withal; and
then let it appear whether we or our Enemies have a greater Testimony, and more
powerful in the hearts of people. And were not this a way full of equity, for
the trial of all things? but doing contrary, as you have done these many years
against us, by Violence, and Whipping, and Persecuting, it shows you have not
the spiritual Weapons, nor the Authority of God with you, nor among you; and
that is the cause of running to Magistrates, and putting in Goals, and
Whippings, and all Violence, because the Authority of God's Spirit is wanting
amongst you, which all the false Sects, and false Churches, since the days of
the Apostles, have wanted to defend themselves, and resist their Enemies; and
so all Sects have been fighting one with another, and killing Persons and
Creatures, and desending themselves by Prisons, and Inquisitions, and
destroying of lives; and all this has been out of the Power of God, and not in
it, but by the power of the Dragon, and of the Beast, who has caused all to
worship, and them that would not, he has power to kill, and has killed them,
by Fires, and Tortures, and cruel Deaths, and all these have lost the spiritual
Weapons, and been without the Power and Spirit of God; And what a Church is
this of yours, which has been to be defended by Goals, and Prisons, and Whips
and Stocks, and violent Dealing? this Church is not the Church of Christ, for
the Power and Spirit of God defends her always, and not Inquisitions, and
Prisons and Whips; these are Cains Weapons, and not the Weapons of the Spirit
of God, whereby his true Church was ever defended; for because Cains sacrifice
was not accepted, therefore he slew his Brother, and persecuted him; and thus
you that are of Cains seed do the same, upon the same Ground, because your
works are rejected and theirs accepted, with whom you deal thus in this violent
way of persecution and wickedness.

And this is the Protestant Church (so called) and her Ministers, with whom I
am now Dealing, which seems to be the true Church, and more then the Church of
Rome; for you Protestant Ministers do deny and cry against the Church of Rome,
as a false Church, and her Ministers to be Deceivers (which in it self is very
true) But yet your hypocrisy in this does appear, and your double-mindedness;
for let me tell you, while you cry against the Church of Rome, as a false
Idolater, and a Persecutor of the true Church, and against her Ministers to be
Deceivers, and contrary to the Apostles; are not your spirits the same, and
your works the same in nature (though not in measure) and in particular, this
work of yours to imprison people, and whip them, and put them in the Stocks,
and beat them, and abuse their Persons and Bodies, who do but speak against you
and your Religion? is not this work of the very same nature as the work of the
Romish Church? she to defend her Church has Inquisitions, and Banishment, and
many cruel Tortures, and with these things her Church she defends, killing and
afflicting of Peoples Bodies, that do oppose her Church and deny their
Religion, and you have Stocks, and Whips, and Houses of Correction, and putting
great Fines and Taskes upon People, and Banishing People out of Towns, and
spoiling their Goods and casting men into Prison, who do oppose your Church,
and deny your Religion, and is not this equal and justly according (in Nature)
to the Persecution that is in the Romish Church? and what difference between
the defense of the Church of Rome and your Church of Protestants? they have
their Inquisitions, and you have your Houses of Correction; they have their
Slavery in the Galleys, and you have Whips, and Stocks; they have their diverse
Torments, and cruel Dealings toward Persons that oppose them, and upon their
Bodies in one manner, and you have your Torments and cruel Dealing toward us
in another manner, though not in the same measure, yet in the same nature; and
what difference between you and them? And herein does the Hypocrisy of the
Protestant Church and their Ministers appear, in that they cry against; and
deny the Church of Rome, and their Persecution, and Cruelty acted against
others, and yet in nature and manner do Practice the very same upon us, as in
England this day is witnessed; And not only in this particular may the Church,
and Ministers of the Protestants be condemned for Hypocrisy, but also in many
other things, even the most of their Practices in their Worship is of the same
nature, and by the same spirit, which the Practices of the Church of Rome is
practiced by and in; and not only so, but it may be truly proved, and made
manifest, that the original and institution of many of your Church-Practices
proceeded from the Church of Rome, and the Church and Pope of Rome did ordain
and institute many of your Practices, and a great part of your worship, which
is performed in the Church, and by the Ministry of the Protestants (so called)
and this in its time and season I may make fully appear, and discover to the
Nations, and I may show in the particulars, what particulars of the worship and
practice in the Protestants Church had their first rice and beginning and
original in the Church of Rome, though they are minced and degressed with
diminishings and addings, according as their imaginations have guided them, yet
still they retain the strongest taste and Savor of the Church of Rome, and had
their rice and original there, though in the performing thereof, they may be
altered and changed in appearance and from, but are perfectly the same in
Ground and Nature, as springing from the Church of Rome, and she the Mother of
the Protestant Church, and of the Practices of the most of her performances in
worship, and this may be proved, as God willing upon oecasion, as the Lord
moves, I may let sorth my mind, and what I know in these things, and may show,
though that the Church of the Protestants have disserted the Church of Rome;
yet their Ministry, its Call, and Ordination, and its Practice, and
Maintenance, has a dependancy upon the Church of Rome, as being the Original
of that which is by them therein practiced, though in some things deviated from
the perfect Form and Practice thereof; and also the whole Worship of all the
Particulars in relation to the Protestant Church, and Ministry, and Worship,
has a dependence upon the Church of Rome, as being the first Original thereof,
and though they cry against her and her Ministers, and have denied her, yet is
she the Mother and Womb in which was bred, and out of whom proceeded the
Protestant Church, Ministry, and Worship, and Practices, and this may be
manifest at full that the Protestant Church, Ministry, and Worship, chiefly
tastes and savoureth of the Church and Worship of Rome, and had their original
out of her: And also further may be showed, that the Protestant Church, and
Worships, and Ministry are not another in nature and being, then the Romish
Church, Ministry, and Worship; but is sprung out thereof, as a Branch out of
the same Root, the Ground being one and the same, though differing in
appearance; for in her beginning and first dissenting from the Romish Church,
she did not deny her in ground and being, as not being at all the Church of
Christ; but only in some particulars dissented always then, and to this day
retaining diverse of their practices in Worship and Church Government, which
does show, that the Protestant Church is not perfectly another, nor her
Ministry, and Government, and Worship another then is the Romish Church; but is
the same in ground and being, only digressed and deviated in particulars; and
this may be fully manifest in season, that the Protestant Church, and Worship,
and Ministry, is of the Romish Church sprung as a branch out of her, not
contrary to her, and against her; and all these things is the Lord discovering
and laying open, that Nations and Peoples may come to behold the Mother of
Harlots, that Mystery of Iniquity, and all her Children, and may see the state
and turning of times, and things, ever since the days of the Apostles, and true
Churches; and how that all these diverse Sects, and all these Churches, falsely
so called, are risen up and sprung out one of another, and coming from one Seed
and Womb; and though diverse in Appearances, and sundry in Practices, and
Professions, yet are they all one in the Ground and Nature, sprung from the
Mother of Harlots, all of them, and being her Children; and she has corrupted
the Earth with her Fornications and Whoredoms, and made Nations and Kingdoms
drunk with her Cup of Idolatry: but the Lord God is risen and will plead with
her, and give her double, and the holy Prophets and Apostles shall rejoice over
her; and this is coming to pass; and this have I seen from the Lord, and
received it from him; and thus it come upon me to write.

THE Waters I have seen dried up,
the Seat of the great Where,
Who with the Fornication Cup
of her enticing power
Has made all Nations drunk thereby,
and the whole Earth defiled
With her gilt Cup of Sorcery,
whom she has long beguiled.
But Peoples many are, and shall,
and Multitudes all may;
And Nations be Converted all
unto another Way:
And Tongues they now confounded be,
and Kindreds they must mourn;
And when thou this shall finished see,
then say her Seat is torn.
For these are all the Waters great,
on whom her Seat has been,
And over whom her rule was great,
like as a stately Queen.
For Ages bypast (its now seen)
She has her Whoredoms played;
And Kingdoms have bewitched been,
And have her power obeyed.
But now its seen, she shall not deceive;
Her Witchcrafts they are known;
And men no more will her believe;
her Misery is shown.
And now the woeful Bed I see,
of Torments great prepared,
Whereon she shortly cast must be;
and Plagues must not be spared.
But woe to her the wrathful Cup
(is filled) she others gave;
She must it now her self drink up,
the same she now must have.
And drink she must and that full deep,
of God's fierce Indignation.
And then shall all her Lovers Weep,
and make great Lamentation.
The City also I have seen,
which once was great and fair,
Destroyed, and soon laid waste has been;
her Merchants did despair,
Who by her got great gain and trade,
to make them rich withal;
And trafficks from far she had;
but now lament they shall.
For Fire in her is kindled bright,
which must her all consume;
And up to Heaven day and night,
ascends up her fume.
And Antichrist (who ravened
from Truth within, the Light)
Was with Sheeps Clothing covered,
and ruled Kings by his might:
Who had laid waste God's Heritage,
and had a Kingdom great;
The Saints against him war did wage,
and Truth gave him defeat.
Behold the Whore's Flesh burnt I Have seen;
her beauty does now fall.
All Harlots Mother she has been;
her Daughters are Whores all.
Behold, the City great and fair,
she is fallen to the ground;
By which Nations enriched were;
in her no profits found.
Behold the Antichrist, once great,
his Kingdom's near laid waste:
The Lord will bring him from his Seat;
the day comes on in haste.
Christ's Kingdom's coming on with speed;
the Lord alone will reign:
He will for aye exalt his Seed
over Antichrist and's Train.
The Woman I have seen return,
the Wilderness did take;
A place where she did greatly mourn;
and rest she there did take.
The springing of her Seed I Have seen;
the Man child now must sway:
(By'm Nations have replenisht been)
for evermore I say.
Then Praises to the Heavenly King,
when come to pass this shall.
Oh then do ye rejoice and sing,
ye Saints and Prophets all:
When God shall pour his Vengeance great,
to cause our Enemies Fall:
Then is the Day of Praises meet
for Saints both great and small.
E. B.

THis Epistle was by E. B. prefixed to a Book of G. Fox's, in Folio, Entitled,
The Great Mystery of the Great Whore unfolded, published in the year 1659.
which, though some of it related to that Book; yet it being E. B's Epistle, and
much of it of a more general Concernment, it was judged meet to be here
inserted, and published with the rest.

FRANCIS HOWGIL's TESTIMONY Concerning the Life, Death, Trials, Travels and
Labors of Edward Borough, That Worthy Prophet of the LORD.
SHall days, or months, or years wear out thy Name, as though thou had had
no being? Oh nay! Shall not thy noble and valiant Acts, and mighty Works which
thou have wrought through the power of him that separated thee from the Womb,
live in Generations to come? Oh yes! the children that are yet unborn, shall
have thee in their Mouths, and thy Works shall testify of thee in Generations,
who yet have not a being, and shall count thee blessed. Did thy Life go out as
the snuff of a Candle? Oh nay! thou have penetrated the hearts of many, and the
memorial of the just shall live for ever, and be had in renown among the
Children of Wisdom for ever; for thou have turned many to righteousness, and
shall shine as a Star of God in the Firmament of God's Power, for ever and
ever; and they that are in that, shall see thee there, and enjoy thee there,
though thou be gone away hence, and can no more be seen in mutability; yet thy
Life, and thy Spirit shall run parallel with Immortality. Oh, Edward Borough!
I cannot but mourn for thee, yet not as one without hope nor Faith, knowing and
having a perfect testimony of thy well-being in my heart, by the Spirit of the
Lord; yet thy absence is great, and years to come shall know the want of thee,
Shall I not lament as David did for a worse man then thee, even for Abner, when
in wrath he perished by the hand of Ioab, without any just cause, though he was
a valiant man? David lamented over Abner, and said, Dyed Abner as a fool dies?
(Oh nay! he was betrayed of his Life) even so have thou been bereaved of thy
life by the hand of the Oppressor, whose Habitations, are full of cruelty. Oh
my soul, come not thou within their secret, for thy blood shall be required at
the hands of them who thirsted after thy life; and it shall cry as Abels, who
was in the Faith; even so were thou, it shall weigh as a ponderous Millstone
upon their Necks, and shall crush them under, and be as a Worm that gnaweth,
and shall not dye: When I think upon thee, I am melted into tears of true
sorrow; and because of the want that the Inheritance of the Lord has of thee,
my substance is even as dissolved: Shall I not say as David said of Saul and
Jonathan, when they were slain in Mount Gilboa, The beauty of Israel is slain
upon the high places: Even so wast thou stified; in nasty Holes, and Prisons,
and many more, who were precious in the Eyes of the Lord: And surely precious
wast thou to me, Oh dear Edward, I am distressed for thee my brother; very
pleasant have thou been to me, and my love to thee was wonderful, passing the
love of Women, Oh thou whose Bow never turned back, neither Sword empty from
the Blood of the Slain, from the slaughter of the Mighty; who made Nations and
Multitudes shake with the Word of Life in thy Mouth, and wast very dreadful to
the Enemies of the Lord; for thou did cut like a Rasor, and yet to the Seed
of God brought forth; thy words dropped like Oil, and thy. Lips as the
Honeycomb. Thou shall be recorded among the Valiants of Israel, who attained
to the first Degree through the Power of the Lord, that wrought mightily in
thee in thy day, and wast worthy of double honor, because of thy Works sake;
thou wast expert to handle thy Weapon, and by thee the Mighty have fallen, and
the Slain of the Lord have been many; many have been pricked to the heart
through the. Power of the Word of Life; and Coals of fire from thy Life came
forth of thy Mouth, that in many a Thicket, and among many Briars and Thorns it
came to be kindled, and did devour much Stubble that cumbered the Ground, and
stained the Earth. Oh how certain a sound did thy Trumpet give! And how great
an Alarm did thou give in thy day, that made the Host of the Uncircumcised
greatly distressed! What man so valiant, though as Goliath of Gath, would not
thy Valor have encountered with, while many despised thy youth! And how have I
seen thee with thy Sling and thy Stone (despised Weapons as to war with) wound
the Mighty! and that which has seemed contemptible to the Dragon's Party, even
as the Jaw Bone of an Ass; with it thou have slain the Philistines Heaps upon
Heaps, as Sampson. Thou have put thy Hand to the Hammer of the Lord, and have
often fastened Nails in the heads of the Lamb's Enemies, as Deborah did to
Sisera; and many a rough Stone have thou polished and squared, and made it fit
for the Building of God; and much knotty Wood have thou hewed in thy day, which
was not fit for the building of God's House, Oh thou Prophet of the Lord; and
shall for ever be recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life, among the Lord's
Worthies, who have followed the Lamb through great Tribulations, as many can
witness for thee from the beginning, and at last has overcome, and found
worthy to stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, the Hill of God, as I have often
seen thee, and thy heart well tuned as a Harp, to praise the Lord, and to sound
forth his great Salvation, which many a time has made glad the hearts of them
that did believe, and strengthened their Faith and Hope. Well, thou art at
rest, and bound up in the Bundle of Life; and I know Tears were wiped away from
thy Eyes, because there was no cause of sorrow in thee; For I know thou
witnessed the old things done away, and there was no curse, but blessings were
poured upon thy head as rain, and peace as a mighty shower, and trouble was far
from thy dwelling, though in the outward man trouble on every side, and has
had a Greater share in that, for the Gospel sake (though a Youth in thy time)
than many besides: But now thou are freed from that, and have obtained a name
through Faith, with the Saints in Light. Well, had thou more to give up then
thy Life for the Name of Jesus in this World? Nay; and to seal thy Testimony
committed unto thee with thy blood, as thou have often said in thy day, which
shall remain as a Crown upon thee for ever and ever. And now thou art freed
from the temptations of him who had the power of death, and art freed from thy
outward Enemies, who hated thee because of the Life that dwelt in thee, and
remains at the right Hand of God, where there is joy and pleasure for
evermore in the everlasting Light, which thou have often testified unto,
according to the Word of Prophecy in thy heart, which was given unto thee by
the Holy Ghost; and art at rest in the perfection thereof, in the beauty of
Holiness; yet thy Life and thy Spirit I feel as present, and have unity with
it, and in it, beyond all created and visible things, which are subject to
mutation and change; and thy Life shall enter into others, to testify unto the
same truth, which is from everlasting to everlasting; for God has raised, and
will raise up children unto Abraham, of them that have been as dead stones,
whose Power is Almighty, great in his people in the midst of their Enemies.

This same Edward Buroughs was born in the Barrony of Kendal, in the County of
Westmoreland, of honest Parents, who had a good report among their Neighbors
for upright and honest dealing among men, who brought up Edward in his Youth in
Learning, and good Education as the Country does afford. He was a very
understanding Boy in his Youth, and his knowledge and understanding did far
exceed his years: He had the Spirit of a man when he was but a child; and I may
say, gray hairs was upon him when he was but a Youth; for he was clothed with
Wisdom in his Infancy; for I had perfect knowledge of him from a Youth: He was
inclinable from his Youth upwards, to Religion, and the best way, always
minding the best things, and the best and nearest way of Worship to the
Scriptures of Truth, and always did accompany the best men, who walked in
godliness and honesty, insomuch I have often admired his discreet carriage, and
his great understanding of the things of God: He was never known to be addicted
to any vice or malignity, or bad behavior, neither followed any evil course of
life from his childhood, but feared the Lord, and walked uprightly according to
the light and knowledge received in all things. In his natural disposition he
was bold and manly, dexterous and servent; and what he took in hand, he did it
with his might; loving, kind and courteous, merciful and flexible, and easy to
be entreated. His whole delight was always among good people; and to be
conferring and reading the Scriptures, and little to mind any sports or
pastimes, which there is an insidency unto in Youth; but his very strength was
bended after God, and was separted (I may say) from his Mother's Womb, and
fitting for the Work's sake, whereunto he after was called.

And when it pleased the Lord to raise up unto us the ancient Horn of Salvation
among us, who were reckoned, in the North Part of England, even as the
Outcasts of Israel, and as men destitute of the great Knowledge, which some
seemed to enjoy; yet there was more Sincerity and true Love amongst us, and
desires after the living powerful Presence of God, then was among many in that
day, who seemed to make a great flourish; who ran into Heaps and Forms, but
left the Cross behind them, and indeed were Strangers to it: God out of his
everlasting Love did appear unto us, according to the desire of our hearts, who
longed after him; when we had turned aside from Hireling-Shepherds Tents, we
found him whom our Souls loved; and God, out of his great Love, and great
Mercy, sent one unto us immediately by his Power, a Man of God, one of Ten
Thousand, to instruct us in the Way of God more perfectly; who laid down the
sure Foundation, and declared the acceptable Year of the Lord; who indeed made
the Mourners to rejoice, and the Heavy-hearted glad, which yet was terrible to
all Hypocrites, and all formal Profession; which Testimony reached unto all our
Consciences, and entered into the in-most part of our Hearts, which drove us to
a narrow search, and to a diligent inquisition concerning our state, which we
came to see through the Light of Christ Jesus, which was testified of, and
found it to be even what it was testified of; and the Lord of Heaven and Earth
we sound to be near at hand; and as we waited upon him in pure Silence, our
Minds out of all things, his Dreadful Power, and Glorious Majesty, and Heavenly
Presence appeared in our Assemblies, when there was no Language, Tongue nor
Speech from any Creature, and the Kingdom of Heaven did gather us, and catch us
all, as in a Net; and his Heavenly Power at one time drew many Hundreds to
Land, that we came to know a place to stand in, and what to wait in; and the
Lord appeared daily to us, to our Astonishment, Amazement, and great
Admiration, insomuch that we often said one unto another, with great joy of
Heart, What, is the Kingdom of God come to be with men? And will he take up his
Tabernacle among the Sons of Men, as He did of old? And what shall we, that
were reckoned as the Out casts of Israel, have this Honor of Glory
communicated amongst us, which were but men of small Parts, and of little
Abilities, in respect of many others, as amongst men. Howbeit, thus it seemed
good unto the Lord, to chose the weak things, and the foolish things of this
World, as to the aspect of men, that no Flesh might glory, that no man because
of his Parts might glory, or because of his strength or wisdom might glory; but
that the Glory which is his, might only be given to him, Unto whom be the Glory
of all his Works forever and ever, Amen.

And from that Day forward our Hearts were knit unto the Lord, and one unto
another, in true and servent Love; not by any External Covenant, or External
Form; but we entered into the Covenant of Life with God, and that was as a
strong Obligation or Bond upon all our spirits, which united us one unto
another; and we met together in the Unity of the Spirit, and of the Bond of
Peace; treading down under our Feet all reasoning, questioning, debating and
contending about Religion, or any part or parts, or practice or practices
thereof, as to any external thing: and we waited at time and times, as God did
grant us Oportunities; and the more we had and could obtain from our necessary
Occasions of this present life, the better we were, and the more we were
confirmed and strengthened in our Hope and Faith; and holy Resolutions were
kindled in our Hearts, as a Fire, which the Life kindled in us, To serve the
Lord while we had a Being; and to make mention of his Name and Power whilst we
did live; and to hold forth that Testimony which was committed to us, in the
sight of Men and Nations, by Doctrine, by Practice, by a holy Conversation; and
mightily did the Word of God grow amongst us; and the desires of many were
after the Name of the Lord. Oh happy Day! Oh blessed Day! the memorial of which
can never pass out of my Mind. And thus the Lord, in short, did form us to be a
People for his Praise in our Generation.

Howbeit, after all this, and much more, which time would fail me to write of
(neither is the purpose of my spirit bent that way at this time) we did come
through very great Tribulations, extreme Distresses, great Perplexity; and
passed out oftentimes hungry, and hard put to it, both within and without; yet
such was our love to the Lord, and such servency in our hearts, That we rather
chosed to dye, and to undergo every Difficulty, than to dishonor or deny the
Name of Christ in the midst of suffering, because of that Taste that we had of
his Goodness and immortal Life revealed in our Hearts; this Young Man, of whom
I am speaking, had his share, though but a Youth at that time, of 16. or 17.
years of age. Because of the I ruth which crossed all the world's ways, his
nearest Relations, even his own Parents, cast him off, as an Alien, and turned
him out from their House, as not to have any Part or Portion therein, as a Son,
nay, not so much as a hired Servant; which this young Man bore very patiently,
without Murmuring or Complaining, having a taste of that then which was better
then all the World; and through conversing with his people, and amongst them,
the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding entered into his Heart, and the Spirit of Knowledge and sound
Judgment came to be seated in his Reins, and the Spirit of Prophecy came upon
him, like as it did upon many more, through the Holy Ghost's Power and
Operation; and he spoke of the wonderful things of God among them that
believed; and was one of the first among us which the Lord opened the Mouth of,
to show forth his Praise, and to speak of the things of his Kingdom to as many
as he met with, who waited for the Consolation of Israel, for the Riches of the
Gentiles, and to as many as desired and hoped after Eternal Life. At last the
Lord signled him out, and commanded him to go forth into Countries, unknown to
him, as he did some more besides, upon whom he laid a necessity to preach the
Gospel freely, without Money, without Price, without Tithes, Augmentations,
Gifts or Rewards, and in that he was as faithful a man, none exeeeding him in
his Generation; for those things were an abhorrency to his heart; and where he
met with any such Hireling Shepherds, and deceitful Workers which had gulled
the Nations, and cheated the people for dishonest Gain, and kept them in
Blindness, the Indignation of the Lord was kindled in his Heart, and the Sword
of the Lord was very Sharp in his Hand; and whomsoever he met with, which
walked after this sort, they were sure to feel the weight of his Weapon, and
the force of his Blow, by which many have been deeply wounded, that they have
grinned like Dogs on him, as greedy Dogs indeed, because of their present Wound
and Blow that he did give them; and though he was but young in years, yet he
was full of fortitude and true valor: The Lord oftentimes, when he exercised
him in such War as this, has filled his Quiver full of polished Shafts, and
made his Bow to abide in strength, and he was as dextrous and as ready handed,
as any that I knew in his day, against the Dragon and his power, against the
Beast and his Followers; and indeed he was very even-handed, and had a special
good Arm, and seldom mist the Mark: God had filled his Mouth with Arguments, so
that he has often made a breach, in the Face of an Host.

And it was my lot (which I cannot but say fell in a good ground) to be his
Companion and Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel, whereunto we were
called for many years together: And oh! when I consider, my heart is broken;
how sweetly we walked together for many Months and Years! in which we had
perfect knowledge of one another hearts, and perfect unity of spirit, not so
much as one cross word, or one hard thought of discontent ever rose (I believe)
in either of our hearts, for ten years together; but our Souls were bound up in
unity and peace, having the frame of our hearts bent after one and the self
same thing, to wit, the propagation of that Truth by which Liberty was
obtained, and Salvation received through Jesus Christ the true Light of the
World, seeing through his Light the whole World to lie in wickedness; a
necessity lay upon this person of whom I am speaking, being constrained by the
Spirit of the Lord, by which he was made an able Minister of the Everlasting
Gospel, to preach Repentance, Conversion, Salvation and Remission of Sins; and
accordingly he went forth in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus, the Savior
of Mankind, and was an able Minister of the glad Tidings of Salvation, in many,
or most parts of this Land; and also he traveled through again and again, the
whole Nation of Ireland; and in some part of Scotland, and some part of
Flanders; and his Ministry was made effectual, through the Almighty Power of
God, in turning many from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to
God; there are many thousands who are living in the Body, and alive in the
Truth, who can in the Spirit of the Lord bear Testimony to the Power and Verity
of his Ministry, in many Countries where he traveled; for he labored much in
diverse places, even in the heat of the day, though he began early in the
morning; and in the beginning of his Travels and Labors, it was his share to
break up rough places, and untilled ground, and to walk amongst many Briars and
Thorns, which scratched, and pricked, and teared; and traveled with some
other, not without great opposition; and he often trod the paths and ways
which had not been occupied in the Truth; and where darkness had the Dominion,
and was as a covering, he brake through as an armed man, not minding the
opposition, but the victory, and the good of all souls; though to my knowledge
his sufferings and trials have not been small, nor his exercise a little, on
the right hand, and on the left; in travels often, oftentimes buffetted,
sometimes knocked down by unreasonable men, who had not Faith; loaded with
Lies, Slanders, Calumnies and Reproaches; often in Weakness, yea in Deaths
often; in Watching, Fastings and Temptations often; in Straits and Necessities;
in Perils among rude Multitudes; in Perils in Idol-Temple; in Perils in Streets
and Markets, where the Lord did move him often to go in the beginning of his
time; besides the exceeding weight of service from Weeks end to Weeks end,
insomuch that he had seldom many Hours of repose; and often suffered by those
spirits who lost their first love, and rose in opposition. He was very diligent
and faithful, true hearted and valiant, and the Yoke at last came to be easy
unto him, though no ease at all in the Body, as to the outward man; for he made
the Work of the Lord his whole business, without taking so much Liberty unto
himself, or about any outward occasion in this World, as to spend one Week to
himself (to my knowledge) these Ten Years: He had ventured himself often, for
the Bodies sake; and a great care I know was in his Heart, that them that he
had ministered unto, and others that had believed in the same Truth, might
thrive and prosper, and might walk as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

He was of a manly Spirit in the things of God; he has engaged himself often
upon the Lords account singly in great Disputes, when there were many Opposers;
he has stood in the Door, and in the Gap, against all his Enemies, for the
worthy Name of God, and taken the whole weight of things upon his own
Shoulders, that others might be eased, though often to the weakening, and
almost destroying of the outward man; yet doing all in love to the Lord, and
for his peoples sake: he did it with Cheerfulness, and it was a Grief to him if
any opportunity was missed of doing good: He was a man of no great Learning in
natural Tongues, which men so much applaud; yet indeed his Heart was full of
matter, and his Tongue was as the Hand of a ready Scribe; and yet he had the
Tongue of the Learned, having had experiment of the Work of the Lord, and being
acquainted with many conditions which God had carried him through, he could
speak a word in season unto all who declared their conditions unto him; or
otherways in his public Ministry he was very plausible and elegant in his
speech, and indeed had the Tongue of a learned Orator to declare himself to the
Understandings and Consciences of all men with whom he conversed, by which many
received great profit, and their Understandings came to be opened; for his
words ministered Grace to the Hearers, and his words were forcible and very
pleasant, as Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

This young Man of whom I am speaking, was one of the first (with some others)
who came to the City of London, where he met with no small opposition both from
Professors of diverse Forms, and also Profane, who heeded no Religion at all;
and the Way of Truth seemed contemptible, and without form or comeliness to
them all; which made the Opposition so great, and the Labor so hard, that
notwithstanding it pleased the Lord to reach unto the Consciences of many, and
many were pricked to the Heart, so that they cried out, what shall we do to be
saved? And God made his Ministry very effectual to the conversion of many in
the City of London, whereby a great change was wrought in the hearts of many,
and many hundreds brought to know the Lord their Teacher, which are as Seals
unto the Word of Life through him unto this day. And many hundreds, I may say
thousands, heard the lively Word of God declared by him, and were convinced of
the Way of Truth, though still remaining in the Disobedience to that of God in
their own hearts unto which he declared; and many have lost their day which
they had of hearing and receiving the things of God; for now he is taken away
which might have been a help unto them while they had time; and all such are
not worthy of him. He continued in this City very much at time and times,
betwixt eight and nine years together, preaching the Word of God, and speaking
of the things of his Kingdom to all that looked after it; and great watching,
travel, and exercise in the Work of the Lord; and his earnest desire was, That
all might have come to know God's Salvation, and the Redemption of their Souls.
And his great diligence was known unto many, that his only rejoicing was in the
prosperity of the Work of the Lord, and the increase of Faith amongst them that
did believe: And his heart was much drawn toward this City, and oftentimes
has he said to me when sufferings did come for the Gospel sake, which he knew
would come, I can freely go to that City, and lay down my Life for a Testimony
of that Truth which I have declared through the Power and Spirit of God: which
in the end indeed came to be his share, and will for ever be his Crown, who
loved not his life unto death for the Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And in the same year 1662, being pressed in his spirit to go visit them who
were begotten unto the Faith of God's Elect at the City of Bristol, and in
diverse other Counties, at diverse Meetings, and diverse particular Friends, he
took his leave of them, saying to very many, That he did not know he should see
their Faces any more; exhorting them all to faithfulness and stedfastness in
that wherein they had found rest for their Souls: And said to some, I am going
up to the City of London again, to lay down my LIFE for the GOSPEL, and suffer
amongst Friends in that Place; as having some sense of his Suffering before.

And a little after his return to the City, at a public Meeting, which the
People of the Lord have kept these many Years, to hear and speak of the things
of God to Edification, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, by certain
Soldiers, under the Command of Richard Brown, then General of the City of
London, he was violently plucked down, and haled away in a barbarous manner,
and carried to the Guard, and so committed to Newgate; not for Evil-Doing, but
for testifying unto the Name of the Lord Jesus, and for the Worship of God; as
though this were become a great Crime, worthy of Bonds, and (at last) Death: He
was had to the Sessions in the Old Bailey, and his Accusers were Witnesses
against him, and them that had abused him violently, their Testimony was
received as good Proof against him: And at last, after two or three Sessions,
he was fined by the Court One Hundred Marks, which at last was reduced to
Twenty Marks, and to lie in Prison while payment; where he continued a pretty
long season, about Eight Months, with Six or Seven Score Prisoners besides,
upon the same Account; many being shut up among the Fellons, in nasty Places;
and for want of Prison-room, the Natures of many were suffocated, and
corrupted; till at last many grew Weak, Sickened and Dyed.

At last this same Young Man grew Weak; and though a special Order from the
King was sent to the then Sheriffs of London, for the Release of him, and the
rest that were left in Prison; yet such was the Emnity of some of the Rulers of
the City, that they did what in them lay to obstruct the Execution of the
Order, that he should not be released: And so Weakness grew upon him daily,
though in much Patience he was carried through all. In the time of his Weakness
he was very fervent in Prayer (and that often, both Day and Night) unto the
Lord, as concerning himself, and also his People; and at several times he spoke
several precious words from the sensible feeling of God's Spirit in his Heart,
and said, I have had the Testimony of the Lord's Love unto me from my Youth,
and my Heart has been given up to do thy Will: And he said, I have preached
the Gospel freely in this City, and have often given up my Life for the
Gospel's sake; and now Lord rip open my Heart, and see if it he not right
before thee. Another time he said, when he had a little ease, There is no
Iniquity lies at my Door; but the Presence of the Lord is with me, and his Life
I feel justify me. Another day afterward he said, Thou have loved me when I
was in the Womb; and I have loved thee from my Cradle, and from my Youth unto
this day, and have served thee faithfully in my Generation: And he spoke to
Friends that were about him, To live in Love and Peace, and love one another.
And at another time he said, The Lord takes the Righteous from the Evil to
come: And he prayed for his Enemies, and for his Persecutors, and said, Lord
forgive Richard Brown; he may be forgiven. And though the Distemper and the
Disease was violently upon him, yet he was preserved sensible. And in the
morning before he departed this life, being sensible of his death, he said, Now
my Soul and Spirit is centred into its own Being with God; and this form of
person must return from whence it was taken: And after a little season he gave
up the Ghost and died a Priso^er, and shall be recorded, and is in the Lambs
Book of Life, as a Martyr for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, for
which only he suffered, and gave up his life, whose death was precious in the
Eyes of the Lord. But now he ever lives with God, and his Work follow him, and
his Labors shall testify of him in Generations to come; and thousands beside
my self can bear witness, his Life and Death was to the praise, honor and
glory of the Grace of God; unto whom be the glory of all his Works for ever,
Amen.

ANd oh thou City of London! who have been a professing City of the Name of
God, and Christianity so many years, must it be said of thee as Christ said of
Jerusalem, that a Prophet cannot perish out of thee: Oh, how many Warnings have
thou had! and how do thou remain in obdurateness and impenitency! Oh, thou
art not worthy of those Heavenly Tidings of Salvation which has been
proclaimed in the midst of thee, these many years, by this faithful Messenger
of God deceased, with many more, who is taken away in judgment unto thee,
because many of thy Inhabitants despised and set at naught that in which the
blessedness of all Nations consists. Oh how is thy Gold become dim! and how
is thy glory stained! How is thy Countenance marred! How is all thy Profession
became dead, and like a withered Tree without Sap! The Symptoms of death are
upon thee; Your Sun is set, your Glory is passed away; Night is coming, and
Darkness is surrounding you, and you shall have enough of Darkness, and your
Paths and Ways shall be filled with it, because you have hated the Light, and
would not have him who is the Light of the World, to rule in your hearts; but
have chused Darkness rather then Light, because your Deeds are evil, and in the
end thou shall be made to see, you have chosen lying Vanities, and have taken
Pleasure in the Flesh, and have forsaken your own Mercies.

Repent, repent (if any can find a place) while it is called to Day, lest you
be shut up in everlasting Darkness, and Truth be hid from your Eyes for ever.
^ake warning, cease from Persecution and afflicting the Lord's People, who
desire to live quietly and peaceably, and to worship God in Truth and
Righteousness, with a pure heart: It is too too much that you have done
already; the suffering and death of many Innocent Righteous Men, who have
suffered these Winters past, will lie as a load upon your City in Summers to
come; Remember what God did to Amaleck, the first of the Nations, and to Moab
when Israel would have passed to their own Land and Country, that God had
promised them, and have eaten their own Bread, and Drank their Water, and have
passed on peaceably; but they rose up and fell upon the Poor, and upon the
Hindmost and Weak; God was Glad to Force his Way, though it proved the ruin of
Amaleck, and the Misery of Moab. We would glad walk on our way to the promised
Land which belongs to the Saints in Light; we would eat our own Bread, and
Drink our Water, and what we needed, and keep our Consciences clear (in our
Generation we must) to that which God has promised; and if we cannot have
away, God will make one for us; and that you that set your selves against the
Lord, in the end shall be sure to know and feel, though we shall never lift up
carnal Weapon, nor draw Sword, neither use Bow nor Spear; for God has taught
us to love our Enemies; and out of these things we are come, and to the end of
Wars, and to be for it; yet God's purpose shall be fulfilled, and he has ways
enough to plead the cause of his people, and he will do it, and woe to all their
Enemies. And do you cry out of Popery because of cruelty and persecution? And
will you be found in the same Footsteps, and in the same nature? Oh! let it
never be said nor thought, that ever the Church of God or true Christians did
Drink the Blood of the Saints, or cast them into prison; for that is Babylon
the Mother of Harlots, that does so. Therefore be informed and warned; set not
Briars and Thorns in Battle against the Lord, neither stubble before devouring
Fire; for if you do, a Consumption will come upon you, and your Name and
Memorial shall rot, dye, wither, and melt away, as Snailes; and Glory shall
rest with, and upon the Heads of the Sufferers of Christ for ever.

Reading the 22. of the 12. Month 1662. By one who has chosen rather to
Suffer with the People of God called Quakers, then to enjoy the Pleasures of
Sin for a season, or to be reckoned as a Prince amongst the Uncircumcised,
Francis Howgil.

GEORGE WHITEHEAD HIS TESTIMONY AND ACCOUNT Concerning Edward Buroughs
ANd as for E. B. our dear Brother, and Companion in Travel, Suffering and
Consolation for the Everlasting Gospel's sake in his day, his Testimony lives
with us: He was a Preacher of Righteousness, and one who traveled for the
Redemption of the Creature from under the Bondage of Corruption, and proclaimed
Liberty to the Captives, in the Power and Authority of God, and therein was a
true Witness against Oppression, and all the Antichristian Yokes imposed in the
Night of Apostasy upon the Persons and Consciences of People; and truly and
valiantly he held sorth the Liberty of Conscience, and vindicated it to the
great men of the Earth, in things appertaining to God in matters of Religion
and Worship, against the persecution and compulsion (which had its Original and
Rise from the Power of the Beast, which has made War against the righteous
Seed) that men might be left free to the guidance of the infallible Spirit of
God (which is not to be limited) in these matters, and not be compelled nor
brought under the corrupt wills of men, nor their failible judgments nor
invented Forms in these cases: And the Name of this Minister of Righteousness
is written in the Lambs Book of Life; and all the Enemies of his Life can never
be able to blot it out, nor extinguish his Memorial. Oh! the remembrance of his
integrity, uprightness and sincerity, has deep impression upon my heart; and
that tender love and affection in God's Truth which he was filled with toward
all the upright, (who are lovers of peace and unity in the Lord) is never to be
forgotten by us who are yet remaining in the Work of the Lord, and the
Everlasting Gospel, for which he has left a glorious Testimony, the glory of
which shall never be extinguished, but thousands shall praise the Lord our God
because thereof; yea, even the Seed that is yet in the lower parts of the Earth
(where darkness covers it) and the child that is yet unborn in many, that is
curiously framed in the Mothers Womb, whose Members are written in the Book of
God, shall glorify the Lord on his behalf. And this Testimony many have
already concerning him, that though his Body is dead, his Spirit lives in the
immortallity of that Life that is immutable, and shall never die, not wax old,
and is felt among the Righteous, who walk in their integrety and constancy to
the Lord.

And this faithful Servant of the Lord, and valiant Soldier of the Lamb (as
in his day was evidently apparent) as to live to him was Christ, and to die was
Gain: And though in his time many were the S^fferings and Afflictions which his
life went under, and his upright spirit suffered by, both from his open
Enemies, and Persecutors in the World (because of the valor and courage for
the Truth of God) and from deceitful and transforming exalted spirits, which
burden the holy Seed; but now his Life is caught up above them all (and is out
of their reach) in the transcendent and unspeakable Glory, in the Everlasting
Habitation and Firmament of God's Power, where he has shined (and does shine
among the Stars, that have kept their Habitations, as one that has turned many
to Righteousness, and that has overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word
of his Testimony, with those holy Prophets and Martyrs who rejoice over Babylon
and her Abominations (in whom their blood is found) and against whom he was a
faithful Witness, and valiant Warrier, whose living and absolute Testimony
therein God has blessed, made prosperous, and will fulfill to the uttermost.
And though he be ceased from his Labors, his Works do follow him, which will
be had in living remembrance, and precious esteem among the Upright, when his
Persecutors shall be broken and laid low in the desolation and ruin of Babylon;
and all that continue in Enmity and Deceit, and all the deceitful spirits that
have burdened his righteous Soul, shall fall, and their blossom wither and come
to naught.

And if any of his Persecutors or Oppressors be yet so impenitent and obdurate,
as to triumph, and be elevated in an exalted or prejudiced spirit, because of
his death, and in their exaltation and pride of heart say, He was taken away in
Judgment, or in Wrath.

To such in Gods Fear I answer, That thousands of the Servants of the Lord are
of another persuasion, not questioning but it was in God's tender Love (as to
his own particular) that he was removed out of the Earthen Vessel, in which he,
(though a man as in the prime of his years) endured great Travels in his time
for the Truth's sake, and the gathering of many into the Way of the Lord, and
in which his Travel was the greater (when the time of his dissolution drew
near) to be dissolved, because of his Sufferings, (and the extremity of his
Sickness occasioned thereby) which many others were pertakers of, who suffered
Persecution and Imprisonment by unreasonable men in this City of London, for
the Cause of God and a good Conscience, as chiefly for their meeting together
singly in the Worship of God.

But this I testify in the Lord, as in him I have felt, that his being
removed, was in Judgment from the Lord against his Persecutors, who desired and
sought his Destruction; and what they have done against him, has greatly added
to the fulfilling of their Iniquities, That the Blood of the Righteous, which
cries for Vengeance, may be avenged to the utmost upon them, who would not
suffer the Righteous to have a Being amongst men, nor lay to heart their being
taken away from the Evil to come.

And they who, in a byast or prejudiced spirit of Enmity, are listed up because
of his Decease, they were not worthy of him, nor of his Testimony; and they
have cause to Mourn and Lament amongst those that have pierced the Just, and
slighted and despised the Messengers of Truth and Righteousneds, whom God has
therein Honored: and God will debase such and their vainglory unto the Dust,
and exalt the Testimony and Life of his faithful Witnesses over all their Heads.

But we, who have been well acquainted with the deep suffering of the Righteous
Seed, and with the worth of true Unity, in the weighty Body and Spirit of
Christ, and therein do behold the Glory and Compleatness of the City of our
God, which is at Peace within it self, cannot but prize the Ministers of
Righteousness, and every Member of the same Body; and oh how blessed and
precious is the Memorial of the Righteous in our eyes! and how deeply is my
Soul affected with that comfortable Communion, and those many and living
Refreshments that we have enjoyed one with another, even with him and others,
who have finished their Course! Well, however in this I am satisfied, That
though we be left in Travel, and our Days have been Days of Affliction and
Suffering, for Christ and the Gospel's sake (as in the World) yet in him, whom
the Prince of this World has nothing in, we have Peace; being come into
Communion with the Spirits of Just Men, who are the Family of God, written in
Heaven, and called by one Name both in Heaven and Earth; and the God of Life is
their Portion, and his Glory is the Rereward of his Called, and Chosen, and
Faithful Ones, who have dealt their Bread to the Hungry, and brought the Poor
to their House, even to the Habitation of the Righteous, where the Living Bread
is received, and the Heavenly Mansions lived in, and enjoyed by all who abide
in the Truth, and retain their first Love and Habitation therein, in which True
Fellowship is enjoyed, and the Prosperity of the Elect Seed known. Blessed be
the Name of our God forever and ever.

London, the 12th day of the 1st Month, 1663. George Whitehead

JOSIAH COAL HIS TESTIMONY Concerning The Servant of the Lord, and Minister of
Jesus Christ, Edward Buroughs
FRiends, a necessity is upon me, and I am even constrained and pressed in my
spirit to bring in and give my Testimony concerning my beloved Brother before
mentioned, that it may remain and stand upon record for Ages and Generations to
come.

And this first I say and declare unto all people unto whom this shall come,
That he was a man endued with the Almighty Power of God, which lived and
reigned in him; and the Treasury of pure, divine, heavenly Wisdom was opened in
him, etc. and understanding (in the things that relate unto God's Kingdom of
Peace and Righteousness, and in the things that concern the Everlasting peace
and well-being of all mankind) was plentifully manifested unto him by the good
Spirit of God, which (I may say) he had received in a plentiful Measure: And
this many can testify unto, and his own Writings which remain upon record,
will in a large Measure manifest the truth thereof. And this Spirit dwelt
plentifully in him; so that thereby he was able to instruct many in the Way of
Life, Peace and true Holiness; and if any were afflicted in spirit or mind, by
reason of the Wiles of the Enemy of their Souls, or if they met with any
difficulty in their journey, as they passed from Death to Life, he was a man
able (through the large experience that he had of the dealings of the Lord, and
also of the Wiles of Satan, having followed the Lamb in the Regeneration) to
administer a word in season to their refreshment and comfort, and for their
establishment in the most precious holy Faith; and this I know the Witness of
God in thousands must and shall testify unto, who are the Seal of his
Ministry. And moreover he was a man that was able (through the Wisdom and
blessed Gift of God that was in him) to convince and stop the mouths of all
Gainsayers of the Truth, which he (with us) professed and lived in. And it is
well known to many, that he was never backward, but always ready and willing
to appear in a way of public conference, as in vindication of (and against any
that should oppose) the blessed Truth of God which he held and professed; and
also to manifest the Grounds and Reasons wherefore we deny (and dissent from)
the National Priests of the World, (and their traditional Ways of Worship) and
the hypocritical Professors thereof, who have not the Life and Substance of
what they profess in words. And these things (it is well known unto many) he
was often exercised in; and he did not go about in Corners, nor creep into dark
Places, hiddenly nor secretly, but preached the Truth of God, and Doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ boldly and openly, even upon the Housetop; and his valor
for God's Truth on Earth, was well known unto many; and his voice was as the
found or rattling of the Charriots of God's Host upon the tops of the Mountains,
and was often uttered sorth in the Name of the Lord, even like Thunder, and the
Voice of the Son of God was uttered forth through him, by which the Dead was
raised: the Witnesses are now alive, let them bring in their Testimony, that
the truth hereof may be confirmed. His Doctrine dropped as the Oil of joy upon
the spirits of the Mourners in Sion: His life extended it self as a sweet
Stream into the hearts of the Children of Light that thirsted after
Righteousness: He was one of the Cloud of Witnesses, that dropped down the Dew
upon the tender Plants of God: He pleaded the Cause of the innocent suffering
Seed, and earnestly contended with the Powers of the Earth of all sorts, in the
behalf, and for the freedom of the suffering people of God: He fore-prophesied
unto them that were in Authority in the days past, of their destruction, and
of their overthrow, because of their deceitfulness to God, and their false and
cruel, treacherous and merciless dealings toward his people; who had made many
fair Promises both to God and Man in the time of their adversity, That they
would grant free Liberty of Conscience in things relating to the Worship of
God, and that Oppression should be removed, and the like; but in the time of
their prosperity, when they were waxen fat, and grown great, and lived at ease,
and in Pleasures, then they forgot God, and regarded not to perform their
Engagements neither to God nor his People; for which cause the Lord cut them
off in his sore displeasure, and brought an utter Desolation upon them,
according to the words of his Servants; and this Prophet of God lived to see
their Desolation come, (which was sad to behold) and his Prophesies were
fulfilled in his own days.

And he also warned the present Rulers of this Nation, to take heed of walking
in the Steps of them that are gone before; and for these things, and for the
publishing of the Truth of God, and for bearing his Testimony with boldness
against all Oppression and Cruelty, he was hated of the men of this Generation,
but chiefly by some of the Rulers of the City of London: He sealed his
Testimony with his life in Bonds; and so they have wilfully brought innocent
Blood upon themselves; and heavy will it lie upon them in the day of Account
(which greatly hastens) wherein the Lord God will make inquisition for the
Blood of the Innocent, and reward every man according to his Deeds; then will
his Blood be upon you as the Blood of a thousand men; and how will you bear
your Sentence from the Lord of Hosts; because you will be found guilty of the
Blood of his Prophets, Messengers and Servants, which he sent unto you in love
to your Souls, to fore-warn you of the Evil which greatly hastens to come upon
you: Yet notwithstanding you have done all these things, and the cry of
Innocent Blood has been heard so loud amongst you, yet have you hardened your
Hearts, and go on in stiffneckedness, and persist in your Cruelty toward the
Servants of the Lord that are left behind, and are found casting them into
Prison: Oh, woe is me for you! where will a place be found for you in the day of
the Lord? or what Covering will you hide your selves under? Or how will you
appear before the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth? Have you no consideration
in you of your latter end? Or else do you believe that the Lord sees not your
Cruelty toward his People, that you will not answer his requirings, which is
to do Justly, and love Mercy, and walk Humbly with the Lord, and to do unto all
men as you would they should do unto you? surely if the consideration of these
things were in your hearts, or if you had any regard to keep your Consciences
clear in the sight of God herein, you could never do as you have done.

Wherefore consider these things, and lay them to heart, and repent speedily,
lest you sin your day away, and place of repentance there cannot be found: For
this I tell you plainly, that it is in vain for you to strive against the Lord,
or to seek to stop or hinder his Work which he has begun; for he will be too
strong for you, and he will make you bow and bend to his own Name and Power,
whether you will or no.

And though he bear with you long, and suffer you long, yet his Long-suffering
will come to an end; and though you should be permitted to fulfill your envious
Wills and lustful Desires so far as to Banish, or Kill, or Destroy us from off
the Earth; yea, all of us who are now in being, (which I do not believe ever
shall be) yet would God raise up another People by the same Power and Spirit in
and by which we stand, which should be a Terror unto you; and should possess
God's Everlasting Kingdom (which is not of this World) over your heads.

And in the time of his outward weakness he was heard to say, That though this
Body of Clay must return to the Dust, yet I have this Testimony, that I have
served God in my Generation, and that Spirit which has lived, and acted, and
ruled in me, shall yet break forth in thousands; and my faith is, That it shall
be even so; for we have found him a true Prophet amongst us, and to the Nations.

And this also near his departure he was heard to desire of the Lord, That if
it were possible, to forgive Brown, etc. And so let all Friends be encouraged
to wait upon the Lord in the feeling of the same Spirit that was in him, (which
we know is the Saints Comforter) that thereby you may be carried through all
Tribulations and Persecutions with cheerfulness, that in the end you may all
receive the Crown of Everlasting Righteousness with him and the rest of the
Saints of the most High God, and holy Prophets and Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And so the Lord God Almighty of Heaven and Earth be with you all, and keep you
all in faithfulness unto the end, Amen.

And this is my Testimony for that Man of God, who has been a Blessing to the
Lord in his Generation, and also to this Nation: And in this I have eased my
Spirit, and am clear in my Conscience in the Sight of God, having done that
which was my duty to do. Josiah Coal.

A Testimony of George Fox Concerning Edward Buroughs
HIS Name is Chronicled in the Lamb's Book of Life, a Righteous Plant, Pure,
Chaste, Clean: Who can tax him for Oppressing them, or Burdening them, or being
Chargeable to them? Who through the Suffering has finished his Course, and
Testimony; who is now crowned with the Crown of Life, and Reigns with the Lord
Christ forever and ever.

And in his Ministry in his Lifetime he went through Sufferings by bad
spirits; who never turned his Back on the Truth, nor his Back from any out of
the Truth: A Valiant Warrior, more then a Conqueror; who has got the Crown
through Death and Sufferings; who is dead, but yet lives amongst us, and
amongst us is alive.

George Fox.

A 1654
Warning from the Lord To the Inhabitants of Underbarrow, and so to all the
Inhabitants in ENGLAND, Where it shall meet with them, who holds up the false
Teachers, and false Worship, and who beat, stock, stone and persecute, and hale
out of their Assemblies those who are sent by the Lord to speak his Word
freely: With an Exhortation that they haste to meet the Lord by true
repentance, by putting off the works of darkness, lest the Lord cut them
assunder by his Sword, which is already drawn and put into the hands of his
Servants. Also a word to my Brethren and Companions in tribulation in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, who are by the World scornfully called
Quakers. With the manner of my passage through the dark World, (wherein the
simple ones may see the deceits of the man of sin in his actings like the true
Spirit) to warn all to follow the true Light within, which leads unto God, and
to beware of the Voice, Lo here, and Lo there.
TO all you the Inhabitants of Underbarrow, (profane ones and Professors) you
my Neighbors and Country men according to the flesh, (but Strangers as in the
spirit) to you all who are in the customary, formal, traditional Worship of
Heathen, and under the barren, dry, and empty Ministry of Man, which stands in
the will of man, and have proceeded out of the carnal inventions and
imaginations of fallen man, and is not according to God, nor to the practice of
the Saints in former Ages and Generations: To you all do I clear my conscience
in the presence of God, by declaring to you in writing, being that I cannot
have freedom (through the subtilty of the Serpent, who does work always to
prevent the living Truth to be declared, and the deceits Act. 6. 58. from 51.
of himself to be discovered and made manifest) to declare in word among you: I
have been sent by the Lord, moved of him to come, and to declare to you the
Word of the Lord, to the directing of your minds where to wait to attain the
true Knowledge of the Lord, and to that one Thing needful, the Eternal welfare
of your souls; and to lay open the deceits of the Serpent, who does work in the
cursed deceitful Ministry, which is upheld by you, whereby your souls are kept
in the death, and only your dark minds fed and nourished by the painted and
Serpentlike expressions and declarations, coming out of the carnal wisdom and
brain knowledge of your Hireling, who walks in the way of the false Prophets of
Israel, Isa. 56. 10, 11.
which the true Prophet called greedy dumb Dogs: four several times has the
Lord by his Eternal Spirit working in me, moved me to come into the
Congregation and Assembly, he himself is the Witness that I came not of man,
nor by the will of man, but contrary to the will and desires of man, wherein
stands the true Ier. 1. 6. Jonah (...), 3. Gal. 1. 1.
Ministry of God, now as it was ever, the true Prophets, Jeremiah and Jonah
witnessed the same, and the Apostle Paul, and as it is known to you unto whom I
speak, that I could not have liberty to declare to you the Truth from God, who
came not to you with entising words, neither what I had gathered out of
Scripture from without me, neither to speak my own imaginations and
conceivings, as your false Hireling does, but to declare the Word of the Lord,
to the convincing your dark understandings, that you might see the deceits by
which you are, and have been led, that your souls might have been redeemed up
to God, out of the imagined worships of the World, to worship in Spirit and in
Truth: Hear ye the Word of the Lord ye people, all your carnal traditional
Ordinances and Observances is abomination to the Lord, all your praying and
praising is odious Isa. 66. 3. Ioh. 9. 21. Prove. 15. 9.
in his sight, for all your worship is an imitation and an imagination of the
dark mind of man, and was never commanded by God; therefore consider all ye
people what you are doing, and reject not the Lord, nor his Everlasting Truth,
but prize your time, and now seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
his name Isa. 55. 6.
while he is near: Your souls are kept in the death under your dead Minister,
and under his dead Doctrines, dead Reasons, Points and Uses, which he speaks
from the Saints conditions and experiences, but is an enemy to the substance,
and to them in whom the same conditions are made manifest in the power of
Truth, and he does make manifest himself to be in the same generation of them,
who had the form of Godliness, but denies the Power; having the Letter as the
Pharisees had, but persecuting the substance as they did: All people consider
whether he be not in the generation professing God and Truth in Word as the
Scribes and Pharisees were, but persecuting the Son of God, who is the
Substance of Truth, where he Mat. 2. 5.
is born and made manifest; he is in the generation of them who professed
Abraham's freedom, and that God was their Father, but were of their father the
Devil; for his works they did; they said, and did not, as he does, as it is
made manifest, Ioh. 8. 44. Mat. 23. 3. 27.
he is a whited Wall, a painted Sepulcher, which Christ the Son of God cried woe
against, who was and is the Light, by which all Deceivers, Hirelings and false
Teachers are discovered, and cried out against: The Light which is Christ do I
witness to be made manifest in me from God the Father of Light, daily leading
me up to him, to live in Purity and Uprightness, praises be to him for ever, in
which Light I see your Teacher to be a Hireling, a greedy dumb Dog, seeking for
his gain from his Quarter, one that God never sent, but has run and was not
sent, therefore does he not profit you at all: and from this Light, which is
Christ, do I declare against him, as knowing him that he has not the Word of
the Lord, but the Letter: Freely do I declare against him, as knowing him to be
a Deceiver, and an Antichrist, being once I was deceived by him, but now
through the rich Love of my Father, who has made himself known to me, and has
shined by his Eternal Light in my heart, do I see him and all such to be
Antichrist, and no Minister of Christ; from the mouth of the Lord I do declare
it, that you are led blindly by him; your blind Guide and you are ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Living Truth by his
Ministry: He lays heavy burdens upon you: He is in the generation of them who
had the Law and Prophets, but persecuted him who came to fulfill the Mat. 2. 5.
Law, and who has the substance of the Prophets: He has the Conditions and
Experiences of the Saints in the Letter, but who are brought to witness the
same Conditions and the same strait Way in which they walked: He is an enemy to
all people, to you from God I do declare it, he is one that God never sent to
speak his Word to you, he calls good evil, and evil good; and puts Light for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light; and therefore woe is his Portion, and woe is
the Portion Isa. 5. 20. Ier. 5. 31.
of all that upholds him: What will ye do in the end thereof? He does bewitch
you to observe, That calling is an Ordinance of God, which he never commanded:
Poor people! your souls lies in the death under the power of darkness and
corruption, under your dead Minister, and under his dead carnal Observances;
and your dark Minds, your Wit and Reason is only fed, and so the enemies of the
Lord are strengthened by him, and you remain in ignorance and in blindness, and
Ier. 23. 24. Ioh. 14. 6.
cannot attain the true Riches; for Christ only is the Way to the Father, the
Light in every man which leads to the Father; but this Light he denies as
having enlightened every one that comes into the World, as several times he
has done to me in Argument: Here he makes Christ a Liar, and does not know the
first Principle of Religion, nor the Light which leads unto God, but is a
Heathen, and knows not God; for this is the Light which all the Servants of God
in all Generations witnessed, and which Light we do now witness, praised be the
Lord for evermore, who has in his Light led us to himself, and has showed the
deceits of him to us, and of all such as he is; he is in the generation
shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither entering himself, nor
suffers others to enter that are entering: Mat. 23. 13.
Through the Power of the Lord made manifest, am I bold to declare against him,
who walks not in the Doctrine of Christ, and therefore is an Antichrist, and
does deceive you, professing himself to be sent of God, and walking contrary to
the Truth of God; a Hypocrite, saying, and not doing: Ye my Country men, be not
deceived by him, try him by the Scriptures, and see how he walks according to
the Declaration, as they did who were Ministers of Christ, not by the will of
man; but his Ministry is by man, and according to man, and had his Call from
man, as it is known to you all; but they who were true Ministers witnessed the
contrary, neither received they their Gospel from man, but by the revelation of
Jesus. The true Ministers Gal. 1. 1. 12.
of Christ, sent sorth by Christ, witness now the same thing, for Christ is the
same that ever he was, which is now made manifest in the Saints, and his
Ministry is the same, which is not by man, but contrary to man; be not
deceived, God Gal. 6. 7. Mal. 4. 1.
will not be mocked, for he is terrible, and his day is powerful and dreadful,
that shall come upon the Heathen, and upon the workers of Iniquity, and upon
all Dissemblers and Hypocrites, all your carnal Worship, and Ordinances, and
Observances, is but mocking of God, and dissembling with him, and is but an
imitation and an imagination of the Mind of fallen man, imitated by you and
your Minister, droven by the imaginations from the true Worship of God, which
the Saints in former generations was exercised in, who were led, not by
imagination, as you are, but by the Spirit of God, as all the servants of God
are: Now as ever was, true Baptism I own, which is by the holy Ghost and with
Fire, and Mat. 3. 1.
the Baptism with one Spirit into one Body do we witness; but that which your
Chief Priest and false Hireling holds up, I deny it; it is not of God, but is
an imitation, and is abomination in the sight of God; and therefore from God do
I Declare against it, and against your Hireling that upholds it among you. True
Communion of Saints I own, for we have Union, and the Bread which we break is
the body of Christ; and the Cup which we drink is the Blood of Christ, by 1
Cor. 10. 14. Ior. 6. 53.
which we are nourished and fed up to Eternal Life; for he that eats not
Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood, he has no life in him; he among you that
can receive it let him, but your Communion I deny, for it is Heathenish, and no
more but an imitation, having proceeded out of the imagination of the Proud:
Your breaking of Bread and drinking of the Cup, is abomination; and God never
commanded it, and this does your Pharisee uphold, sitting in the seat of
Christ, and of the Saints, as the Pharisees did in Mose's seat, saying, and not
doing: True singing 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ephesians. 5. 19. Rev. 14. 3. Isa 35. 10.
I own, with the Spirit and with Understanding, singing in the Spirit, making
Melody in the heart to the Lord, this singing was and is among the Saints in
the Church of Christ, this is well pleasing to God, for it is not an imitation,
nor by tradition, as your singing is, but it is true Sacrifice, the song of the
redeemed ones, which none can learn but the redeemed ones of the Lord, who is
come and coming to Zion with songs and everlasting Joy upon their heads; but
your singing is Carnal, Traditional, and Heathenish, and is an Imitation, and
is not with the Spirit of Jesus; but with the spirit of the World, with the
spirit of Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Mockers, Scorners, Coveteous ones, with
the spirit of Wrath, Envy, Malice, with the spirit of Cain, with the spirit of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and chief Priests, who persecuted the Saints which
sang in Truth in former Generations, and now the deceit is turned into the form
of singing, and they that live there persecutes them that sings in the Power;
for thus it was ever, they that Amos 6. 5.
lived in Profession of the Word outwardly, persecuted them that lived in the
Power of which was professed, and there you and your Hireling is; but know,
that the Lord will take an account of you, and give unto every man his reward
according Rom 2. 6.
to his deeds: You and your Priest have got the form of Baptism, of the
Communion, of Singing, and of a Church; but the Power and Substance of these
Ordinances you know not, for they are hid from all vulturous eyes, and from the
generation of the Pharisees, and Serpents, who are called of men Master, and
which have the chief place in the Assemblies, as your Hireling has, and who is
called of men Master, as they were which Christ cried Woe against: True
preaching of Jesus Christ Crucified we own, and do witness, for the preaching
is out of Mat. 5.
the will of man, out of Form and Custom, and is foolishness to the wisdom of
the World; now, as it was ever, this is not with the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, and the preaching
of the Word of Faith, which is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, that
preaching we do 1 Cor. 1. 18. 21. 1 Cor. 2. 4. Rom 10. 8. 17.
own, for Faith comes by the hearing of this Word preached: And the Prayer with
the Spirit of Truth we do own, for that is not in word to be seen of men, but
led to that, not by Custom, Form, and Tradition, but by the Eternal Spirit,
which proceeds from God, which has free recourse to God, which God hears and
does accept; for their iniquity is purged out of the heart, and is not
regarded, for he that regards iniquity in his heart, God will not hear his
Prayer; but the Isa. 66. 18.
Preaching and Praying of your Hireling I do deny, for they are abomination to
the Lord, for his preaching leads from God, stands in his own Will, in his own
Time, in Form, Custom and Tradition, and your souls are not refreshed by it,
neither is true Faith known among you, for how can he being evil speak good
things? A corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, said he, who cried Woe
unto Mat. 12. 34. Mat. 7. 18.
them that said, and did not, in which generation he is; how can he teach and
direct toward true Religion? being he denies the Corner Stone, the first
Principle of Religion which is the Foundation, which no other can any lay, the
Light of God, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
which has enlightened every one that comes into the World, which he denies to
Ioh. 1. 9.
have enlightened every one: Poor people! I do pity your souls (God is my
witness) to see you lie in darkness, in ignorance, and blindness, and in
deadness, under your dead Hireling, and under his dead traditional Preaching;
your wisdom, reason, and dark minds is only fed and strengthened by his
preaching, and you all are but building upon the Sand, hearing but not doing,
and we, who have suffered the loss, and have witnessed the destruction of that
building, do Mat. 7. 29.
now Declare freely against it where it is standing, for we know the depth,
height, and breadth of all your profession, and of all your carnal Worship, and
Observances; and the Word of God is as a fire, which will burn up, and as a
hammer, which will beat down all your imagined Worships and carnal Ier. 23. 29.
Ordinances: And his Praying is abomination to the Lord, for it is as theirs
was which the Son of God cried Woe against, which stood Praying in the
Synagogues, and which made long Prayers, and the Praying of all such we do
Deny, for their Prayers is as the Scribes and Pharisees was, who were called of
men Masters, as Mat. 6. 5.
they are now, and who were sayers and not doers, as your Hireling is;
therefore all you people consider, and diligently weigh these things: If I
declare unto you the Truth, own it without respect of Persons; If I speak a
Lie, let me be accounted as accursed for ever; and all you simple ones, who are
seeking the living among the dead, who are in the simplicity, seeking after the
Truth, and yet are bewitched to observe that which God never commanded, and to
seek God in that Luke 24. 5. Ioh. 14. 6.
Way which he was never found in, for Christ alone is the Way to the Father,
and he is but one from generation to generation, in all generations; for your
sakes do I lay open the deceits of your Hireling and chief Priest, who is in
the way of Balaam, following the wages of unrighteousness, and do advise you as
from the Mouth of the Lord, to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
and to cease from all your customary carnal observances, which God never
commanded, but is only Isa. 2. 25.
an imitation and an imagination; your souls are kept in death, under the power
of Corruption, Pride, Drunkenness, Coveteousness, Oppression, and
Earthlymindedness, Wontonness, and the lustful Nature ruling is head in you,
and among you are that generation that draws near God with their mouths, but
your Isa. 29. 13 Ezekiel. 33. 31
hearts goes after Covetousness, and are far from the Lord; ye worship an
unknown god, and are Persecutors of the true God, and of his Servants, as ever
it was in all generations by Priest and People, as it is now with you and your
Priest, they that professed Truth in word, persecuted them that witnessed the
Power, the horrible filthy Thing is committed among you, and you love to have
it so, but what will you do in the end thereof? you are in the generation of
your Ier. 5. 31 Luk 6. 26.
forefathers, who spoke good of the false Prophets, but persecuted the true
Prophets; so it is now among you, he that has the Word of the Lord from the
Mouth of the Lord to declare unto you, him you revile, and mock and scorn, and
persecute, but he that speaks the imaginations of his own heart from the Saints
conditions, him you own and hear, and here you show your selves to be them
which Christ spoke of which would receive them that come in their own name, but
will not receive him that comes in the Name of his Father: Repent, and turn to
the Ioh. 5. 43. Ezekiel. 14. 9. Pro. 21. 15. Amos 5. 18.
Lord, lest his Judgments come upon you and destroy you with an utter
destruction; the Day of the Lord is terrible and dreadful, which will come upon
the wicked, and upon all the Workers of Iniquity: Be ashamed ye Heathens, you
maintainers of the greedy dumb Dogs, and upholders of the horrible filthy
Thing, the persecutors of the righteous Seed, the contemners of the just, the
generation of Serpents, who cries, let Barrabas go free; ye generation of
Hypocrites, who professes Mat. 23.
God, but persecutes the Son of God where he is made manifest, of this
Generation in which you are shall all the Righteous Bloodshed be required even
Isa. 25. 6. Mal. 1. 1.
from Abel? Repent, and cease from all your former ways and doings, from
Pride, Drunkenness, Coveteousness, and Oppression, from Lying, Swearing, from
Mirth, and Wontonness, and vain Pleasures, for the Day of the Lord comes that
shall burn as an Oven, and the Proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as
stubble, fully dry, for the Lord will be avenged of his enemies, and render
vengeance 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Mal. 3. 2. Isa. 33. 14. Ier. 9. 25. Ier. 7. 20. Rev.
6. 16.
in flames of fire upon all that know not God, and that obeys not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ: Who can stand when he appears? Who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? even he that does righteously, and that is purged from
iniquity: But then woe unto you all Hypocrites and Professors, and to the wicked
and profane ones, ye shall all partake of the righteous Judgment, and drink of
the Cup of the Lords Fury and Indignation, for your iniquities are seen, and
your transgressions are not covered from the Lord; all your Profession will not
hide you from the presence of the Lamb, for in your Sacrifices are found
deceit, and in your Offerings lodges iniquity, the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it; therefore be ashamed of all your profession, and of all your
Glorious Carnal Ordinances; for the Lord is coming to uncover you, and to make
you and your profain Hireling manifest, for God is Pure and Holy, and no
iniquity dwells with Hab. 1. 13. Psalm. 102. 7. Mic. 3. 11. Ier. 23. 31.
him, nor none that works wickedness, therefore stop thy mouth thou Hireling,
who preaches for hire, and divines for money; and leans upon the Lord, and
uses thy tongue, and says, he says it, when the Lord never spoke to thee:
Thou art in the Generation of the Scribes and Pharisees; and be ashamed ye
upholders of him, for now every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, must be
hewn down, the Lord has said it; his Word is as a Fire, which will burn up
all the wicked; his Mat. 3. 10.
Word is sharper then a two edged Sword, which will cut down and wound the head
of the wicked; ye Mockers and Scorners, ye Swearers and Liars, ye Proud and
Heb. 4. 12.
Coveteous ones, ye Merry-hearted and Wonton ones, dreadful is the Day that
shall come upon you, the Lord will make his Power known, and Glorify himself
in your destruction, except you repent and turn to the Lord: Ye hard hearted
ones and rebellious ones, the Plagues of God is to rest upon you, therefore
Joel 2. 2, to 12. Exodus 7, 8, 9, Chap. Rev. 14. 7.
prize your time, and repent, and fear the Lord God Almighty, and lay aside
your vain wicked ways, and confess your sins, and forsake them, for such shall
find Mercy,

All ye People, mind the Light of God within you, and hearken to that which
shows you what is sin, and evil, which shows you your proud minds, your Pro.
28. 13. Ioh 1. 5, 9. Ioh. 8. 12. Ioh. 11. 9, 10.
carnal coveteous desires and affections, which checks and reproves you for
your ungodly deeds; this Light shines in Darkness, but the Darkness cannot
comprehend it: This is the Light which has enlightened every one that comes
into the World, which Light is Christ, he that follows this Light walks not in
darkness, but has the Light of Life; he that hates this Light stumbles, and
walks in darkness, ignorance, and blindness, as you do, turning the Grace of
God into wantonness, which same Grace is the Saints Teacher, this is the free
Grace of Jude 1. 4. Tit. 2. 11.
God which has appeared to all men, which in all Generations taught the Saints
to deny ungodiness and worldly lusts, and led them into purity and holiness:
This Grace do we witness, praised, praised be the Lord, to be led by it, which
ever was the Saints Leader; and through the teaching of this Grace do we deny
your Hireling, and all such Pharisees and Hypocrites, who makes a prey upon the
poor people; and if you stop not into their mouths, they even prepare War Ezekiel.
34. from 2. to 9. Mic. 3. 5.
against you, as the false Prophets of Israel did; and daily are we taught by
it in the Ways of God to do his service, praised be the only Lord of Glory for
ever more, who has gathered us up to himself (to be taught alone by his Grace)
out of the mouth of your Hireling, who once made a prey upon us, but Eternal
Praise and Glory to our God, who in his Light has discovered unto us his
nakedness and his shame, his hypocrisy and deceit, in the Eternal Light of God
do we see him, and all such to be blind Guides, and leads the poor blind people
in darkness and ignorance, and none is able to come to the true Knowledge of the
Eternal Truth in his Ministry, for he is no Minister of God, but an Antichrist,
denying Christ to be come in the flesh, denying the Light to have enlightened
every Ioh. 1. 7.
one, as several times he has done to me; but my Father who is Light and
Glory, has now made him manifest: And in that Light Christ Jesus, do I see him
to be one who has run, whom God has not sent, therefore does he not profit
you at all, nor puts no difference between the precious and the vile in you,
nor leads you to discern the clean from the unclean, the pure from the impure
in you, but speaks the Divination of his own brain, feeding your dark minds,
and Ezekiel. 22. 6.
from the Eternal Light made manifest in me from God the Father (who is over
all, and above all) do I declare against him, and against all Hirelings and
greedy dumb Dogs, that seeks for their gain from their Quarter, as he does,
f^^ely Is. 56. 10, 11.
do I declare, as knowing them to be Deceivers and blind Guids: For the simple
ones sake among you, who are ensnared and kept in ignorance by him under his
dead, dry, barren, sloathful Ministry; Repent ye people, who lies in the
Captivity of Babylon, under your Bahylonish Merchant, now is the Lord leading
his Rev. 13. 10.
Sons and Daughters out of Egypt out of bondage, and now he that has led
Captive is led into Captivity, praised and honored be the God of Saints for
evermore, who has redeemed us out of the mouth of your Idol-shepherd, (who
feeds himself Ezekiel. 34. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
with the fat) and who has enlightened our dead Consciences, and has shined
in our hearts, in his Eternal Light, and of this have I received freely, and
from this do I let forth freely, to the laying open the deceits of your
Hireling.

Now is the Day of your visitation, wherein the Savior of the World stands at
the door and knocks, if any open unto him he will come in; therefore prize
Rev. 3. 20. Col. 3. 8, 9.
your time, and hear the Word of the Lord, and lay aside the works of darkness,
Lying and Swearing, Mocking and Scorning, and beating of your fellow Servants:
Woe unto you ye Strikers, who hardens your hearts against the Lord, Mat. 24. 48
to 51,
and against those who declare to you the wickedness of your ways; the Lord
will come when you are not aware, and give you your Portion with Hypocrites and
Unbeleevers, and cast you into utter darkness: Repent. and turn to the Lord
Joel 2. 12.
your God with mourning and lamentation, and cease from all your former ways
and doings; cease from Coveteousness and Opression, ye aged people; and cease
Na. 1. 16.
from Lightness, Vanity, and Pride, ye young people; and from all your Priests
and Steeple Houses, for there your Lightness, Pride, and Vain minds are fed and
nourished, and the enemies of the Lord are strengthened. Dear people, there had
I once fellowship with you in your Pride, Lightness, and Vanity, and there was
once my joy and delight; but now am I chosen by the Lord out of all these
things, praised be him for ever, to serve the Lord, in declaring against all
these abominations, in whom they are standing; For, woe unto the proud and Isa.
2. 12.
light vain minds, who are tripping upon the mountains, and whose hearts are
not subject to the Lord; against all these abominations, do I Declare as from
the Lord, and do advise you as from him, to depart out of these abominations,
for the day is coming when you must be separated from all your lovers, a day of
darkness and misery; therefore prize your time, and hearken unto the Light of
God within you, which reproves you for your filthy and ungodly deeds and words;
Joel 2. 2. 1 John 1. 7. Ioh. 4. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1.
this Light will lead you to God, out of all filthiness, obeying it; this will
separate the clean from the unclean in you, and will lead you to be taught of
God, and to have unity with God, and with the Saints; for it was in the Light
that the Saints had unity; this Light will lead you out of your hypocritical
and deceitful carnal Worships, to Worship in Spirit and Truth; this Light will
lead you to the true Baptism, out of your deceitful imitation of a Baptism,
which your Hireling upholds among you; this Light will lead you to the true
Church in God out of your formal imagined Church, and to the true Communion of
Saints, and true Singing to God, out of your Heathenish Communion and Singing:
Therefore all ye people mind the Light, for the Light has enlightened every
one, which is the Savior and Reedemer of him that loves it, and brings his
deeds to it, but is the Condemnation of him that hates it, and walks not in
it; therefore all people John 3. 19.
mind this Light which is of God, this will lead you up to God; this is the way
to the Father, and none comes to the Father but by me, said he, who was, and is
the Light; this Light loving it, and walking in it, will free you from all the
burdens John 14. 6. Mat. 23. 4.
which the Pharisee lays upon you, and from all the taxes of Pharaoh's
Tax-masters, and will lead you into the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, to
know him who is invisible, and is present every where, yet hidden from all dark
minds, who lives in the imaginations and imitations, as you and your Hireling
does: If you love this Light and walk in this Light, it will bring you to be
witnesses of the Scripture and of the Saints Conditions, which you are but
talkers of; this is the Light from which they spoke that spoke the truth of
God, and from this Light did Isaiah cry, who lived in the obedience of it,
against the greedy dumb dogs, that Isa. 56. Ier 23. Ezekiel. 34. Mich. 3. Mal. 2.
sought for their gain from their Quarter; and so did Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Micha,
and Malachy cry against Hirelings, and against those that said, the Lord says
it, and he never spoke to them, and against them that preached for hire, and
that divi^ed for money, and that taught for the Fleece, and yet leaned upon the
Lord as your Pharisee does, saying, Is not the Lord among us? And from this
same Light do we declare against all such, and sees them to be abomination to
the Lord now, as they did then, praised, praised, be the Lord for ever, for now
the abominations of the Whore is made manifest that sits upon many waters,
that has made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her fornication, and now is
the Rev. 17. 1, 2, 3.
Judgment of the Whore come, and the day wherein she must reckon to drink the
wine of the Wrath of God; and he who was and is this Light cried Woe against
them that said, and did not; and against them that had the chiefest places in
the Mat. 23.
Assemblies, and that were called of men Masters: This same Light do I witness
to be made manifest from God the Father of Light, and am not ashamed to declare
it before men; for, he that denies Christ before men, he must be denied by Mat.
10. 33. Acts. 26. 24.
Christ before the Father; and this Light lived the Saints in, and spoke from,
who were called Madmen, and deceivers of them that professed Truth in Word,
but persecuted them in whom the Son was born and made manifest, in which
Generation you and your Priest daily makes manifest your selves to be;
therefore repent, and come down ye high minds and lifted up spirits, for the
Lord is against you, and hearken to the Light of God in you, and wait in it
according to measure, and cease from all your formal, customary, traditional
worshipping, and from all your dumb Teachers, who are Antichrists, and denies
the Light, as having enlightened every one; this Light is the only Way to the
Father, which all must (who John 14. 6. 1 John 2. 10, 11.
comes to God) follow and walk in, for he that walks not in this Light, walks
in darkness, and stumbles, and knows not whither he goes; and there are all
Priests and People in darkness and ignorance, who walks not in this Light;
therefore love the Light and obey it, it will separate you from all filthiness
and corruption, and lead you into purity and holiness, without which none shall
see God, and here is your Teacher always present with you, which teaches to
deny ungodliness, and the wicked ways of this World; he who walked in this
Light, by this Light saw all the World to lie in wickedness, but said they were
of God, and all that were of God heard them who dwelt in the Light, but he who
disobeyes this 1 Ioh. 5. 19. 1 Ioh. 4. 6.
Light, follows the blind Guides of the World as you do, and sets up Teachers
to themselves, having iching ears, and that ministry is of man, and by man
called to the ministry by the earthly Powers, by earthly Magistrates, or at
Oxford, Cambridge, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
or Newcastle, all this ministry, who is here called, is by man, and their
gospel is of man, which the true Gospel is not, and he that has the Word of
God to declare from God, his call is not by man, neither does he go to man to
be approved; for he that preaches the true Gospel, consulted not with flesh
and blood, Gal. 1. 16.
and so it is now, the same thing do we witness, and to be Ministers of the
everlasting Gospel, called not by man, but by God; praised be the Lord for
ever, from Generation to Generation, who has revealed himself unto babes, and
has hid himself from the Wise and Prudent of this World; stop your mouths ye
Ministers, which is by man, which Gospel is according to man, for now the Lord
is Mat. 11. 25.
arising, whose Angel is gone forth preaching the everlasting Gospel: Sing
praises to the Lord for ever ye Redeemed ones, who are brought from under the
empty, Rev. 14. 6.
dead, deceitful Ministry, which is by man, to be true witnesses of the true
Ministry which is of God: Therefore be ashamed ye upholders of the deceitful
Ministry, which is but the Ministry of witchcraft, by which your eyes are
darkened, Nahu. 3. 4.
and under which your souls does lie in blindness and ignorance under the power
of witchcraft and sorceries.

Be confounded ye Back-sliders, who once heard the Word with joy, and received
it; who were once among us, yet not of us; who has chosen the glory of this
World rather then the everlasting Truth, and has fold your birthright of the
Everlasting Inheritance, for the satisfying of your earthly minds, with Mat.
13. 20.
the earthly treasures: Hear the Word of the Lord ye sloathful servants, who
not abiding to wait upon God, eats and drinks with the Drunkards, and beats
your fellow servants, and are now become Haters, Mockers, and Revilers,
suddenly will the Lord come and cut you all assunder, and give you your Portion
Mat. 24. 48. to the end. Psalm. 50. 22.
in the Lake that burns with fire, except you repent: Repent you Back-sliders,
and consider ye that forget God, now while you have time, before the Lord ^wear
in his wrath that ye shall not enter; hearken to that which convinces you of
your filthiness, the Light of God within you, which shall eternally witness us
to be true, which Light shall be your Condemnation, because you love darkness
rather John 3. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 22.
than Light; ye are returned with the Dog to his vomit, and with the Sow to the
wallowing in the mire, your latter end is worse then your beginning, and the
Parable is fulfilled upon you, for lying against the Truth will the Lord plead
with you, and woe will be your Portion for ever, for the Liars shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God; therefore all people fear the living God, and prize
your time, and see where you are, his servants you are unto whom you do obey;
all Rev. 21. 1. Romans 6. 16. Romans 2. 6. Luke 6. 2.
must give an account to the living God, and must receive according to what is
done in the body; in such an hour will the Master come which you are not aware
of, and will take account of your stewardship, for God has given unto every
one a Talent; therefore spend not away your time in wickedness, and in a
deceitful Profession of God, feeding your dark minds with the dead formal
Preaching, of your dead carnal blind Pharisee, but hearken to the Light of God
within you, and improve every one his Talent; the good and faithful servant
improves his to the honor and riches of his Master, but the sloathful servant
hides his in the earth, Mat. 25. 20, 21, 24, 25.
living in the filthiness, saying he has no power; now see which servant you
are, and read your selves within, how you stood covered, in the presence of the
living God, for woe unto him that is covered but not with the Spirit of the
Lord; the Isa. 30. 1.
servants of God brings forth fruit unto God, bears the image of their Father;
and the servants of the Devil brings forth fruits of darkness, and bears the
image 1 Cor. 11. 7. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
of the Devil, which is glorious to the carnal eye, and feeds the carnal mind:
The Seed of the Woman is but one in all generations, and the Seed of the
Serpent is but one, which ever was, is ruling and reigning in the Children of
Disobedience, who are disobedient to the Light of God within them; and betwixt
these two Seeds is Enmity, the one against the other, each Seed is known by its
fruit; Genesis 3. 15.
the old bottle pours out old Wine, the new bottle new Wine; therefore all
people sink down to within, and call in all your wandering thoughts,
imaginations and Mat. 12. 34.
affections, and desires, and see which seed is head in you, and see what your
desires and affections goes out after, for where your hearts are, there is your
treasure; see what you do possess of God in your Souls, and what you are made
witnesses of, for he that believes has the witness in himself, and Faith is
the Victory over the world, he that can receive it, let him: Dear people, I
have freely Declared to 1 Ioh. 5. 10. and verse. 4.
you the Truth, and from the love of God shed abroad in my heart to your Souls,
and for the Seed sake in you, which lies in death, captivated under your
Wisdom and Reason, have I spoken the Word of the Lord, which if you own it, and
abide in it, shall be the savor of Life, and in eternal joy shall you witness
me to be true in what I have Declared; but if you harden your hearts, and kick
against the Truth; and against what I have Declared, shall be the savor of
death unto Death, and in eternal torment and misery shall ye witness me in what
I say, for to that which should exercise the Conscience do I speak in every one
of you, and to that in you have I cleared my Conscience, and have freed my
Spirit; this is the day of your Visitation, the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it: Remember that you have been showed the Deceits which you live in, and have
been warned of the misery and desolation that shall come upon you, except you
lay these things to heart, and turn to the Lord. Farewell.

By him who is despised, and had in derision among you, who is not greater then
his Lord, and therefore is contented to be called a Blasphemer and a Seducer,
as he whom I serve was, by them of your Generation. E. B.

TO all you my Country people of every degree, who are Inhabitants in
Underbarrow have I cleared my Conscience, and have freely Declared to you the
Word of the Lord, and have laid open the Deceits of your Deceitful Ministry and
Ministry, and have directed you to that in every one of you which leads unto
God, and which is the way to the Father, which is the true Light which has
enlightened every one that comes into the World, which light all who loves and
follows, walk not in darkness, but walks up to God out of the Fall, from under
the Curse, into the Being, but all who hates this Light, and follows the
imagination of their own brains, and of the divination of their Hirelings and
Pharisees, this Light shall be their condemnation, because they walk not in it;
even this Light, which is come into the World in every man, even the witness in
the Conscience which is placed by God, shall for ever witness against you, and
against all your false worships and Hirelings, and shall bear testimony to what
I have in this little Volume declared to be true, when the Book of Conscience
shall be laid open, for to every man's Conscience am I made manifest in what I
have to you declared as concerning your Hireling, whom God has never sent, but
is in the way of the false Prophets and Pharisees, for he that abides not in
the Doctrine of Christ has not God, 2 John 1. 9. but is an Antichrist, and of
the Devil. And as concerning the Light within you, that Light will bear witness
to it self, that every one of you to whom I speak, has this Light, which shows
you sin, your lying, swearing, pride, and wicked ways, covetousness and
wantonness to be sin: this is the true Light, which is, as ever was,
foolishness and a stumbling block to the wise ones: This is the Light which
your Pharisee denies to have lightened every one, and this Light shall for ever
witness me to be true, and shall witness this poor people among you who are
despised and contemned by you, and scornfully called Quakers, to be the
servants of God, whom I do own as my Brethren in the sufferings of Jesus, who
are my joy in the Lord. Now all people every where, to you all, a word from the
Lord, though I have spoken in this small Volume, as moved by the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, to the Inhabitants of Underbarrow, as declaring against their false
Teacher, and false Worships which they uphold: now freely and plainly do I
declare against all thy Teachers, O England, who are one in the same generation
with him in the Seat of Christ, and of his Apostles, professing themselves to
be sent of God, but walking contrary to his commands, in the same footsteps
which the Scribes and Pharisees walked in, which were persecutors of the Son of
God; and which he cried woe against, they who said and did not, as all these thy
Teachers do, who are called of men Masters as they were, and have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies as they had, and prayed standing, as these thy
professed Ministers do: Now the same Light which ever was, which is Jesus
Christ, is now born and made manifest, which is witnessed among the Saints, in
which Light I see all thy Teachers, O England, to be drunk with the Wine of her
that has deceived the Nations, who sits upon a scarlet colored Beast, and is
arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones,
and has the golden cup in her hand full of abominations, whose name is written
in her forehead, Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and
abomination of the Earth: And in this Light to I declare against them all which
are in the generation of the false Prophets of Israel, which seeks for their
gain from their Quarter, and which steals the word from their neighbor, and
have taken the words of the Prophets of Christ and of his Apostles and sells
the divination of their own brain upon the Scriptures, (which the holy men
speak forth freely to the poor blind people) and teaches for the Fleece; and
if ye stop not into their mouths, they prepare War against you, and which are
called of men Master, which Christ forbids: Against all these freely (as from
the Lord) I do Declare to be no Ministers of Jesus Christ, but are Seducers,
and blind Guides, and are Antichrists, and leads the poor blind people in the
ways of death and destruction; for they are no Ministers of Christ that abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ: these have run, but have not been sent by God,
and therefore is not your Souls profited by them, but are in the dark
heathenish nature, as by your fruits it made manifest, leaning in the
imaginations, and not in the counsel of the Lord, and in lying, swearing,
drunkenness, covetousness, and oppression, and according to the course of this
world; these iniquities are ruling among People; Priests, and Rulers in this
Nation, from the least of them even to the greatest, every one is given too
covetousness, from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals falsely: All
your Hirelings and greedy dumb Dogs I do deny, and all who are of God denies
all such, and are taught of God in the ways of God, which ever the world
derided: All thy Teachers, O England, is denied of them who are taught of God,
and whose Teacher is the Anointing, needs not any man to teach them: And by thy
Teachers who are in the way of the Pharisees, art thou blindly led in the ways
of darkness and ignorance, and all thy carnal worship, which is in every part
of thee upheld, which is to Read, Sing, and Preach upon the Saints Conditions,
which were witnesses of God: All this I do deny and freely declare against as
from the mouth of the Lord, to be no worship of God, but imagination, and an
imitation of the Worship of God: And the living eternal God of Heaven and Earth
is but mocked by you, in your imagined worship, for your reading of another
condition, and singing of that which you live not in, and preaching that which
is gathered from without by imagination, and conceiving upon that which the
Prophet Prophesied, or which Christ spoke, who was, and is the Substance, and
which the Apostles witnessed; this is carnal and heathenish, and was never
commanded by the Lord, nor is no worship of the true God, and against this
worship I do from the Lord declare, as in the eternal Light of God seeing it,
to be deceitful and abomination to the Lord, being I am Redeemed up to God by
his eternal Spirit, and to worship in Spirit and in Truth, and not limited to
a day, place, or time; neither at Jerusalem, nor in this Mount, etc. and am
freed and redeemed out of this fallen man's invention and tradition, which is
but Cains sacrifice, which God does not accept, but is abomination in his
sight, praised be the Lord for evermore. And O England, I do declare against
all these thy Teachers, and against this all thy Worship, as from the mouth of
tbe Lord, as moved of the Lord to speak this word unto thee, Thou have spent
thy money, this many Generations, for that which is not bread, and thy labor
for that which does not satisfy thee, all thy imagined formal Worships and
carnal Traditions and Ordinances of man is the Lord risen in his Servants to
declare against: And the same Light which ever made manifest deceitful
Worships, and the deceitful Hirelings, and them that cried Peace, peace to the
people when the Lord spoke no peace, is now risen and speaks in thy ears; O
Nation, the same everlasting Light which the true Prophets lived in, who cried
against them that sought for their gain from their quarter, and that cried
against the horrible filthy thing which is upheld in thee; O England, this same
Light is made manifest in the despised People, called Quakers, in this North
part of the Nation: O People your Teachers have beguiled you, and have taught
for the Fleece, and fed themselves with the fat, but your souls are hungered by
them; for they are in the Generation of them that said and did not, they love
the Wages of unrighteousness, and follows the error of Balaam for Reward, and
have devoured souls for dishonest Gain; but the only true God is arising to
beat the Mountains to dust, and to cleave the Rocks assunder: In thee, O Land,
will the Lord manifest his Power, and will stretch forth his Arm for the
deliverance of his Chosen, and for the Redemption of his two Witnesses, which
have layn slain in the great City in this Land, which they that dwell upon the
Earth have rejoiced over, and made merry, and triumphed in their slaughter; the
Lord is arising to require his Flock at the hands of the Idols-shepherds. O ye
Idol dumb Shepherds, the Lord will be avenged upon you, for you have scattered
the sheep of his pasture, and have fed your selves with them; the Lord of Hosts
is grieved with you, and have shaken his hands at your dishonest Gain, and ye
shall no longer wear Garments to deceive; ye have long deceived the simple by
your lies, and by your lightness, but now you are discovered and made manifest
in the eternal Light of God, and the mystery of witchcraft is not hid now from
the Saints: Therefore O England hear the Word of the Lord, Thy Prophets are
light and treacherous Persons, thy Judges judges for Reward, and thy Priests
preach for Hire, and thy Officers imprisons the Just, and thy Rulers are
evening Wolves, which seeks for the Prey, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth is
grieved with these things; therefore, O Land, tremble at the presence of the
Lord God of Jacob, for Esau shall become a place for Dragons, and shall be
dis-inhabited in the day of mourning, and lamentation is coming upon thee; for
that which the Lord has not planted will he pluck up, and every corrupt Tree
shall be cast into the fire: All thy corrupt Judges, and Officers, and Rulers
will the Lord cut off utterly from the face of the Earth, and will restore to
his People Judges as at the first, and Councellers as at the beginning, the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Therefore, O Land, prepare to meet the Lord
thy God by true repentance, by putting off the works of darkness; thy Pride and
thy Oppression, O Nation, is seen by the Lord, and the cry of the Oppressed
through thy pride and tyranny is heard in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, and
he will avenge the cause of the poor and needy that is Oppressed by Priests in
their Tithes, by Lawyers in their Fees, and by Officers in their unrighteous
dealing, and the Seed of Abraham shall go free, and Israel shall no longer be
subject to Pharaoh, nor to his Tax-masters. O England in the North part of thee
is the Light of God arisen, which shines clearly, and which discovers the
abomination of thy Teachers and of thy Worship, and we are bold to declare
against them, and against all thy corrupt Officers, Judges, and Rulers, and
this Light shall shine through the Nation, and shall be spread over Kingdoms,
and the fire is to be kindled which the Lord has promised, which shall burn as
an Oven, and the proud and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble: This fire
shall proceed out of the mouth of the two Witnesses, as it did before they were
slain, and shall devour the enemies of the Lord; the Sword of the Lord is drawn
in thee, O Nation, and put into the hands of them which is hated and despised
by the Rulers and Officers, which is scornfully called Quakers, but they shall
conquer by the sword of the Lord, which the Lord has put into their hands,
over Countries and Dominions: For, O Nation, the Lord is with them, and thy
unjust Rulers and Officers cannot hurt them, not a hair of their heads shall
perish without my heavenly Father: It is for a testimony of their Fathers love
to them that they suffer shame and reproach, and some of them imprisonment by
the unjust Rulers, and for a witness against them that some of them are brought
before them, the Lord is choosing the weak things of this World, and he is
making manifest his Counsels to Babes, and revealing his Counsel and eternal
Truth to Children, and keeps his hidden Treasures from the eyes of the Wise,
and vulturous ones, Praises, praises be to him for evermore: For the Lion of
Judah is opening, and has opened the Sealed Book, let all his Saints rejoice
for evermore. This is the day of thy Visitation, O Nation, wherein the Lord
speaks to thee by the mouth of his Servants in word and writing, therefore
return to the Lord thy God from whence thou art fallen: Now will the Lord
gather his Jewels and Chosen ones out of thee, and will raise up the dead which
lies slain under thy Teachers and Pharisees, which makes a prey upon the
people, which was never sent by God to speak unto thee. O Land, Hear the Word
of the Lord, Depart from all thy Teachers, for the Lord has drawn his Sword,
and lifted it up against the false Prophet, and the Vials of Indignation shall
be poured upon him, and upon all that upholds him in his Whoredoms and
Witchcraft, by which he deceives the simple; therefore lest thou be partaker
of their Plagues, depart from them: And all people, mind that measure of Light
within you, which the Lord has lightened every one of you withal, for the Lord
is risen to teach his people himself, and he is fulfilling his Prophecy in thy
ears, O Nation, they shall teach no more every man his neighbor and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least
of them unto the greatest of them says the Lord; for I will put my Law in
thine inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Ier. 31. 33. The Lord is
about his great and wonderful Work in thee, and all the Wars and Contentions in
thee, O Land, has but been a making way for this Work of the Lord, and has
not been the Work which the Lord has purposed: This Work is made known to them
that fears the Lord, and abides in his Counsel: The Lord will overturn,
overturn the Nation, and will create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein shall
dwell righteousness, in which all the Chosen of the Lord shall rejoice for
evermore; And all the Kings and Nobles shall cast down their Crowns before this
Glory: And all the men of War shall lay down their Armor and Weapons of War:
And Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation any more: For the Lord will
establish Righteousness and Peace; this will the Lord bring to pass in thee, O
England, through the destruction of that which now lives, and through the
Resurrection of that to Life which now lies in Death: Hear, O Land, give ear,
O People, for the Lord of Heaven and Earth is now turning the World up-side
down, all old things shall pass away, all things shall become new by fire, and
by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of him shall be
many; corrupt Judges and Officers will the Lord sweep away, and their name
shall no more be found in the Nation, the fire is kindled and the sword is
drawn, happy is he that keeps himself from fighting against the Lord in this
his Work, and happy are ye, O Brethren, that stands faithful to the end to see
these things accomplished, great shall be the battle, it is now begun, many
shall see death, and shall yet live to see these things.

TO all the Despised and Contemned ones, who are Persecuted and shamefully
entreated by the Generation of the Chief Priests, and by them who live in the
highest Profession in the Word outwardly, ye who are the scorn of the Nation,
and the derision of all the Heathen, and are called Quakers; you are my
brethren, children of my Father, have been brought forth by the same Womb, and
have sucked the same Breast; Ye are chosen out of the world, out of all worldly
glories, and earthly excellencies, and are not of this world, and therefore the
world hates you, you are brought out of the broad way of the flesh, and are
separated from all the world in their ways, worships, and forms of religion,
and are redeemed out of the mouths of all Idol dumb Shepherds, and has one
Shepherd, and are gathered from all the mountains, and out of all the desolate
disinhabited places, and are come into the pleasant sheepfold, where is green
pastures and fresh springs of living Waters: By Faith with Abraham are ye come
out of your native Country from among your kindred, and out of your Fathers
house: And with Moses have you forsaken the glory of Pharaohs house, and chosen
rather to suffer affliction among the poor despised people, than to have
enjoyed the pleasures of sin; but great shall be your reward ye Contemned ones,
glory, and honor, and everlasting happiness is prepared for you, if you stand
faithful to the end; the Lord is with you as a mighty terrible one; and
therefore shall all your persecuters be ashamed and confounded; the sound of a
trumpet is heard among you, which makes all Nations at a stand, and all the
Heathen to wonder, and all the Rulers, Nobles, and chief Priests are in
consultation, combining together to suppress the Army of the Lord of Hosts,
which he is gathering together: fear not, nor be dismayed, for the sounding of
your trumpet causes an alarm, and makes all the inhabitants of the Land to
tremble, and all bows before the sound of it; for the sound of it is terrible
to the Nations, to all Kingdoms and Dominions; the Lord of Heaven and Earth is
your Captain, which rides upon the Clouds, and whose glory is above the World,
and therefore in the battle shall you obtain the conquest, and all your enemies
shall be put to flight, and one of you shall chase a thousand, for he is with
you who has all power in his hand, and all your enemies are limited by him;
therefore be not discouraged at the raging and swelling words of your
Adversaries, but be bold and valiant and faithful to him, for his is the
victory, and by his own Right Hand will he get himself the victory: Ye are my
fellow Soldiers; and fellow Members of the same body, and my joy in the Lord;
stand faithful to the Lord, and be bold and valiant for the Truth upon Earth,
for you has the Lord chosen of all the Families of the Earth to place his Name
among you, and he will glorify his Name by you, he will accomplish his
Wonders, and make his power known, and the greatness of his Name in the sight
of the Heathen; let all flesh be silent before him, and let all the Pharisees,
and chief Priests, and the wise men of the earth stop their mouths before the
Lord, for you have the word of the Lord, and you are made patakers of the
everlasting wisdom; and are the beloved of God; for his eternal Son is born and
brought forth among you, and therefore does the wise men and chief Priests
consult to take his life; but woe unto your Persecuters, for they are the seed
of evil doers, and better it were that a millstone were hanged about their necks
and they cast into the sea, for the Lord has sought you to worship him, and he
is worshipped by you in spirit and in truth, your sacrifice is accepted, and
therefore they that are of Cains generation persecutes you, seeking after your
blood; you are made partakers of the blessing, and therefore does Esau threaten
your destruction; but your Preserver is the Lord of Hosts, and therefore shall
all their consultations be disappointed: For woe unto them that digs deep to
hide their counsel from the Lord, and that takes counsel but not at the Lord;
All ye my brethren, be ye faithful and obedient to him who has called and
chosen you out from among the heathen, out of all imagined worships, to worship
in truth, serve the Lord in singleness of heart, and give up all to him freely
to be ordered and disposed by him, and look not back at the glory of Sedom, nor
at the riches of Egypt, but follow him who has enlightened your dark
understandings; and has gathered you up by his eternal Light; walk in
obedience to the Law of God, and to the Light made manifest, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is as a man traveling into a far Country, which has given talents to
his servants to improve; now all you my beloved ones, improve every one your
talent that the Lord may receive his own with usury, that he may be glorified,
and that you all may receive a reward; therefore all be bold and valiant in the
truth, and fear not man, but fear the Lord God Almighty, and walk in the fear
of the living God, and despise not the cross of Christ, but let the cross be
your rejoicing, for through the cross is the power of the Lord made manifest:
Rejoice for ever and be exceeding glad that you are counted worthy to suffer
shame and reproach, and some of you imprisonment for the Truths sake: thus it
was ever, he that was born after the flesh, persecutes him that is born after
the Spirit; but be glad and rejoice in the Lord, for you has he chosen and
called even to shine as light in the dark world, and to be as a burthensom
stone to the Nations; your fame is gone abroad through Nations, and because of
the Man-child that is born is the Nations troubled, and the chief Priests and
Rulers combined together, but that the Lord may be glorified, and for your
sakes will he scatter the proud in their imaginations; and will break in pieces
the snares which the Pharisees and chief Priests have laid for your feet, and
they shall be taken in their own craftiness, and fall into the pit which they
have dug for you, for the Lord, who has called you, will set you upon a
rock, and will preserve you out of the mouths of cunning Wolves who devours
souls for dishonest gain: Sing praises for ever to the Lord our God, who has
chosen us to make manifest his love and truth unto, and has gathered us up out
of the mouths of all Idol shepherds that made a prey upon us, and from all the
mountains and hills where we were scateered in the cloudy and dark day, where
we were devoured by the wild beasts, being without Shepherd and Sheepfold, but
praises, glory, and honor for evermore that we are freed out of the cruelty of
Pharaoh, and from under his tax-masters, which lays heavy burdens upon the
people; rejoice and be glad in faithfulness and truth unto our King for ever,
who is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who has opened this book, and unlosed
the seals, and has led us to himself, and by suffering under all are we made
Kings and Priests over all for evermore, he alone is worthy to be praised, who
has avenged us of our adversaries, and has given her to drink of the wine of
the wrath of God; who once made us drink of the wine of her Fornication; I am
with you, you despised ones, and my prayers are for you, and the eternal
glorious God of power be with you, and keep you in the midst of this crooked
and perverse generation, for this generation seeks the blood of the Saints; the
Beast, which was, is, and now makes war against the Lamb.

E B.

A true Declaration and a Discovery to all the World of my manner of Life; what
I have been, and what now I am at present.
I Was brought up by my natural Parents in the profession of Religion,
according to the generality of this Nation, going one day in seven to hear a
man Preach the Word, as they said to me, and to be exercised in the formal
worship which was then upheld, to read and sing, and to rabble over a Prayer;
but I was wanton and light, and lived in pleasure, without the fear of God, not
knowing of God, but by hearsay and tradition: but when I grew up toward twelve
years of age, something stirred in me, and showed me, that there was a higher
Religion than that I was exercised in; and then I inquired where the chiefest
of the Presbyterian Priests preached, and would have gone some miles of a first
day to have heard one of the best of them, which seemed liker truth than the
other, and so I got up to be a Presbyterian, and followed the highest of the
Priests and Professors of that form, and grew in favor with them, then some
small of my vanity and lightness I left, and Pride grew up in me, for wisdom
grew up in me; then some of my for^er acquaintance began to scorn me, calling
me a Roundhead, and the like; and by my laboring here, I gathered knowledge
in things without, but yet was ignorant of the living Truth: Then when I was
about seventeen years of age, it pleased God to show himself a little to me,
and something struck me with terror, and when I had been praying, I heard the
voice often, Thou art ignorant of God, thou know not where he is, nor what
he is; to what purpose is thy Prayer? And so much fear and dread came upon me,
and broke me off from praying many times, and trouble came thick into my mind,
and fearfulness fell many times upon me, and I was struck off my delights that
I formerly loved, and what I had gathered in as of a god died; and I left off
reading in the Scripture, for something showed me that I was very ignorant, and
knew not the true God, and the beauty of all things vanished; And I went to
some, asking, What God was, which was professed? for I said, I knew him not:
but got no satisfaction from any. And I was much separated from the vain ways
of the world, and from vain worldly people, and was made to reprove many, often
for wickedness, in words and actions, and was much decided, and looked upon
scornfully by many; and then the Preaching of them whom I had formerly much
delighted in, was as withered and decayed; yet then it pleased the Lord to show
himself a little in love to me, and I had sweet refreshments coming in from him
to my soul, and had joy and peace in abundance, and openings of the living
truth in me, which the world knew not of, and the mystery of the Scripture was
something opened, which before I knew nothing of, and I saw many glorious
things in it, which lie hid under the letter; and I was in much rejoicing many
times, and sang praise, for I was brought out of the Land of darkness, and
could say, I was in the Light, and I grew up to know high things, but not
knowing the Cross of Christ, I ran forth in my wisdom comprehending the
mysteries of God, having a Light shined in me, and I grew up into notion, to
talk of high things, for it was my delight to comprehend in my busy mind; thus
being ignorant of the Cross to keep low in it, I ran before my Guide, up into
comprehension, and then was I above many of the Priests and Professors, and
followed only to hear the highest Notionists, that Preached high things, but
the fleshly man was at liberty, and so I became one of them in their
discoursings, and was looked upon by them to know much; the former terror was
gone, and I had got up from under the judgment, and now pride grew more than
ever, and self-conceitedness and presumption, and fleshly liberty to the carnal
mind, and my delight was much in discoursings, where I played the Ha^lot, and
the Prodigal, and gave holy things unto Dogs, and cast Pearls before Swine,
(for wisdom was hid from me) and here I lived pleasantly, for I had the true
God, and the true Truth in my comprehension, which by my wisdom in the Light I
had comprehended, and I had the world in my heart, Pride, Covetousness, and the
earthly spirit ruled, and my delight was grown up to that, which once I had no
delight in, and the beauty of things grew up, which seemed to be vanished; here
I was ^un from my Husband after other Lovers, and had left the Lord my Maker,
who had so graciously made manifest himself unto me, and had spent my portion
among harlots; but I became to be darkened, and had lost that which once I had,
and had but in memory that which before I had enjoyed, could tell of
Experiences, but they were dead to me; and something within me began to question
how it was with me; for I saw my self to be ignorant more than formerly, and I
saw I knew nothing; something desiring in me to be from whence I was come, but
I grew to be much given to the world to seek after riches, and glory in it; and
I fed my self with what I had formerly enjoyed, and said, Whom God loves once,
he loves for ever: (but that was then head, and ruled in me, which he loved
never) I was wanton, and lived in the lustful nature, among heathens,
crucifying the Lord of Life, but the blood of that which I had slain cried
continually, and the witness which lay slain, would give me no rest, which the
earthly made merry over; and I grew to be weary of hearing any of the Priests,
though never so high, for something, which shined deep in me, showed me
ignorance in all profession, and I was put to a stand many times in my self at
those things, which were come to pass; then it pleased the Lord to send his
true and faithful Servant and Messenger, who is called according to the flesh,
G. Fox, he spoke the language which I knew not, notwithstanding all my high
talking, for it was higher, and yet lower: And it pleased the Lord to speak to
me by him, that I was in the prodigal state, and above the Cross of Christ, and
not in the pure fear of the Lord, but full of corruption and the old nature,
though I had professed freedom, yet it was but such as the Jews professed; for
I saw my self to be in bondage to my own Will, and to my own Lust; and through
the Word of the Lord spoken to me by him, I began to see my self (the witness
being raised) where I was, and what I had been doing, and saw I had been making
an image to the first Beast, which had the Wound by a Sword and did live, whose
deadly Wound was healed, and was full of Airy Notions and Imaginations, and was
worshipping the image which I had made; and then I saw my self to be a Child of
Wrath, and that the Son of the Bondwoman lived, and that Harlots had been my
Companions, and was no more worthy to be called a Son: Then trouble and
distress came upon me, such as was not since the beginning of the world, and I
was at my wits end, and a day of thick darkness and trouble, a day of weeping,
and mourning, and misery, and a day of vengeance and recompense, came upon me,
such as I had never known; one vial of Wrath after another, the great Whore was
to be judged, and to drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which had made me
once drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and then I separated from all the
glory of the World, and from all my Acquaintance, and kindred, and betook my
self to the company of a poor despised and contemned people called Quakers, and
now am I one in that Generation, which is, and ever was hated of the world by
the chief Priests and Pharisees, and Generation of Serpents, and has chosen
rather to suffer Affliction with a poor despised People, than to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin with the great multitude (though the worldly pleasures were
not wanting to me) and now do I bear witness against all Forms of Religion, and
false Hirelings, and chief Priests, who walks in the steps of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and of the false Prophets of Israel, and was never sent of God to
declare his Word: And do freely Declare against all outside Profession, and
Notion, and do witness George Fox to be a true Minister of God, one that speaks
the Word of the Lord from his mouth, one who was sent of God, and who is the
Servant and Messenger of the living God, he is the Friend of God, and woe unto
his Persecutors, they are the Seed of evil doers; and now I am despised of my
neighbors and carnal acquaintance, and is not greater then my Lord who was
called a Blasphemer and a Deceiver, as now I am; but praised, praised be the
Lord for evermore, who has separated me from the World and worldly glories,
and has made me a partaker of his Love, in whom my Soul has fall satisfaction
joy and content: Thus have I traveled through the World, even unto the end,
and am now come to the beginning of that which never shall have end, which the
dark mind of man knows not.

E. B.

I Am a Prisoner for the Truth sake, and for Declaring to man of his
Wickedness, and of his Transgression of the spiritual Law of God, which is
spiritual, and for writing of a Letter, which was written from God, to show to
man of his wicked ways, and how he stood in the presence of God, as by the
spiritual Light of God (which shines in the hearts of his servants) was
discovered and made manifest unto me; for who Speaks, Writes, or Declares, from
the Light of God (which does discover all the dark paths of fallen man, and all
his spiritual Wickedness) Speaks, Writes, and Declares, not as from man, whose
light is only natural and carnal, (which is darkness in the pure Light which is
eternal) but as from God, whose Light is spiritual, and does make manifest the
secret Whoredom of fallen man; and from this Light did the Prophets and
Ministers of God, who were sent by him to reprove Sin and Transgression, Speak,
Write and Declare; and in this Light did the true Prophets Jeremiah and Hosea
discover Israel to be adulterous, and in the presence of God to be guilty of
Whoredom, from whose presence they declared: And all now who are sent of God,
to reprove for Sin and Iniquity, declares from the same Light of God, and by
the same Spirit which Jeremiah and Hosea did; For the pure Light of God is but
one, from generation to generation, in all generation, which discovers Sin and
Iniquity, the same Light now, as in the time of the Prophets and Apostles: and
from this Light (which is not carnal, but eternal) did all the holy men of God
Write, and Declare; And all who are sent of God now, witnesses the same Light,
and Speaks from the same Light now, as they did then; for, who cannot witness
this Light, are no Ministers of God, neither ever were sent of God to Declare
the Truth from God, but are Deceivers and blind Guids, and spea^^ from the
natural and carnal light, the imagined and supposed light, which has not seen
the living and spiritual God; for Declaring by Writing to a man that he is
guilty of all manner of wickedness, naming, pride, drunkenness, and whoredom, I
am imprisoned; I wrote not as from man, whose light is only natural and carnal,
and does only make manifest carnal Transgressions, of a carnal Law, but as from
the eternal and spiritual light, which does make manifest spiritual
Transgressions of a spiritual Law; And in this Light, is he to whom I wrote,
guilty of all manner of Wickedness: Now this which I declared from God who is
spiritual, is above the reach and comprehension of the carnal and earthly Law;
for by the natural light through the earthly Law is no natural man able to
judge of that which is spoken or declared from that which is eternal and
spiritual, (for darkness cannot comprehend the light) which light all the
Servants and Ministers of God are guided by, to Act, Speak, or Write; and
therefore do I deny to have this Cause put into the Judgment of carnal
Lawyers, who judges by the natural light, through the earthly and carnal Law,
yet willing I am before any Authority to Answer for my self that whereof I am
Accused; but to the Judgment of earthly Magistrates I do not stand, but to the
Judgment of the Living and Eternal Judge, who Judges not according to the
sight of the eyes, and hearing of the ears, but who judges with Equity and
Righteousness; thus rather I chose to suffer imprisonment in the Body, yet free
as to God in the Truth, waiting to be Redeemed, not by the earthly Powers,
through the earthly Law, but by him who is Eternal, whose Law is Eternal, who
orders all things by his mighty Power, to which Power I give up my self to be
kept in it, and ordered by it continually.

Here I have given to all People the ground of my Imprisoment in the particular
of it, though I might in few words have declared the thing; for between the
feed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent, is Enmity put; and he in whom
the Seed of the Serpent is Ruling, seeks the destruction of him in whom the
Seed of the Woman is Raised: And here is the Ground of all the Saints
Imprisonment now, as ever was, the envy of the Devil working in Fallen man,
against the living Truth of God, where it is made manifest.

By one who is a Labourer in the Vineyard, who is not known to the World;
(though named of the World) EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE Walls of Jericho Razed down to the GROUND: OR An Answer to a Lying Book,
called, The Quaking Principles dashed in pieces: Wherein one called Henoch
Howet, which goes under the name of an Anabaptist, does falsely accuse, and
maliciously belie us: his seven Principles, which he calls ours, I shall lay
down, and what we own is vindicated, and what he has belyed the Truth in, is
turned upon his own head.
NOw is the time wherein the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is setting up a
Kingdom, and exalting his Name in the Earth, and is exalting his own Son upon
the holy Hill of Sion, and is discovering the Mother of Harlots, who has made
all Nations drunk with her Fornication, and Iezabel shall be cast into a Bed of
Torment, and the fire of the Lord God is come down from Heaven, and is kindled
in the Earth, to burn up and destroy, and to consume to ashes, even all those
that have worshipped the Beast, and has his Image, and the false Prophets that
have deceived the Nations, and they both shall be taken alive, and cast into
the pit; for the Lord is grieved and wearied with this adulterous and viperous
Generation, who are offering up that which stinks in his nostrils, and strange
fire, and are professing him and his Resurrection, who crucify him, and put
him to open shame, and they deny the end of his coming, and are offering in
Cains nature, while they slay the Just, and are in the gainsaying of Corah, who
perished in it, and so shall all those that gainsay the Lord in his Way; and
now the Lord of Heaven and Earth is proclaming War with the Dragon and his
Angels, and they shall be cast out, and whosoever does resist him in his way
shall be broken to pieces as a Potters vessel; and thou Henoch Howet, who would
limit the holy One of Israel, and bind him up in thy carnal reason, and stint
him in his Way, and Form up things in thy imagination from the Scripture, and
walks by Tradition; thou art accusing us among the Papist, but let it stand for
thy self, and to that in thy Conscience I speak, and it will let thee see that
all thy worship is taken on in thy will, and in that nature in which the enmity
stands, and so has taken on things, and taken up things by tradition from
others, and that which was commands to others, who followed the Lamb
whithersoever he went, and no commands to thee, neither does God require those
things of that nature, neither does he accept it, while the bands of wickedness
is not loosed, and the oppressed is not set free, and therefore let all flesh
and carnal reason be silent, for God will confound the wisdom of the wise, and
they that have divined in their reasons, which is in the curse, and under the
curse, shall be mad, now in the day when God is raising up his own Image, and
bringing back that which has long been held in captivity, and now the men of
the Earth, Pharaoh, and all the Inchanters of Egypt, and the South-sayers, and
the Diviners, and Gog and Magog, among which thou Hewet art found one, and they
compass the Camp of the Saints about, but fire shall come down from Heaven,
that shall destroy all the Adversaries of the Lord, and Israel shall go free.

1. That which thou calls our first Principle; And first, thou say, They
oppose the Word Christ, to the written word; and will have a Word that is a
discovery spiritual to be the Word, but whatsoever it is they call the Word, it
is perfectly false, and not the truth.

Answer. Oh thou Liar and Slanderer, the Lord will plead with thee, for Addars
Poison is under thy tongue, and thou have a Whores forehead, that art not
ashamed of thy false accusing, let hundreds in the City of London, who has
heard us, be witness against thee, and thy Lies that thou have Printed, and
suffers them to be cried up and down the streets, as thy filthy Songs and
Ballads, and runs to disgrace the Truth, but to the Lord, who is righteous,
shall thou give an account; and thou art as Ianes and Iambres, that withstood
Moses, and for all thy hard Speeches and filthy. Lies, shall thou give an
Account for to him who is the Searcher of hearts, and that in thy Conscience
shall bear witness against thee; and that we oppose the Word Christ to the
written word, as thou callst it, I charge it upon thee, that we do not oppose
Christ to the Scripture, for Christ is the Word, John 1. and this the Scripture
does not oppose, but bears witness to him who is the Word; and his Name is
called the Word of God, and this Word became flesh and dwelt among us, as the
Scriptures witness, and the Word of the Lord endures for ever; but he does not
say the Letter endures for ever: but thou that art accusing us that we do not
own a form of sound words, here thou shall be judged out of thy own mouth;
where readst thou of a written word in the Scripture? and here thou shall be
tried by the Scripture, and judged by it, that thou art a perverter of the
Scripture; thou would have more words then one, the Word is but one, the Word
sanctifies, Sanctify them through thy Word, but he does not say the Letter
sanctifies; And the Word of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, but
the Letter is not from everlasting; and the Scripture had a beginning, and was
declared in time, and Prophecy shall cease, but the Word is from everlasting
to everlasting; And the Word of the Lord is as a Hammer, and as a Fire, but the
Scripture does not say that it is as a Hammer and a Fire; and yet the Word that
he spoke was Spirit and Life, yet the Scripture is not Spirit and Life; and
thou that would set up the Letter in the place of God, to try all things, and
search all hearts, thou make an Idol of it, and so opposes God with it, and
so would bring that to contend against the Lord, the which they witnessed
through sufferings: and I tell thee and all the world, the Word is but one, and
all who knows God hears that Word, and it is a Light and a Lanthorn unto their
Paths, but that is invisible and eternal, and what the Saints did witness of
this Word they declared, 1 John, and the Scripture is true, and bears true
record and testimony of the Word, and they were true Witnesses of the Word of
Life that wrote it, and it is a true Declaration or Testimony of those things
that are certainly believed, Luke 1. of the which they saw, and heard, and
tasted; and all who come to know the Word of the Lord, reads it again, and sees
it as it is written: and further, thy envy and shame is made manifest, that
thou would accuse, and yet thou say whatsoever they call the word, it is
perfectly false, and not truth; here thou would judge, and yet thou can not
tell what we call the Word, but at last concludes its false whatever it be: and
here thou blasphemes, and call Christ Jesus, in whom is all truth, false;
for no other Word I own but Christ; and the Scripture speaks of no Word of God,
but one; and thou that would make the Letter the Word, it self shall judge
thee; and thou make much mincing and arguments in thy carnal reason, and
say the ground of error, is ignorance of the Scripture, and thou bringst Mark
and Matthew; alas, I know what Mark and Matthew wrote is true, if thou had an
ear to hear, the ground of all error is because he is not known, nor his voice
whom the Scriptures bear record of; and thou say we drive men into darkness,
that works upon people to dis-esteem the Scripture, and persuades people to an
uselessness of the Scriptures; let all that have heard us in the City of
London, or elsewhere, speak, if they heard us say the Scriture was useless, or
did dis-esteem it; but on the contrary we exhorted them to search if the
Scripture did not bear witness to those things we declared, and so let shame
cover thy face thou false Accuser; and thou bringst 2 Timothy 3. 17. that it is
for the perfecting the man of God, and that its profitable to correct and
instruct; this is owned, but its not the man of God thou would have perfected
by it, but such Hirelings as thy self has been, and false Accusers as thou
art; and I say it is profitable to us to reprove thee, and correct thee, and
read thy portion; a Liars portion is in the Lake, and as Romans 15. 4. its not
denied; but as Christ Jesus is witnessed, who is the Comforter, which the
Scripture bears witness of, there is comfort and hope; and thou say, the
Scripture proves the New birth, and teaches perseverance to the end; It bears
testimony of some that did witness the New birth, and that persevered unto the
end; but what is this to thee, that never came one step in the way? and as for
promises, there is no promise, but condemnation in the Scripture, in such as
thee, and read it, The Liar and false Accusar, and the Envious shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; and there own thy promise and thy portion.

2. Particular which thou callst a mistake, that is speaking to a thing within
thee; I would fain (say thou) know what can be meant of the thing within men;
for there is nothing to be spoken to in man, but man.

Answer. Here thy ignorance, shame and envy is made manifest, that thou that
has pretended to be a Minister, and a Pastor of a Church, and cannot tell what
thou have spoke; to what have thou ministered, to the Wind? or have thou
ministered to the Devil, and preached glad tidings to him, who is in the
transgression, and free grace to him that has walked contrary to God? it is
so; and therefore thou, and all who are in that nature, knows not what you
speak, and therefore none has been at all profitted by your Ministry; and
blessed be the Lord that its hid from the eyes of the Wise, and revealed to
Babes: and thy envious spirit is seen, that it is of thy father the Devil, who
is the Accuser of the Brethren, that would lay a thing down as an error, and
tells of dashing in pieces our Principles, and yet know not what they are,
nor what we speak; do thou accuse, and know not for what, let shame cover
thy face, that ever thou should put pen to paper, or speak of God or Christ,
and speak thou know not what, and then thou have hatched a thing, and
concludes there is nothing in man to be spoken to, but man, and before thou
knewst not, and so art in confusion; for Christ and his Apostles always spoke
to man, thou say the Apostle says, he went and ministered to the Spirits in
prison, and to open the bind eye, and to raise the dead, and the dead should
hear the voice of the Son of God and live, and he preached liberty to the
captive, and is given for a Covenant to open the blind eyes, and unstop the
deaf ears, and make the Lame to walk, if thou have an ear thou may hear, but
not to feed thy Serpents wisdom do I speak, I will shut thee out, for into it
thou can not enter, but through death, and death wrote the book; and the
Apostles were made manifest to every man's Conscience in the sight of God; and
the slothful servant had a talent given to improve, which was another, and
not his own, and that was required of him, and that will God require of man;
and unto that we speak which hears us, and shall witness us eternally, even
that which is not in the transgression, neither is of man, but is given to man
to improve, and yet is not far from man; but this is a mystery, and it shall be
sealed; for without a parable spoke he not to such as thou art, and I know this
is a parable; but in the end thou say, thou know not how they can speak to
any light in man, distinct from him, unless they speak unto Satan, or some of
his Legions: here again thy shame and ignorance is made manifest, we speak to
the ear, and the eye in man, which the god of the World has blinded, and this
is not of man, and yet is not far from man; but [distinct] that is thy own
word, I do not own it: bring forth the Blind that has eyes, and the Deaf that
has ears; did the Prophets speak to the Devil in man; we speak to the witness
of God in man, and according to this shall all be judged; if thou have an ear
thou may hear; oh thou Blasphemer, do thou call that which may be known of
God, which is manifest in Romans 1. 19, 20. do thou call this a Legion of
Devils, even that which declares the eternal Power and Godhead, but thou art he
that calls the Master of the house Beelzebub, and in that nature thou art, and
the Lord will rebuke thee.

3. Principle, That thou calls a mistake, that is, The denying the use of
Reason in the matters of God, calling it Serpentine.

Answ. The World by wisdom knows not God, and all the disputing and twining,
and lavishing of the wisdom of man, and that which thou callst reason, it is
corrupted, and is shut out; and who lives in that nature are the unreasonable
men that has not faith: now he that has not faith, has not reason, and he
that has faith, has the Witness in himself; but I see thee, thy witness is
without thee, and so thou speaks unreasonably; and all that would understand
the mysteries of the Kingdom, must come through death, for Light shines in
Darkness, but Darkness cannot comprehend it, and therefore one cries, lo here,
and another, lo there, and with that which thou callst reason, is Scripture
torn asunder, and it begets strife, contention, endless disputes and striving
for Mastery, which is carnal; and all this we deny: And thou say [upon this
ground they will not do as the Apostles and Christ himself, who disputed with
the gainsayers, Ioh. 6. and Stephen, Acts 6.] and thou bringst in some of the
Synagogue of Libertines, and Syrenians, and Alexandrians, and the rest that
disputed with Stephen, and they were not able to resist him: let many hundreds
of this City of London, both in public, and in private, bear witness against
thee, if we have not disputed, and have not been ready to give an answer to the
gainsayers, though not such a one as they desired, even as Christ our Master
did not answer the Jews in their subtle tempting of him; and of those Sects
that encountered both Stephen and Paul, truly I must needs say unto thee, we
have met with the same Generation in this City, whereof thou are one, and truly
more subtle then they were, but in the eternal Light you are all seen, and many
though they could not gainsay, yet have resisted us; and after a little, thou
pleads not for carnal reason, for this will not suffer any to follow Christ:
further, then they can carry their own things, their honors, pleasures, ease
and lusts, to that in thy Conscience I speak whether this does not rule thee
and guide thee; it will let thee see thou art pleading for honor, and
respecting men's persons, and has them in admiration, because of advantage, and
brings the example of others to prove and uphold thy deceit, which they were
neither commanded nor commended for to oppose the commands of Christ, and the
express Scripture: and thou goes on further and say, [God is the Author of
memory, and wisdom and reason] but I tell thee there is a wisdom and a reason
that God will confound, for by faith we know the heavens were made, and see
them upholden, and by faith all things is brought to our remembrance, and it is
the Light that convinces of sin, even the Light of Christ; and so in the
eternal Light I see what thou pleadst for, for eating of the tree of knowledge,
and there thou art, till thou art become a Fool, and dead to that reason, thou
shall never eat of the tree of Life, and therefore Flesh, be silent: and thou
say, thou do not allow that reason that gets only a conclusion, or an
argument instead of Christ; and after thou say the day is yet to dawn, and
the day Star to arise, and thou cries violently for it: and here what have thou
more for an assurance of thy salvation, then an argument, and a conclusion
instead of Christ; for thou confesses the day is not dawned, and then thou are
yet in the night, and in darkness, for the day dawns, and the day star arises
before Christ be witnessed; but thou knows no such thing, as either Christ, or
the dawning, if thou had not others testimony, and that is without; and thou
art one Christ spoke of, Since John the Kingdom suffers violence, and many
thrust into it; and thou art striving, and are violent; but I say thou shall
not be able till thou layst down thy contending in thy carnal wisdom, and
striving, and resisting; but thou must become a Fool, and sit at Jesus feet,
but thou art full, and rich and whole, and need no Physician, and therefore
thou must be sent empty away, and when the Book of Conscience shall be opened,
thou shall be judged for what thou have done against the Innocent.

Now something in Answer to the Fourth Particular, which thou say is a
Tenent held forth by the Northern people; which is, A denying of the Ascension
and Being of the Body of Christ.

Answ. O thou Enemy of Righteousness, when will thou cease to pervert the right
Way of God, who utters thy Lies and Slanders against the Innocent; God shall
judge thee, and between thee and us, whether thou have not uttered Lies and
false Accusations in the Name of the Lord, and put forth in Writing unto the
World for truth, that which is absolutely contrary unto the Truth; God will
reward thee, thou full of subtilty, according to thy deeds, who takes part with
the Dragon against the Lamb, and goes about by thy lying Slanders, to render
the Way of Truth (which thou can not comprehend in thy serpents wisdom)
odious unto all men, but God takes our part against thee, and will dash thy
Lies and Slanders, and thy Impudent Forehead in pieces, even by that Power
which makes the Earth to quake and tremble, which is become a reproach unto
this Generation, many who have heard us since we came to this City (though our
Enemies) shall witness against thee, and for us, in this particular; for we
have often witnessed forth, and I do here again witness forth in the sight of God
and men, that Christ Jesus is risen, and ascended far above all Principalities
and Powers, and the same which descended into the lower parts of the Earth, is
also ascended, and raigns over all, subjecting all unto himself, that he may be
Lord over all, and in all, and may be glorified by all; and Members of his Body
we are (who thou enviously raylst against) and Witnesses of the Body we are
whereof Christ Jesus is Head; and because of the Resurrection of the dead Body,
which is ascended, we are called in question, and all Sects and Opinions are
troubled, and on an uproar concerning us; and I tell thee plainly, we are so
far from denying the Ascension and Being of the Body of Christ, that because
of being called to witness it, as being Members of it, we are persecuted and
reviled by such as thy self, whose carnal conceptions and imaginations of Truth
we do deny, and do testify unto you all, that through death is the
Resurrection and Ascension witnessed, and every one that reads the Scripture is
not witnesses of the resurrection of the body of Christ; and all whose witness
is only without them, other men's words, which had the Witness within them, we
deny to be true Witnesses, but are found false Witnesses of the Resurrection,
and of the Ascension, and knows not Christ, nor his body but by hearsay; and
whereas thou bringst many Scriptures to prove his Resurrection and Ascension: I
answer, the Scriptures we own to be a true Declaration of the Witness which was
in the Apostles of the Resurrection and of the Ascension of Christ; but thee we
deny, who are found a Liar and a Slanderer, and thy resurrection will be unto
condemnation, and thy ascension will prove a descending into the
Bottomless-pit, for ever to be tormented, except thou repent; and from the Life
of the holy men of God thou are razed out, who art found in the way of
ungodliness, and thou have nothing to do to profess their words, who art out of
their life, nor no inheritance in their words, but as thou steals them, adding
thy own imaginations upon them, and wresting them to thy own destruction, being
one unlearned in the Way of God, and in the Doctrine of Christ.

And whereas thou say, And thus you see how these men deny the Lord that
bought them, if they deny the Body that was crucified for them.

I answer, We deny not the Lord that bought us, for by him can we say we have
received the end of his coming, and of his Death and Ascension, even he has
purchased us, and set us free from the Power and Kingdom of the Devil, of Lies,
and Slanders, and false Accusations of us, by whom the Man-child is brought
forth; and this shall stand for thy own condition, who art a wandering Star, and
has no habitation in the Heavens; God will plead with thee, thou who have set
thy self against the Lord, in Slandring and reviling his servants.

Now to thy fifth Particular, That we deny the Ordinances of Christ, in which
thou say, We also deny the Lord that bought us.

Answ. The Way unto God, and unto Everlasting Life, which is Christ Jesus, we
do not deny, but are true Witnesses, that same Christ alone which was crucified
at Jerusalem, and which God has raised from the dead, and which is ascended,
in him alone is Salvation, and by him also alone are all justified that believe
in him; and this we declare freely unto all people, that Christ is the
Ordinance of God, ordained by him, for the Salvation of all that believe, and
for the Condemnation of all that believe not in him; and that the Way unto this
Christ, is not any outward visible thing, but even that which is manifest from
him, leads up unto him, even the Light by which he has enlightened every one
that comes into the World, which is Spiritual, as Christ is Spiritual; and
whereas thou say, there is nothing that Christ commanded, but we deny it,
mentioning only your Baptism, and Breaking of Bread, which is your Idol, and
your Image you bow unto; the one Baptism, which is by one Spirit into one Body,
into the Death of Christ, we are Witnesses of; and the Bread which we break, is
the Communion of the Body of Christ, and we being many, are one Bread; but the
beggarly Rudiments of the World we testify against, being Witnesses of the
Substance, and your taking on practices in that nature which is contrary unto
Christ, from the Words and Commands of Christ, unto them that followed him, we
also testify against; and in it you are found among the Papists, which walks
by Tradition, and not from the Motion of the Spirit of God; and here thou art
found a Liar; for the Commands of Christ is our life, our joy, our peace and
glory, and hereby we know that we love him, because we keep his Commandments,
and they are not grevious unto us (which is not received by tradition from
without us, but by the Eternal Spirit, Christ Jesus revealed in us, which is
not contrary to his Commands without, but a fulfilling of them; for he is not a
Jew who is one outwardly, whose praise is of men; neither is the Obedience
which Christ does require a conforming the outward man unto an outward thing,
which Obedience is your boasting only, and there only your difference lies
from all the World, in the outward appearance, Pharisee-like; but the ground of
enmity, and seat of the Beast is standing within, and you are twofold more the
children of the Devil; and God is risen to confound you, and to break your
Image to pieces; and he shall have the praise of God who is the Jew inward,
whose obedience and circumcision is inward, and who have no confidence in the
flesh: And whereas thou exhorts to hear one loving Reproof out of the
Scripture, which their Predecessors (I mean the Papists) thou say would have
taken from us in the English Tongue, and these would take from us the virtue of
it, that is to say, the sharpness and sweeness of it, by working upon us a
dislike to it: I Answer, we do deny thy voice, and though thou may bring
Scripture in thy mouth to us, it is but as the Devil brought it to Christ, and
we deny it from thee; for if thou say God lives thou swears falsely; and the
Papists they are thy Predecessors, who walks only by tradition as thou do,
from a thing without them, separate from the Life, and both them and thee we do
deny, and bears witness against you, to be without God, in the World, in the
alienation, out of the Covenant, knowing nothing of him but what you have heard
by a Fame and a Report and that we in the least would take from any the virtue
of the Scripture; it is a Lie uttered by the Devil in thee: for we testify
unto all, that it shall every tittle be fulfilled, even upon the ungodly, and
thou shall know it one day to be fulfilled upon thee, thou Liar must be cast
into the Lake that burns for ever; and this is the sharpness and sweetness
which thou must have from it, who art a false Accuser of the Brethren, bearing
the Image of the Dragon, the Devil, whose servant thou art, as it is made
manifest by thy Writing; and this many will witness with us, that often we do
declare upon the just and the unjust the Scripture must be fulfilled, and the
righteous must have a Reward, and the ungodly must have their Portion in utter
darkness, according as the Scripture says; and herein we establish the
Scripture in its place, to be a true Declaration of God and Christ, and what
the righteous and the wiced shall enjoy; but that it is God and Christ, or the
Way unto Life, we deny it; for this is its virtue, a declaration of that which
the Saints believed, and he that witnesses the same Life and Truth which it
testifies of, to be made manifest in him, is a Witness of it, and it is a
Witness unto him, and this is the virtue of it; if thou have an ear thou may
hear, and that we work upon Any a dislike of the Scriptures, I charge thee to
be a Liar; for to the fulfilling and establishing of it we declare, that every
one may walk up in the Life of it, by that which gave it forth, and to be a
true witness of it, as they were that spoke it; but thee, and all such we do
deny, which adds your imaginations upon it, to sell for money.

And whereas thou say by way of Query to us, [Hath the Scripture no power
over you? have you a spirit to guide you without a written word; it is out of
Gods Government if it cannot be brought to the Law and to the Testimony?]

I answer, Jesus Christ only has power over us, and not a Letter without us;
and the Spirit by which we are guided, is no other but that which gave forth
the Scripture, which Spirit is the Word of God, and which Spirit the Scripture
bears witness unto; and this we often say, if we speak or act contrary to
Scripture, let us be judged by the Scripture; and we, as Paul did, do commend
all that shall search the Scripture, to try whether these things be not so
which we declare; and herein we are under the Government of God, who alone has
power over us; but you who have not the same spirit which gave forth the
Scripture, neither knows it nor us; but out of the evil corrupt ground thou
judge of it, as thou do of us, and both thy judgment of it and us is to be
judged by the Eternal Light of Christ, which never erreth nor changes.

And whereas thou say [We may be Familiar-spirits for ought thou know,
what muttering and uncouth howling is among us, which you cannot but impute to
be a spirit contrary to the Word, if we will not come to the Word to be tried.]

I answer, it is true, thou know us not, for we are unknown to thy
Generation, (though you have the Scripture, which we in our lives and
practices, are Witnesses of) as Christ was unknown to the Pharisees, who had
the Scripture, which he came to fulfill; and thou art ignorant of the Scripture,
and a Scorner of the Power of it, who callst the Power of the Lord uncouth
howling; what would you have said concerning David, who lay roaring all the day
long even as a man distracted? and concerning Habakkuk, whose belly trembled,
and whose lips quivered when he heard the Voice of God? But here you are made
manifest, who scorns that which the Scripture bears witness of, and never knew
what it was to be pricked to the heart, as they were which cried out, what
shall we do to be saved? and, if thou can, thou may try by the Scripture,
whether this be any other but that which the Scripture speaks of, and not the
same Spirit which made the Servants of God to quake and tremble, which the
Scriptures speaks of, which this day is become a reproach, even unto them that
profess the Scripture; for by the Word of God, which the Scripture declares of
shall all flesh tremble and be confounded, and then thy self shall be judged
into the Lake that burns for ever, except thou repent.

And whereas thou say, How shall you do to try spirits, if we deny both the
written Word which is your Rule, and Reason too; for we appeal from both.

Answ. Art thou not ashamed to say, The Scripture is thy Rule, who art found a
Liar and a false Accuser; thy Rule shall try thee, and shall bear witness
against thee, when God judges thee by Jesus Christ; for neither by the
Scripture nor thy corrupt reason, can thou know the things of God, who art a
natural man, in the fall, in the World, without God: But again I say, let any
try us, in our lives and in our practices, and if we speak or act contrary to
the Scripture, judge us by it; but thy eye is blinded, and when thou feast the
Scripture fulfilled, even crying out as a Woman in travel, thou calls it
uncouth howling, and a spirit contrary to the Scripture; and how art thou able
to try who art blind and deaf in the mystery of the Kingdom of God, for thy
reason must never enter unto God, but is shut out, and in seeing thou see
not, and in hearing thou do not understanst; and upon thee herein is the
Scripture fulfilled.

And whereas thou say, We will not have Christ to rule over us, for we deny
both his Person and Word, which is the Rule of Life and Love.

I answer, O thou Liar, God shall judge thee, let shame cover thee, and let thy
own Conscience convince thee of thy Lies and Slanders against the Innocent,
Christ Jesus is our Head, and we are of his Body, and his Word is sweet unto
us, even our life and rule of life, and by him we see thee to be an Enemy to
him, and from him I judge thee; not his Word, but the spirit of the Devil is
thy rule, for he is the Ruler and Father of Lies and Liars, and thy Portion
thou must have with him in the Lake; and what thou say of us it shall stand
for thy own Condition, thou will not have Christ to rule over thee, who lives
in thy lust and carnal mind without the fear of God, which Christ comes to
destroy in all that witness him.

And whereas thou say, In the Name of God thou proclaimest, That those men
that disown the written Word, are not Spiritual men; they may have the Spirit
of Antichrist.

Answ. Thou have nothing to proclaim from God, but as the false Prophets had
other men's words; and also I say, if thou find any that disown the Scripture,
we also disown such, and do say they are not spiritual men, but have the spirit
of Antichrist, and of this number thou art, guided by the spirit of Antichrist,
who art a Liar and a false Accuser, which is contrary to the Spirit of Christ,
and art without Faith, and so art unreasonable in the corrupt reason, without
pure and undefiled Reason.

And whereas thou say, Who but the spirit of Antichrist durst countermand
the Commands of our Lawgiver the Lord Jesus Christ?

I answ. The Commands of Christ are Spiritual, and in and by the Spirit, and
not traditional from the Letter without, and Antichrist may conform to the
Command without, as the Pharisees did, and yet be an Enemy to the Life and
Substance of his Commands; and this is thy own condition as it was the
Pharisees, who said, He destroyed the Law, who came to fulfill it, as thou
say, We make void and deny the Commands of Christ, when as we are Witnesses
of them, and directs all unto the fulfilling of them; and thy spirit here is
tried to be the spirit of Antichrist, the same which was in them which
persecuted Christ; and thou raylst and slanderest his Members.

And whereas thou say, There were never any men appeared in the World so
like those that Peter speaks of in his second Epistle; and these desire to
overthrow the Writings of the Spirit of God.

I answ. Peter spoke of such as thou art, for as a Cloud carried about with a
Tempest thou art, and a Well without water, and defilest the flesh, and
dispisest the Saints dignity, and speak great swelling words of Vanity,
whilst thou thy self art a Servant of corruption, serving the Devil, by lying
and falsely accusing: and that we desire to overthrow the Writings of the Spirit
of God, thou art a Liar, for we go about to establish them, and declares of him
who is the Substance of them, and God will reward thee according to thy deeds:
Who also accuses us of unseemly Kissing in Glasiers-hall, thou say, if Mr
Pope do not belie us.

I answer, This is another Lie which proceeds from thee; let all the honest
hearted which ever have frequented our Assembly at that Place testify against
thee, and Pope, and your father the Devil, whom by lying you, serve, and that
no unseemly Actions have proceeded from us, but Sobriety and Civility; and
unseemly Actions shall stand for thy own condition, they are such as thy self,
who commits unseemly brawling, and folly, and vain contending against the Truth
in Glasiers-hall, as many Honest-hearted will witness against you, and for us
who have seen your base actions, as Scorning and Flouting in that Place; and so
here you your selves are guilty of the Wontonness which Peter speaks of, and of
aluring through the lust of the flesh, which thou slanderously would cast it
upon us.

And thou further say, None ever promised to themselves so much liberty as
these and the Ranters, in being freed from the power and trial of the Word.

I answer, Both the Ranters and thee we do absolutely deny, and testify
against you both to be in the enmity against God, and against us who are his
Servants: Thou before did rank us with the Papists, and now among the
Ranters; but herein the Scripture is fulfilled upon us, as they have done unto
Christ, so they do unto us; he was numbered among Transgressors by the
Generation of painted Sepulchers, and whited Walls, as we are by thee; and all
liberty which is of the flesh, and to the flesh, we do deny, as many can
witness, who are Witnesses of our Ministry; and again I say, he that is able,
let him try us by the Scripture; but thou art blind, and has hardened thy
heart against God, and has neither salt nor savory, and so are good for
nothing but to be trodden under foot.

And whereas thou say, The Lord bless every one of his from the condition of
Chandler, who formerly was the head of a Company of Shakers.

I answer, The day is coming when thou can not flee the wrath of God, though
thou pray, God will not hear thee; and if ever thou have seen Chandler in this
condition, thou might have read thy figure in him, weeping, and howling, and
gnashing of teeth will be thy portion for ever; and I say unto thee, this
condition of Chandlers is not come upon him, because he was once a Shaker, by
the dread of the Lord upon him, but because he went out from that condition,
out of the fear of God into the liberty of the flesh, out of his shaking and
fearing state which once he was in, and this he shall witness with me to be
true, and against thee, who would reproach the Way of Truth by him, when the
Book of Conscience is opened.

And whereas thou further say, Their spirit will persuade them that they are
not fallen from righteousness, and would therefore justify them.

I answer, We are gathered up into righteousness, and fallen from vanity, and
this the Spirit of God persuades us, and witnesses in us and for us, by which
only we are justified freely, and not by the works of the Law, nor by any
outward observance; and herein thou also art a Liar; who say, we are fallen
from righteousness, for even the righteousness of God is manifested to us, by
which we deny all your carnal outward observances, by which you think to obtain
life and righteousness.

Now in answer to thy sixth Particular, which thou calls a heavy and sad
offense, which is a denying honor to men, which thou say is the example of
good men; to which I do answer: God has commanded to honor him alone, and not
to how down to any Creature, and thou have brought many Scriptures to oppose
the command of God, and so art more fully made manifest to be an enemy unto
him, which would plead against him, by that which is written from him, pleading
the example of good men, which is no example to us to break the command of God,
no more then David's example in coming whoredom, and Joseph's example in
swearing by the life of Pharaoh, is an example for any to act those things now;
and I do utterly deny that any of these Scriptures, which thou have cited, will
prove and maintain your heathenish custom, in your deceitful way of honoring
one another, to please the Devil in one another, which is without the fear of
God; and it is a sad offense to none but the Devil, because it weakens and
disturbs his Kingdom, of which thou art, as is made manifest, who pleads to
uphold it from the Scripture; but vain honor with flattering titles unto any
man, we do deny; but yet we honor all men in the Lord, and out of him we
honor none, to uphold the pride of man for God will bring it all down, and lay
it in the dust, and exalt himself, to reign over you all; and whereas thou
say, [how far are these men from the holy Writ:] To which I say and answer,
thou slanderously would make us to appear odious in the sight of men, but all
the upright in heart will see thee, and thy blindness and ignorance, who
bringst that Scripture where Christ (in fulfilling the Law of God, which he
came to fulfill) worshipped in the Temple, to prove and maintain the worship of
man.

Answ. O thou blind Pharisee and perverter of the Scripture, God will plague
thee, thou enemy of his truth; who perverts the Scripture, to thy own
destruction, and art worse then the Pharisees, who said, he respected no man's
person, and they shall witness against thee; and whereas thou speaks of
honoring Father and Mother, which thou say we deny in this our practice: I
answer, I charge thee to be a Liar, for, as I said, we honor all men in the
Lord, and direct all Children and Servants, to obey their Parents and Masters
in the Lord; and this many can witness for us, which have more frequented our
Assemblies then thou have done; but this we also testify, where the obedience
to any man stands in opposition to God, the obedience to God is rather to be
chosen; and herein he that will not hate Father or Mother for Christ sake is
not worthy of him; but thou carnal earthly man art pleading for the Kingdom of
the Devil, to honor man above God; and I say how can you believe, that seeks
honor one of another? your honor and your heathenish custom we testify
against, yet unto every Ordinance of man we are subject for Conscience sake.

Now to that which you call the seventh mistake, [affording absolute perfection
at one Instant, in admitting of none but perfect men into conjunction.]

Answ. It is a mistake in thee, for such a word never proceeded from us, I may
say it is rather an absolute Lie invented by thee, to make us odious, then a
mistake from us; for thy heart is desperately wicked, and thy torment is
kindling by the Breath of the Almighty; many which have heard us will testify
against thee; for we say the Saints have their growth up into a perfect man in
Christ, as Christ himself had, and we say also, there is children, and young
men, and fathers, as the Apostle said, but thou art not ashamed to utter thy
Lies and Slanders, which hundreds in this City will witness against thee for a
Liar; and even the light in thy Conscience will accuse thee to thy face, that
thou have imagined lies and mischief upon thy bed against us; and whereas thou
bringst many Scriptures to prove thy slanders against us to be true: to which I
answer, all the Scriptures we own and bear witness unto, by that Spirit from
which they were spoken; but thee and thy spirit we deny, for both you and it is
of the Devil; and thou have devillishly added thy imaginations upon them, and
wrested them, which I shall not now mention, because I do deny the thing which
thou assertest, for its an absolute lie, and do say unto thee, God will reward
thee thou slanderous tongue: and whereas further thou say, [in our
perfection, we deny any man, being under frailty, or capableness to sin, to be
of our communion.]

I answer, here again thou art a Liar, these words were never uttered by us, as
thou have set them down; but I say he that sins is of the Devil, and such we
have no unity withal, nor such has no unity with God; for no impure thing
enters to him, nor has communion with him; for whosoever works abomination, is
to be cast out, and trodden in the winepress of his wrath, where the portion of
Liars is, among whom thou must receive thy reward; for with such we have no
union, who are disobedient children, but with him who in the least measure
which he has received from God, walks up in the Light unto God, we have unity
and communion with him. Thou say one of us told thee [that which sinned could
not be saved.] I answer, it is out of the reach of thy wisdom, and thy
vulterous eye shall never see it; I say as the Scripture says, The soul that
sins must die, and every man must die for his own iniquity, if thou have an
ear thou may hear; and further thou say, [that our Doctrine may appear to
be utterly against the Scripture thou bringst, Romans 7. 23.] where Paul was
under the Law, and saw a Law in the members warring against the Law of the
mind: I answer, his Scripture we own, and are ture Witnesses of it; but there
was also a time, that the Law of the Spirit of Life had freed him from the Law
of sin and death; but thy ignorance is made manifest, who bringst one Scripture
to oppose another, and know not the conditions in thy self, from which Paul
spoke, and so art ignorant of what he spoke; for I say, there is a time without
the Law, and a time under the Law, and a time dead to the Law, and not under
it, and all these states Paul witnessed, which we also in our measures are
witnesses of, which thou know not in thy self, and so wrests Paul's words; And
whereas thou say, [Yet let not them think that we by this doctrine nourish
sin, having brought many Scriptures to plead for sin;] I answer, being guilty
in thy self, thou art afraid, and has a jealousy lest we should lay it to thy
charge; and truly concerning thee we think nothing in this matter, for thy
heart, and the secrets of it is made manifest in the Eternal Light, by which
thou are comprehended, and answered, and by which God will eternal judge thee;
therefore repent lest the wrath of God overtake thee, and thou be swept away
with the Beesom of destruction, who has falsely accused and slandered us with
lies and false reproaches: but now its the time that Pilate and Herod is made
Friends, and Gog and Magog is gathered together to compass the Camp of the
Saints about; and even the Priests and their Crew, and the Anabaptists and
their Crew, and all Sects is combined against the Truth, but God is with us,
and in him alone can we rejoice over you all for ever and ever; and in him make
our boast all the day long, for this is our heritage; every tongue that rises
up in judgment against us shall be condemned, for the Lord is our portion, and
even the stone which is become the head stone of the corner; and thou Howet
shall be grinded to powder by it, who has bent thy bow to shoot at the
righteous; therefore consider what thou have done, and repent, lest God tear
thee in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

By one who is zealous for the Name of the Lord of Hosts, called, EDWARD
BOROUGH.

Answers to several Queries Put forth to the despised People, called Quakers,
by Philip Bennett, who calls himself a Minister of Christ, but is found a
Deceiver. Also Answers to several other Queries put forth by John Reeve, who
lives in the City of London, who calls himself, The last Messenger and Witness
unto the true God, but is found a false Witness, and a Liar, and a Perverter of
the right Way of God.
A Paper being received which was directed to Rich. Roper, and to his Quaking
Friend, which words comes from the dark carnal mind: quaking and trembling,
which the Saints and holy men of God witnessed, we own and witness; therefore
we do deny thee, and all thy dark Divinations.
WHereas thou Philip Bennett, in thy Note which thou have written to Roper, in
Answer to a Letter which he wrote to thee, wherein he charges thee to be a
Liar, and a false Accuser, and charges thee to bring any man to witness what
thou have spoken by them, whom thou say, denied that Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, and who they were that denied that Christ that suffered at
Jerusalem, or else acknowledge thy self to be a Slanderer; and in thy Paper,
thou gives no Answer at all to these words, but say, thou call the
Congregation to witness, but does not mention one in all the Congregation that
will witness it; whereupon the Lie rests upon thy head, and thou found to be
the Liar, and the Slanderer, and the false Accuser.

And whereas thou say, thou have sent queries concerning that matter; thy
queries makes thee manifest what thou art, many of thy own Tribe and
Generation, if they saw thy queries, would be ashamed both of thee and of thy
queries; for hundreds there are in the world that know nothing of the true and
living God, and yet would see thee and thy queries not to be worth answering;
yet lest thou should boast in thy filthy ignorance and darkness, and for
clearing of the Truth to the simple: Something in answer to them.

1 Quer. Whether was the Word made flesh, or the Son of God made of a Woman
more, or oftener, then once?

Answ. In this first query thou have manifested what thou art, to all the
Children of Light, and where thou art, and what spirit thou art of, a
Reprobate, a child of Darkness thou art; thou might have spared the other
nineteen queries, for in this query thy spirit is tried, and in the Eternal
Light seen and known: Thou ask whether the Word was made Flesh any more or
oftener then once, which makes it plainly manifest, that thou know no^ ^^at
thou ask, and that thou do not know, nor can not witness the Word to be
made Flesh once, but art one of the Antichrists and Deceivers which John speaks
of, that are entered into the World, which cannot confess Jesus Christ come in
the flesh; and therefore thou queries whether the Word was made Flesh any more
or oftener than once, which query comes from thy dark polluted mind, who is out
of the Light, and a Stranger to the Life, and without God in the world, amongst
the false Prophets, Antichrists and Deceivers which are in the world, and in
the Light of Christ, which condemns the world, ye are all seen known, and made
manifest, and are turned away from by these who dwell in the Light, which Light
condemns thee and all thy Generation eternally; and the Word made flesh we
witness, which dwells amongst us, and we behold his glory as the glory of the
only begotten of the Father, according to the Scripture; whereby we witness
thee, and all thy Generation, to be in the Sorcery, and in the Witchcraft,
deceiving and betraying the Souls of the Simple, the Light of Christ in thy
Conscience will tell thee so, for that thou must be obedient to, and witness
before thou witness the Word to be made flesh once, for thou art Darkness it
self; and the Light in thy Conscience, if thou would let it rise, will be thy
condemnation, and when thou can witness the Word to be made flesh once, then
thou will know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman any more or oftener
than once: But thou art the Dragon that would devour the Man-child which the
Woman has brought forth, who shall rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, and
her Child is caught up to God, and to his Throne, and thou, the Dragon, and thy
Angels are cast out into the Earth; and therefore do thou persecute the Woman
which has brought forth the Man-child; but thou art overcome by the Blood of
the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony; and for thy other nineteen queries,
thou have conjured them up in thy black Art, out of the Bottomless-pit, which
is to be turned into perdition; if thou had an ear thou might hear, or a
eye thou might read; but thou art blind.

2 Quer. Whether did the Man Christ Jesus the Son of God, slain, (in respect of
Gods Decree and Efficacy of his Death) from the foundation of the world really
and indeed suffer death, or dissolution of Soul and Body, as upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, more or oftener than once.

Answ. Here in this query thou, Diviner, art found adding to the Scripture thy
divinations of thy own brain, whereupon the plagues of God is to be added unto
thee, and poured upon thee, for as thou say, the Man Christ Jesus; the Lamb
of God, slain (in respect of Gods Decree and Efficacy of his Death) from the
Foundation of the World. Oh thou Liar, let all people see where there is such a
Scripture that speaks as thou speakst here; but in the Light of Christ thou art
seen, and in the life comprehended, and art for condemnation. The man Christ
Jesus we own, and witness, and the Lambs Book of Life, which was slain from the
Foundation of the world we witness the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins
of the world; this we witness according to the Scripture, praises, praises
eternal praises, be to the Lord God for ever, and thee to be the Beast that
makes war with the Lamb we witness, and thou Antichrist which looks at Christ's
death at Jerusalem alone, and cannot confess him no otherwise but without thee;
here thou art but equal with the Pope of Rome, for he confesses Christ dyed at
Jerusalem as well as thou; so let all thy Congregation see what they hold up
that follows thee.

3. Quer. Whether did the man Christ ever really and indeed suffer in his own
person, for that end and, after that manner which he did once upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, before the time, or since the time?

Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty have made manifest thy Poison and enmity,
but with the Light of Christ thou art seen, and known, and with it condemned
for ever; Christ Jesus in his own Person does, and ever did, suffer by thee,
and such as thou art, and by thy Generation he did suffer at Jerusalem, and
does suffer where he is made manifest by you, after the same manner, and thou
Blind-Pharisee and Blasphemer, would thou have Christ to have more ends in
suffering then one?

4 Quer. Whether was not that death which the man Christ suffered once, and but
once, upon the Cross at Jerusalem, so satisfactory for all the sins of the
Elect, as that the Justice of God, did not, does not since require any
suffering or working upon that account, either from Sinner or from Saint.

Answ. Here thou, Jesuit, art pleading again for a Christ far off thee,
according as thy Father does at Rome: That Christ that dyed at Jerusalem did
not satisfy for thee who art an enemy to him, and does not abide in his
Doctrine, but acts contrary to his Commands, and art under the woe, which he
cried against them that were in the same steps where thou art, and from that woe
thou shall never flee: The death of the man Christ Jesus which suffered at
Jerusalem we own and witness; the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem we
witness made manifest, and the one God and the one Mediator we witness and
know, betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, according to the Scripture:
And here thou Liar art made 2 Timothy 2. 10. Tit. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
1 Pet. 5. 13.
manifest to all thy Congregation to be a Liar, who said amongst them, that we
denied that Christ that died at Jerusalem, so let them all be Witnesses of thy
Lies, and let thy mouth be stopped thou Liar, who art for the Lake; and whereas
thou queries; whether the justice of God be not satisfied for the sins of the
Elect? here let shame strike thee in the face, that ever thou should take
upon thee to speak to any people, and know not the Scripture; where do thou
read in all the Scripture, that God does require satisfaction for the sins of
the Elect, or laid any thing to their charge, let all people try thee here by
the Scripture, and see whether thou be not a blind ignorant Sot, who does not
know what the Justice of God requires, neither from Sinner nor from Saint, Isa.
42. 1. Isa. 65. 9. 22. Luke 18. 7. Romans 8. 33.

5 Quer. Whether you are reconciled to God by any other obedience, than that
particular obedience which Christ performed in his own Person, and is mentioned
in the Scripture, or by any other suffering or death, than that which Christ
once suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem?

Answ. Silence flesh: would thou, (who art an Enemy to God, and a child of
disobedience, in whom the Prince of the Air rules) know how we are reconciled
to God, and by what obedience; first own the Light in thy Conscience which
condemns thee, and be obedient to that, and then thou shall know by what
obedience it is that we are reconciled to God; for yet thou know no
obedience, nor the Death which Christ suffered upon the Cross, thou do not
know, but art an Enemy to the Cross of Christ, and in the mystery of iniquity,
and in the dark power and man of sin; what have thou to do to talk of
obedience, who art reconciled to thy lust, and sin reigns in thee, and thou art
blind, in the broad way that leads to death, as thy fruits makes it manifest,
who lives in strife and envy?

6 Quer. Whether did not the Man Christ suffer as a public Person in the
Elects stead, or in their behalf, and for that end that none who believed in
him might dye eternally?

Answ. There thou Blind-Guide, make many replys, but still one and the same
thing, but thou make it manifest, that thou do not know the man Christ at
all, nor his sufferings, for that death reigns in thee yet that has passed
over all men that asks this query; for a public Person Christ is not to thee,
but a mystery which thou know nothing of, and for the redeeming of the Elect
from under such mouths as thine, did and does Christ suffer; and those that are
brought to believe, deny such dumb Idol Shepherds as thee, who as yet does not
believe, and therefore shall dye eternally, except they repent.

7 Quer. Whether the sufferings of Christ now in his Saints, be all the
satisfaction that is made to, or which the justice of God looks for, for sins
past, present and to come?

Answ. There thou Blasphemer ask thou know not what; is not Christ the
same now as ever? and is not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory where ever?
What will thou have to satisfy, if the sufferings of Christ do not satisfy,
let all people take notice what a Blasphemer thou art, or what they can learn
of such a one as thee, who know neither the justice of God, nor the
sufferings of Christ in his Saints.

8 Quer. Whether was not that Body of Jesus which consisted of Flesh, Blood and
Bone, and which was offered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, the one and only
sacrifice for sin God accepted, and to which alone exclusively the Saints
before under the Law, and the Saints since under the Gospel, did, and do look
to be justified by, without any other works.

Answ. Here again thou art replying thy former sottish queries, which rises out
of thy dark mind, concerning the Body of Jesus, as the Devil did about the Body
of Moses; let thy mouth be stopped here, for the Body of Jesus thou know not,
nor what it consists on; and the offering of it up thou know nothing of, but
what thou know and hear by the outward Letter; that it was offered up at
Jerusalem; and the sacrifice for sin thou know not, and thou art none of the
Saints, neither under the Law, nor under the Gospel; but are without in the
world, in the Broad-Way, blind, leading the Blind into the Ditch; and for thee
the Body of Christ is no saisfaction: And thou Reprobate, what have thou to do
to talk of believing? for that is the condition of the Saints, they do believe
and are justified; and their works thou know not, thou disobedient one, upon
whom God will render vengeance in flaming fire.

9. Quer. Whether there be not another righteousness by which the Saints are
justified in the sight of God, than that which Christ works in them and by them?

Answ. There thou accursed, art made manifest, who preaches another Gospel,
and would have another righteousness than that of Christ, here thou Beast, to
whom the Plagues of God is due, and upon whom his wrath must be accomplished,
here thou have made thy self manifest, thou who would have another
righteousness than the Righteousness of Christ, which he works in the Saints,
and by them; and so thou would be justified and live in thy sin, but thou art
shut out from God for ever; and we witness justification by faith, and the just
shall live by his Faith.

10 Quer. Whether does sanctification or justification, in order antecede
holiness of life, or justification by faith go before; or whether does not God
love man, ere man loved God?

Answ. Here thou, dark blind Hypocrite, have shut thy self out from the
knowledge of God in any measure; oh that People should ever be so blind, as to
look for to learn any thing at such a one as thee, but sin and filthiness! and
what have thou been teaching them all this while, that neither know
Sanctification nor Justification yet, but art querying whether goes before? let
all people judge if thou art not a Teacher of Laciviousness, Sin and
Uncleanness; and how dare thou mention a holy life, or justification by Faith,
and know neither Justification nor Sanctification? And thee, man, which art
Cain, God does not love nor accept thee nor thy Sacrifice; and for
Justification by Faith, thou know nothing of it, which we own and witness;
and thou, who art in envy do not love God.

11. Quer. Whether the Justice of God be not fully satisfied for all the Sins
of the Elect; ere Christ appears to their Souls, or Holiness appears in
their Lives?

Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty art comprehended, and with the Light of
Christ thou art seen, and with the Life judged and condemned, who woulde^t lay
sin to the charge of the Elect, when the Scripture faith, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? The Soul that sins shall dye. Thou Sorcerer, Does the Elect of God
sin? Shall the Elect dye? To that in thy Conscience I speak.

12. Quer. Whether the holy Lives, or holy Works of the Saints be not excluded
from the Act of Justification, from the Guilt of Sin?

Answ. Thou dead Beast have made it manifest, that thou art a Stranger from the
Life of God, and is excluded from the holy Life of the Saints and their Works,
who art querying whether this be not excluded from Justification: Oh that ever
thou should open thy mouth, or take upon thee to speak of the Scripture;
Does not the Apostle say, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
Blemish and without Spot, who verily was ordained before the Foundation of the
World was, but was manifest in these last times for you who by him do believe
in God, that raised him up from the dead? Now let all people read this Chapter,
and try thee, who know nothing of Jesus Christ, but as thou have heard of
him, that he was crucified at Jerusalem, and so thou art unredeemed from thy
vain conversation, and so art not justified before God, nor never shall be; but
those that can witness Redemption by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, as all
the Saints of God do, are justified; and by the same that they are justified
thou art condemned into the Lake for ever.

13 Quer. Whether is that righteousness which is wrought by the Saints every
way answerable to the justice of God?

Answ. There again thy blindness is made manifest; is there any righteousness
but that of Jesus Christ? and is not that every way answerable to the justice
of God? but such polluted filthy Beasts as thou would have another
righteousness, as thou speakst plainly in thy ninth query; but all thy
righteousness we deny, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ we own and
witness, whose righteousness shall be revealed upon thee in flames of fire.

14 Quer. Whether none be accounted righteous in Gods sight, in whom there is
any corruption or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of justice?

Answ. Here thou polluted beast, have made it manifest what thou have been
driving at all this while in thy queries, which is, that thou would have
corruption and filthiness to be accounted righteous in Gods sight, that so thou
might lie and wallow in thy sins and filthiness, but John says, that he that
commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sinned from the beginning; and for
this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, that he might destroy the works
of the Devil; and thou man of sin would have it to stand; but those that
loves God keeps his Commandments, and they are not grievous; and God does not
accept any where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer
every demand of justice; and he does reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and chiefly them that walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness; and there thou art.

15 Quer. Whether a soul be justified before God by the non-imputation of sin,
and the imputation of the righteousness of the Person of Christ to his Faith,
or by a righteousness wrought by Christ in the Person justified, or to be
justified.

Answ. Here stop thy mouth, thou Sorcerer, which art gathering up here a heap
of confusion, which is fit for nothing but to be turned with thee into the
bottomless pit, from whence it comes, wherein thou talkest of imputation and
non-imputation, and of a person justified, and to be justified; thy language is
of Egypt, and in the mystery of iniquity, thou speakst it, which is condemned
into the ^ake of perdition by the Light of Christ, and in the Light thou and it
art seen and comprehended; and as I told thee before, I own no righteousness
but what is of Christ and wrought by him, which Righteousness shall confound
thee and all thy unrighteousness and conjuration, and the same that justifies
us shall condemn thee eternally.

16 Quer. Whether Christ be in his Saints in respect of that nature wherein he
suffered at Jerusalem?

Answ. Here, thou Enemy of Christ, would know how the Saints enjoy Christ
here, the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, the Light shines in darkness, and
darkness comprehends is not, when thou comes to own thy condemnation, the Light
in thy conscience it will let thee see thy evil deeds, it will lead thee up to
Christ from whence it comes, and then thou will know that nature that he
suffered in; but now thou art in that nature that Judas was in that betrayed
him, and that they were in that crucified him.

17 Quer. How, and after what manner Christ, who in respect of his Divine
nature is in all places, may be said to be in a Saint, and not in Reprobate?

Answ. What have thou to do to query after the Divine Nature, who art the
natural man, that knows nothing of God, but what thou know naturally as a
bruit beast, and knows not the things that be of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, and the manner of Christ's Divine nature, which is
infinite, is hid from thy eyes; for with that eye that thou should see, with
that art thou blind, and the manner of his being in a Saint thou know not,
who art a Reprobate, and thou shall find him to be thine eternal condemnation.

18 Quer. Whether does Christ now in these days assume or take upon him the
form of a servant, and the seed of Abraham, that is our flesh: And Whether does
not this assumption cause such a perfection of the Godhead and the Manhood,
as that both of them are united together into one person?

Answ. O thou dark Beast and Conjurer, who art querying with thy conjured
words, that which thou know nothing of, and which is out of thy reach, and
comprehension; thou Blasphemer, do thou limit Christ to days, in taking upon
him the form of a Servant, and the seed of Abraham? Is not he the same now as
ever he was? And for the union of the Godhead and Manhood, as thou callst it,
let thy mouth be stopped, for with thee God nor none of his Children has any
union; for God has put an utter enmity, betwixt thy seed, thou Serpent, and
the Seed of the Woman, and the perfect union with Christ we witness, who is the
same to day, yesterday and for ever, and therefore are we separate from thee
and thy Generation.

19 Quer. Whether is Christ now conversant upon earth, amongst men, since his
Ascension, as he was before, and in those times wherein the Apostles lived?

Answ. In thy queries thy speech bewrayes thee, thy language is the language of
Egypt, for in it thou make it clearly manifest that thou know not Christ
at all, not in the least measure, for where the first Principle of Truth is
made manifest, it is the same that ever was, and never changes; and thou ask
whether Christ be now conversant upon Earth amongst men since his Ascension, as
he was in the Apostles time; Do thou know what thou ask? Did he not appear
to the Apostles since his Ascension, in the most glorious manner that ever thou
readst; and is he not the same now as he was then? What would thou make of
him, (thou dark sottish Beast) such a one as thy self? who would be pleading
for darkness and ignorance of God, but praise and glory to him who has
discovered thee and all such Deceivers as thou art.

20 Quer. Whether did not Christ dwell among his Saints, after another and more
visible manner than now he dwells in his Saints?

Answ. There again thou have showed thy ignorance of the Scripture, and for thy
word visible, he is not, nor never was visible to thee, nor to thy Generation,
for those that did profess the Scriptures, as thou, and thy Generation does,
crucified him, and said he was of the Devil, as thou and such as thou art, do
now; thou Blasphemer, where have thou a Scripture that says, that Christ would
dwell in his Saints after another manner? Did he not say, It is expedient for
you that I go away, and I go and prepare n place for you, and I will come again
and receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also; and ye
have heard how I have said I go away and come again unto you, and if ye loved
me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father; and Christ Jesus says in
John 14. 21. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works
that I do, he shall do also, and greater works than these, because I go to the
Father: But all these Scriptures is hid from thy eyes, and thou art one of
those that Isaiah prophesied on; and that Scripture is fulfiled on thee, which
says, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts. Now blessed be the
Lord that has discovered thee, and such Blind-Guides as thou art. So thy
queries are answered in the eternal Light and Life of God, and judgment is
given upon thee and them, which thou shall eternally witness, without roving or
wandering; but thou who art out of the Light art roving, and wandering and
stumbling in darkness; who have put forth these stumbling queries, which are
Answered lovingly and plainly, and in the Scripture Language and Terms, and
with the Eternal Light and Life of God, set thee in thy own place, which thou
shall eternally witness.

These are matters of great concernment, and if you refuse to answer them in
writing, spare your tongues and spare your Papers, for I will henceforth
neither hear the one, nor read the other.

Answ. Thou say, these are matters of great concernment; We see that that
which makes thee manifest, and such as thou art, and which lays thee open to
poor ignorant people, who are deceived by thee, and led into the ditch, and
their souls kept in death by thee; to make this manifest is of great
concernment, as these dark black stumbling queries, and thy conjured words has
done, which thou have no Scripture for, as ambiguity, efficacy, exclusively,
antecede, and non-imputation, assume, and assumption: Now let all people read
and consider what they do that holds such as thee up, who is shut out from God,
and shut out from the Saints life and language, and art shut out of the
Scriptures, though thou make a trade of them for money, and deceives poor
people, but thou know nothing of the Life and Power that gave them forth; So
thou art to be condemned with the Light, and with the Life which gave forth the
Scripture.

Let all people read Deuteronomy. Chap. 18. from verse 9. to 15. there the Priests and
the Levites which were ordained of God, were to have no Inheritance among the
people, but the Lord was their Inheritance, and they were to have it of that
which was offered up to the Lord, and this was a figure of the everlasting
Priesthood which ministers out of the everlasting Treasure; and the Lord God
commanded Israel, not to do as they did when they came into the Land, nor to go
after their abominations, as you may see, but gave Israel their Land to possess
that did hearken unto such as the Lord had not sent, which was Abomination to
him; and the Lord said to Israel, Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God;
and in the 15th verse, The Lord thy God will raise unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken; And so
to the end of the Chapter; he that has an eye may see, and the Lord is the
same that he was, and he will not suffer the abominations that are committed in
this Land, but is discovering the abomination of it: A horrible and a filthy
thing is committed, which Jeremiah cried against, Coveteous Men preach,
Drunkards preach, Swearers preach, Liars preach, Strikers preach, and Proud Men
preach: Oh wonderful! where are your eyes? Try your Priests by the Scriptures,
see if they be not found in the same Generation that all the false Prophets and
the Deceivers were in, which the true Prophets of God cried against, and
discovered; and in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, that Christ cried woe
against; and see if they be not the Antichrists and the Deceivers which are
entered into the World, which John speaks of, which cannot confess Christ come
in the flesh, but transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, so
has not God, neither knows him, but preaches for sin, and against
Perfection; and denies the Light which enlighteneth every one that comes into
the World, and so keeps people in blindness and ignorance, and out of the
Knowledge of God, and never any that follow them shall ever come to the
Knowledge of the true and living God; therefore all people see where you are,
and mind the Light in your Consciences, which is pure, and which testifies
against sin, and it will let you see all your Blind-Guides which deceive you,
to be in sin, and ignorant of God; for they deny that which should make him
manifest, therefore beware what you hold up, and give over going after them; to
that in your Consciences I speak, which shall witness me eternally to speak the
Truth, if you obey it; and shall condemn you eternally, if you disobey it.

These Blinde-Guides that are in this Land, deny the Prophet which Moses wrote
of, which is the substance of the Priesthood, which was before, and here they
are found in the same Generation, in the Sorcery and in the Witchcraft, which
the Lord commanded should be put out of the Land, where the Children of Israel
went to possess.

Answers to several other subtle Queries, put forth by one John Reeve, who
lives in the City of London, who callst himself the Messenger and Witness unto
the true God, but is found a Liar, and a Perverter of the right Way of God.
A Certain Writing is come to my hand, called An Epistle from the Mighty
JEHOVAH, or Jesus the only LORD, and God of the E^ect Israelites, from one,
whose name is subscribed John Reeve, Pilgrim, who calls himself the last
Messenger, and Witness unto the true God, unto which, for the sake of the
Simple, I am moved by the Spirit of the Lord of Heaven and Earth to write
something in answer, that so his folly may be made manifest, and his ignorance
and blasphemy laid open unto the simplehearted, who have been long deceived by
such through their false Voice, lo here, and lo there: Friend, to thee, who
have subscribed this Writing, who calls thy self the last Messenger, and
Witness unto the true God: I Answer, the Lord of Hosts, and God of the Elect
Israelites, does not accept thy Testimony and Witness; for thy spirit is made
manifest not to be the Spirit which came from God, and which dwells with God,
which bears true Witness unto God; but the spirit which is driven out from
the Presence of God, into the Creation, and into the visible World; and that is
the lying spirit, and bears not true witness unto the true God, but is a spirit
which bears witness to the imaginations of thy own heart, which looks upon, and
declares the living God, as if he was carnal, and a Creature-like Substance;
and here the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, thou think he is altogether
such a one as thy self; and for the true God thou art no Messenger, nor have
received any Message from him, for thy spirit is known, and he never delivered
his Message unto it in any Generation, but kept his Secret sealed up from it:
And Friend, here I charge thee, in the Presence of the true spiritual God, that
thou belyst the Lord of Hosts, who say thy Epistle is from him; thou uses
thy tongue, and say, The Lord says, when, says the Lord, I have not spoken
unto thee: And of that Generation thou art which Jeremiah cried against; and
therefore let all flesh be silent before the Lord, and call not thy own
imaginations his Word, but thou who have a Dream, tell thy Dream for a Dream,
and he that has the Word of the Lord, let him speak it faithfully; and though
thou call thy self the last Messenger, or Witness unto the true God; yet I
say unto thee, verily the Lord has a Witness which was before thee, which has
been slain in the Streets of the great City, which the Lord will bring forth
after thee, which will bear true witness of the true God, and, against thee;
and thou, who have been alive, shall be judged by him who has lain slain, and
he will eternally condemn thy Testimony and Message: Friend, in the Light of
Christ, which has lightened every one that comes into the World, thou art
comprehended, and seen, thy beginning, thy time, and thy end, and with it thy
Testimony and Message is denied, for thy Testimony is such, that if thou
swearst the Lord lives, thou swearest falsely; and further thou say, [By
inspiration of the holy Spirit thou wast moved to present this Epistle:] I
answer, the language of the holy Spirit is like it self, Pure and Spiritual,
but thy language is carnal and sensual, and so is thy spirit; the Saints which
spoke by the inspiration and moving of the Spirit, cursed not that which God
had blessed, as thou do; neither did they say the Elect were defiled, as thou
do; neither did they speak of God as a carnal Substance, as thou do, but
said that God was a Spirit; and here art thou a Witness against thy self, that
thou speak not by the inspiration and moving of the holy Spirit, but
speak thy imaginations and lies in the Name of the Lord: And whereas thou
say, [In this confused Age there has appeared variety of spirits,
pretending to be sent by the everlasting God, yet they are at war with all
their power to overthrow one another, that their own Opinions may bear rule.] I
Answer, Among the Many Pretenders thou speak of, thou art one; and it is
true, you are at war with all your power endeavoring to overthrow one another,
that your own Opinions may bear rule, and though there be among you variety of
Opinions, yet by one spirit you act, for the Kingdom of the Devil is but one,
and yet divided, and it is at war with it self, and therefore it cannot stand;
and you cannot overthrow one another, but one is appearing to overthrow you
all, and all your Opinions; for all you Pretenders are made manifest by your
fruits, and thereby men may try you; for nothing is to be gathered from you but
Opinions and airy Imaginations, some of you speaking of a God and Christ a far
off to believe in, others of you speaking of a God and of a Christ within, and
a far off to believe in; thus you feed people by your own imaginations; and
some of you pretend Revelation, others of you denying Revelation; and thus you
strive to set up your own Opinions, but you live all in one nature, and are of
one Generation, and he that walks in the Light sees you all, and comprehends
you all, and judges all your Opinions, and are redeemed out of all your vain
imaginations, into the Life of God, acting and speaking as the Spirit acts
and speaks, and seeks to exalt Christ, and him to bear rule, that all
Opinions may be by him thrown down, and that by him people may be brought out
of a confused Age, into the Land of Rest, and Peace, and Righteousness, to
serve the true Spiritual God in the Spirit, and by the Spirit of his own Son:
And further, thou say [Some there are that take upon them to speak of a God,
and of a Christ in the invisible Heavens, above the Stars, but are incapable to
demonstrate how Christ by his spiritual Word lives in men's hearts, and how he
reigns visibly in glory with his Elect Angels.] I Answer, there are not some,
but many, which lives in, and speaks forth their own imaginations, upon God and
Christ, and one of them thou art, thy spirit is tried; God who is a Spirit,
dwells in the Spirit of his Son, even in the high and holy Place, and with him
also who is of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at his Word, but this by thy
vulterous eye is not seen, neither can any demonstrate how Christ dwells in the
heart, but he who witnesses it through death, and where he reigns, his Glory
is with him and his Elect Angels; this I witness, but to thy carnal eye it is
invisible, and by thy carnal wisdom he can never be known, Christ and his
spiritual Word is not to be divided, though thy sensual spirit would divide
them, but by the Flaming Sword thou that speak art divided from both, and
shall know neither, but to thy condemnation: And further thou say [Others
there are which speak of an eternal Spirit, or Christ only in the Consciences
of men, as if there were no Creator or Christ at all, visibly reigning upon his
Throne of immortal Glory.] I answer, they who talk of an eternal Spirit, or
Christ in the Conscience by hearsay, or of other men's words, without (as thou
do) and does not in Life and Power witness it, from the Father within, made
manifest, such are denied by them who witness the eternal Spirit dwelling with
the contrite heart, which Spirit is the Creator which dwells also in the high
and holy Place, and reigns upon his Throne for ever; and who do in Power
witness this, sees and judges all your carnal imaginations, and conceptions of
the living God in your carnal minds; where he dwells shall no unclean thing
enter, but is without to be trodden in the Wine Press of his Wrath for ever and
ever; and by him shall thy carnal conceptions be consumed, even by the Breath
of his Mouth, for he is Eternal, and his Throne is Eternal, and by the carnal
eye shall never be seen: And further thou say, [There are some (who through
unbelief that ever any living Creature had a beginning) do affirm there is no
God or Christ at all, but perishing nature; this sort are innumerable, witness
the lives and conversations of people every where.] I answer, All who do
witness the Eternal Spirit made manifest, to rule and guide; all such do deny
and declare against such Opinions; for nothing was without beginning but the
Eternal Word, which was the beginning of all things, and will be the end of all
things; even the destruction of the wicked, and the Salvation of them that
believe, who are born of the immortal Seed, and redeemed out of the perishing
nature into the image of God, and such do set to their seal there is a God, who
will reward every one according to their works, and bears witness against them,
who in their lives and conversations denies God, as all do who do not witness
the eternal Spirit of Christ ruling in the Conscience, but talks of a God in
imagination at a distance, and such are innumerable, and says in their hearts,
there is no God, and such are the fools the Scripture speaks of; and whereas
thou beseeches to consider of these ensuing particulars; I answer, They are
considered, and by them thy ignorance is made manifest, and thy folly
disclosed, and thy blasphemy, who calls thy self the last Witness.

1 Quer. In thy first particular thou queriest, Whether these men were sent
forth by the eternal Spirit to preach, which in the least cannot demonstrate
what the only true God is in himself, and how he is a distinct Being from all
living Creatures, and how he reigns in the Elect by a created Word, Voice or
spiritual Motion only.

Answ. Those men were not sent forth by the eternal Spirit to preach, who have
not received it, and such know not God, what he is, nor where he is, but in
their imaginations imagine him to be like a creature, by being in a creaturely
Place or Habitation, God is a Spirit, and he is not distinct from living
creatures, for in him living creatures lives, moves, and have their beings, and
he is not far from them, nor distinct from them, as he spoke who was sent by
the eternal Spirit to preach, he reigns in the Elect not by a created word,
voice, or a created spiritual motion, for the Word which lives in the Elect,
from which voice and motion proceeds, is not created, but is uncreated, even as
God is uncreated, for God is that Word, and here thy ignorance appears, by
calling the Word which lives in the Elect a created word, or voice, or motions;
and here be a witness against thy self that thou speakst from darkness, and not
from Light, which darkness cannot comprehend the shining of the Light; and this
discovers thee more to be a false Witness, and not the true Witness of God, and
therefore thy Portion must be the Portion of false witnesses; read what it is.

Quer. 2. In thy second particular thou queriest, Is not this an infallible
demonstration to men, that a man is sent forth by the eternal Spirit, if he
have received a gift from the holy Ghost, to demonstrate what the true Creator
was in his own distinct Essence, Nature and glory, from all eternity, in time,
and to all eternity, and wherein Elect men and Angels differ in their natures,
and glory, distinct from their Creator in their Persons.

Answ. He that has not received a gift from the Holy Ghost in some measure, is
not sent forth by the Eternal Spirit, or God of all Truth, this is infallible;
and such knows not what the Creator is, but by imagination, and carnal
conceptions of him; and such in the Light of Christ is seen, and by it judged;
and among such thou art, to that in thy Conscience I speak, which will witness
me, he that has received the Holy Ghost, turns people from the power of
Satan to the power of God, and knows the Creator, and the dwelling of him in
the heart; for as the Scripture says, The Word is nigh, but let all flesh be
silent, he who is in time, knows not him which was before time, and shall be
when time shall be no more; he who knows the Creator which inhabiteth Eternity,
is redeemed out of time, into the Habitation of the Almighty; but this to thy
dark mind and spirit is unknown; if ever thou know it, it must be through
death, the nature and glory of the Elect differs not from the Nature and glory
of the Creator, for the Elect are one with the Creator, in his nature, enjoying
his glory, which was from eternity unto eternity, he that reads let him
understand, thy word [distinct Essence,] I deny, for the Elect is not distinct
from the Creator, but lives by the dwelling of the Son in him, and with the Son
the Father dwells also; if thou have an ear, thou may hear.

3 Quer. In thy third particular thou queriest, What that Angelical Serpent was
in his creation, which the Scripture speaks of, and how he came to be cast out
of his glory; and how he overcame innocent Eve, and how he entered into her
womb, and changed her pure Seed into his nature of unclean reason? And thou
ask, What think you, Was not that man Cain the first murdering lying Devil
that ever was? And is there any Devil but proud, vainglorious, unmercifull men
and women?

Ans. That same which speaks in thee is that same servent which the Scripture
speaks of, and if thou have the spirit of Moses, thou know what he was in
the Creation; for Moses saw his Creation by that Spirit which was before he
was; and if thou know his creation in thy self, then thou may know him
without thee; but yet he lies under his vail deceiving thee, and is not
deceived by thee; and by the same which thou lives in, he was cast out of his
glory, even disobedience; and he over came innocent Eve even as he overcomes
thee, by promising what he fulfilled nor, and by presenting that which was
visible, and so her mind was led out, as thine is, and by her consenting, he
entered and got power, and set up his habitation, which is now standing in
thee, and so she became the likeness of himself, her mind and lust strayed
into the visibles, out from the Creator who is invisible, and spiritual, and
she now lives under the curse, and brings forth cursed children, such as thou
art who puts forth these queries; and this child was begotten by him who
deceived her, and he is the Father and Prince of all you who are Wells without
water, Clouds without rain, and wandering Stars, having no habitations in the
Heavens, the blackness of darkness is reserved unto you for ever, ye who speak
great swelling words of vanity (that ye are the last Witnesses and Messengers,
etc.) but you your selves are servants of corruption: and to the last part of
thy query. I answer, before Cain, who is a lying Devil, was a child, he was a
father; and if thou have an ear, thou may hear; the proud, vain glorious,
unmercifull men and women, who bears his image must with him be tormented in
the Lake which burns (by the kindling of the breath of the Almighty) for ever
and ever; and here thou art answered, though not to the feeding of thy wisdom,
but in the Light, by which thou art comprehended, which Light will eternally
condemn thee who hates it.

4 Quer. Thou queries, What condition Adam was formed in, and how he came to
fall from his estate, and what sin it was they committed, (Adam and Eve) and
whereby the Elect and Reprobate are defiled.

Answ. Adam was created in the image of God, and God breathed into him the
breath of life, and he became a living Soul, but eating of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil; therein he turned from the Command of God and did
dye; if thou have an ear thou may hear, and thou that queriest have eaten of
that Tree; and thou shall never know in what condition he was created in, but
through the death: for a sword is set at Edens gate to keep the Tree of life,
which will cut thee down, before ever thou know, or can witness his
estate: and as for the Elect being defiled, here thou make thy self manifest,
that thou never knew what the Elect was, for the Elect is born of God, and
he that is born of God sins not; and the promises of God are to the Elect, and
election obtains it, and the Elect was never defiled: if thou have an ear thou
may hear; that which is defiled shall not enter into the holy City; and here
thou have manifested thy ignorance, and art that Reprobate thou speakst of,
which is ordained of old for condemnation, which is the Transgressor which is
cast out, thou have no communion with the Elect, for thou art defiled, and art
without the Gate, to be trodden in the Wine Press.

5 Quer. What that heavenly glory is, and where it is that the Elect Wheat of
Christ shall eternally enjoy, who are the Seed of Adam, and not of Cain?

Answ. What that glory which the Elect, which thou have spoke of in thy fourth
query shall inherit, which was and is defiled, it is to be in Hell, in utter
darkness for ever and ever, where all the unclean are; and thou would know
where it is; it is without the Gate of the City; among the Dogs and
Whoremongers, and Liars, and Deceivers, and whatsoever is defiled shall be
trodden in the Wine Press of the Wrath of God for ever and ever, where is
Weeping, Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth: But as for the Elect Wheat of Christ,
which thou say is the Children of Adam, thou speak thou know not what,
the first man is of the Earth earthly, and he begat his Image, and that which
is earthly shall never inherit, but are to have their portion with Cain, where
thou art that have uncovered thy nakedness; but the Elect, and the Wheat shall
be gathered into the Barn, and they are not, nor ever were they defiled, but
shall reign with the Lamb in the New Jerusalem for ever and ever, where no
unclean thing can enter, nor nothing that destroys or defiles in that holy
Mountain of the Lord; if thou have an ear thou may hear.

6 Quer. What is that painful and shameful Death in utter darkness, (and where
it is) that is reserved for the Reprobate; who are the seed of Cain, and not of
Adam, or blessed Abraham.

Answ. Thou that queriest shall surely know, it is Tophet, prepared of old even
for the King, the burning of it is as Fire, the Breath of the Lord does kindle
it, it shall be destruction for ever and ever to that which has given forth
these queries, and it is to be separated from God for ever among all Idolaters,
and Adulterers, and Liars, the Unbelieving, the Abominable, and the Fearful, in
the Lake of Fire where the Worm dies not, nor the Fire goes not out; as for
Adam, in innocence, thou knows nothing of him, who art of Cain, who slew his
brother, and must have thy portion with him, and not with Abraham: the promise
was not to the Transgressor, nor to Adam when he eat of the Tree of knowledge,
for the Lord said in the day thou eatest thou shall dye; he was driven from the
Presence of the Lord into the Earth, in the curse; the Promise was to Abraham,
in Isaac is the Blessing, not in Ishmael; and here thou shewst thy ignorance,
but it is but like the former, when thou joynest the Elect and Reprobate
together, Light and Darkness, and in Babylon thou art, but in that which was
before Babylon was, thou art seen; and as for those dark spirits thou speaks
of, who mind nothing but their lusts, condemning the glorious things of
eternity, because their carnal reason cannot comprehend them; see at home; for
in the Light of Christ thou art seen, that thou know nothing of Eternity by
thy dark imaginations, being naturally as a Bruit, to the Light of Christ in
thy Conscience I speak, which will let thee see it is so.

7 Quer. Are they not deceived Persons, and utterly ignorant of the true God,
who judge men and women in darkness, if they ask them Questions about the
needful things of Eternity? is it not because they went before they were sent,
and so are of a bitter spirit for want of spiritual Light to satisfy the
tender Christian Querier.

Answ. All who dwell not in this Light, which is pure and eternal, are ignorant
of God, and never knew God; such judging shall be judged; and by the Light
which sees and comprehends all darkness thou art seen; but the spiritual man
judges all things, and he is judged of none; and all Judgment is committed to
the Son, and where he is made manifest he speaks, and judges righteously,
and those men and women who would be asking questions of Eternity, and never
came to the first principle to be guided by it, the Light which leads to
Eternity, all such men and women are in darkness, and that mind which is in
the Earth and in the naturals shall never know; and therefore they are judged
to be in darkness, and darkness cannot comprehend the Light; Christ and his
Disciples answered and judged that spirit which would have had a sign; and
called them Adulterers, which Spirit we witness to the praise of God; and to
thee that put forth the queries, I speak to thee in the presence of God,
whether thou putst them forth in simplicity, and art ignorant, or would know,
or in the pride of thy heart, and subtilty to tempt; the Light of Christ will
let thee see, but thou art rich and full, therefore thou must be sent empty
away; all who queries from that nature that would know, but never come to
obedience, that is to be judged, and judgment must thou witness, and for a
bitter spirit of envy, that shall stand for thy self; and that thou wantst
spiritual Light is made manifest, which curses that which God has blessed, as
I have seen under thy own hand, far remote from this City, and that thou have
cursed them soul and body to all eternity, which thou never heardst nor saw;
let shame strike thee in the face, and stop thy mouth, for thou can not put a
difference betwixt the precious and the vile, but cursest thou know not what,
and speaks to that thou know not: But as for them who have a desire to know
the way to the Father, we are ready to give an answer, and to impart of the
gift we have received, and does not break a bruised reed, but the fat we feed
with judgment, and there thou art answered.

8 Quer. It is not an infallible demonstration unto them who have a discerning
Spirit, that that man has no commission from the true Spirit to preach or
speak to a people, when for fear of his ignorance being discovered, or for fear
of losing his He^^ers, ^e shall counsel them to stick close to the Word of
God, or to he^^ken to the Light within th^^ in their Consciences, without
knowing what that is in the Conscience, or what will be the issue of it, if men
be obedient to it; or disobedient to it, and to beware of false Prophets, and
not thinking in the least himself to be that false Prophet; and thus borrowing*
Scripture language which we are the true Messengers of the Gospel, does he not
in his p^ ^inder his He^^ers from reading the glorious things revealed unto the
two last Witnesses, and so thou say, it is clear that the Spirit is not in
them which was in Paul, who gave the^ leave to try all.

Answ. Here thy infallible demonstration is made manifest to be fallible and
lying, when thou layst that down to be a sign of them that have no Commission
from the Spirit, and not to have the Spirit, because they exhort them to cleave
close to the Word of God, and to mind the Light which shines into the
Conscience of every man, which is the Light of Christ; here thy Spirit is
tried, that thou have not the same commission as they had, who spoke forth the
Scripture, and so thou preachest another Gospel; for the Word of God endures
for ever, and by the Word which is eternal, and which was in the beginning,
which tryes all things, which searches all things, comprehends all things, and
judges all things, he that cleaves not close unto that, builds upon another
foundation; and by the Word which endures for ever, thou art seen, not to have
that Word, neither know what, nor where it is, neither have cleaved to it,
and so art ra^ed out from the Life, and from the Foundation; and the Apostle
who had his Commission not from man, nor by man, he exhorted those he preached
and wrote to, to take heed to the sure Word of Prophecy, as unto a Light that
shined in a dark place, and to wait in it, till the Day did dawn, and the Day
Star did arise; and for distinguishing of that in the Conscience what it is, he
that is not separate from the darkness knows not how to do it. But this I say
unto thee, as we declare unto all, the Light which shines into the Conscience
is the Light of Christ, which he has enlightened every one withal, and it is
spiritual, like himself, and eternal, and it leads out of sin, and declares
against all iniquity, and he that comes to own it, and to be guided by it, it
leads out of sin to know the Cross of Christ, which is a Mystery to thee, and
it leads to the eternal Word, which was in the beginning before sin was, and it
will judge all thy imaginations and vain conceivings, and it leads to the
Inheritance incorruptible, out of corruptible; if thou have an ear to hear,
thou may hear, it is that which will let thee see thy vain frothy
imaginations, which thou have of God, and will condemn all thy vain
imaginations; and hating it, it will be thy condemnation, and there is the
issue of it; and all such as steals other men's words, and the true Prophets
words, and never knew the life that was in them, all such we deny, and shut
them up within utter darkness, where they, and thou art; and for the glorious
things that thou and thy Partner speaks of, which call your selves the two last
Witnesses, it is manifest that your mysteries are as in thy Book, and thy
queries, where thou putst Elect and Reprobate together; and as for trial of
spirits, we give liberty, and exhort all that may to try, and we direct them to
that to try by, which is infallible and eternal, whereby they may see and
comprehend thee and all who have not the Spirit. But that they should try, who
have nothing to try with, let all such be silent for ever, for none understands
the Spirit, but the Spirit with which we see thee, and all who stands in their
imaginations are ignorant of it; therefore stop thy mouth in the dust; and be
silent.

9 Quer. Do not they that speak to a people that declares against all
appearances, which are contrary to his way; discover himself unto a true
discerning Spirit, not to be of the Lord unless they can demonstrate a
spiritual Commission that he has received from Heaven, by voice of words
through the glorious mouth of the Lord; so that no mortal man can disprove him,
though few for want of understanding receive him.

Ans. The, Way that leads to the Father is but one, which is Christ, and he
that declares from him, made manifest in him, declares against all Sects, and
Opinions, that which thou calls appearances, and the Way is one, and the Truth
one, where there is no rent nor division, and he that dwells in the life has
discerning, and he that witnesses the anointing discerns, he is able to judge
and discern, and in that thou art seen, who would sit on the throne, but thou
must come down and lick the dust, dust is the Serpents meat, and they who had
their Commission from God, and have their Commission from God now, they were
made manifest to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, and this we
witness, this the Scripture witnesses, and he that believes has the witness
in himself, and the father bears witness, and they witness the voice of the
Lord, which is spiritual, speaking to them, and they declare from that which is
spiritual to the Consciences of Gainsayers, and this is witnessed; but thy
voice of words is carnal, and is denied; and who art thou made manifest unto?
that which is mortal cannot discern and disprove thee, but that which is
immortal can, and they who are guided by the immortal denies thee, and will
receive none of thy Testimony, because it is not the same which the holy men of
God witnessed, and does now witness, which voice shakes the Wilderness, and
rents the Rocks, and makes the Earth to reel to and fro; but to thee this is a
mystery, and sealed.

10. Again he that speaks of an invisible spiritual God, or Christ living in
the Consciences or Spirits of men, thou say, He questions the truth of all
the Scripture records concerning the Life, Death, and Resurrection, and
Ascension of the blessed Body of Christ into the Throne of his Immortal Glory:
And does he not question, Whether the Consciences of the Saints being sprinkled
with the Blood of Jesus, which dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, are
purified from the pollutions of the Flesh and Spirit; does he not question the
Resurrection of the Souls and Bodies out of the Earth at the last Day?

Answ. Here again, thou have made thy shame and ignorance manifest, and knows
not so much as the Letter of the Scripture; Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
not by the will of man, and a Minister of the Everlasting God, he witnessed the
Son of God revealed in him; and he said, Know ye not that Christ is in you, or
else you are Reprobates; And Christ is not divided; And he that is joined to
the Lord is on^ Spirit; And I and my Father are one; And where Christ dwells
the Father dwells; And if thou have an ear to hear thou may ^ear, and if the
same Spirit be not in you that raised Christ from the dead, you are none of
his; and he that declared these things spoke of a spiritual Christ, and an
invisible God; and who shall ascend up to Heaven, the word is nigh, in thy
mouth and in thy heart, and this is the same Christ that suffered without the
Gate at Jerusalem, and no other which Paul traveled till he was born in them,
if thou have an ear thou may hear; and the Apostle did not question the
Scripture records, for they spoke it, and recorded it, and they witnessed the
Life of Christ, and his Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension, and they
witnessed him ascended above Thrones and Dominions, and to sit at the
right hand of the Father; and we witness the same Christ made manifest in us,
and his Resurrection, not because Paul said so, but we have seen it, and are
Witnesses of it; the same that ever was, the same that did Ascend, the same did
ascend; this is a riddle unto thee, and seven seals is upon it, and thou that
queriest shall never see them opened; and they who had Christ in them, and the
Father, and the Son supping with them, they had their Consciences sprinkled,
and none else; for his blood thou know not; and so I say unto thee, thou art
not sprinkled, nor thy Conscience purified from dead works, and they who know
Christ in them, and no more after the flesh come to know his Resurrection, he
is the resurrection, he is the first and the last, who knows him risen, and
have seen him witness the first day and the last; what speaks thou of a last
day, that never came to the beginning, and so thy soul lies in death, and in
chains, and in utter darkness; and therefore lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and
see where thou art, and the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures thou can
not witness.

11 Quer. If after death there is no bodily Resurrection for the Spirits of men
to possess an immortal Glory to eternity, or to suffer an eternal Devil-like
shame, according to their deeds, whether good or evil; Is it not one of the
vainest things in the World to discourse of God, and Righteousness, unless it
be for earthly Gain amongst men?

Answ. There is a Resurrection both of the just and of the unjust, the just
into everlasting life, and the unjust into everlasting shame and contempt, and
every one shall receive according to his works, whether they be good or evil;
but this is a mystery hid, for none knows it, but through death; but what
know thou who art yet alive in sin, what shall be in the resurrection which
is after death? which whoever comes to know the resurrection, knows the end of
all things; therefore it is not taking their words, nor thy own imaginations,
that is Faith, nor if thou know Christ no nearer than Jerusalem, nor no nearer
than above the stars, thou know not where, but through thy dark imaginations,
this is not to know Christ risen from the dead; see therefore what have thou
seen in thy self: But thou art dead while thou live in that nature, and at
the resurrection contempt and shame will be thy portion; and turn in ^hy mind
to that which shows thee sin, and witness the body and sin destroyed within,
and then, and not till then, shall thou know how it is in the resurrection.

12 Quer. Thou raises a question from Paul's words to the Athenians, and did
before condemn them that stole other men's words, and here thou have stolen a
Query; and thou askestwhat think you; did that spiritual Creator dwell and sive
in the Athenians Consciences? or did his glorious person visibly appear in the
highest heavens?

Answ. The Athenians to whom Paul spoke worshipped the work of their own hands,
as this Generation does their own imaginations, and that God whom ignorantly
they worshipped at a distance, which God lived in Paul's Conscience, Paul
declared unto them; and they looked, as thou do carnally, thinking God to be
carnal, and at a distance; but he said, he was not at a distance from every one
of them, for in him they lived, moved, and had their being; and this was the
God which Paul preached of, which Creator, we witness, lives in the high and
holy place, and with him also that is of a humble and a contrite spirit, and
trembles at his Word.

13 Quer. And thou say, what think you, can there be any living Spirit
without a body, or person to display its life, in, or from, and must not the
Creator of necessity be a glorious personal substance, and thou say, does
not these men that worship an infinite Spirit without any bodily form, living
in men's Consciences, glory only in a god of ^^eir own imaginations instead of
honoring the only Lord of all life, the man Jesus, yesterday, today, and for
ever?

Answ. That which is not possible with men is possible with God, which God is a
Spirit, as Jesus Christ says, and a spirit has not flesh, and bone, nor a
created body, but displays it self as it pleases, contrary to thy will, and the
will of all men; and thou who would by thy reason tie the Creator, with a
necessity, to a personal Being, art void of the knowledge of God, and led by
thy corrupt reason, which shall never know God; and all those who worships God
in Spirit, worships an infinite Spirit, which Spirit inhabiteth eternity, and
lives in the Consciences of the Saints, and this is not to glory in an
imagination, but a witnessing of the same eternal Truth which the Saints
witnessed which spoke forth the Scripture; for they witnessed Christ to dwell
in them, and the same God they worshipped, whose temple they were, and not
another, and the same we witness, and this to the honor of the Man Jesus, who
was yesterday, today, and for ever.

14 Quer. The eternal Spirit, Creator, and alone everlasting Father, which
dwells essentially in the glorified Body, as our Lord Ies^^ his eternal Son,
and virtually reigns in all the Saints, Elect men and Angels, be Record between
me and you world without end, whether this Epistle shall not be sent to you,
and all the chosen that shall peruse it, principally for the establishing of
your tender spirits upon that eternal spiritual Rock Jesus Christ God and Man
in one distinct body, or person glorified, and only honored with all
spiritual praises from Elect men and Angels when this World is consumed into
ashes, and all time or times is swallowed up into eternity or eternities.

Ans The Eternal Spirit, which is the Everlasting Father, which thou say is
essencially in the Son; thy word [essencially] I deny, and thy voice, yet
Christ and the Father is one, and the same Spirit that dwells in the Son dwells
in the Father, which is one, I and my Father is one; the same dwells in the
Saints; thy word [virtual] I deny, the same that dwells in the Father and in
the Son, the same dwells in the Saints, not distinct nor divided, For he that
has seen the Father has seen the Son, and he that has the Son, has the
Father also; and Christ is not divided. I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be perfect in one: and he that is joined to Christ is one spirit, and not
distinct nor separate; if thou have an ear thou may hear; and that eternal
Spirit, which is the Father and the Son, which dwells in the Saints, is Judge of
thee, and by that Spirit I judge thee, that this Epistle came not from him to
none of the chosen, for they who are chosen deny thy voice, and what do thou
speak of Elect and Angels, with whom God dwells, when in thy fourth query thou
said, they were defiled? and the holy Ghost says, He dwells with no
uncleanness, and so speaks confusion, and Babylons language, which is the land
of thy nativity, from whence all these things have been spoken by thee, and all
that shall ever be established with thy declaring, or thy Epistles, shall be
thrown down; for the Rock shall beat thy Image to pieces; and therefore leave
off thy speaking of him, and of thy distinct body, and of his glory; for when
he shall appear in his glory, instead of thy praises, thou shall bowl and
lament, and wish the mountains to cover thee; and he who is out of time shall
consume thee to ashes, who stands in time, and in the airy Philosophy and
imagination, and thy great words [etetnity and eternities] shall stand thee in
no stead; for that which is Eternal was before thou wast, and shall be when
thou art brought down to the pit with all thy imaginations: And so that thou
might not glory any more in thy shame, I have answered thy Queries, and for
the simple ones sake, that they might not be stumbled by thy stumbling queries,
who dwell^ not in the Light.

EDWARD BOROUGH.

An Answer to a Book, called, Choice Experiences, Given forth by I. Turner.
Also the Copy of a Letter sent to the Assembly of those that are called
Anabaptists in Newcastle.
I Have met with a Book called, Choice experiences, given forth by one J.
Turner, who by John Spilsbery in his Epistle, is called, a Daughter of Syon;
and her self declares in the 109. page of her Book, of being brought out of
Babylon into Syon, but all along through her Book, he^ language is one and the
same, before her coming out of Babylon, and in Syon (as she says) her
language is the language of Babylon wholly; and she is yet a servant in bondage
in Babylon unto the Mistress of Witchcraft, and never came to witnes^ freedom
in Syon; for I know her voice, its the language of her City where she now
dwells, which is in confusion in Babylon.

And whereas she declares of some particulars which she calls Dec^its, whereby
she was deceived, in the 109. page in that which she calls, the fifth note of
experience, concerning notions and pretended spiritualities in which Satan
transforms himself into an Angel of light, and how the Lord was pleased to
recover her out of deceit.

I answer, It is plain to the spiritual man which discerns of truth and deceit,
that she is yet deceived and unrecovered out of deceit; and here I charge her
that she belyes the Lord, for he has not recovered her out of deceit; for she
has resisted him in that work, as is made appear in her Book; and she is now
in notion, and not in power, and in pretended spiritualities, and not really in
the Spirit; and Satan is now transformed in her into an Angel of light, by
which she is deceived; and whereas she talks of her choice experien^es, death
yet raigns in her, and is no whit subdued; I speak as in the presence of the
Lord, who am moved to lay open her deceit to the simple, who does blaspheme the
God of Heaven in his Saints, in calling Truth error, and calling that deceit,
which by the Spirit of the Lord I own to be truth, and calls those corrupt
Principles, which were owned by the Servants of the Lord in former Generations,
and which are owned now by them which witness the same Spirit, which Spirit of
Christ she makes appear, she knows not, who has denied him, and salvation by
him, within.

Whereas she speaks of Satan envying her happiness, and waits his opportunity
to catch her, as a Fish in the Water, covering his book, with a bait of
Mystery and spirituality.

I answer. She is yet in the power of Satan, he has already catched her with
his covered hook, which is covered with a very fair out side, a fair Form of
Truth, a likeness of it, with the likeness of a Church, and of a Baptism, and
of a Fellowship, etc. is she beguiled already, and is unhappy through the
opportunities which the Devil has waited over her; for she it under the curse,
lying in the fall and enmity.

And whereas she speaks, Of having escaped him in his former appearances as a
Devil yet now transforms himself as an Angel of light.

I answer. She has not escaped him, as a Devil; and here she is a Liar, for
his appearance is in her, in lying and in speaking evil of those things she
knows not; and he is transformed in her as an Angel of light, but she knows it
not; but lies in darkness, in the mystery of iniquity, in notion, and the
pretense of spirituality.

And she says, Those that are so deceived are the fittest Agents to promote
his Kingdom.

I answer, Here it is made manifest, she, who is deceived, by the Devil, does
much promote his Kingdom, by strengthening the hands of evil doers, who through
her writing hardens their hearts against the truth.

Whereas she speaks, Of Satan's drawing persons by corrupt principles, which
they would have trembled at the thought of, before they had such principles.

I answer. This is her own condition, she is drawn by Satan, to follow corrup^
principles, which, if she did see, she would tremble at the sight of them.

And she says, God was not only pleased to keep her from such things, but to
discover the way by which persons are brought to such things.

I answer, Here again I charge her that s^e belies the Lord (which is
Blasphemy) for he has not kept her from corrupt Principles; he would, but she
has resisted him; and the discovery from God to her, will be plagues and woe;
for death and darkness raigns, which makes manifest themselves in her, which is
her discovery.

She speaks, of avoiding those ways, and forewarning others to avoid them
likewise.

I answer, She has not avoided the ways of darkness, but has chosen them,
and has avoided the way of truth, as is made manifest, who has denied
salvation by Christ within; and as she has avoided the way of truth her self,
so she casts a stumbling block in the way of the simple to avoyed it likewise.

Whereas she speaks, of discovering Satan under these vails, and says, by
barkening to the voice of the Tempter she was deceived, and beguiled by him, in
some particular things.

I answer, Satan is not yet discovered to her, but lies under his veil in
Flesh, deceiving her; and by her bearkening to the voice of the Tempter, she is
now deceived by him, not in few things, but in many: I speak it as in the
presence of the Lord who shall judge of her and me.

And she speaks of ever being humbled in the presence of God for it.

I answer, When the dreadful God shows his presence, she cannot stand, but
shall be confounded, who does here speak to the dishonor of his Name: True
humility she knows not, for the man of sin is exalted in her above all that is
called God.

And whereas she speaks, of beginning to be somewhat confused in her judgment;
and she speaks, of not being swallowed up with confusion.

I answer, She is in confusion, and has never been out of it, as to every
single eye may appear; she is not only somewhat in confusion, but is rolled and
swallowed up in it; and it is long since it began in her.

Whereas, she speaks of being weak in Principles.

I answer, It it true, the Principle which is of God, is, and has been weak in
her, for it is over-powred by the Principle of Deceit, which is not weak, but
strong; and which rules and Guides her in her own will.

Whereas, she speaks, of being with a people, and by them being deceived in
some particular things: naming only three things; the first whereof is.

That godliness being a Mystery; that it did consist of something within, and
not of something without; and that the Saints were to expect life and salvation
from a Christ within, and not from a Christ without.

I answer Godliness is a mystery; the Image of God, which is Godliness is a
mystery hidden from the eye of I. Turner, and from all vulterous eyes; and this
mystery is within, in life and power consisting of the new man Christ Jesus,
who is the Image of God made manifest within the Saints, in whose Image man is
like God, godly; and this mystery is not in outward things, in word or
declaration, or outward practice, though where this mystery is made manifest,
godly practices will flow from it to without; but yet the power, life, and
mystery of godliness is within, and cannot be seen with the carnal eye, not
comprehended with the carnal mind. And here I charge I. Turner, in the presence
of God, that she knows not the mystery of Godliness, who blasphemously calls
this a corrupt Principle; and here it is made manifest, that she is in Babylon
yet, and is deceived and bewitched by the Devil: I bear witness to the truth,
and to this particular, and against her who denies it. And the Saints have Life
and Salvation from Christ made manifest within, which is the same Christ which
suffered without; and this I affirm, that till Christ be revealed within, there
is no Salvation, nor Life partaked of. The Scripture says, they were
Reprobates in whom Christ was not; And the Apostle said, Christ in you, the
hope of glory; and Christ lived in him, which was his ^ife and Salvation. Where
Christ is not made manifest within, the Serpent is Head, and the Devil is King
in the heart; and this I witness, and do declare it, as in the presence of God,
that till Christ was made manifest within me, I was not saved, nor had no life
as to God, though I was high in Profession and Knowledge outwardly. And here
again I. Turner has showed forth her blindness and sottishness to all, and may
stop her mouth for shame, and confess, that she is a bondslave in Babylon, who
calls this a corrupt Principle, which is the Way, Power and Life of Religion
and Salvation, which is Christ Jesus within made manifest in the Saints, which
takes away Sin, and destroys the Works of the Devil; and she and all others,
who walks and lives in the flesh, following the lusts and desires of it, living
to their own wills in the broad-way, and talks of Salvation by any thing
without, will be deceived; for nothing will present to God, but the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ revealed, which takes away sin, and sets free
from it.

And now for the second Principle, That Saints were not to do duties by, or
from a commmand without, but from a command within; and that the Word command
in Scripture, was not a command to them, till they had a Word within them.

I answer, That is no command from God to me, what he commands to another;
neither did any of the Saints which we read of in Scripture act by the command
which was to another, not having the command to themselves; I challenge to find
an example for it; they obeyed every one their own command, one was sent to
Baptism and to Preach the Gospel; another was sent, not to Baptize, but to
Preach the Gospel. And thou I. Turner, or any other, who goes to duty, as you
call it, by imitation from the Letter without, which was commands to others, in
your own wills and time, your sacrifice is not accepted, but is abomination to
the Lord; for you go without the moving of the Spirit, in your own wills and
strength, which God hates, and which his wrath is upon. And I charge her here,
as in the presence of the Lord, that she knows not what a command from God in
Spirit is; but is ignorant, and not a daughter of Sion; and let her mouth be
stopped, and let shame strike her in the Face, who professes her self to know
the Lord; and let all be ashamed of her who professes themselves members joined
with her in Church; she has made manifest the ignorance of them all.

Now for the third particular, That as to the time of doing duties, they were
to wait for the moving of the spirit, to carry them forth to it; and this they
called, Waiting for a power; and till they had such a power, they were to do
nothing, but sit still, and wait; and this not only in private duties, but in
Church also; not owning any Ministry by way of gifts of Office, but to come
together, and there sit still and wait till they had a power, and then to speak
whether man or woman.

I answer, who dare call this a Principle of deceit? none but who are led by
deceit, and such is I. Turner, who puts light for darkeness, and darkeness for
light; all duties, as she calls them whatsoever, if the moving of the Spirit do
not carry forth to act them; then the movings of the corrupt will and vain mind
carries forth; and who act from such Principles, are accursed from God. And I.
Turner, and all who denies to wait for the movings of the power of the Spirit
to carry forth, but goes before the moving of it, all their Prayers,
Preachings, Ordinances, and Churches, I do deny, and declare against, by the
Eternal Spirit of God that they are odious and abomination in the eye of the
Lord; and is no duty which he accepts, whether they be done in private, or in
the Church. And that Ministry which is not carried forth by the moving of the
Spirit of God, but of man, and in the will of man, which Ministry is hated of
God; and she which denies waiting upon God, till power be given in from God, to
act and speak for God, has denied the way of God, and the practice of the
Saints in former Generations; and woe is unto her, who makes the simple believe
this to be deceit.

Whereas she says, in these particulars, which carried such a face or show of
spirituality, she was corruped, but did never fully own them in judgment nor
practice.

I answer, O blind deceived spirit, which calls these but a show or face of
spirituality; she calls the substance a show, and the show or likeness, a
substance; And woe unto her, which calls good evil, and evil good; these
particulars by the eternal spirit, I own, and walk in; but that spirit of
deceit, and Antichrist in her, has denied them, and calls them deceiveable,
and says by them she was corrupted; let her be ashamed, and all of her
Faction; it was the Principle which led her from these things, by which she was
corrupted, and which hindered her to own them and practice them, and which now
makes her declare against them; which Principle is the spirit of the false
Prophet, which now rules, which I know will never own nor practice these things.

She also says, She did oppose those Principles which led to looseness, either
in conversation, or in slighting the Churches or Ordinances of Christ, though
she believes such Principles naturally follow the others.

I answer, She did, and does oppose the Principle of God, which would have led
her out of pride and lust, into an holy conversation; and out of false
Churches, into the Church which is in God. And I charge her here, that she
believes Lies, and utters what she believes, which is Blasphemy; who says she
believes that wicked Principles naturally follow the three named by her

And whereas she says, As to that Principle of waiting, she could yet never
come up to it in practice, in private duties, she could not stay so long from
duty, till she had such a power, but did frequently go to duty when she had it
not.

I answer. Here I do believe her she speaks truth, with her lying spirit; she
never yet could wait upon God, to act for him, but has run in her own will,
which is abomination to him, which is no acting for God, but for self, and for
the Devil; and here has she shut her self out, from the holy men of Gods
practice, who waited upon him to be led by him, by the power of his Spirit; and
she shows her self openly to all, that she went to that which she calls duty in
her own power and time, and knew not the power of God, nor his time to be acted
in; and all her Duties, as she calls them, is no more but imagined and imitated
from the letter without, acted by the Serpents strength and wisdom in her; and
she has here plainly discovered that she knows not what waiting upon God is,
in truth and sincerity.

She says, She thought sometime she had had it; and says, she thought she had
had communion with God.

I answer, Her thoughts I do deny, who call truth deceit; and she did, as now
she does, live in thoughts and conceivings, by which she is beguiled; that
spirit which rules and speaks in her, never had communion with God, but is
contrary to him; nor never was acted in the truth of God, but against him.

She says, She knew no Scripture-ground for the practice of waiting to be
acted by the power of the Spirit, and led to duty.

I answer, The Saints ground of acting, is not the outward letter, but the
Spirit which gave forth the letter; but the Scripture does declare of such as
waited to be acted by the Spirit and Power of the Lord: Dare any say, the
Saints Prayed or Propresied, without the movings of the Spirit and Power of the
Lord? here she has shut her self among the Heathens, who knows not God, nor
what it is to be acted by his Spirit and Power.

She speaks of losing her peace, and having little or no communion with God,
nor scarce any thing to speak to, or for God.

I answer, True peace in Christ she never knew; for there is no peace to the
wicked: neither have any, who denies waiting upon God, as she has done, any
communion with God, nor nothing to say to, or for God, but through deceit, and
in deceit is I. Turner. That which brought her into trouble, and let her see
the confusion (Which she speaks of) which she had lived in before, but saw it
not till then; that Witness I own, and it shall witness for the Lord and the
Truth of what I say eternally; though she have slain the Witness, yet it shall
arise to her condemnation, and her everlasting misery.

And whereas she says, Some labored to persuade her it was a dispensation of
God, and that the Saints, after brought out of Egypt, must be in the
Wilderness, before they come to Canaan.

I answer, I bear witness by the eternal Spirit, the truth of this particular,
as having witnessed the same condition; and she which has denied this to be of
God; has openly showed her self to be of the Devil, denying the truth of
Scriptures.

She says, this did not at all satisfy her, but she continued in a sad
condition.

I answer, She here has showed what spirit she is of, of the viperous
Generation which fled the wrath which came upon her, and could not abide the
judgment; and of the spirit of them which would have been back in Egypt,
which murmured, and therefore, with them, she entered not, but i^ perished with
them in the Wilderness.

Whereas she says, She was never so troubled with temptations, as at that time.

I answer, Here she has showed her self to be the stony ground, which when
temptation came, withered away.

She speaks of a particular temptation, which was, Questioning the Being of God.

I answer, That which was troubled, wrought the temptations; and not that which
troubled; and here she shows her ignorance, which cannot discern the ground of
temptation, but lays it upon God, which is basphemy; for he tempts none to
evil.

Whereas she says, this was the (...) fruit of her straying from the pure
ways of Truth.

I answer, Here again she shows her blindness, who knows not that temptations
are for good: That which she calls, straying from the pure ways of truth, is
otherwise; for the stronger man came to dispossess the strong man, and then
began the war, and happy had she been, if she had patiently endured to the end;
but not abiding under the judgment, but starting aside, she is cast out, and
must not enter; for the second Beast whose deadly wound is healed, is alive,
which makes war with the Lamb, which exercises all the power of the first
Beast: and here I. Turner is under the dominion of the second Beast.

She speaks of blessing God that she strayed no further.

I answer. She who has denied to wait unto Prayer and Praises, but prays in
her own strength and time, her Praise is abomination to the Lord, and she calls
that, straying from God, which was leading unto God, and so has forsaken the
right way, and has cast the way of God behind her back, and resisted him, who
would have led her out of darkness, and out of confusion.

Whereas she speaks of God remembering her.

To which I answer, he will remember her to plague her, who has brought
dishonor to his great Name, and has called his way, the way of error, and of
deceit; and his real Truth, a show or notion; she has chosen her own way, the
way of destruction.

Whereas she speaks, being turned from owning these particulars, she was
restored to those joys that once she had.

I answer. She is returned with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to her
wallowing in the mire, and there is her joy; and she now joys in the earthly
dust, in Forms and Traditions, and likenesses of things, and knows not what it
is to joy in God the Substance, as by her writings it is made manifest, who
has denied Salvation by Christ within, and has denied to wait upon God for
the Power of his Spirit, and calls them deceitful Principles; she has chosen
the way of Death, rather then the way of Life, and has taken her self to
follow shaddows and likenesses, and neglected the Substance, which is Christ
within, the hope of glory; her latter end is worse then her beginning, and the
Parable is fulfilled upon her.

And she speaks in the 126. page of Satan being discovered under his vail; and
in particular, as to that of being saved by a Christ within, and not by a
Christ without; and the Lord was pleased to show her it was quite another
thing, differing from the Gospel, and that it was attended with this evil
consequence, to overthrow the whole Gospel, and to deny the Lord that bought
them.

I answer, I charge her here, as in the presence of God, with belying the Lord,
and with horrible Basphemy; who says, That that which the Saints and servants
of God witnessed, who Preached the Gospel and established it, (Christ within
manifested) is quite another thing differing from the Gospel, and that it is
attended to overthrow the whole Gospel: O horrible Blasphemy, and belying the
Lord, who says, that the Lord was pleased to show her it; did ever he show any
Lies? all take notice of this wicked and horrible Blasphemer; the Lord rebuke
that unclean spirit of Antichrist in her.

She goes on, and says, then secondly, as to that of waiting for a power to
Pray, and that here was no command but from within; concerning both these, the
Lord was pleased to show that it was not according to his mind, but a mere
invention of Satan; and that it was attended with this evil consequence to
slight Scriptures and Commands of God, and to expose the soul to Satan's
deceivings to walk by the imaginations of their own heart, instead of the
motions of the Spirit.

I answer, The Saints waited for the moving of the Spirit, which was power in
them to help them to pray, they knew not to Pray as they ought without it, and
this command and help, they had not without them, but within them: And I again
here charge her with belying the Lord, and with notorious Blasphemy, who says,
that that which the Saints witnessed (waiting for the power of the Spirit to
Pray) is not according, to the mind of the Lord, but an invention of Satan;
and she is not ashamed to say, the Lord showed her, and the same which they
witnessed, who spoke forth the Scripture, and which walked in the Commands of
God, tends to slight Scriptures and commands of God, and to expose the soul to
Satan's deceivings: this is Blasphemy and Error, and corrupt Principles: and she
which has denied waiting, to be led by the motions of the Spirit, is led by
the imaginations of her own heart, is under the power of Satan's deceiving, and
speaks contrary to what the Scripture speaks, and so slights it, and the
Commands of God; she has Blasphemed the God of Heaven, and accordingly will
the Lord requite her.

And thus have I for the simple ones sake declared the truth, and every single
eye may see, who it is is led by corrupt principles; and what I have written
shall she eternally witness to be true, and all her copartners. And I pass by
the rest of her Book, as not worth answering, for it is nothing but airy
imagination and confusion, and death yet raigns in her, and in her Book is
spoken out by her; and she knows not the Baptism of Saints, nor Communion, nor
the true Church of Christ; to that witness in her conscience do I declare, and
when it shall arise, it will eternally witness me.

Whose Name in the Flesh is EDWARD BOROUGH.

The Copy of a Letter, etc.
FRiends, (for so I call you) I was moved of the Lord to come into your
Assembly, to declare the truth from him, concerning you, as by the eternal
Spirit was revealed to me; and I do acknowledge it, it was a mercy from the
Lord that I had that small liberty which I had, to clear my Conscience amongst
you, and to discharge my duty, in obedience to the Lord, and to every ones
Conscience am I made manifest, whether you will hear, or you will forbear:
truly Friends, there is something among you which I own, and which is owned of
my Father; but yet many things has he against you, and as I said, I now again
say from the mouth of the Lord, that your Covering is too narrow to hide your
shame, and your bed too short to stretch your selves upon; Now friends, the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which you act in, (you say) in obedience to him, I
do not speak against, but do witness them in life and power; neither do I judge
such amongst you who have entered in at the door, by the Principle of God, to
the Ordinances, (if any such) but you I do declare against, and do judge by the
infallible Spirit, who have in your own wills thrust in your selves, and acted
by imagination and immitation from the Letter without, and not having received
the Command from Christ into your selves; such I judge to be in deceit,
deceived by the Serpent, which deceives the simple, by the likeness of a thing;
and you that limit the Lord to any outward visible thing, that without such,
can be no Salvation, you I judge again to be in deceit, and my judgment shall
stand; for nothing is available, that which God once commanded, nor that which
was not commanded, but the new Creature, which is born of the immortal Seed,
contrary to the will of man. Truly, Friends, you are acting in darkness, and
there is no separation in you betwixt the precious and the vile, betwixt the
clean, and the unclean; for that which did convince you of false Hirelings, and
of their deceitful worship, (which is owned of my Father in you) has not been
obeyed by you, but your minds have been drawn forth from within, to obey a
thing without; and herein have you been bewitched from the obedience of the
truth within, to obey the letter without; as they were which the Scripture
speaks of; and you are acted in another form; and likeness then you were
before, and which some are acted in yet, but by the same spirit; and you have a
zeal, I bear you record, but it is not according to knowledge; I declare
against that spirit, by which you are now acted, as knowing it to be the spirit
of Antichrist; and that which is owned by my Father in you, is oppressed by
you, by your wisdom and reason which stands above, and is head, and rules
amongst you, which is for destruction, and for the Lord to accomplish his wrath
upon: and happy were you if you knew the day of vengeance, which is the
acceptable year of the Lord; but you are yet full and rich, and think you have
need of nothing; and have a name that you live, but you are dead, and empty,
and miserable; your form is corrupted, and you seek the living among the dead,
and you act in the form, but walks at liberty in your own wills, despising the
daily cross of Christ, which if you walked in, would bring down the high mind,
and high nature in you; and through the Cross, that which is low in you would
be exalted, and the witness of your Ordinances would you have within, which you
are seeking in the letter without. And now Friend, to the^ who were the Speaker
when I was present among you; thy Name I know not, but by thy nature and
spirit, thy spirit is the same which they speak from, which thou seems to deny
as false spirits; and by that spirit have thou been deceived, and now it works
by thee to deceive others; and that spirit infallibly, by the eternal Spirit do
I judge; for the time is come, that by the Saints, the great Whore must be
judged, which has made all the men of the Earth drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, and which has deceived the simple. And whereas thou did Quaery,
what one thing I will deny as untruth which you had spoken* I answered then, as
now I do; I do deny thy voice and spirit, for (...) is the voice of the
stranger, and, not of Christ: and though you swear by that spirit, The Lord
lives; I say surely thou swearest falsely; and the false Prophets which used
their tongues, and said The Lord says it, when the Lord had not spoken unto
them, spoke the same words of the true Prophet; but he that had the true spirit
judged the false spirit, and so it is now. And therefore Friend, out of love to
thy soul, I do advise thee to be silent before the Lord, and wait upon him,
till he manifest himself to speak in thee, and by thee; for Friend, thy
Ministry is in the will of man, and thou ministers death unto dead minds; and
the Ministry which is to the Seed, thou art ignorant of; to that in thy
conscience I speak, which shall witness for me before the Lord, who is
appearing in his power, to utter his thunders; and all Flesh shall tremble at
his presence; and all Forms of Worship will he dash to pieces at his
appearance; And yours, which is the purest Form, shall be broken to pieces,
that he may rule, who is without form and comeliness. Now Friends, for the
Seeds sake have I spoken and written to you; and to that in your consciences
have I cleared my conscience, in the presence of the Lord, which you shall
Eternally witness, whether you will hear or forbear: By a Servant of the Lord,
who is named of the World,

Edward Borough.

An Answer to a Book, called, A Voice from the word of the LORD, by one John
Griffith, against us whom the World calls Quakers, wherein his false
Accusations is denied, and he proved to be a Slanderer, and the Truth cleared
from his Scandals.
A Certain Book being come forth into the world, full of Lies and Slanders
against the Innocent, called A voice from the word of the Lord, to those grand
Impostors called Quakers; to the Author of which Book (who calls himself John
Criffith, a Servant of Christ) and to all to whomsoever it may come, I am moved
to write something in Answer, that his lies and slanders, and false reproaches
may be made manifest, and that he may proceed no further; for as Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses, so does he resist the truth, being a man of a corrupt
mind, and reprobate concerning faith, and is not a Servant of Christ, nor a
witness for his Name, but a child of disobedience; in whom the Prince of the
air rules.

And first to the title of thy Book, I Answer, the Word of the Lord is
powerful, and will cut thee down, thou sensual minded man, it thou know not,
but takes the words of others declared from the word which was in them. and
thou uses thy tongue, and says the Lord says it; but I say unto thee, the
Lord has not spoken unto thee, neither commanded thee to speak of his Name:
and I charge it upon thee in the presence of the Lord God of Life, that thou
art of that Generation which Jeremiah was sent to cry against, Ier. 23. 31. for
thou speaks thy imaginations upon their words which dwelt in the life of God,
but the life thou know not, and thy whole Book is no more but an empty sound
and voice, and is as the untimely fruit of the womb which will wither and
perish away: and one of them I am whom thou calls Quakers, to whom thou say,
thou directs thy speech; but that we are grand Impostors, I do deny, for we are
gathered up into the life which the holy men of God lived in, and are fallen
from the world, and from its ways and nature: and I charge thee here to be a
slanderer, and from the mouth of the Lord I do declare unto thee that thou must
have a slanderers reward. And whereas thou say, thou have discovered their
fleshly and filthy mindedness, together with the judgments of God attending
them.

I Answer, Fleshly and filthy mindedness, we have denied by the Power of the
Son of God made manifest in us; thou have laid it to our charge, but thou have
not proved it, nor discovered it, and here again thou are a false Accuser,
fleshly and filthy mindedness shall stand for thy own condition; for there thou
art in the flesh and filth, living to thy will in the lust of uncleanness, for
thou may remember thou came out of the Bowling-Alley to our Meeting, though
Pharisee-like thy outside is painted and made clean, but thy heart is full of
enmity and lies, and slanders, and false reproaches, to that in thy conscience
I do speak which shall forever witness me, and as for the judgments of the Lord
upon thy own head will they fall, and with what measure thou metes it shall be
measured to thee again; we are passed from judgment, and from the condemnation,
and who art thou thou enemy of righteousness, that shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect.

And whereas thou say thou art one that bears witness against those wandering
stars.

I answer, this shall stand for thy own condition, a wandering star thou art,
and has no habitation in the Heaven, but speaks swelling words of vanity, thou
thy self being a servant of corruption, we have an abiding place, and an
habitation in the Lord, and are not wandering; and here again I charge thee to
be a false Accuser, and a false witness, who bears Witness of thy self; for the
Father bears no witness of thee, but against thee.

Whereas thou say the most high God that made the heavens and the Earth, has
moved thee and stirred thee up to bear witness to the Truth, and to witness
against the abominable fleshly mindedness, and yet spiritual pride of those
grand Impostors called Quakers, by whose sorceries many are bewitched and drawn
from the simplicity of the Gospel, to another Gospel, which is not another
Gospel, but the vanity of their own minds and their own fleshly and corrupt
thoughts which they cry up as Oracles of God.

I answer. The most high God judge between thee and us; whose wrath is kindled
against thee, thou enemy of righteousness, and Child of wrath; thou have belyed
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, for to this he moved thee not, for he moves none
to utter lies and slanders, as thou have done, but the spirit of enmity, and of
the Devil, has moved thee; and to the Truth thou bears no witness, but against
the Truth, and against the Innocent; and charges us with fleshly mindedness and
spiritual pride. O thou Liar and false Accuser, the Lord who takes our part
against thee will plead with thee, and render upon thy head according to thy
deeds; prove what thou speaks that we are fleshly minded and spiritually proud,
or else let thy mouth be stopped and shame cover thee forever; Sorceries and
witchcraft, and drawing from the simplicity of the Gospel we do deny; but the
plain single Truth we do declare, by which the eye of the blind is opened in
many to see your deceits who call your selves Churches and Preachers of the
Gospel; which is not the Gospel that the Apostles preached, but an adding your
own Imaginations upon their words, who witnessed the Gospel, and it shall stand
for thy own condition, thou art in the sorcery and witchraft; who draws people
to observe an outward visible thing, from the Light of Christ within them;
which leads to the simplicity of the Gospel, which is inward and not outward;
and thou art in thy fleshly and corrupt thoughts, crying up the Ordinances and
Oracles, of God, which are but carnal and beggarly rudiments of the world,
which passes away; and here thou art seen and made manifest, in the Light of
Christ, to be a Hypocrite, who falsely accuses others of that which thou art
guilty of thy self; the same Gospel as ever was, do we declare; and not
another, which we received not from man, neither was taught it by man: and as
the Oracles of God it shall stand forever for a witness against thee, and all
the world who does not believe; for even the Father bears witness of us, and
therefore our witness is true; and the righteous God will plead with thee thou
Liar and false Accuser, and here be a witness against thy self that the Lord
moved thee not, but the Devil, acting in thy own imaginations, and in the
vanity of thy own mind, and in thy one fleshly and corrupt thoughts.

And whereas thou say to us thou directs thy speech from the Lord, Thus
says the Lord to thee, O Quaker, thou art fleshly minded.

I answer, It is not the voice of the Lord to us that speaks in thee, but the
voice of the Devil, and the Serpent which speaks from thee: fleshly minded we
are not, but are redeemed out of it, and our minds are changed and are
Spiritual, and it is the Spirit of the living God seals unto us, and witnesses
in us; and here thou art of thy Father the old Dragon, and Accuser of the
Brethren, but it is God that justifies, and who art thou that condemns? and
this thy speech is seen and comprehended, which thou have directed to us, and
it is judged, by the Spirit of true judgment to be a false Accusation and a
Lie, and not the Word of the Lord, and into the Lake amongst the false Prophets
thou art to be turned, who uses thy tougue when the Lord never spoke to thee.

And thou say we look upon the Iustitution of Christ Supper with a fleshly
and carnal eye, because we say, that the bread and wine which Christ commanded
his Disciples to eat and to drink, is carnal.

I Answer, The bread, and wine, is visible and carnal, and fleshly, and not
Spiritual, nor Eternal, and in the eternal Light, by the Spiritual eye of God
opened in us, we see them, and do own that it was a command of Christ, to stand
for its time, and no more, but a carnal figure of a spiritual thing, and the
spiritual thing being the Substance bearing witness, the figure is denied and
declared against, and thou and thy Generation who art acting in those things by
tradition, tying and limitting God to a visible thing, (that without it no
salvation) art in the sorcery and witchraft, and an enemy to the substance; for
Christ never since he was sacrificed brake of the Bread, or drank of the Cup
with his Disciples, but new in his Fathers kingdom; and thou who art in the
^arnal figure, acting those things without the enjoyment of Christ, art
sensual, and by the Light of Christ art to be condemned and judged with the
world, who art without God, and without the enjoyment of Christ, in the
beggarly rudiments of the world.

Thou say, O fleshly minded men whom the god of this world has blinded
because you believe not: and thou say, thus says the Lord, and speaks the
Prophet Malachic words.

To which I answer; this again I do deny; the god of the world is cast out, and
the eye is opened through judgments and our fleshly minds are judged, and in
the Name of Jesus we do believe, and our belief in him has purified our
hearts; to the praise of the Living God, who has wrought all our works in us,
and for us, do I speak without boasting; and here again I charge it upon thee,
that thou art a slanderer and a false accuser; and let shame cover thee who
professes thy self to be a Teacher of others, who thy self is not taught of the
Lord; but steals Malachis words, and speaks them to us in thine own
imaginations, and calls it the word of the Lord; the Lord is against thee thou
false Prophet, who prophesies lies in his Name; and that which thou speaks to
us is thy own condition, and that which shall come upon thine own head, for a
child of disobedience thou art, and thy eye is blinded by the god of this world.

And whereas thou say we are spiritually proud, that give forth our selves
to be some great ones; and we say we are Apostles, and are not, but are found
Liars, proud Pharisees, Hypocrites, that say we are Just, Holy, Humble; and the
poor sinful Publicans are more justified then we.

I answer; proud we are not, our God shall judge between thee and us in this
thing, for we have nothing but what we have freely received from him: and that
we give forth our selves to be great ones; here thou art a Liar, and a false
Accuser again; this we have said, and do yet again declare that we were moved
of the Lord of Heaven and Earth to come to declare his mind and his Truth in
this City; but this is no boasting, and by that same spirit which was in the
Apostles, were we moved, and are guided, and by no other; but who has found us
Liars since we came, I challenge you, and all thy Sect to prove one lie that we
have uttered; or else let shame cover thee, and let thy mouth be stopped; and
let thy own heart condemn thee to be found the liar thy self; and this we
testify against thee, and all the world, that by Jesus, and in him are we made
Holy, Just, and Humble, he is made these things in us, and for us; and the
Publican state is witnessed by us who have passed through the figure and
parable into the life and substance.

And whereas thou say we that boast of our light within, and faith, thus
says the Lord, and brings Christ's words.

I answer, this is another lie, we do not boast of our Light within, but we
witness it to be within us, and to have enlightened every one that comes into
the world; which thou and thy Generation denies, and so would make Christ a
Liar, and the Scripture a Lie; but against you all, with all the world, we bear
testimony, and the Father bears witness with us, that every man that comes into
the world is enlightened by the Light of Christ; which teaches righteousness,
unto all that loves it but condemn them that hate it, whereof thou art one who
utters forth thy lies and Slanders, and false Accusations against the Innocent;
and that Scripture Ioh. 9. we own, and do witness to be fulfilled in us by the
coming of Christ; he which did see, is Blind, and he which was Blind now sees;
and while we did see, our sin remained, but being Blind we have no sin; but
this to thee, and to thy spirit, is a mystery sealed, and never to be known in
that nature and wisdom; and here again thou have used thy tongue false Prophet
like, and must receive a false Prophets reward.

And whereas thou say, if Christ had not spoke to us in his word, we had no
sin, but now we have no cloak for our sin.

I answer, Christ's words we own, but here thou art made manifest to all to add
to the Scripture (in his word) this thou have added false Prophet like, and
therefore the Lord will add his plagues unto thee as the Scripture says; be
ashamed and blush, thy folly and wickedness is made manifest, who is not
ashamed (to carry on thy design) to add to Christ's words.

And whereas thou say we do not only neglect the weightier matters of the
law, but t^ law it self, teaching men so to do; for we said that the Scripture
is not the rule of faith and conversation, as one of us taught Sept. 27. in thy
hearing, and many others that will witness it.

I answer, here I challenge thee to prove that thou have spoken, and all thy
witnesses which thou speaks of; oh thou Liar be ashamed to forge such Lies,
and declare them in writing for Truth, we neglect not the weightier matters of
the Law, nor the Law, nor teach any so to do; all that ever heard us will bear
witness against thee, and they (though our Enemies) shall witness for us, and
against thee in this thing; for we declare the Everlasting Gospel, which is the
fulfilling of the Law; and this we declare, that the Law must have its through
operation before the Gospel be witnessed; and one of thy own society said to
us, we had preached the Law, and brought men to understand (...) from Grace;
now let all take notice of the confusion you live in, and let your own hearts
condemn you, and the light in your own consciences convince you, that you are
in Babylon, and in confusion, and are no true Church of Christ, where all are
o^ one heart, and one mind: and this again I affirm, as before I did in thy
hearing that the Scripture is not the Saints rule, but the Spirit which gave
forth the Scripture, as the Scripture it self witnesses, Romans 8. Faith was
before the Scripture was, and therefore the Scripture is not the ground of it,
but a Declaration of it, and no other faith we own but the faith which Abel
had, and which Mo^^^ had, which was when no Scripture was written, and that we
own to be the Rule of our Conversation, which they walked by, the immediate
Spirit of God which was before the Scripture was written; and all you who
profess the Scripture to be your rule, your own rule shall testify against you
when the eternal God judges you, and they who witness that to be their rule
which gave forth the Scripture, walks up in the life of the Sdripture more
then you all; and you are proved to be but the Jew outward, who boasts of the
Ordinances from the Letter, but persecutes them by slanders and false
reproaches, who witness the Substance; and your praise is only of men, and not
of God; and the same woe which thou pronounces upon us will fall upon thy own
head, for this thy grievous slander, that we neglect the Law, and teach men so
to do.

And whereas thou brings many Scriptures, and says, thus says the Lord.

I answer, the Scriptures we own, and by that spirit which speaks them forth,
we witness them to be true, and they are ours; and though you say they are the
savor of death to us that perish, yet thou art found a Liar, for we are saved
out of the perishing state, and death is destroyed through death, through
faith, and thou have diminished from that Scripture 2 Timothy 3. 15. false Prophet
like again, and so art both an adder and a diminisher, and thou may read thy
portion in Rev. 22. 18, 19.

And whereas thou say, know this thou perverter of the right way of God,
thou shall be judged by the word that Christ spoke.

I answer, here thou sets the Scripture in the room of Christ, and art the
perverter of the right way of God thy self, for the Scripture says, all
judgment is committed to the Son, and the Scripture is not the Son; and thou
did say and now again writes, that the Scripture shall judge the world; and
so I charge it upon thee, that thou art a Blasphemer, who exalts the Scripture
above the Son of God, and shall be judged by the Son into utter darkness, and
into the pit from whence thou art come; yet this I testify, he that receives
the Son rejects not those words which was spoken by him; though thou and thy
Generation Pharisee-like may make a profession of the words which Christ spoke
and yet reject the Son, and all to whom Christ speaks, which receives him not,
shall be judged by the word which he speaks; for he speaks eternally, which
shall stand eternally; but when did he speak to thee? For this I do declare,
thou may have those words which he spoke, and yet never have heard his word
nor voice; as the Pharisees had those words, which God spoke by the Prophets,
but never had heard his word, nor seen his shape. John. 5.

And thou say quake and tremble at this; that word which you reject and
despise sha^^ judge you at the last day; and say, thus says the Lord, and
bringst Christ's words, and the Apostles words.

I Answer; The Lord rebuke thee thou Scorner, here thou have made the
filthiness of thy heart known, for out of the abundance thereof thy mouth
speaks: here thou art seen to be a Scorner; quaking and trembling we own, it is
that which the holy men of God witnessed, but here be a Witness against thy
self, that thou art a Scorner of their conditions: what have thou to do to talk
of the Scripture, who art scorning that which it declares of? Here thou art
made manifest to be one that has the form but denies the power, and scorns at
it, God scorns thee, thou scornful one; and let all that fear the Lord depart
from thee, and see thy filthiness and search the Scripture whether it
testifies not of that, which thou scorns at, and makes a mock upon. And that
we reject and despise the Scripture and the words which Christ spoke, which
thou accusest us of, this is another lie, and a false slander, for the
Scriptures we own in their place, and by the Spirit of God sets to our seal
that they are true, but that they shall judge the world we do deny: and herein
thy ignorance does appear, and that thou art blinded by the god of this World,
which thou would cast upon us: and Christ's words, and the words of the
Apostles shall fall upon thy own head, for vengeance in flames of fire will the
Lord render upon thee, thou Liar and Slanderer and false Accuser, who art in
disobedience to the Gospel of God.

And whereas thou say the Lord has spoken it, and it shall surely come to
pass, and bringst many Scriptures.

I Answer, The Scriptures we own, and what is spoken in them shall be fulfiled;
but thou Liar, when did God speak this to thee? the judgments pronounced in
them shall fall upon thy own head, because thou art guilty of the same
iniquities, as they were of, against whom these Scriptures were declaed.

And whereas thou say we are those that the Lord before has spoken of in his
word, (and therefore no marvel we would not have men to read it) and cites the
2. Peter Chap. 2.

I answer, I do in the Presence of the living God deny thee and thy false
assertion, but it shall stand for thy own condition; thou art one in the
Generation which Christ spoke of, and that was in the Apostles days, who has
the form, but denies the power, as they had: And I charge thee again with a Lie
in thy mouth, who say, We would not have men to read the Scriptures; they who
have heard us shall witness against thee, that we do direct to search the
Scripture, whether our doctrine be not true, and by the Scripture shall our
doctrine be tried; how long will thou utter thy lies in the Name of the Lord;
the Lord will plead with thee, thou unclean lying spirit; and that which thou
pronounces against us, shall come upon thy self: And thou say, We through
Coveteousness make merchandise of some. We challenge thee, and all the City of
London to prove this, thou lying Serpent, God shall plead with thee; we are
free and clear in the sight of God, of thy false accusations, and have neither
desired, nor sought after any man's Money, nor Gold, nor Apparel, God is our
Witness, and many in this City knows the fame, though thou slanderously, as an
Enemy of God, do accuse us; but I challenge thee in thy reply to this, make
it appear what thou assertest, or lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and let shame
strike thee in the face for ever; I charge thee, that if thou can, make it
appear plainly in particular, (and do not darkly accuse us) what those damnable
heresies are, which we bring in, and wherein we deny the Lord, and what our
pernicious ways are which thou falsely and slanderously accuses us of, and
wherein we are fleshly, and despise government, and are presumtuous, and
wherein, or how we speak evil of Dignities, and wherein we are as natural bruit
Beasts, and what these things are, we speak evil of, which we know not, and
what our swelling word of vanity are, and whom we do allure through the lusts
of the flesh, and through much wontonness? In the presence of the Lord I
challenge thee to prove the particulars of thy Accusations, and not to slander
in the dark; though such as these there were in the Apostles days, who were
turned out from the Light, and the Apostles which dwelt in the Light saw them;
and such a Generation there is now, they are seen and known where they are, by
them who abides in the Light; but of these thy false slanders upon us, we are
clear in the presence of the Lord God, and that portion which thou would give
unto us must thou have thy self, for with what measure thou have meeted, it
shall be measured to thee again, even the blackness of darkness for ever, and
the Day of the Vengeance of God is at hand against thee.

And whereas thou say, We pretend to tremble: [Its true, we pretend the
example of Moses] and thou say, O abominable hypocrifie and dissimulation,
will that justify your shaking your hands like Idiots, and your raving like
madmen? Moses was a (...) in whom the fear and dread of the Lord was, who kept
his Word, but you despise it; who loved the Law, but you reject it.

I answer, We do not only pretend to tremble, but often do we, and have we
witnessed it, by the mighty Power and Dread of the Lord upon us, and we walk
not by the example of the Servants of the Lord without us, but the same Power
we witness which was in them, by which they were made to tremble which thou
scornest and deridest, and calls it madness: The holy Men of God were counted
(by such as thou art) madmen, (and were cast out of their Assemblies) which
trembled at the Word of the Lord: But that we despise the Word and Law of God,
here thou art a Liar again, and the Plagues of God hang over thy head, for thy
Lies and Slanders against the Innocent; the same fear of God which was in Moses
we witness, and no other, and thou who art without it art a Heathen; and Moses
and Jeremiah, and Habbakkuk, which thou speak of were our example, who
walked by the same Spirit, and served the Lord by the same Spirit; but that we
served out fleshly lusts, which here again thou accusest us of, I do challenge
thee to prove it, but I know thou can not, and therefore art in the nature of
the Devil, accusing the Brethren; and to walk by tradition we deny, which you
also would lay to our charge; but the same Spirit by which they were acted,
acts us the same way according to its measure; and the same Light in which they
walked is our Light, and this Light is the Light of Christ within us, and not
without us.

And whereas thou say, its true, If we served the Lord, and kept his Word,
it would make us to tremble, as it does those that fear him, but we have
rejected the Law of the Lord, and the Word which he has spoken: And the Lord
when he comes to shake terribly the Earth, shall give us our Portion in the
Lake that burns.

I answer, Let all the World here take notice of thy confusion and ignorance
which utters forth it self through thee; thou before wast scorning of
trembling, and now thou art approving of it; and if it be they that tremple
which serve the Lord; here be a Witness against thy self, thou servest him not,
who art not yet come to tremble, but art in thy high nature, above the fear of
the Lord: and here again thou art found a false Accuser, for we reject not the
Law of the Lord, nor the Word which he has spoken, but live in it, and rejoice
in it daily, for in it is our hearts delight: And here again, as thou have
measured to us, it shall be measured unto thee, when the Lord God arises to
recompense his Enemies, thy Portion will be the same, as thou have said, in the
Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone,

And now a few words in answer to that which thou calls, A Caution to all that
are called Saints in the Nation, which may concern all people.

I answer, They who are Saints, who dwell in the Light, and walks in the Light,
do discern thee to be no Saint, neither will receive any caution from thee, but
will testify against thee; for thy Lies and slanders and false accusations
which thy Book is filled with, and herein it may concern all people, that thy
Lies and Slanders be reproved and laid open, lest they receive thy Lies for the
Truth; and be deceived by thy subtle Speeches; who brings the Prophets words,
and the Apostles words, wrest ing them, and falsely applying them, to make thy
Lies to be received; but all people who love the Light wherewith Christ has
enlightened them, will see thee, and deny thee, and turn away from thee, as
having the Form of Godliness without the Power.

And whereas thou say, Ye may rejoice that you live to s^e, not only the
mystery of Godliness, but also the working of iniquity in the fleshly corrupt
and sensual minded men, cal^d Quakers.

I answer, That name Quakers, was cast upon us by the Heathen; through their
scorn and derision, as the name Christians was upon the Disciples; though
quaking we own, for all the Holy Men of God witnessed it, and the Holy
Scriptures declares of it; and here again thou enviously, and maliciously,
castest a Slander upon us, Fleshly, Corrupt, and Sensual-mindedness, and the
working of the mystery of Iniquity, is destroyed in us by the mighty Power of
God made manifest in Jesus Christ, which takes away sin; to the praise of the
living God I speak, in clearing the Innocent from thy false Slanders, and it
shall stand for thy own condition, fleshly corrupt, and sensual-minded, and the
working of the mystery of iniquity; And herein I prove thee to be so by thy
Fruits, thy Lies, and false Reproaches, and envious false Accusations, which is
the fruits of the flesh, and of corrupt sensual-mindedness, which fruits do
appear in this thy Writing, and as for the Mystery of Godliness, it is hidden
from thee, and in that mind and nature thou shall never know it; for thou
live in the sight of thy own Pollution, and of thy carnal Ordinances, and not
in the enjoyment of the Mystery of Christ, which is Godliness.

And whereas thou say, Ye may rejoice, and in nothing be terrified, because
the Scriptures did foretell of such, and is fulfilled in these men: And thou
bring many Scriptures, where Christ and the Apostles prophesied of the
coming in of false Prophets, and Teachers.

I Answer, Though ye do now rejoice, yet your joy shall be turned into sorrow
and howling, and the Lord has said it; and the day of terror will overtake
you, wherein your hearts shall fail you for fear, and your foundation shall be
removed; and its true, that the Scripture does foretell of us, and is witnessed
in us, That all the Lord's Children should be taught of the Lord; And that the
Lord would gather his Flock out of the mouths of all dumb Shepherds, etc. and
according to our growth up in the Life of the Scriptures, they are fulfilled in
us; but false Prophets we do deny, though all those Scriptures which thou have
set down we own to be prophesies of false Prophets, those false prophets which
Christ prophesied of, came in the Apostles days, they saw them coming in
then, 1 John 2. 18.

And as all these Scriptures testifies which thou have cited; and since the
Apostles, days, has been a great Apostasy, and not a true Church of Christ
could be found, and ever since has the same Generation of false Prophets stood
under several forms and appearances, deceiving the Nations: But now the pure
Light of Christ shines, discovering to them, who walk in the Light, who they
are, and daily more and more clearly shall they be seen, and thou will be found
in their number, who art a cursed child, in whom the son of perdition is
exalted, which utters forth thy Lies and Slanders sensually, and make it
manifest to all, that thou have not the Spirit of God, but are separated from
it, in self-seperation which is abomination unto God, and must be scattered by
him.

And whereas thou say, Seeing it is so, let you be filled with boldness, and
let you contend against those ungodly Ones which are now risen.

I answer, ungodliness we deny, and your boldness shall the Lord turn into
weakness, and faintness, and your contendings against us shall not prosper, for
this is our heritage; every Tongue that rises up in judgment shall be
condemned; you shall all be scattered and driven away as Chaff before the Wind,
who sets yourselves to contend against the Truth; for that which is now risen
shall confound you all.

And whereas thou bring many Scriptures, which were Exhortations of the
Apostle to the Saints, with exhorting thy Brethren.

I answer, The Scriptures I do own, and that Spirit which spoke them forth I
witness, but thou art an Enemy to the Power of them; though thou have the Form
of Truth, thy lying and false accusing has made thee appear to be an Enemy to
the Life which the holy Men of God lived in, and so have cleared thy self from
those Scriptures which were written to the Saints, and must own those which
were written to the World; The Liar must be cast into the Lake; the Wicked must
be turned into Hell; and such as these thou must own to belong unto thee, and
these are thy Scriptures which thou have right unto.

And whereas thou say, We talk of high enjoyments and great revelations
without, above and beyond the Scripture, and that we talk of a Light which is
besides the Scripture, but its deep, and thick darkness; and what has such
lights led men unto? even contempt of God, and of all Righteousness,

I answer, Here again thou art found a Liar, and an Accuser of the Brethren,
for what we do declare, the Scripture witnesses to the same, and we speak of
nothing but what is declared of in the Scripture by the Holy Men of God, and
neither without it, nor above, or beyond it, do we speak: I challenge thee (to
prove what thou have asserted) and all the City of London, whether we have
spoken or declared any thing, but what the Scriptures bears witness to; and the
Light which we declare of, is the Light of Christ, which the Scripture says
has enlightened every one that comes into the World; and it is not besides the
Scripture, so as contrary to it, but the Scripture bears witness of the Light:
And here I charge thee with Blasphemy, who calls the Pure Light of Christ thick
Darkness, and that the Light of Christ (which is the Light which we declare of)
has led men, or leads any to contemn God, or his Ordinances, or Righteousness;
let shame strike thee in the face, thou impudent one, who blasphemously says,
that the Light of Christ is thick Darkness, and leads into contempt of God; let
the Light in thy own Conscience condemn thee, thou Enemy of God; for thy Lies,
and Slanders, and Blasphemy, which in this thy Book thou have uttered.

And whereas, Thou exhortest to labor to see an excellency in Christ, in the
Word of Christ, and in the Church and Ordinances of Christ.

I answer, For the simple Ones sake, that they may not be deceived; none ever
shall see any excellency in those things, but who owns and walks in the Light
of Christ, which lets every one see themselves first; and your talking of the
same, and report of Christ, and of his Word and Ordinance, is not to know the
excellency of those things, for death in you talks of the same, but the thing
in Substance you are ignorant of; and you who stumble at the Light wherewith
Christ lighteneth every one; are above the Door, which is the entrance unto the
life of these things: And so I exhort all to mind the Light of Christ, and to
walk in it, and it will lead unto Christ from whence the Light comes, and it
will lead to the fulfilling of Christ's Words, and to the one Bread, and to the
one Baptism; and the Light is the Door and Entrance unto the Life of those
things: But you who hate the Light, and deny it to be in every one, has but
the Husk and outward Declaration of those things, and are without the Life.

And whereas thou say, They that are of God will hear John, Peter, and Paul,
and the rest that were the Servants of Christ, not the fleshly conceits of
those, or any other men; and Christ Sheep hear his Voice, and a Stranger they
will not hear.

I answer, They that are of God, do own the writings of all the Servants of
Christ; but many may profess their words, as the Pharisees did the Prophets
words, and as thou do now, and yet not be of God, but children of the Devil;
but that our conceits are fleshly, I do deny, for all conceits of the flesh we
deny, and bears witness against, and it shall stand for thy own condition, and
thy voice is the voice of a stranger, and they that are of God will not follow
it: though thou bringst the Saints words in thy mouth, as the Devil did unto
Christ; yet in the Light of Christ thou art seen, and comprehended, and from
the Light of Christ answered, and by it judged to be without the life of those
Scriptures which thou speakst of, and they are to thee but as an empty sound.

And whereas thou cites many more Scriptures, which are exhortations of the
Apostles to the Church, and exhorts thy Brethren with them.

To which I answer as before. The Scriptures I do own, but, to thee, thou
envious man, they do not belong, for as in this thy writing thou art proved a
Liar, and a Scorner, and a Slanderer, and a false Accuser, and a Blasphemer;
out of thy own mouth, be a Witness against thy self, and let all thy whole
Assembly bear witness against thee, that the Scriptures which were spoken to
the Saints who walked in the light and had denied ungodliness, do not belong
unto thee who art an hater of the light, and lives in the pollutions of the
world; but the Scriptures will surely be fulfilled upon thee, The wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and the Liar shall have his portion in the Lake, and he
that works abomination is to be trodden in the winepress of the wrath of God
without the City, and such like. And now something in answer to some things in
the Epistle to the Reader.

Whereas thou and the rest of you there say, although the light has appeared,
yet there is a Generation of men in the world, that do hate the light, and
endeavor to put it out, crying against the Scriptures of Truth; its a dead
letter, and against the form of doctrine therein contained.

To which I answer, It is true, the light has appeared; Christ who is the
Light lightneth every one that comes into the world; which light has appeared
in every man's conscience; and there is a Generation which hates the light, and
you are of that Generation which say, every man has not the light, and calls
the Light of Christ thick darkness, and endeavor to put it out; and here you
have read your own condition, though you make a large profession of the
Scriptures (which is not the light, but words declared from the Light) as the
Jews did profess the Prophets words, but persecuted Christ, and spoke against
him, who was the light and substance of the Prophets words: and if you know any
who cry against the Scripture, and against the doctrine therein contained, we
cry and declare against such, for the Scripture we own in its place to be a
true declaration of God, of Christ, and of the Saints conditions, but they are
not the light, but Christ is the light, as themselves bear witness, nor are
they the Saints guide, but the Spirit that gave them forth, as they themselves
bear testimony, neither were the Scriptures given forth to give your own
imaginations and suppositions upon, but they themselves are doctrine, and are
as they speak, he that has the same spirit which speak them forth, reads them
and understands them, and none else.

And whereas thou say, Lest that simple plain meaning men should be kept in
Babels darkness, or the enlightened fall into the error of the wicked, for that
reason your Book came to public view.

I answer, truly you are deceived, who think to gain into your form, the
simple, plain meaning men by Lies, and false Slanders and false Accusation; who
are simple and plain unto God, will descern your deceits, and how falsely you
have accused the innocent, and will see you to be in Babels darkness; and who
walks in in the light wherewith they are enlightened will see you to be in the
error of the wicked, and out of the Truth; and it is well for the Truths sake,
that your Book came forth, that thereby your filthiness and deceitfulness, and
enviousness might be laid open to the simple. And truly I say unto you, you
have, and will miss of your end in putting forth this Book of yours.

And whereas you say you shall be willing at any time to vindicate every
conclusion therein contained against any that shall oppose.

I answer, I challenge you all in this particular to prove those accusations
which you have laid to our charge whom you call Quakers, in many particulars,
which before I have demanded; what they are is before spoken of.

And whereas you say, you account that light within (not witnessed by the
Scripture without) which some so much talk of, to be deep darkness.

I answer, if you know any who speak of any Light which the Scripture does not
witness of, we with you freely declare against such, and such a light is
darkness, but the Light of Christ which we speak of, which has enlightened
every one that comes into the world, I hope you are not so impudent, but you
will acknowledge that the Scriptures speaks of this light; and dare not deny,
but that the Scripture witnesses that Christ is the Light of the word; for as I
said, we freely give way, and desire that all might search the Scripture,
whether these things be not so as we declare.

And whereas you say, and exhort to let the Scripture be the rule of faith and
practice.

I Answ. Here you would always keep people in darkeness, under your teaching,
and would make void the new Covenant which is the Law written in the heart, and
the Spirit of the Lord put in the inward parts, to be the rule and guide of the
Saints; for who walks by the rule without them, and teaches men so to do, would
make void the Covenant of life and peace, where the Teacher is not removed into
a corner, which Teacher all that have faith and an holy Conversation do
witness, which teaches not contrary to what the Scripture speak but is a
teaching and fulfilling of the Scripture, and an establishing of it, though
thou and many may profess the teaching of the Scripture and may in your own
wills, conform unto it in the outward appearance, as the Pharisees did, and yet
be but Hypocrites and deceived as they were; and I say again, that faith was
before the Scripture was written, which faith is declared of in the Scripture,
which faith comes as is manifested by hearing of the word preached, which word
is even in the mouth and in the heart, if you have an ear you may hear; and now
I advise you all in the Name of the Lord to cease striving and contending
against the truth; for verily the stone which is cut out of the mountain
without hands, will dash your image of many mixtures to pieces, and it falling
upon you, will grind you to powder, and your conforming the outward man, to an
outward thing, and teaching men so to do, and limitting and tying the Holy one
to a visible thing, will not cover you in the Day of the Lord: nay verily,
though concerning the Scripture without, you may walk blameless, yet one thing
will be found lacking, even the cross of Jesus Christ, by which all sin is
crucified in them who walk in it; and I say unto you, that your covering is to
narrow, and it will not hide your secret parts: for in the eternal Light of
Christ you are seen and comprehended, your beginning, your time, and your end;
for though you have the Scriptures, and Jewish like, walks up in the outward
appearance of them, crying up the Ordinances and Churches, yet your praise is
of men, and not of God, for you are enemies to the life of the Scriptures, as
is made appear by your many Lies and Slanders against us, which you have
uttered; and I say return your minds every one within to that in your own
consciences which reproves you in secret for your secret iniquities, it will
let you see where your hearts are, and how far they are mortified to the world,
and the love of it, and this light wherewith every one of you is enlightened is
the Light of Christ, and it is the Lords true Witness and shall witness for him
eternally against all whose deeds are evil, who walk in disobedience of it; and
all who love it, and walk in it, it leads unto Christ, and into all purity and
holiness and uprightness of heart toward God and man; and this light leads
unto justification, all t^e^ who are taught by it; and her^ is your Teacher,
loving it; and your condemnation eternally, continuing to hate it. And thus I
have answered thy Book, and the Truth is witnessed, and many false Lies and
false Accusations denied and testified against, and thus I rest, waiting for an
answer to clear thy self (if thou art able) of those things which I have
denied, which thou have charged upon us, for God is my Witness, this I do
desire, that Truth may be made manifest and embraced, and Deceit and Error
discovered and denied.

By one who is a Witness, against the Deceits of the World, called, Edward
Borough.

TO THE 1655
Camp of the Lord IN ENGLAND.
TO all you Called, Chosen, Elected, and Beloved of the Lord, who are of the
Circumcision made without hands, of the Seed of Abraham; who are Jews indeed,
not after the flesh but in the Spirit; unto whom belongs the Everlasting
Promise and Covenant, which God has, and is fulfilling in you, and
establishing with you: We your Fellow-Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem which
is the Mother of us all; and of the same Body, and of the same Seed, and same
Birth, begotten and brought forth by the immortal Word of Life, which lives for
ever, do send greeting, and do embrace you in the Arms of our Beloved, who is,
and is to come, God blessed for ever: You who are called Quakers, who are so,
not only in word, nor in show, but in Life and in Power; whom God has called
and chosen to place his Name in, and to take up his Habitation among, above all
the Families of the Earth; the Tabernacle of God is with you, and his
Dewlling Place is among you, and only among you is God known, and his Name is
great in your Assemblies.

We who are of the same Root and Offspring, do bring in our witness, and do
set to our seal, That God of a truth is with you, and among you; and he is the
God of the living that answers by Fire; he is, I am, and there is none besides
him, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End of all things.

Praise him for ever ye Redeemed of him; lift up your heads, your Redemer is
come; clap your hands, and shout for joy, and let the everlasting Praises of
God be in your mouths for ever and ever: Exalt ye his Name above all gods, and
glorify him in the sight of all the Heathen, and let his mavelous Works
stand upon Record from Generation to Generation.

Wonderful has his Work been among you, and that my soul knows right well; you
that were scattered in the cloudy and dark Day, and were a prey for the wild
Beasts of the Forest, and were driven away as lost Sheep in the Wilderness,
has God gathered into the Fold, to lie down by the Springs of Living Water in
fat Pastures for evermore.

Your Bread is sure, and your Waters never fails; a Feast of fat things is made
unto you, of Wines well refined; the Lord is become the Lot of your
Inheritance, and the Portion of your Cup forever.

Your Crowns have you laid down at the Feet of the Lamb, and your lives and
liberties have not been dear unto you; and let this never repent you, for now
the Lord will exalt you, and Crown you with Immortal Glory.

The Everlasting Day Star is risen among you, which gives Light unto the
Nations; and the light of the Sun is as the Light of seven days; and there is
no need of a Candle in your Dwelling, but the Lamb is the light thereof; fair
as the Sun, clear as the Moon; yea, it is he which was dead and is alive, and
behold he lives for evermore. Praise him all ye people, praise ye him ye holy
Host; let all that has breath praise him for ever. Who can express his noble
Acts? And who can declare his wondrous Works? Oh, my Soul is ravished, and my
heart is overcome! let me speak that I may be refreshed, and let me declare his
Wonders among all People.

The Lord is our King, our Judge, and our Lawgiver, and our Rock of defense;
Just is he in his Judgments, who has avenged us of our Enemies; Mercy and
Judgment meet, Righteousness and Peace do embrace each other. Rejoice for
evermore ye Saints of the most High, and tell it to your Children, that they
may tell it to an other Generation what the Lord has wrought among you, and
what his Hand has brought to pass. Salvation is come, and plentious
Redemption, and the dead has heard the Voice of the Son of God, and lives.

Let sorrow and mourning flee away, and be ye comforted ye that have mourned,
and be ye refreshed ye that have been weary; for God has opened the
Everlasting Fountain, and the Streams run pleasantly, which refresh the City of
our God; He is come and his Reward is with him, even he for whom we have
waited; this is he, who is our Life, our Peace, and our exceeding great Reward;
the Light of the World is our Savior, but the Worlds Condemner; our Peace, but
the Worlds Torment: Glad-tidings glad tidings, the acceptable year is come;
praise ye the Lord ye Sons and daughters of Sion, beautiful is your dwelling
place, and abounds with pleasant fruit, for you are dug and pruned and
enclosed a Garden of lovely branches; let the wonders of the Lord never be
forgotten, nor his works never pass out of your remembrance, for he has
wounded and healed, killed and made alive, raised the dead, and slain the
living, brought out of captivity and bound with chains, gathered and scattered,
brought low and exalted, saved, and condemned; all this has your eye seen, and
your ear heard; and the Heavens and the Earth has been burned as a scroule,
and the indignation of the Lord you have born: But the Winter is past, and the
Summer is come, and the Turtle dove, and the singing of Birds is heard in our
Land. O magnify his Name for ever; you are made vessels of honor wherein the
everlasting Treasure abides, which never waxes old; the voice of the
Bridegroom is heard among you, and how can you have any more sorrow? instead of
weeping, rejoicing; and instead of heaviness of heart, fullness of everlasting
joy: the Lord has fulfilled his promise, and made good his word, and his Law
and Covenant is with you; and from you does the Law go forth, and the powerful
Word of Life, and Death sounds out of your Dwelling and you are Gods only
witnesses to testify of him in the presence of all Nations, some of you by
suffering, and some by declaring: Oh endless love, and life, and riches, an
eternal Crown is upon your heads, and your suffering (which has not been a
little) is not worthy to be compared with the glory that is and shall be
revealed. I speak to you who have an ear to hear, my soul and heart is
comforted in you, in the midst of my burdens and sufferings, who is separated
from you outwardly, yet joined and united to you by the Spirit which is
unlimited, which does comprehend all Nations: yea I behold your beauty afar off
and my heart is ravished with it, and I am sick of love: let his works praise
him forever, which he has wrought, for his Dwelling is with you in the Light,
unto which no mortaleye can approach.

The new Jerusalem is come down from Heaven, and no unclean can enter: but you
are made white with the blood of the Lamb, and purged as silver, and purified
as gold in the burning, and unto you an entrance is given, and the way is
prepared, and the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self
ready, and the Way of the Lord is pleasant to you, and his Commands are not
grievous; no unclean thing can pass over, nor no Lions Whelps can tread
therein, but it is called the way of holiness, where only the ransomed of the
Lord do walk; even your Mountain is established upon the top of all hills, and
all Nations shall flow unto it. Sing praises for ever, for the Kingdom of
endless peace is come, which passes understanding, and of glory, which on
mortal eye can behold, and of life which no flesh can live in. Oh my beloved,
come up hither and I will show you what God has done from you, he has rebuked
the Sea, and driven back the floods of waters which compassed you about, and he
has scattered your enemies with a whirlwind, and be has given you to feed
upon the flesh of Kings, and of Captains. Can you call to mind the doings of
your God, and his mavelous works brought to pass, and not cry out in praises
for evermore, O drink and be refreshed, and eat and be satisfied for ever, and
let your soul delight it self in fatness; the planting of the Lord you are, and
his own purchased Possession; he has separated you from the womb, and has
called you out of kindreds, and ye are the Royal Seed of the Offspring of the
Lord Almighty, and all Nations shall call you blessed.

And O thou North of England, who art counted as desolate and barren, and
reckoned the least of the Nations, yet out of thee did the Branch spring, and
the Star arise which gives light unto all the Regions round about; in thee the
Son of Righteousness appeared with wounding and with healing; and out of thee
the terror of the Lord proceeded, which makes the Earth to tremble and be
removed; out of thee Kings, Princes and Prophets did come forth in the Name and
Power of the most High, which uttered their voices as thunders, and laid their
swords on the necks of their Enemies and never returned empty from the
slaughter. Though I be as by the waters of Babylon, in a strange Land; and as a
Pilgrim and Stranger destitute, but not forsaken; as dying but behold I live;
yet if I forget thee, let my right hand forget her cunning, and let my Name be
blotted out of the Book of Life. O how I love the holy Seed which in my eye is
precious! No man can hinder my boasting of thee, for I am sealed among you in
the Record of eternal life, to be read among you in the light where I am known
to you, and where my unity stands with you in the love and life, which never
changes, and you are my Mother, and my Brother and Sister, who does the Will of
my Father; Our God is a consuming fire, and his Habitation is compast about
with dread and terror. The Heathen shall see and fear, and the Inhabitants of
the Earth shall tremble; o^^ God is everlasting burnings, and it is tempestuous
round about his Throne, and he reigns for evermore; and though thou be despised
and set at naught, and counted as the offscouring of all things, and the scorn
of the Heathen, yet thy King reign^ upon Mount Sion, and if he utter his voice
all flesh shall tremble, and before him thy Adversaries shall fall, and thy
Persecutors shall be confounded, for tho^ shall never be forgotten of thy God,
but with his arm will he defend thee, and compass thee about, and thy seed
shall be increased, and thou Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the whole
Earth, for among you is laid the sure foundation, and the tried stone, Christ
Jesus the Light of the world, in whom you have believed, which unto the Nations
is a stumbling stone; but unto you precious: bring in your testimony, and set
to your seal; is there salvation in any other, but in him who is the Light of
the World? Nay there is no redemption wrought but by him, nor no deliverance
but through him; his is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, and he is become
all in all; and you are no more of this World, but are of the chosen
Generation, and of the royal Priesthood, a people, Redeemed, unto whom there is
none like among the thousands of Israel and Judah, whose God is the Lord, whose
Savior is the Prince of Righteousness, who covers your heads in the day of
Battle, and smites your enemies in the hinder parts; and wounds them in the
forehead.

And now my beloved, let his Name be had in remembrance for evermore, and let
his praises be declared throughout Ages to come, and walk you worthy of his
everlasting love, wherewith he has loved you more then your brethren; let his
Name be exalted by righteousness, by purity, and by a blameless life, and bring
forth the fruits of righteousness and peace, and let your light shine forth
into the world, and your good works abound plentifully; for you are as a City
set on a hill, and as a lighted candle to shine abroad; and are created unto
good works. Let faith, hope, love and unity be increased among you; and let
mercy and judgment and equity flow down and be established for ever; never to
be removed. Let joy, and long-suffering and meekness and temperance spring out;
and be you perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.

Stand upon your watch Tower, and be not shaken nor drawn aside to follow any
other gods, nor to bow to any other Image, nor join your selves to strangers,
and mingle not your seed with the adulterous Generation, nor take not, nor give
not in marriage with them; but keep your selves from the Idols of the Heathen,
be not defiled with them; but abide in your strength, you know where it lies,
by which you may work good, and be perserved from evil; and you need not that
any man teach you, for you are taught of God, and are far from oppression.

Ye Children of Light, worship your God for ever, who is light, and in him is
no darkness at all, who is the same and changes not, whose mercy endures for
ever: Be Followers of the Lamb as undefiled Virgins, and let your soul scorn
the glory of Babylon and Egypt for ever; for you are not your own, but are
bought with a price, no more to serve your selves, but the Lord of Israel
forever.

Put on your Armor, and gird on your Sword, and lay hold on the spear, and
march into the field, and prepare your selves to battle, for the Nations does
defy our God, and says in their heart, Who is the God of the Quakers, that we
should fear him, and obey his voice? Arise, arise, and sound forth the
everlasting word of war and judgment in the ears of all Nations; sound an
Alarm, and make their ears to tingle. Our Enemies are whole Nations, and
multitudes in number, of a rebellious people that will not come under our law,
which arise up against us, and will not have our King to reign, but trample his
Honor under foot, and despise his Law and his Statutes, and count his Subjects
as Slaves and Bondmen. Stand upon your feet, and appear in your terror as an
Army with banners, and let the Nations know your power, and the stroke of your
hand: cut down on the right hand, and slay on the left, and let not your eye
pity, nor your hand spare, but wound the Lofty, and tread under foot the
Honorable of the Earth, and give unto the great Whore double, and give her no
rest day nor night; but as she has done, so let it be done unto her; and give
her double into her bosom: as she has loved blood, so give her blood, and dash
her children against the stones, and let none of the Heathen Nations, nor their
gods escape out of your hands, nor their Images, nor Idols, but lay waste the
fenced Cities, and tread down the high Walls; for we have proclaimed open War
betwixt Michael our Prince, and the Dragon. Your Captains are mighty men, and
your leaders are skilled to handle the Sword, and they are riding on before
you, Arise worm Jacob, and fear not, but thresh the mountains to dust; for God
has given thee the power of thy enemies to tread upon, and they shall fly
before thee, and shall fall by thy sword; there is none to strong for thee, nor
no enchantment against thee; but thou art blessed, blessed world without end.
Therefore all ye Lambs of my Father, and ye Camp of the Lords Host, wait upon
him to fulfill his Will, for he has put into your hearts to make war in
righteousness against the beast and the false Prophet: and cursed be every one
that rises not up to the help of the Lord against the mighty: the Beast is
mighty; and the false Prophet is great; and they keep the Nations under their
power. But O thou Beast, and thou false Prophet you shall be tormented
together: thou Beast, upon which the false Prophet sits, whom thou upholds by
thy Law; and defends by thy unrighteous power, thy power is limited, and it
shall be taken from thee, and thou shall be overcome, and the Lamb shall get
the victory, and into the pit and lake of fire shall you be turned to have your
resting place.

And thou false Prophet which has deceived the Nations, and scattered the
Inhabitants thereof, and builded by fraud, and daubed with untempered mortar;
thy Judgment is past upon thy head already, and the Decree of our God is sealed
against thee; thy smoke shall ascend for ever and ever; and of thy sin there is
no forgiveness, nor of thy torment no remission. Over you do we (and shall for
ever) rejoice and sing, and over your god and your King, the Dragon that old
Serpent; cursed be he, and his memorial for ever.

Ye Lambs of the true Shepherds fold, with whom my soul rests, whether ever I
behold you outwardly, yet my heart is with you, and I am one of your fold, and
I lie down with you under the shadow of the rock, upon the Mountain which the
beast cannot touch, where we are safe from all our enemies, and am to you well
known, to be read in your hearts, in the Record of the Lambs Book of Life, and
known only to the world by the name of,

EDWARD BOROUGH.
Written at Dublin City in Ireland, To the Camp of the Lord in England.
Several Epistles to Friends in LONDON: Written in the Year 1655. by E. B. Some
of which were subscribed by F. H. who was Fellow Laborer with him in the Work
of the Lord.
FRiends of God in the Truth, whom the Lord is gathering as desolate Stones to
build unto himself a Habitation, whom the Lord is bringing back out of
Captivity, wherein you have been held under the Chains of Darkness, in the Land
of the shadow of Death the Lord is calling you, and choosing you, to place his
Name in you, and to spread forth his glory among you: Therefore all dear
Friends, whose hearts the Lord has touched by his Love, and by his Power; be
faithful unto God, who has called you; and look not out at any thing that is
mortal, to draw you from the Obedience of the Eternal Light of Jesus Christ
which shines clearly in Darkness: Resist not the Drawing of the Father, but
take up the Cross, and abide in it daily, that your wills may be crucified, in
which the ground of enmity lodges: So all in your own conditions wait in the
Fear of the Lord, in singleness of heart, and in simplicity of mind for the
powerful Appearance of the Son of God, to be revealed in you, to destroy the
works of the Devil; for where he is not witnessed the works of the Devil
stands, and the nature of the earthly man in the fall: All of you whose minds
are turned home to within, where the Pearl and the Lost Money is to be found;
dwell and walk in the pure Fear, and Obedience to that of God which is made
manifest in you, and made known unto you, and there will Peace flow in from the
Presence of the Lord unto you, and refreshment and strength to the Seed, and
the Pure will live, and the Corrupt will die daily: Beware every one that have
put their hands to the Plow, that you look not back at any thing which you have
left behind in the World, but press on in the strait Way, which is the Light,
which gives no liberty to the fleshly man, but which judges and condemns all
that hates it and turns from it; the Light is the Way that leads to Life, and
by it as you wait in it the Life will be made manifest, which is immortal, and
your Redemption will be witnessed; dwell in the Judgment and in the Burning,
that the Dross may be consumed, and the Pure may be refined, and the earthly
carnal minds may be confounded and judged: The Lord is near unto you, wait for
his powerful Presence in his own Light, to see him, and in it to comprehend all
the World, with all its Profession, which leads not to God, but keeps in the
separation from God; your Way is near, walking in the Light you will see it,
and in the Light you will see all the paths, and all the ways of the Harlot,
which leads into the Chambers of Death; look not out at words, for that which
feeds there, is for the Famine; but dwell in the Light, joining with the
immortal Principle, which receives nourishment from the Eternal Fountain, which
the World knows not, nor comprehends, as you grow in the Pure, and in the Life,
so you are unknown to the World, and your growth will appear by your obedience
in the Cross of Christ; so take off stumbling at the Cross; for such has no
part in the Eternal Inheritance; but walk in the Cross, which is life to the
New-man, and death to the Old, and so through Death Life is made manifest, and
the pure Life of God arising in all, the World will be trampled upon, and
denied by you, but such amongst you that chooses the World, wrath from God I
declare against you; and you who knows the way, and casts off the Truth, and
for the love of that which is visible, turns from the Truth, you cannot escape
the Damnation of Hell: So all dear and tender hearts, abide in the Counsel of
God, and let not the World overcome your minds, but wait for a daily victory
over it, that so you may with the Saints possess the Eternal Riches, and that
in you which is carnal and corrupt may be overcome, by that which is Eternal
and Holy, as you abide and walk in the Truth, and grow up in the knowledge of
the eternal God; so our joy will be fulfilled in you, and our rejoicing will be
increased by you; therefore walk and live in that which God has made manifest
in you, which is of himself; and the eternal God of Life and Power prosper you,
and lead you up unto himself, to dwell and walk in his Love for evermore.

Be not troubled at the rage of the World, nor at Temptations, but stand in the
Will of God, which has been declared amongst you; that you may all be
established and guided by that which is not of this World, but by the Principle
of Life, which is Eternal, which judges all the fruits and grounds of Darkness:
Our love salutes you all, who walk in the Truth, and our prayers are for you,
that Life may spring up in you, to praise the Lord for ever.

This was also subscribed by F. H.
We are Servants unto you, and unto all the Elect Seed of God every where, for
whose sakes we give our selves to be spent, E. B. F. H.

To Friends in London.
ALl Friends, whose minds are turned to the Lord, by that which is Pure, which
comes from him who is the Light of the World; all mind it, that with it your
minds may be turned to him, from whence it comes, out of all the perishing
things, and out of all the visible to the invisible, that so you may all come
to know the Word of the Lord, which endures for ever; which is as a Fire and a
Hammer, which breaks down the Mountains, and burns up, and destroys all that
which is acted in that nature which leads into transgression, and into the
curse from God: And therefore all dear Friends whose minds are turned to the
Lord, and have tasted of his Power, all dwell in his Fear, and keep in your
minds from gadding abroad; and that which has discovered the lusts and
filthiness of your minds, and turned your minds from these things, and from
that nature that rules in the children of disobedience, that so you may all
come to know the Life, and that he may lead you, and direct all your minds up
in his Fear and Wisdom, that so you may be preserved out of those Paths that
lead to destruction, and out of all the deceitful Profession of the World; and
in the Light of Christ you will see the rise and ground of all Deceivers, and
Dreamers, and all them that speak their own Imaginations, and yet boast of
great things, and strive, and contend about words, and feed upon wind, and
bring no fruit unto God; and all ye that are not of the Light, and walk not
according to the Light are there, and lending your ears to such who act and
speak in that nature, you turn from your Guide which is near, and lend your
ears to the wicked, and so have walked in Darkness: But now you who have tasted
of the Love and Power of God, which all the Profession in the World knows
nothing of, in it dwell, and abide in that which has convinced you, and in
that which judges you, and abide in it, that so you may witness the Fallow
Ground plowed up, and the Earth shaken, and the Rocks rent, and the Vail taken
away, that so there may be a way, and a passage for the Pure to pass through
the Earth, and so the Earth may waste, and wither, and decay, and the Lions may
suffer hunger, and the gods of the Earth may be famisht, and the lust
destroyed; and all keep low in the fear, and wait in silence upon the Lord, to
be near you to direct all your minds and stay, and establish you; And as you
have received the Truth, so walk in the Truth, we do charge you all in the Name
of the Lord; and be faithful every one to your measure, and improve, and wait
for power, and stand in the cross to the earthly, that whatsoever your minds
have delighted in, in the first nature, may all be denied and crossed, and the
Cross is to the ground, to the lust; and as you nourish the lust, and let your
minds and wills at liberty, and deny the Cross, then that which is pure is
vexed and darkened, and so the deceit and lust gets up again, and so the Guide
is lost, and condemnation comes upon you; and therefore all be diligent in the
Work of the Lord, and watch over your actions, and deceit; and you will come to
see Satan has many strong holds, and would spare the best and the fat; but in
that which is a Cross to all mortal stand, and abide, and dwell, that so you
may be preserved and kept out of all snares of the Devil: And now take heed of
judging the Power of the Lord, and that it knows not what it is to be silent
and wait, that you may come to see in the Light, and be Partakers of the same;
and all who have tasted of the Power, wait, and keep out of imaginations, and
thoughts, and false voices, that so the Enemy may not be hearkened to, nor the
deceit, but all in the measure wait upon the Lord in singleness of heart, out
of all deceit; and form nothing in your minds; but all in Purity and
Uprightness dwell, And all Friends, now take heed of carelessness, slothfulness,
and sluggishness of mind, and of giving liberty to the flesh, and ease to the
carnal mind: And we charge and command you in the Presence of the Lord, whose
Power is dreadful, that you meet together in silence, and wait, and none to
speak a word but what he is moved to speak, a word from the Lord; take heed of
adding to it, but only what you are moved; and take heed of striving, and
contending, or letting out your selves to strange spirits, but every one keep
in his own Tent, and sit down under his own Vine; and eat not that which dies
of it self, but feed upon the Eternal, and so you will be nourished, and grow
up in Wisdom and Power, in that which is pure, that all deceit may be kept out.
And all Children and Servants, be diligent in your places, more willing, more
ready to labor in love and diligence, that so the Name of God may not be
dishonored. And all you who have Callings, throw off nothing hastily nor
rashly, but wait and flee not the Cross, for if you do, you will be darkened,
and the Name of God dishonored: And therefore all dear Friends, who have owned
the Truth, now wait upon the Lord in diligence, that so you may grow in the
Life, in the Power of the Lord, that nothing may be spared that is for
destruction; and so God Almighty bless you all, and keep you out of all deceit,
in the pure Life which is made manifest, that you may have victory over all,
and witness him who puts all under; with it, if you wait, you will see him
present and near you.

And so the Everlasting God of Power keep you all; for great is our care over
you, and our love is to you that abide in the Truth, which you are already made
Partakers of; and when Joy springs up, keep in it, and run not forth, and spend
it not; and take heed of exalting, for then pride and presumption gets up, if
you keep not in his Fear, and so Darkness will come upon you; but all dwelling
in that which is pure, you will be preserved out of snares, and temptations,
and your minds kept clear and pure, out of all things that defile; and so the
Everlasting God of Life and Power be with you all.

Your dear Brethren in the unchangable Love of God, E. B. F. H.

To Friends at London.
Dear and beloved Friends, in that which is pure of God, and made manifest in
you all, wait and abide, and walk in the Light, which comes from Jesus, from
whence it comes, who is the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, condemns all
unrighteousness into the pit; and therefore all wait in that which is pure of
God, which has turned your minds from Darkness to Light, and from Satan to
God, and has convinced you of all unrighteousness, and has let you see all
that ever you have done; behold, he is the very Christ; and therefore all
Friends of God, mind that which is pure of God, which shows you the deceits of
the heart; the Light is the Eye which discovers all the secrets of your hearts,
and it will show all deceit, and your present condition, and that which would
lead aside; and temptation as it arises it will discover, and resisting in the
Light, here temptations come to be escaped, and the pits and the snares which
they who err from the Light fall into. Dear Friends, great is our care one
every side, and we are jealous over you lest you depart from the simplicity of
the Gospel, and so the deceit lead and guide, and so you will come under
condemnation; and therefore all in silence wait, be swift to hear, slow to
speak; and all wait upon the Light in diligence, and take heed of forward minds
and wills, which would go before the Light and run before the Guide; there is
the Deceiver and false Prophet within, the same that is without, and therefore
we charge you all in the Name and Power of God, to take heed of forward wills
in speaking, lest your minds be drawn out from the moving of the Pure within,
to hearken to words without, which are spoken from that which is above the
Light, and this feeds the carnal reason, and the earthly wisdom, and lets in
the Inchanter, and so your minds being turned without you feed upon the husk,
and not the Life, and therefore that nature that cannot live without words is
for the Plague and for the Famine, and must be famished and stopped: And
therefore now as the Power arises in you, dwell low in it, and sink down in
the same, and as things open in you speak not forth, there your minds would run
out, and speak that which is opened by the Spirit, this is the Prodigal; but as
things open, treasure them up in your hearts; and all keep in that which
separates between Light and darkness; and be not hasty to do any thing, lest
your wills betray you, and all keep in Patience, there the Crown is obtained;
and flee not from the trouble, nor from that which judges; but dwell in it,
and pray that your flight be not in Winter, if you do, you are Vipers; And
despise not the Cross, even the death of the Cross, that all your iniquity may
be nailed to the Cross, and so the righteousness may be set up within, and so
the Land is kept in Peace: And therefore all, dear Friends, whose hearts the
Lord has touched, meet together, in silence wait, and you will see the Lord
present among you, and his power made manifest among you, and the earth broken
up, and the fallow ground, and a passage for the Seed; and we charge you all
take heed of many words, or feeding upon that which is torn, and dies of it
self; and we charge by the Lord, that none speak without Eternal Motion; for if
you do, the false Prophet speaks, and his words eats as a Canker, and darkens;
and vails them that hearken to it: And therefore all wait to have Salt in your
selves, and savor and discerning, that you may come to know the voice of the
Lord from the voice of a Stranger, and so you may be kept out of all deceit,
for there Thorns and Briars; and the cursed fruits are brought forth: but in
the Light of Christ dwell, and wait, and grow up in it, and walk in it, that
you may come to know your Redeemer, and what you are redeemed from, and see him
near you, and in you, else you are Reprobates: And so the Lord God of Life and
Power preserve you all, for we have kept nothing back, but are free from the
blood of you all, and of all that hears us; but our desire to the Lord is, that
what has been sown in weakness may be raised in power, and that you may grow
up in the Truth, and walk in the Truth, that we may see the Travel of our
Souls, and be satisfied; and if the Lord give us to see your faces again, we
may rejoice in you, and with you: and so the Everlasting God of Life and Power
keep you all in his Wisdom and Power, to have victory over all your Enemies,
that you may serve him in uprightness of heart, and be faithful to that of God
made manifest in you all.

Your dear Brethren in the Gospel of Christ committed to our charge, E. B. F. H.

To be read at Meetings of Friends in London.
FRiends of God, called by him out of the dark World, into his mavelous
Light; to all you who by the Power of God are kept faithful, to walk and abide
in the measure of the Gift of God received; Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God
the Father of Life be multiplied in you, and amongst you, that you all may grow
up in the Power of God, out of Darkness, and the shadow of Death, wherein you
have been held captive in a strange Land: Dear Friends, our souls are poured
out for you, that you all may abide in that which you have received, and heard,
which is the Way and Path of Life, and Righteousness, and Peace eternal;
therefore all dear Friend, walk worthy of the calling, whereunto ye are called,
and wait in the Light by which you are enlightened, that all deceit in
particular and in the general may be comprehended, seen, and judged; we bear
you record, there is a Witness of God manifest in you, and true desires which
flows to God from you: Therefore take heed to the measure of God, that by it
you may hear the Voice of God, and see his powerful Presence; for by that which
is manifested of God in man, God speaks, moves, and acts, and is known unto
man; and all that neglect the measure of God, to walk in it, all their
Knowledge, Experiences, and Profession is for condemnation, by that which
changes not; so all dwell in the measure which is the Light, in the Cross
which keeps under and judges the fleshly man, so the understanding will be kept
open to receive the Mercies of God, and to walk worthy of the Mercies received;
but turning aside from the Light you neglect the Mercies, and follow lying
vanities, and err from the Way of Righteousness, and bring your selves under
condemnation; for no longer is God enjoyed by man, then man abides in his
Counsel, in his Fear, where the secrets of God are manifest and received by the
Light, which is the first entrance unto God, and the fullness of the enjoyment
of God: Beware of the World, where all the temptations lie, to draw away your
minds into the carnal and visible things, out from the Light by which the Life
is enjoyed, and so death passes over you, and condemnation comes upon you,
and the Life be lost, and misery be revealed against you.

Large is the Love of God unto you, in calling you, and choosing you, and
therefore forget not this Love, but walk in it, up to God, from whom free
Redemption is manifested, unto that which has lain in Death, overcome by the
Darkness; follow not your own wills, nor the voice of the Stranger and false
Prophet, which draws out into visibles, into here, and there; but have salt and
discerning in your selves, that you may try every motion, and every spirit, and
may by that which is infallible and errs not, comprehend and judge that which
is fallible and erring, which flourishes for a time, but comes to an end, is
withered, as that in your own Knowledge and Consciences will set to seal, who
have been strayed and scattered upon the Mountains in the cloudy and dark day;
but now the Light is breaking forth, and the Day begins to appear; and all you
who abide faithful shall see the Glory of the Lord, and (shall enjoy him in the
Land of the Living) End of the Work of God. We charge you all in the Lord, that
you who profess the Truth walk in it, and who profess a change, to let it
appear by putting off the works of Darkness, which by the Light are made
manifest unto you, and testified against by the Witness of God in you; for know
this, that that which lives in you which is contrary to God, witnessed against
by the Light of Christ, shall be as a Prick in the eye, and as a Thorn in the
side for ever; and Wrath is to be revealed upon him that spares the best, and
saves the fat from Judgment, for to the slaughter all must come, that Life and
Glory may be made manifest; and he that looks back by the way is not fit for
the Kingdom; and he that returns again to the pollutions, his latter end is
worse then his beginning, and the Judgment of God cannot be escaped: Therefore
wait in the Power of God, and stand in the Light, which is the Armor against
all temptations, whereby the Darkness and Death, and he that has the power of
Death is overcome, and all that love the Light, and are guided by it. And all
dear Friends, who have tasted of the Love and Power of God, and do witness the
renting of the Earth, dwell in the Power and pure Fear of the Lord, that so all
deceit may be kept down, and under; and take heed of the false Prophet,
speaking or suffering your minds to run out in the openings, and so you will
speak that which is opened in the Light; and therefore we charge you all in the
Presence of the dreadful God of Life and Power, that you all wait in silence,
and wait to have Salt and Savor in your selves, to know the Voice of Christ
from the voice of the Stranger, for till that be known in your selves you are
not able to judge; and therefore all wait in the Light, which is the Eye, which
sees into the Mysteries of the Kingdom, and none to utter a word, but what you
are Eternally moved unto, or else that in every ones Conscience will bear
witness against you; and therefore be not hasty now when you see things open in
your minds, dwell in them, and run not forth and speak, but treasure them up in
your hearts, and take heed, and keep low in the Fear of the Lord God, that
pride and presumption get not up, nor nothing be exalted above that which is
pure. Dear Friends, you are upon us as a great weight and burden, lest we
should have bestowed our labor in vain, but we hope and trust the Lord will
preserve you, if you stand in obedience to that of God made manifest in you,
and so you will grow; and take heed of striving and contending, but judge that,
every one in your selves, that you may all grow up in the pure Life of God: And
so the everlasting Power of God bless you all, and keep you in his everlasting
Love, and Power, and give the victory over your Enemies, that you may come to
witness eternal Life in you, made manifest from God. This was also subscribed
by F. H.


Your Brethren in the Work of the Lord, E. B. F. H.

To Friends in London.
DEar Friends, in the evelasting Covenant of Life and Peace whom we bear
witness of, and unto whom we have declared, and preached in season and out of
season among; yea, and have often come unto, in much weakness, and fear, and
trembling; and have not ceased day by day to watch over you, lest any should
start aside from the Hope of the Gospel, which was declared amongst you in much
demonstration of Spirit, whereby your understandings came to be opened, even by
the Word of his Power, which we directed you to wait in, and for; and you are
Witnesses your selves of the Love and mighty Power of God, which was made
manifest among you; which made the Heathen to rage, and confounded the wisdom
of the Wise: So dear Children of Light, of whom we have traveled in pains, and
great burdens, that Christ might be formed in you; fulfill ye our joy, make our
hearts glad in your growth up in him, who has called and spoken to you from
Heaven by his Son, in the Light; and your ears have heard, and your eyes have
seen, and you have been made to understand the Mystery of the Kingdom of God,
which is a Parable to all the World, and sealed, and cannot be read; but to you
who continue and abide in the Grace of God, which has appeared to all men,
which brings Salvation to all that walk and abide in it, and leads to the
Entrance, and Earnest, and the sealing of the Spirit, until the time of the
finishing transgreson, and making an end of sin, and so the everlasting
Offering be witnessed, which perfects for ever them that are Sanctified;
therefore all Friends whose minds are turnto the Light, and do witness a change
in you, by the working of the Spirit, and now a door of Hope being set open,
abide in that measure every one, and stay your souls upon him, who is your
Hope; and keep low in the Fear to the just Principle of Life; that you may have
savor and discerning, to know the Voice of Christ from the voice of a Stranger
in your selves and in others, and so grow up in the discerning; and comprehend
all spirits, and judge them by the Light that makes all things manifest; and
all meet together in your several Meetings, and watch one over another; and be
diligent all in your measure, and take heed you neglect not; and none be of a
careless mind to meet and wait upon the Lord in silence; for whose life stands
only in words without, such we deny, for their eyes and ears are without, and
they would be ever learning, and that is the silly woman that is laden with
lust, And all dear Babes, take heed of taking liberty to the flesh, nor give no
ear nor liberty to the Earth, but in the Cross dwell to the carnal, and so you
will witness the Plant of the Lord watered, and a growth in the Immortal, and
the Seed you will see, which is one in all, which the Promise is to; and all be
still, and cool, and quiet, and of a meek spirit, that out of boysterousness,
and eagerness, and feignedness, and self-love, you may be preserved in your
measures up to God; and if any be moved to speak a few words in your Meetings,
this we charge you all, That you speak nothing but that which is given in, and
in the sense, and in the cross; and do not add your own words, for then you
will burden others who dwell in the Life; and take heed of whispering, and
backbiting one another, or uncovering one another nakedness, but if any see
any to be overtaken, or walking disorderly, reprove such a one privately, and
exhort private, and bear and forbear one another; and so love will increase,
and your joy, and your wisdom, and your strength will grow; and so the Lord God
of Life preserve you all in his Wisdom, and take heed of imaginations or
running out, and do nothing has^ily; but wait at Wisdom's Gate, that so you may
do all things in wisdom; and all be faithful in your measures, and give up all
freely unto the Lord, that he may take away your Enemies, and bring you into
everlasting Righteousness.

All Friends in your places, Masters, Parents, Servants, and Children in your
places be diligent in that which is just unto the Lord, that so the Name of the
Lord by whom you are called be not dishonored, but that you may all dwell in
the Counsel of the Lord, in the Light of Christ single, which keeps you out of
all pollutions, and out of that nature that starves you, and darkens you; and
so the living God of Life preserve you, for you are dear to us, even all of
you, without respect of Persons, who walk with the Lord; and we cease not to
make mention of you to the Lord, (and he hears us) that you may grow up in the
Life of Christ Jesus, to follow the Lamb wheresoever he leads you, or moves
you; for truly our hearts are bound to you in the Lord, by one everlasting
Cord, and if you make us sorry, who shall make as glad? for you are our Crown
of rejoicing in the Lord.

We are your Brethren, nay, your Servants for Christ's sake, E. B. F. H.

To all the beloved Friends, and Brethren, and Sisters, who are made Partakers
of his eternal Word of Life, by which you are gathered into one Light and
Power, in which is Life eternal abiding in it.
DEar Friends of God, who have received and heard the Word, the immortal Word
with gladness and readiness, who are accounted worthy to receive the Testimony
of our Lord Christ; our love in the eternal Life of God which endures for ever,
which is not limited to Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People, is shed abroad
in all, and to all that wait upon Christ Jesus, who is the Light, the Love, and
the Gift of the Father, which we are made Partakers of, by which Gift Eternal
Life and Peace for evermore is witnessed, unto all them that continue and dwell
in him, who is Love. Beloved in the Lord, our thirsting is great after you,
that the Truth you have received from him whom we declared unto you, contrary
to our own wills, in much weakness, and much fear, and often tears, and much
trembling, and walking before you in Uprightness, without fraud and
dissimulation, as Patterns and Examples; and the Lord by his eternal working of
his mighty Power made his own Ministry powerful unto you, unto whom be glory
for evermore: So dear hearts, in the Grace of God which has appeared unto you,
which did convince you of sin, and condemned sin in the flesh, by which Power
ye are saved from sin, and brings Salvation unto you who walk in it; in it
dwell and wait for the day star of Jacob to arise, and the Babe of Glory to be
brought in you, and made manifest, and the Government may be upon his
shoulders, who rules in righteousness for ever: There is a Crown before you;
and therefore our dearly beloved ones, all wait, and press on to the work
before you, in the Cross, and on the Cross give up all to be slain, and keep
nothing back, for if you do, the Canaanite will vex you, and trouble you, and
be a thorn in your eyes, to blind the eye, and so turn you into darkness; but
all keep low in the fear, and wait, that the head may be exalted and uncovered,
that so the man may bear rule who is not in the transgression, and so in the
living hope which is come to you from him who is the Life of men you may
purify your selves, and all the old Leaven may be purged out; and so wait for
the Faith of the Son of God, which is born of God, by which the Just lives, and
so the Everlasting you will come to see; and so the Everlasting God of Life and
Power preserve you all in one, out of all jar and strife, pure to himself, in
one, that you may bear witness to his Name by your holy conversation, in that
great Place; for I see there is more yet to come into the Fold in that City:
And so be diligent in your meeting together, and his eternal Power and Presence
you will see, as you have done continually; so grow up in the Life of God, and
here you are unknown to the World; salute us to all the Church of Christ in the
City, without respect of persons, whom we love and own in the Life that never
dies; and as many as are free, write to us, for a Friend here were precious
indeed; but none knows us here, nor we are known to none, but well known to the
Elect and precious, in whom we wait to hear from you, to be refre^^ed to hea^
of you, of the work of the Lord every where; the Grace of God by which you are
saved from (...), be with you, and in you, to give you dominion over all in it,
we lie down with you, and are your Brethren and Servants for Christ's sake, to
whom be glory for evermore.

E. B. F. H.

DEar Friends in the Truth of God, without respect of persons, grace, mercy and
peace from the Everlasting Father be multiplied among you, that in the Faith
and Love, and every good work you may abound toward God and man, (...) may
show forth the praise of the Lord, and walk as a People redeemed by him, in all
holiness and pureness, that your good works may be seen, and your light may
shine before men: Dearly beloved in the Lord, my love does salute you all who
are ^^pt in faithfulness to the gift of Grace received, in which you walking,
Salvation it does bring, and redemption it does manifest, out of the World, and
out of its nature, into the Image and likeness of the Son of God; therefore
dear Friends and Babes of God, by the immortal Word of Life begotten and
nourished, who waits upon the Lord, blessed are ye that wait to the end, till
he who is the Light of the World has put all things under him, and he to be
exalted your Head; if in that you dwell which from the beginning has been
heard, you need no man to teach you, but the Way you know, and the Word of Life
is your victory: So keep to the measure, that self-will, and self-love may be
judged, and your Neighbor loved, as self, and the living God, who is Light,
above all, who has begun his work in you, and among you, with his right Hand
will finish it: And dear Friends, keep nothing back, nor the best, nor the fat,
let not be spared from slaughter; but let the Sword p^ss upon all, that you
peace may be for ever, and your righteousness may never perish; Oh, how does my
Soul long to know and understand of the growth and unmovableness in the Truth
manifested among you, and gladly received by you, even your Crowns you laid
down at the feet of the Lamb, and your glory and renown in the World! Ye
despised for the Lights sake, but your Reward shall be everlasting, and your
Inheritance shall never wither; I speak not to puff you up, but that you may
the rather be kept low in subjection to the Light of the Lord Jesus, by which
self, and that which would be exalted must be crucified; and this is the
victory, and precious Faith which will purify you, and sanctify you
throughout, from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, in that Faith to stand as
Witnesses for the Lord God in that great City, and against all its pollutions
and Idol gods, which neither do hear, see, nor taste; in wisdom, as examples
one to another in love and unity walk, as children of the Day, being past
through he dark night where the works of darkness were committed; but now being
separated from the World, join not your selves any mo^^ to strange women, which
enticeth from God, but sit under your own vine in peace, dwelling with the
Lord, who is Light, of whom you are become the Temple an^ Tabernacle; and watch
in diligence one over another, that as the day appears, yo^ may edify one
another, and may be made one in the Light, which is Christ, upon whom you have
believed, which unto you is precious, but a stumbling Stone, and a Rock of
offense to all the World: The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ preserve you, that
by it you may be preserved, to walk in the pure Religion, where your ow^ will
is not to be done; the Power of God Almighty fill your hearts with joy, ad
peace, and love in him; and this is the desire of my Soul, who is a Labourer
among^^ you in the Work and Travel of the Gospel of Christ,

E. B.

A General Epistle to Friends in London.
MY dear beloved Friends and Brethren, in the Everlasting Unerring Trut^, of
which you are made Partakers, who are called of God, his Witnesse^, to be of
his Name, and of his Truth; with my dear love I do salute you, dearly and
tenderly, and all the rest of the Begotten of God, in that City, whom my soul
longs after, your growth in the inward man; the Everlasting Father strengthen
you, and refresh you with the living Streams from his Presence; and his Love
and Power, and Grace be multiplied among you, unto whom he has opened a Door,
and made an entrance into the true Rest, which remains for you, unto which
the Lord of Glory is gathering you, and leading you, and carrying you as Lambs
in his Arms, into the Fold of everlasting Refreshing; my dear hearts, walk
wo^thy of the love of God, wherewith he has loved you, and let your Light
show, ye Children of Light, forth into the World, that your good Works they may
see, who over you watch with an evil eye. Dear Friends, to you that believe, he
who is the Light of the World, is precious; therefore in the Light wait, that
your Understandings may be opened, and your Feet prepared to walk in the Ways
of the Lord, which to all the Children of Light are pleasant Ways; and be not
entangled with any yoke of bondage which may burden you from running the ra^e
that is set before you; but in the death of all mortal stand, and there the
Life of immortallity you will see and witness, and the daily Food you will
receive, to that Life which the love of the World does crucify; for do you not
know that the friendship of this World is at emnity against God; but you are
called not to serve the World, but God, who is the Light, and the World must
serve you; so take heed lest your affections, and desires, and hearts be drawn
aside from the pure Way of Life into that which is visible, which will not
endure forever* for that life is death, and that glory is shame; in the Light I
read you, and do behold many pleasant Plants springing up in the Garden of God;
and I bear you record some of you have laid your Crowns down at the Lamb's
Feet, and have scorned the glory of Babylon and Egypt; surely your Reward will
be everlasting, and your C^ps will the Lord fill in the sight of your Enemies,
and your Glory shall be above the glory of the Earth, and your Crowns shall
never wither; therefore press on, and look not back, nor spare not the fat, nor
the best from slaughter, but to the Sword bring all your Enemies, which have
been they of your own house, which over you have prevailed; but now the Lord is
arising among you, and the day you have seen of the shaking of the Earth, and
the Heavens, and of the darkness of the Sun, and of the falling of the Stars;
therefore wait to the end, that the Crown of Immortallity you may wear; and
with the Instrument of the Lord the Mountains you may thresh, and may give the
Whore double reward into her bosom, for all her ways. The day among you begins
to dawn, therefore put of every work of the night, and walk all in the day; for
ye are the Light of the World, and a City set upon a Hill which cannot be hid;
the Lord prosper you, and preserve you, and be with your spirits, and establish
you,

Amen.
Edw. Borough.
Dublin, the 14th of the 5th Month, 1655
THE VISITASION Of the Rebellious Nation of Ireland. And a Warning from the
Lord proclaimed to all the Inhabitants thereof, to make their Peace with him
before his Long-suffering come to an end. With a Lamentation over its
Unfruitness and Rebellion after so many Visitations. And an Exhortation to all
the honest-hearted, to meet the Lord by repentance, while the patience of the
Lord continues. Or the Sealing of the Lord's Testimony unto all sorts of People
in that Land, by his Servants, after their several months sore labors and
travels, and sufferings therein, who loved not their lives for the Seed sake.
Also some particular Papers, written in that Nation, to several sorts of
People. I. An Information to the Heads and the Ground of the Law laid down to
the Judges and Justices, and to all that handle the Law through that Nation.
II. An Exhortation sent to the chief Commander and his Council, and the just
cause of the Innocent laid before them. III. The unjust Sufferings of the Just
declared, and their appeal to the just Witness of God in all m^ns Consciences.
IV. A Challenge to the Priests of Dublin to try their God, and their Ministry,
and their Worships. V. A Discovery of the Idol dumb Shepherds in that Nation,
and a Lamentation over their starved and strayed Flocks. VI. An Invitation to
all the poor desolate Soldiers to repent, and make their peace with the Lord,
and their duty showed them, what the Lord requires of them.

ALas, alas, woe is me for thee, thou desolate Nation of Ireland, thou art to be
pitied and lamented, because of thy backslidings, and rebellion against the
Lord; thou aboundest in Iniquity, and thy Transgressions cannot be numbered, O
thou art a fruitless Habitation, and barren of Righteousness, and Mercy, and
true Judgment; even from the Head to the Tail thou art corrupted, and thy
wickedness is marked before the Lord: Thy Rulers, and Teachers, and People are
all gone out of the Way, and are disobedient Children, having backslided from
the pure Ways of the Lord God; a deceitful Heart is found among them, and a Lie
is in their Hand; even the best of men are as a Bryar, and the most upright
among men sharper then a Thorn-Hedge; a cursed seed has taken root in thee,
and fruit of a cursed taste is abundantly sprung forth; thou a^t turned into
the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto God, and are become abominable in
his eye; thy vines brings forth a sour grape, and the Lords soul has no
delight therein; thou art altogether untilled, and thy flowers give an ill
smell; thy Inhabitants have let themselves to do wickedness they imagine
mischief upon their beds and brings it forth in the morning, cruelty is their
weapon against the Innocent, and hard heartedness is their defense against the
upright.

Woe is me for thee, thou desolate Nation, who have rejected the counsel of the
Lord, and neglected the day of thy Visitation, wherein the Lord would have
gathered thee, but thou would not; How often has the Lord spoken unto thee,
and thou will not hear his call? By judgment has he spoken, and by mercy has
he drawn, but thou refusest to return, and wilt not be reclaimed, but continues
in thy Rebellion against the Lord, and forgets the work of his hand, in Ages
and Generations past; even since the beginning have thou been a Land of
wickedness, and a people of a cursed seed, drinking up iniquity as an Ox that
drinks up water, and filling the measure of Transgression, till the Lord was
forced in grievous judgments to deal with thee, even his wrath in a day broke
forth upon thee, and the fire of indignation was kindled in thee, and thy
Princes were cut off in fury, and thy Inhabitants fell by the plague and sword
in great numbers, and thou were given up to be a prey to thy enemies in thy
treasures, and the cruel hearted took the spoil, thou wast laid level in the
dust of deep misery and confusion, and thy lamentation and sorrow was heard
among the Nations, and the stroke of the Lords hand was heavy upon thee, and
his judgments was just upon thy head, and he gave no rest unto thee for many
years, but thou wast as a trembling leaf, and as a forsaken bough, and thou
wast made desolate and comfortless, and misery girded thee about, and then thy
stout heart was brought down into sorrow, when the Lord contended with thee;
but now thou have ease from thy bitterness, and a day of rest from thy sore
trouble, yet have thou forgotten the day of thy distress, and art again more
abundantly exalted, and thy sins are much more increased, the pride of thy
heart is become equal with Sodom, and thy transgressions are increased to her
number, and the rebellion against the Lord is grown more high, and through
mercies and deliverance art thou waxe^ fat, and now thou kicks against the
Lord, and in thy heart says, Who is he?

O when will thou consider, what the Lord has wrought? when will thou call to
mind his just and righteous dealing? who have forgotten the day of thy former
visitation, and is becoming more vile in the sight of the Lord, by thy secret
hypocrisy of deceitful profession, then thou wast in thy open profaneness, when
thou layest naked in thy open sins.

O Desolate Nation, the Lord once and again has stretched forth his hands unto
thee, in pity for thee, and he sent his Servants and Witnesses to warn thee of
these thy transgressions, and to call upon thee to awake thee out of thy
carelessness, and he gave thee a glorious day of visitation, and free tenders of
salvation, wherein thou might have made thy peace with him, and repent thee
of thy sin, And his Servants were faithful in thee, and lamented over thee,
and gave themselves to be spent for thee, and gladly suffered the reproach of
the Heathen, and the cruelty of the wicked, that thereby thou might be
reclaimed out of thy Rebellion and wickedness, and they gave their back to the
Smiter, and loved not their lives unto death, nor prized not their liberty unto
bonds, but diligently in sufferings, and labors, and perplexities, called unto
thee, and through thy Towns and Cities proclaimed the visitation and message of
the Lord concerning thee, and was accounted as sheep for the slaughter, that
they might finish their Testimony to the gathering of thee* but thou would
not, but have to this very day stopped thy ear from counsel, and hardened thy
heart against reproof, and contemned the day of thy visitation, and hereby
added to thy measure of wickedness in dealing cruelly with the Lords Servants,
who rewarded them evil for good, and entreated them shamefully, and laid thy
hand of oppression upon them, and rejected their message of glad tidings, and
would not be instructed in the way of the Lord unto salvation, but gave heed
unto the false visions of thy lying Prophets, and took counsel against the Lord
of thy Inchanters, and persecuted the faithful, by unjust Imprisonments, and
dealt wickedly with the Lords chosen, and made unrighteous de crees is thy
wrath, and sealed them in thy cruelty, and made a purpose in thy heart to root
out the Seed of Jacob, and to lay wast the Lords Heritage.

O Ireland, hereby in the Name of the Lord (thus far) I seal my Testimony in
faithfulness unto thee, and binds up my many burdens, and travells, and
reproaches, and trials, and sufferings in thee, in a few words, which is the
Word of the Lord concerning thee.

Ye Heads and Rulers that sits upon the Throne, Repent, and turn to the Lord,
from whom you are grievously revolted by woeful backslidings, a grievous sin
have you committed, a gross sum of heinous abomination is recorded against you,
the righteous God will meet you in his Judgments, and once more will appear in
the fire of Indignation against you, and your mountains of pride, and
vainglory, and self-exaltation, shall be laid waste, as your enemies were
before you, and as you have thought to do (to root out the Seed of Jacob, and
to spoil the tender grapes of the Lords vintage) even so shall it be done unto
you, and your destruction comes as an armed man, and you cannot escape, nor
fly to hide your selves, from the wrath that comes, which is kindled already
to devour the pleasant Palaces of your wicked hearts delight.

Woe is me for you; you that are exalted upon your mountain of ease and liberty,
having forgotten the rock from whence you are hewn, who were raised out of
weakness to reprove the mighty, and gives not glory to the Lord, neither
considers what he has done for you, but are become ungrateful, and
disobedient children, and of a double heart and tongue, professing liberty of
the pure conscience, but living in corrupt fleshly bondage, oppressing the
Just, and slaying the holy One, and neglecting the cry of the Innocent, having
made your fingers as heavy as your Fathers loins; the hand of the Lord is
against you; and his wrath will break out upon you, who strengthens the hand of
evil doers, and gives liberty, in your Dominions, unto the scum of the Nations,
to possess your Land in peace, and will not give place unto the Seed of Jacob;
but fortifies your selves against him, and will not suffer him to inherit; how
full is your Land of murderers, of drunkards, of Liars, and swearers, and of
profane persons, of fugitives, and vagabonds, and runnagades, who are
protected by your Law, to possess in peace? but in wrath have you turned your
sword against the upright, and have made Laws to limit the Spirit of the Lord,
and to uphold deceit.

Therefore repent of this your sin, who have endeavored to prevent the Lord;
and humble your selves ye Lofty, for the purposes of your hearts are broken,
and a scattered Seed remains in your Dominions, which the Lord will bless, and
which you cannot be able to suppress, and as pricks in your eyes will it stand
a Witness against you in your hypocrisy and cruelty, and the more ye lay yokes
upon it, the more it will spring forth.

Therefore be wise ye Rulers and Judges, and leave to imagine mischief; and lay
your hands upon your mouths, and open them not any more; and turn in your
minds to the Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith you are enlightened, and it will
let you see what you have done, and will set your sins in order before your
eyes, and will justly reprove you, who have not done as you would be done unto,
but have cast the Law of God behind your backs, and not regarded the call of
Equity; and if you love the Light of Christ it will change your minds, and will
bring you to Repentance from sin unto God, and from the Dominion of Satan unto
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus: The Light is your Teacher, if you love it, and
will guide you in the Way of God; but if you go on in your wickedness, it is
your Condemnation eternally, and shall seal to the justness of the Judgments of
God, when they come upon you; now you have time, and a fair Warning, prize the
day of your visitation, before the Decree of Vengeance be sealed against you,
and Repentance be hid from your eyes; lay it to heart, you are but men, and not
God, and your strength flesh and not Spirit; if you own the Light it will
manifest the Will and Counsel of the Lord unto you, and give you Power to act
Righteousness unto God, wherein you will be accepted: Consider, lest you go
down to destruction, and there be none to deliver you.

ANd unto all you that do profess the Name of the Lord, and have got the form
of the Saints worship in your imaginations; and have separated your selves into
an outward conformity, without the Power of Righteousness brought forth in you,
and would be called Members of the Church of Christ, all Sects and Sorts:
Repent ye, of your Hypocrisy, and stop your mouths in the dust, for you are
weighed in an equal Balance, and are found wanting; and are tried by the
Searcher of hearts, the Light of the World, and are found corrupted; deceitful
are you in the Root, and cursed in your Branch, deep and secret Hypocrisy,
Pride, and Coveteousness, and the love and glory of the World, and fleshly
Exaltations abounds among you; as Branches of the Root wherein you grow: And
how can you bring forth good fruit out of your cursed Ground? your knowledge is
brutish and vain, and your outward conformity is a weariness to the Lord, for
you are found Fighters against him, and Opposers of Christ Jesus, and Deniers,
and Contemner of his Light, by which he has lightened every man that comes
into the World: You stumble at the Foundation, and build upon the Sand; one of
you building a Wall, and another daubing it with untempered Mortar; your hearts
are not upright with the Lord, but flatters your own souls: Which of you have
denied the World for Christ, or what have you laid down for him? In your vain
imaginations you worship God ignorantly, making his Commandment^ void through
your transgressions.

You stand in the cursed Nature, alive to the World, following the vain
delights thereof, resisting the Way of the Lord, through your wisdom, which is
foolishness with God, you have the profession of the Scriptures in your natural
knowledge, but you are without the Life thereof, out of the unity of the one
Spirit of life in several meanings, and opinions, which is death; and in vain
conceits are you scattered upon the barren Mountains, where your souls are
starved* and strayed, in the cloudy and dark day; and you are devoured under
your dumb Idol Shepherds, who are in Cains way of wickedness, and in the steps
of all the false Prophets, and of the Scribes and Pharisees, fulfilling their
measure of wickedness and persecution; against them is the wrath of God kindled
to consume them as stubble; they preach for hire, and they divine for money,
and they seek for their gain from their quarter, and they run, and were never
sent, and you are not profited by them, but are ever learning, and never able
to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Awake, ye Professors, God calls unto you, give ear unto his voice, Come out of
Babylon, and turn unto Sion, that her desolate places may be builded; you
wander abroad in the darkness, groping as blind men, your profession will
wither, and all your knowledge will consume away, and your righteousness is
abomnation to the Lord, your praying God hates, and your oblations is a
weariness to him, for you are in the enmity against God, and the Serpents head
is not bruised.

Come down ye Cedars, who are exalted above the Cross of Christ, and make not a
cloak of the Saints words to cover your unrighteousness; grievous is your
Idolatry, who have painted your selves with the likeness of the Saints life,
and bows to the Image set up in your imaginations, drawing near God with your
mouths, but with your hearts going after your coveteousness: Repent, the day of
the Lord is coming upon all flesh, and meet the Lord, and prepare his way; and
bow your heads you lofty Oaks, who says in your hearts you are the only
people, but your lying hearts deceives you, and you are found naked, and
without a covering.

All ye that desire after the way of the Lord, of all sorts of people who are
simple and honest hearted, whether profane or professor, you have a day of
visitation from the Lord, yet stretched forth unto you; Come ye unto the Lord,
and forsake all your lovers, lay aside your evil hearts which has led you
aside from the way of salvation, and now learn the fear of the Lord, which is
the beginning of wisdom, and mind the one thing needful, which is of great
prize, even the salvation of your souls; press after, and come out of the broad
way of perdition, wherein the world goes on to destruction, and enter into the
strait-way, where the unclean walks not; cease from all the deceitful ways and
worships of the world, and love truth, and walk in simplicity.

Cease from all your Idol Temples, for God dwells not in them, but his Saints
are his Temples, wherein he dwells and walks: cease from all your Idol
worships, and feigned prayers, and praises, for God is not worshipped in vain
traditions, as in observing days, and times, and outward things, but in Spirit
and truth is he worshipped, and such he seeks to worship him, and a broken
spirit and an upright heart is accepted with him. Cease from all your Idol
Shepherds, and Priests of Baal, that preaches for hire, and divines for money,
and seeks for their gain from their quarter, for they profit not the people at
all, who are ever learning while they live upon earth, and none able to come to
the knowledge of the truth: therefore cease from man, and wait upon the Lord,
who is now risen to teach his people by his Spirit in his way of truth and
righteousness, in his peace and purity, where his blessing is received from his
presence, which is with all that fear him.

Therefore awake, awake out of darkness, and love not to slumber in the dark
night, which long has ruled over you; this is the day of your return, and of
your visitation, wherein the Lord would gather you; Therefore resist not the
love of the Lord, wherein he calls you to repentance from dead works to serve
him in righteousness; but every one turn your minds inward, to the Light of
Christ Jesus, wherewith every one of you is lightened, which light is it which
convinces you of sin, and lets you see your evil deeds, and whom you have
served, and how you have spent your time; the Light shines in darkness, and
reveals unto you the secret intents of your dark hearts, and does secretly
reprove the wicked purposes of your minds: with this light in your consciences,
your sins are written, and all that ever you have done is recorded; and this
light shall be the swift witness, and the condemnation of the wicked, in the
day of the Lord; and by it all your works will be brought to remembrance, and
your sins will be set in order before you, to receive judgment by Christ
Jesus: And here is the free love and gift of God unto you, who has given you a
light to guide you in his way; if you own it, and wait in it, it will manifest
the judgments of God against sin in you, and will condemn sin in your flesh,
and will reveal the righteousness of God to be your covering; if you dwell in
the light, it is your Teacher, and way unto life eternal, and if you bring all
your deeds to it, it will reprove every evil word and work, and give you
discerning of things that differ, it will manifest the secretest deceit of your
heart, and winding of the Serpent, and will be judge thereof, till
unrighteousness be taken away, and a birth brought forth from above, and born
of another nature and Seed, which if you be not born again, you cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

Therefore in the fear of the Lord all consider, and search your selves; in
tender love to all your souls I write: You must be judged in the flesh, that
you may be justified in the Spirit, and you must be made poor, and emptied of
all your knowledge, and wisdom, that you may be filled, and made truly wise. So
if you believe in Christ Jesus the Light, and life, of the world, your hearts
will be cleansed by the word of God, which endures for ever; and the Covenant
of peace will be established with you, where sin is no more remembered, being
condemned, so ^ow you have all time, this is to you all a warning, as I was
moved of the Lord.

Repent, the dreadful day is at hand, and meet the Lord, by confessing and
forsaking your sins, and prepare the way of the Lord, his coming draws near,
lest his Judgments come upon you unawares, and his Wrath sweep you away in
fury, and your Nation become more cursed then the rest; all your applying of
Christ's Righteousness, whilst your selves are Sinners, is to no purpose, for
no Hypocrite can enter into Life, nor none that work wickedness have Eternal
Life abiding in them, but are in the death, which has passed over all men, and
the curse remains upon the Disobedient, and all in the first nature are
Children of wrath.

Therefore every one wait in the Light, that you may be changed, and take up
the daily Cross of Christ, that your own wills, affections, lusts, and desires,
may be crucified, and you may become dead to the World, and may live unto God,
in his Nature and Likeness, that your souls may be satisfied therewith, and all
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled with the true Food.

Therefore wait, all you that fear the Lord, and meet together in his Counsel,
and wait for his Law that you may walk therein, and lay aside the works of
Darkness, which are made manifest by the Light, and also condemned, in all that
come to Sion. Spend not your time in the vain deceits of the World, nor follow
no^ the delights thereof, for according to your works must you be judged in the
day of the Lord. Depart from Iniquity, and all the works of the Flesh, Pride
and Cotousness, Lying, Swearing, and Double-dealing, and all the fruits of
unrighteousness, let them be judged; and let the time past be sufficient that
you have wrought evil, and now return, and work Righteousness in God, by the
Light, which all that love, works in God.

And deceive not your selves, with a deceitful covering, of self-making, and
self-righteousness, professing Scriptures in your carnal minds, which was given
forth by the Spirit, and is not understood, but by the same Spirit: Whilst the
first nature stands alive in you, you cannot please God, but are in the emnity
against him: Humble your selves, and come down to the Light, and search your
hearts thereby.

Woe unto the Lofty, and High-minded, who will not be instructed, but hat^^
reproof. Woe is unto all Liars, and Swearers, and Whoremongers, and Vagabonds,
and profane Persons, such cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, (...) enter to
within the Gates of the City, but are to be trodden in the Wine Press of the
Wrath of God for ever and ever.

Therefore, Awake, awake, ye Careless and Unbelieving, and fear and tremble ye
Children of disobedience, who hate the Light, and love your evil deed, and
upholds your false Prophets, whom God never sent, and will not own the Lord to
be your Teacher; the Light in your Conscience is your condemnation; for this is
the Condemnation of the World, That Light is come, and men hate it.

So be you warned all People, the Day of the Lord is at hand, and now he calls*
therefore hear his Voice, and hearken to his Light, which is of Christ, which
only is needful to Salvation; and there is no other Name given for Salvation.
And if you will not hear, and receive thi^ Day of visitation, which in love
appears unto you, you shall hear in the Day of visitation of Vengeance; and
behold the Lord comes quickly, make straight his Path; the Light is your
Teacher if you love it, and your condemnation if you hate it.

Written from London, to go abroad in the Nation of Ireland, as a visitation to
all sorts of People, and is the sealing of the Lords Testimony unto that Land,
(...) moved of the Lord in love and pity to lost souls; by E. B.

An Information to the Heads, and the Ground of the Law laid down, to the
Judges and Justices, and to all that handle the Law in that Nation.
ALL ye Heads and Rulers, and Judges, and Counselors, and all you that ^it in
Council together in the Seat of Justice and Judgment, from whom the Law do go
forth into the Nation, and all you that handle the Law take heed to your
selves, for the Living God of power is Judge of you, and over you all, to you
all I speak the Word of the Lord, without respect to any of your persons (but
is a Lover and Respecter of Righteousness, and true Judgment, and Justice) that
I may stand clear of your blood, for God has laid it upon me to give you
warning, which if I do not, your blood will be upon me, and if this you refuse
to hear and obey, your blood be upon your selves for ever.

Christ Jesus is the Light of the World, the true Light, which lightneth every
man that comes into the World, and by which every one of you is lightened, which
Light, if it you love, and be guided by, it will lead you out of the Worlds way
and nature, and unrighteousness, and will give you an entrance into Etetnal
Life and Peace, and an assurance in Christ when this World ceases to be; and in
this World it will teach you how to serve God in Righteousness in your
Generation; and to give righteous Judgments and Councels among your Brethren
without respect of Persons, for the Law of Gods respects no man's Person, nor
Justice regards not the Person of the Mighty; the Light of Christ Jesus in your
Consciences, and in all men's Consciences, is just and one with Christ, and one
with the Law of God, in its measure, and condemns the unjust, and all works
of wickedness, who against it do act; by which Light every one of you being
guided, your own Consciences in particular will be exercised toward God and
toward men, and by him you being ruled and judged, will know how to rule and
judge for him in the World among men, who are required for God to rule and
judge in righteousness and equity; and none can rule for God, but who are ruled
by him, with his Light that shines in the Conscience, by which you being
governed, will by it govern in the Earth righteously. You are not to judge for
Gifts and Rewards, for if you do, you judge not for God, but for your selves,
and you and your Judgment is to be judged and condemned with the righteous Law
of God, which is free; but such who fear God and hate covetousness, and gifts,
and rewards, are to bear rule, and such will handle the Law righteously, and
will be a terror to evil Doers, who do not fear God, but act contrary to the
Light of Christ in their own Consciences, and so transgress the just Law, and
brings themselves under the guilt, and so under condemnation; and such a
Government will stand for the praise of them that do well, and encouraging of
the Upright; but if such bear rule and handle the Law which know not God, nor
is not ruled by him, these will abuse the Law, and will be a terror to
righteousness, and good works, and will strengthen the hands of Evildoers, and
will let Vice and Wickedness escape unpunished. This I speak in love to all
your Souls, to the informing of all your minds, that you may know your place,
and how to exalt Justice and Judgment; the Light of the Son of God, by which
every man is lighted, is but one in all, just, righteous and equal; the same in
him that hates it, and transgresses the righteous Law, as it is in him that
loves it, and judges all transgressions. And this Light of Christ, by which all
men are lightened, is the Seat of Justice, and true Judgment, and the Ground of
all good wholesome Laws,) and every Law that is contrary to it is for
condemnation by it: Therefore, I say, wait in the Light, by which you are
lightened, to receive the pure Law of God to judge all Causes by, and make no
Law in your own wills, nor act not in such Laws made by the will of man, for
such Laws are oppression, and tyranny lodges in them, and false judgment, and
such God has and will cast out, who act from that ground. So be ye warned by
their fall, and judge not after your own thoughts, nor sensual carnal wisdom,
nor follow not your own wills, nor the counsel of your own hearts; but stand in
God's Counsel, and fear his Name, and tremble at his Presence, and wait to be
guided by him in his holy Law, which all unrighteous counsels, and vain
affections, and false judgments will condemn in your own hearts, and then you
will truly know how to judge your Brethren in Equity and Righteousness, how to
reward well Doers, and how to punish evil Doers according to the measure of
their transgressions, and according to the Light in their own Consciences, by
which they being convinced from your Law, of the evil of their transgression,
will confess your Law and Judgment to be just and equal, and you to be
righteous Judges; here you judge for God, and bear not the Sword in vain, but
are a Terror to Transgressors, and to the Disobedient, and Lawless, against
which the Law was only added, to slay unrighteousness; but it was not made for
the Righteous, whose Consciences are exercised toward God and toward man, by
the pure Law of God written in the heart: and upon such, and over such your Law
has no power, for they are one, and in union with that Law which is righteous,
and do witness the justness, and goodness, and holiness of it; but if you make
a Law in your own wills, and judge by such a Law, then you will make the
Innocent suffer, and oppress them who walk in the Law of God, and in the
exercise of a pure Conscience: Christ was put to death by such a Law, and the
Saints in all Generations were persecuted by such Laws, which were made in the
will of man, contrary to the Will and Law God: Therefore take ^eed to your
selves lest God hew you down and your Law together, and condemn yo^ by his
righteous Law eternally, which Law of God needs not to be made, but i^ made
already, and to be witnessed by the Light in every man's Conscience to
Justification, or condemnation, and is revealed in all that love Righteousness.

So take heed what you do, and know your place, and the length and breadth o^
your law, which is committed to you, which is to keep the outward man in good
order, and the Nations in peace and truth, and from Theft, and Murder, and
Adultry, and Fighting, and Quarrelling, and Drunkenness, and Wronging one
another, and such like; such who acts these things walk contrary to the Light,
and so brings themselves under the penalty of the law; but over the inward man
you law which is outward has no power to bind, to limit or to tie too or from
any way of worship in Religion, but let Religion defend it self, and lay not
your la^ upon the Conscience, to exercise dominion over it, for it is Christ's
Seat, in who^ he will rule; lest you be found Tyrants, and numbered for
destruction; nor li^^^ not the Spirit of the Lord, how, when, where, and by
whom it must speak; for the Holy-men of God in all Ages, ever cried against
such laws as were contrary to the Law of God, and did limit the Spirit of the
Lord, and against such Rulers as did judge false Judgment, and for Gifts, and
Rewards; and against such Priest^ and Prophets as preached for Hire and divined
for Money, and sought for their Gain from their Quarter, and made a prey upon
the People, and through Coveteousness made merchandise of souls: Therefore be
ye warned, if such you uphold by a law, which act those things which the
Scripture declares against, which the Holy-men of God gave forth by his Spirit;
the Scripture which you profess shall stand a Witness against you, and the Law
of God will condemn you; and God will lay your honor in the dust, and cast you
out of the Seat of Judgment* But judge the cause of the Poor, and Needy, of the
Widow, and Fatherless, and join Mercy with Judgment, and lay your Swords upon
oppression, and all tyrany, and wrong dealing; that the Land may cleansed of
evil Doers, and Equity and Righteousness may flow down, and the Nation in good
order may be kept i^ Peace and Righteousness; and so God will establish you
among his Children, who are taught of him alone, and are far from oppression:
To the Light of God in all your Consciences I do speak, which if you make laws
contrary to it, and judge contrary to it, it is the eternal Condemnation of
you, and of your laws, and judgment. And remember you are warned in your* life
time* and my Conscience is cleared to you, and in the Day of the Lord you shall
witness (...) to be tru^ and this to be the Word of the Lord to you, whether
you will hear or (...) ^ear.

Written to you by a Friend of Righteousness and true Judgment from the Spirit
of the Lord, as moved of him in love to all your souls; to go abroad among the
Heads; and Rulers, and Judges in Dublin, and elsewhere through the Nation of
Ireland; from one who is called a Quaker by Scorners, whose name in the flesh
is, Edward Borough.
Written at Dublin, the 23d of the 8th Month, 1655. And now Oye Heads and
Rulers, happy had you been if you had taken the counsel of the Lord, and
submitted to have obeyed his* Word, which came to you as moved of him, but in
that you have neglected, and have made laws in your will, and exercise lordship
over the Conscience, and have limited the Lord, and have purposed to ^e a
^error to good, and strengthened the wicked, and have not regarded the Will of
God, but have persecuted and imprisoned the Innocent, and ^udged (...) your own
hearts; therefore according to the Word of the Lord, your blood will be upon
your own hea^s, for you have not taken Warning, and I am (...) hereof for ever.



An Exhortation sent to the chief Commander and his Council, and the just Cause
of the Innocent laid at their door.
WE who are Servants of the Lord of Hosts, who is the Protector of Heaven This
Exhortation was written by E. B. on the behalf of himself and Fra. Howgill, who
was, then with him in Ireland.
and Earth; we who stand in his Fear, and know his Co^nsel, are moved of him
who lives for ever, who is, I Am, and there is none besides him; to clear our
Consciences, and our Lords Truth, from the Lies and Slanders which are cast
upon us, and the Good Way of the Lord; which envious spirits, wh^^ are proud
and know nothing, that cannot abide sound Doctrine, do reproach and slander us,
and by false (...) (...) things to our charge which we never kn^w; therefore we
being innocent and clear cannot but deny and (...) witness against all those
proceedings, which are ^ot according to the Law of Righteousness and equity,
and lay the at your door* whom it nearly concern^.

Unto thee Henry Cromwell who is Commander in chief for the Affairs of Ireland,
and to thy Council we write. We have seen two several Warrants ^^der your
(...), dated at Dublin, and in them both you say, You have received information
at your board, of great disorders, and disturbances of (...) in the Cou^ of
^^rk^, and Places adjacent, by Francis Howgill and Edward Borough. This we say
unto you; your Informer has declared an ^^truth at your Board, and we de^^re
that you may make it appear where in we have made any disturbance, or disorder;
all these things in your Warrants we deny and do charge you in the Name of the
God of Justice, to send for them that so informed you, that have so abused you,
and are so bold and impudent, as to declare unto you any such thing, and so
have caused you to bring guilt upon your selves, in sending ou^ your Warrants
to bring the Innocent before your Judgment Seat; and caused us to be dragged a
hundred Miles from place to place, as M^lefactors, and as though we had done
some criminal act; and when we have dome before yo^* you had nothing to lay to
our charge* but have endeavored to give Sentence of Banishment of us out of
your Nation, who are freeborn English men, nor have we been burthenfom to your
Nation, nor transgressed any known Law of the Nation; and you have judged us
before our (...) came; and herein you do us great injustice, and you act
contrary to the Law of Equity, and that which you your selves in your own case
would not allo^, to that in all your Consciences I speak. Oh, that ever you
should thus req^ the Lord for his Love and Mercy, in breaking the Yoke o^ the
Oppressor from off your necks; and now power is given into your hands to
relieve the Innocent, and to set the Opressed free, to execute Judgment and
righteousness upon the Transgressors, whom the Law is against. And this does
God require of you, that his Wi^^ may be done, and your wills denied, that so
the Nation may be established in Righteousness, and that your latter end may be
better then your beginning; but if you go on in the way you are beginning, and
^ur^ Justice backward, and l^^ Equity fall in the Streets, and not suffer
Judgment to enter, then misery will be your end.

Woe is me, for you have all forgot the Rock from whence you were h^^en, and the
Deliverances of the Lord to you in the time of di^^^^ss, yea, you have
forgotten, and your hearts are lifted up; and by your policy think to establish
your own wills, and to limit the Holy One a Way, and set up your Standard by
his, and tru^^ in the ar^ of flesh: What is become of the liberty of tender
Consciences you have spoken of, and we have engaged with you to purchase? And
is it ended in this? O^ horrible hypocrisy! that they who bear witness against
all sin, and iniquity, and against all deceit, that they should now be made a
prey of. And we charge all i^ the Name of the Living God in Ireland to convince
us of evil, or the transgression of any Law; and if it cannot be done, let none
lay hold on us, to abridge (...) of our liberty, lest you bring guilt upon your
selves. And do not take counsel at them nor hold them up, who are Hirelings,
and walk in the steps of the false Prophets, and in the error of Balaam, who
speak for Gifts and Rewards, who in all Generations resisted every appearance
of God in his Saints, and now would make all bow to their Image; and they bend
their tongues, and report Lies, and make Lies their refuge, the Hand of the
dreadful God of Heaven and Earth is against them; yea, the Lord will thunder
from Heaven against them, they shall be blown away in the Whirlwind of Gods
Wrath, who have perverted the Way of the Lord, because they stand not in the
Counsel of the Lord, but flatter you, (...) they have done the Princes in all
Generations, till all were laid waste together.

Woe is me for you, Have you consulted, have you taken counsel together agai^^^
the Lord, and his Servants, whom he has sent unto you, and do you thus requi^^
the Lord already? Have you sent out your Decree, to shut out and root out the
Seed of Jacob in a day, whom the Lord has made choice of above all the
Families of the Earth? Surely your Decree will be broken, and your Cords wi^^
(...) but as a Bulrush; for them whom you now set at naught are precious in the
Ey^^ of the Lord, and unto our God shall you bow, and worship at his feet.
Consider, if there be any honesty left among you; What is become of all the
Persecut^^^ of old? And will you tell of Reformation, and yet act in the
footsteps of the Persecutors? If you go on, you are at the brink of
destruction, and at ^^e sides of the pit; and you will be made a ruinous Heap,
and as desolate as Mo^ Esau, which is a place for Dragons: Was not persecution
ever blind? Would they ever own themselves to be such? For verily if you knew
us, you would (...) have done so unto us. When Herod stretched out his hand to
vex certain of the Church, the next you hear of him, he is eaten up of Worms.
The dread of the Lord of Host is upon all the proud, and lofty, and high Oaks,
and the wind o^ the Almighty shall blow them all down root and branch, and all
your strength, is which you trust, if you take counsel at Egypt, will become
as a bowed Wall, and as a rotten Hedge; and God will make them that exalt
themselves against him, (...) a Dunghill, and as the Princes of Gog, of Mesek,
and Tubal, which are all perished among the rest of the uncricumcised. Oh, ye
Potsheards, do you think y^^ can limit the Lord? will he be instructed by you?
he that reproves him, let hi^ answer it: Can you command the wind that it blow
not upon the Earth? C^^ you stop the Waves of the Sea, and say unto them he
still? Can you stop the Bottles of Heaven, that it rain not? If you cannot, all
be silent, and (...) not to resist the Lord in his own Work which he is
bringing to pass in this (...) own day, he will confound the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to naught the honorable of the Earth, and make all as a Plain
before him, who can withstand him? Oh, ye Potsheards, fear and tremble before
him, who is a consuming Fire to all the ungodly, who is visiting the
Transgressors with vengeance dread and fury, and putting into their hands a Cup
of trembling, and making Jerusalem a burthensom Stone, all that meddle with it
shall be wearied, they shall faint, and bow themselves, and sink under it, and
be crushed as with a Cart-wheel to pie^es, and their names shall rot from under
Heaven, and all shall know our God is the living God, yea, the God of gods,
yea, there is none like him; and know this, no power you had of us, except it
had been from above. We were with you in the City of Dublin near three months,
some of us, and none laid hands on us, but the time was not come, and till the
Testimony of the Lord* was near finished, which he sent us to do, none could
lay hands on us: And know this, though this be a time of temptation and trial,
yet it shall be for the furtherance of the Gospel of Christ; and though you
think in your hearts, by sending us out of your Nation, that so all will cease,
and Deceit will stand without molestation; I tell you, nay, even the children
that are yet in the womb shall be brought forth, and hear witness against the
deceit of this Generation. And know this, there is a Stump, which is but
little, which is bound about, as with Iron and Brass, and out of it shall
spring fire, that shall be kindled, and flame to the torment of all them who
worship the Beast, and have received his mark, and to the tormenting of all the
false Prophets in the Nation, and it shall burn, and none shall be able to
quench it; many shall bear witness unto us, that we came not in our own names,
but in the Name of the Living Eternal God, who by his power has accomplished
his own Work, for his own Glory, and many shall bless us in the Name of the
Lord; and all our Opposers shall gnash their Teeth, and gnaw their tongues for
pain, for the torment that is coming upon them; all that have resisted the
Counsel of the most high God, and have gainsayed the Lord, they shall perish in
their gainsaying, and we are clear and free from the blood of all men in this
Nation thus far; yea, of every City, Town, and Village, unto which we were
moved to go; and the blood of all the rest be upon those that have resisted us;
and a good savor we are unto God in them that have believed in his Name, of
whom we have born true witness unto, and in them that perish we are clear in
the sight of God.

And oh thou City of Dublin, thou art as Moab, at ease, and art lifted up in
thy heart, and rejoicing in thy spoil, and art making thy self merry in the
abundance of thy delicacies; oh, how full of profaness art thou? oh, how full
of pride and vain glory, of deceit and unrighteousness, of lust and filth,
lying and swearing, and full of Briars and Thorns? a careless untoward People:
Oh, your abominations are loathsome to all the Children of Light, professing God
in words, but in your lives and works deny him: oh, that thou had known in
this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; a crooked Generation you are,
the yoke must be laid upon you necks; will neither Plague, Famine nor Sword
bring thee into subjection unto the Lord? will neither Mercy nor Judgment take
place in your hearts? Oh, how long shall the Lord bear with you? how long shall
he spare you? his long-suffering is near at an end; his patience is near out
concerning you; and then, woe woe to him that shall see the day which will come;
the Lord will arise as a Lion, and will rend and tear you, and his Sword shall
be bathed in the blood of his Enemies, and he shall be wrath, as in the Valley
of Acor, and as in the days of Gib^a, and will bring ye down ye Mountains, and
level you ye Hills, and will make his Name known in your overthrow, except ye
repent; and they that are round about you, when they shall see Calamity coming
upon you, this shall be their Proverb, This is the City and People that
despised the Counsel of the Lord, and contemned the Instructions of the most
high God, and provoked the Lord to wrath, till his Patience was worn out, and
his Long-suffering came to an end, and therefore is this evil come upon them.
Therefore gird your selves in Sackcloth, and pour Ashes upon your heads; houl
and weep ye cureless People, misery is coming u^ you; the dreadful God will
visit with a Scourge, and will make you know (...) is the Lord: Blessed is he
that hears, and considers, and repents, and turns (...) his iniquity, before
the Decree be sealed against you, which will never be altered* This is the day
of your visitation, and If you contemn it, ^wo unto you for ever and fo we are
clear in Gods sight of you all, from the highest to the lowest, a^^ your blood
if you perish will the Lord require at your own hands, from this (...) forth
and for evermore.

We are Friends to all just Powers, and are subject to the highest Power for
Conscience (...) but witness against all deceit and unrighteousness, and
against all that hold the Truth (...) unrighteousness, who are Prisoners of the
Lord for the testimony of Jesus, our Consciences bearng us witness in the Holy
Ghost. This was also subscribed by F. Howgill.
Edw. Borough.
Dublin, 24th of the 12th Month, 1655.
The unjust Sufferings of the Just declared, and their appeal to the just
Witness of God in all men's Consciences.
TO all ye Colonels, and Commanders, and Officers, and to all the honest
hearted in the City of Dublin, and elsewhere, to whom this may come* Hereby we
the Prisoners of the Lord, for the Testimony of Jesus, and for the exercise of
a pure Conscience, do lay down our cause before you, and to the Light of Jesus
Christ in all your Consciences we appeal in this our cause of Rightousness and
Innocence, to be judged thereby; We are men fearing God, and working
righteousness, and are Friends to the Commonwealth of Israel, and are Exalte^s
of Justice and true Judgment in the Earth, and are subject to all just power,
and to every just ordinance of man for Conscience sake, and have suffered the
loss of all, and have born part of the burden with you, that we might obtain
the freedom of the righteous Seed, and the liberty of tender Conscience, to
serve the Lord in his own way; and we are well known to the Lord, though
Strangers to you, and are Freemen in the record of Heaven, though now
Sufferers unjustly under your present authority, who have taken the place of
exercising lordship over our pure Consciences, and have imprisoned us, and
endeavored to give judgment of banishing us, only upon false Accusations and
Informations, and Slanders, without the proof or testimony of any Accusation of
(...) justly laid to our charge. And to you hereby be it known, that not for
evil doing do we thus suffer; for to this present no man has convinced us of
any evil, nor justly proved the transgression of any Law (Martial or Civil)
against us, though we stand accused of many grievous things, of which we are
clearly innocent in the sight of him that lives for ever* and do nothing more
desire herein but ^o be tried by the Law of Equity, and Righteousness, and
judged according thereunto* By virtue of command given unto us by the eternal
Spirit of the Lord came we into this Land of Ireland, contrary to the will of
man, not to seek our selves, nor our own glory, not to prejudice your Nation,
nor Government, nor to be hurtful to your Commonwealth, but with the Message of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus we came to turn from Darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan to the Power of God, and (...) minister the Word of
Reconciliation, and Salvation ^^eely (without a Gift or a Reward) unto lost
souls; and hereof God is our Witness* and also we have the seal^ of our
Ministry, which unto us herein can give testimony by the same Spirit, and this
are ^e ready to seal with our blood. And these six months and upwards have we
labored in travels, and sufferings, and reproaches; and have passed through
your Cities and Towns in soberness; and in meekness have we preached the
Kingdom of God, and have holden forth the Word of Truth, and the Testimony of
Jesus; and our lives have we not loved till this day, though sometimes dangers
on every side have beset us, that we might hold forth the Faith of Jesus, the
Author of our profession, in the exercise of a pure Conscience, both by
doctrine and conversation, and herein we are justified in the sight of God, and
who is he that condemns us? And do call Heaven and Earth to record, and the
Light in all men's Consciences, who have heard our Doctrine, and seen our
conversation, to witness for us herein; and we challenge all your Nation of
Ireland, our very Enemies, to prove the contrary, though otherwise we stand
falsely accused, and falsely reputed to be Disturbers, and Makers of disorders,
to the breach of public Peace, and such like grievous things upon the false
Information; whereof a Warrant was issued out from the chief Ruler and Council
of Ireland, and we thereby were apprehended in the City of Cork, and haled by
Guards, as Malefactors too, before the Council in this City, where none of all
these false Accusations were, or could be proved against us, nor the
transgression of any known Law could we be convicted of, and though occasions
were sought against us* yet none could be found, and though snares were laid
for our feet, yet were we not entrapped, but were cleared in the sight of God,
witnessed by the Light in all their Consciences, and were found innocent, and
without reproof in the Eye of the Lord; and by our innocence were their orders
of false Accusations made of none effect, and we thus far proved to be
guiltless before the Throne of true Judgment: Yet notwithstanding contrary to
the Light in their own Consciences, and contrary to the just Laws of the
Nations (which afford freedom to the Freeborn and Righteous) were we committed
to Prison, without conviction or any guilt charged upon us, or the least
appearance of evil toward any man's person, though falsely accused, yet no true
testimony given against us, whereby our boldness in the Way of the Lord could
be discouraged, as having the Testimony of the Spirit of God bearing us witness
in the Holy Ghost, that in all good Conscience toward God and toward man we
have lived to this day, and so are without reproof in the sight of God, and all
just Men; and though upon search and examination we were found guiltless thus
far, yet further has the Enemy the Devil prevailed in cruelty against the
Innocent, that it is endeavored that we be banished, under the account of
Vagabonds, which last Accusation is the most false and unrighteous; for we
challenge this, Of whom have we begged? or to whom have we been burdensome? or
whose bread have we eaten for nothing? or what evil have we done? Where is the
testimony of your Slanders? But innocently do we suffer these things, bearing
reproaches, and binding the cruelty done unto us, as Chains about our necks,
and as Crowns upon our heads, having the assurance that for well doing we
suffer these things from the hands of the Rulers, through the Lies and Slanders
of the Teachers, who are in Cain's way of persecution, till they have fulfilled
their measure of wickedness, and be laid waste as the Wilderness. And this is
our cause, and hereby it comes before you, by the Light of Christ in your
Consciences to be judged; if your Hearts be not altogether hardened, and your
Minds wholly blinded; and we lay it at the door, to receive sentence from you,
and without respect of persons, holds forth our guiltless cause before you, not
begging any thing from you, but herein to clear our Consciences, that you may
save your selves from this untoward Generation, whose Root is corrupt, and
Fruit bitterness; for while we have breath from the Lord, and enjoyment of his
Presence, our duty is to serve the Lord, in bearing witness against injustice,
and all cruelty, and oppression, and shall appeal to receive justice from the
present power which now rules; for in the Name of the Lord we challenge our
privilege of freedom as being Freeborn, till we be accused guilty by the just
Law of Equity, unto which we are subject for Conscience sake, and not to any
man's will, but by word and writing are bound by the Law of God, to bear witness
against the unjust proceedings herein of the Heads and Rulers of Dublin, and
shall seal our witness against them, and against their unrighteous Decrees
sealed in their cruelty against the Innocent, with our blood, if thereunto we
be called.

Edw. Borough.
Dublin the 26th of the 12th Month, 1655.
A Challenge to the Priests of Dublin, to try their God, and their Ministry,
and their Worships.
WE the Servants and faithful Witnesses of the most High God, called and chosen
of him, and redeemed out of Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People; who are
Ministers of the Word of Life, and Reconciliation and Messengers of
Glad-tidings, and Salvation, unto captive and weary Souls; our glorying is only
in the Lord, and not in our selves, who are by the World in scorn called
Quakers; who are at this present in outward bonds, for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ in Dublin; and who have been in the labor and travel of the Gospel of
God these six months and upwards, in this Nation of Ireland, according to the
Will of God ordained hereunto, and moved, and commanded by his Eternal Spirit
into this his Work, for the Seed's sake which is not of this World, to the
gathering of it into the Fold of Everlasting Peace; and to the clearing of the
Lord from the blood of his Enemies, that they may be left without excuse, by
his Powerful Word given unto us, and uttered by us (and herein we are a good
savor to God, both in them that perish, and in them that believe) and for this
cause have we denied our dearest and nearest Relations, and love not our lives
unto death, that our Testimony we may finish, which is committed to us of the
Lord; and because of this are we Laborers under many burdens, and travels in
many afflictions, and sufferings, and are abundantly reproached, and our Lord's
Truth, of which we bear witness, greatly infamed, by many slandering and
backbiting Tongues, especially by Teachers, and professed Ministers, in the
ears of their People, and Hearers; slandering us with being Jesuits, and
Deceivers, and Seducers, and Heretics and Blasphemers, and Witches, and such
like; and we of those false Accusations being clear, and our Lords Truth, the
Testimony which we hold, wholly innocent, and are willing to be tried and
proved, and made manifest to the Inhabitants of this City and Nation, in the
sight of God.

This therefore am I moved to give forth; and hereby in the name of our Living
Eternal God of Heaven and Earth, whom we serve and worship, in that Way which
is called Heresy, to send it abroad as a Challenge to all you Teachers, and
pretended Ministers, of what sort and form soever, and to all you People whom
it may really concern; and especially to all you in the City of Dublin, and
Places elsewhere in Ireland, to whom this may come; that you meet us in the
City of Dublin, at some public Place, at a convenient time appointed by you,
at which place and time if the Lord permit (by the permission of the Council of
Ireland, whose Prisoners we are) we shall meet you then there, to have a fair
and sober Dispute in the presence of all People, who may desire to be informed,
or satisfied, concerning us and you, in these things whereof you can accuse us;
and also of those things, by way of sober Questions, which we have to propound
to you, not for any end to our selves, nor to set up a Kingdom of our own (God
is our Witness) but that the Way of our God may be made manifest, and all
deceit and error discovered, and all People may be informed the Way to
Salvation; and as you are true to your God, and will answer for him, and are
willing to be made manifest in your way of Worship, and Doctrine, and Ministry,
you are not to neglect, but herein to answer our desire and the desires of many
hundreds, that you and we may be made manifest in the sight of God, to all men's
Consciences, who are in Truth, and who are in Error, that Shame and
Condemnation may come upon the guilty, and Truth may be exalted over all Deceit.

Given under my hand, who am a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, whose name
in the This was also subscribed by F. Howgill.
flesh is, Edward Borough.
Sent forth the 23d of the 12th month, from the Sergeant at Arms his house in
Dublin. You are desired to send your Answer of these Propositions to us, and if
you consent to meet us, let sufficient notice be given abroad, that the
Inhabitants of the City, and Country may know five or six days time before.




This was sent to the Priests of Dublin, but no answer to this day have we
received from them; whereby it is manifest that they are not true to their God,
nor willing to be tried and made manifest; but love Darkness, and hate the
Light, and back-bite in secret, and cannot give a Witness openly, but fall
before the trial, and Truth reigns over them, and is exalted over their Deceit.

A Discovery of the Idol dumb Shepherds in that Nation, and a Lamentation over
their Starved and Strayed Flocks.
THe Day of the Lord is approaching, and the Day of account draws near upon you
the Inhabitants of the Earth; the time of your Covenant is expired made with
Death, and Hell; and the Lord God will plead with you, and reckon with you, and
give unto you a just reward, every one according to your deeds, even the
condition of your Bond.

Ye Shepherds, and Pastors of the flock, and Teachers of the people, what
account will ye render to the Lord in the Day of his appearing? Should you not
have gathered the Flock, and fed them, and taught them in the Way of
Righteousness, and preserved them from straying abroad, but instead thereof you
have scattered them upon the barren Mountains, and have starved them, and have
strayed them, and led them into bypath of Idolatry, and made a Prey upon
them, and have fed your selves of them, and the Heritage of the Lord has been
wasted by you, and the Pastures of the Fold eaten up by Wolves, and Devouters,
and Lions Whelps, which made the Flock afraid, driving them into secret
corners of Darkness, Leanness, and Poverty, where they are dead for want of
Food.

O ye Shepherds, your account will be woeful, and miserable in the dreadful day
which is hastening upon you; not one Lamb have you brought forth to Perfection,
to lie down in Peace in the Fold, but have nourisht it into the nature of a
Doge, and a Wolf; and you have fed them with Swines-flesh, and with the Husk;
and Milk they have not received from you, thereby to grow up unto God in his
Image; and not one Fleece has the Lord gathered from all your Flock. You
Teachers, Shepherds, and Pastors, your debt of wickedness is a gross sum of
great abomination in the Record of account; you have taught innocent Children
into subtle hypocrisy, out of Uprightness into Guile: you have taught Lies
instead of Truth, and thereby have the People been instructed into Error,
Sects, and false Opinions; and not one Child have you taught perfect in the Way
of the Lord, neither one of your Hearers have you presented perfect in Christ
Jesus unto the Father, but for Gifts and Rewards have you taken the charge of
the Hearers, and not one has come to the Knowledge of the Truth, by you under
your teaching; for you have been a cursed Example, in Pride, in Coveteousness,
in Oppression, and in Hypocrisy; And how could you teach Children in the Way
of Purity, when your selves have walked in the way of Idolatry? The lang^^ge of
Babylon have you instructed the People, and not one verse have you learned in
Sions Record; you have nurtured them in the nature of whoredom, and their
Virginity have they lost.

What will ye do ye Shepherds, and Teachers, the Arrest of Judgment from the
Court of Equity is come forth against you, and sealed never to be changed?
Whether will you flee to hide you? Gods Judgments will pursue you, and your
Reward will be Indignation and Vengeance, and your charge will be the devouring
and murdering of souls, and the Flock will be required of you: and every Lamb,
which carelessly you have starved, the blood thereof will be put upon your
account; and every Child you have taught in the way of iniquity, the iniquity
thereof will be laid to your charge.

O Doleful reckoning! when the Lord appears, a grievous sum are you guilty,
which you are never able to pay; and just he is that calls you to an account,
and the truth of his Bill will be sealed with the Light in your own
Consciences, which is the Lords Witness, which has been privy to all your
abominations; one year, after another have you been spared, and interest upon
interest will be put upon your score; not one day of faithful service and true
watching over the Flock can you give testimony of; but idle Shepherds have you
been, and slumbring Watchmen have you proved, and the whole Flock have been
devoured, and scattered, and not one Lamb is found in the Fold, nor one strayed
sheep brought home from wandering, but the Fences of the Fold are laid waste,
and the door is shut up, and bolted against him that would enter, and you have
removed the Pastures out of the pleasant Valleys, into the desolate and wild,
and untilled Mountains, where every wild Beast plays, and every desolate
Bird inhabiteth.

What will you plead for your selves? Oh, ye deceitful Hirelings, who have
run, and were not sent, by whom the People are not profited at all: But you
Leaders of the People have caused them to err in unknown Paths, and you have
taken the charge of that you were not able to perform; you have wasted the the
Masters goods, and his Children have not been taught the Way of Holiness; you
have spent his Portion among Harlots, and have given your Lord's Money to
abominable uses; nothing is gathered of your Vines, but wild Grapes, and sower
Grapes, which the Lords Soul loatheth; no Figs of your Thorns have been reaped;
but your best fruit have been of a loathsome taste, the most Innocent among you
have been found guilty of Innocent Blood of Souls.

Woe is me for you, ye Flocks of these Shepherds Folds; alas, alas, your souls
are starved, and your feet are strayed, and into Bypath of Whoredoms have you
been instructed, and the door of the true Shepherds Fold has been shut against
you, and the Key of true knowledge has been hid out of your sight, and
obscurity and darkness has been cast before you, and the Way of the Lord has
been undiscovered to your understandings, and into secret and subtle Idolatry
and Witchcraft have you been nurtured, and your wounds have been healed
falsely, and will break out into more incurable dangers. O how have you been
driven away into strange Pastures, and into barren Heaths and Deserts,
scattered lo here, and lo there, by the voices of Strangers; now when the Lord
is come to search you, instead of Lambs, you are found in the nature of Wolves,
and Dogs, and Lions, biting, and devouring, and scorning, and reproaching the
Children of the true Seed; and instead of Children of Light and Truth, are you
found strong men of Darkness and Error: How is your nature changed since the
first creation in the Innocent Image of God? strayed have you been, and not one
brought home by your Shepherds into the Fold of Truth; you have been a prey to
the Devourers, and meat for the wild Beasts of the desolate Forests, and a
strange Language have you learned of the Egyptians Character, and your delight
have been therein, even you have loved to have these things so; and like
Shepherds like Sheep, Strayers and strayed, Devourers and being devoured, What
account will you give in the Day of the Lord? For your sins are written with a
Pen of Iron, sealed in your foreheads, children of the womb of wickedness: A
gross sum of abomination is put upon your account; even Lovers of Darkness, and
Haters of the Light; How many times have you been called by the true Shepherds
Voice, and you neglect, and will not be gathered? How many good instructions
have you heard? And what profit have you received? Much Teaching and many
Sermons have you heard, and yet to this day the Way of Truth have you not
learned, but are groping in the dark, in blindness, and ignorance; and you
Blind have been led by the Blind, and the mouth of the Ditch is opened to
swallow you up together; and you have refused Knowledge, and cannot endure to
be reproved; you love to stray rather then to be gathered, and you delight in
leanness and poverty upon the barren Mountains, rather then to be fed in the
fat Pastures of true Food. Shall not the Lords Soul be avenged upon you? Ye
Shepherds and Flocks, ye Teachers and People, your debt is summed into a large
sum of grievous abomination, the Indictment of Vengeance is read, and sealing
against you, proved to be just in the Register of Heaven; everlasting Prison in
the pit of Darkness, and everlasting Banishment from the Presence of the Lord
is signing against you, in the eternal Law and righteous Decree; the Light of
the Lord Jesus Christ which shines in all your Consciences will arise to be the
evidence of this just proceeding. God is grieved with you, you spiritual
Idolaters.

Repent, repent ye Idol Shepherds, and deceitful Teachers, and ye scattered
Flocks, and deceitful People; This is the day of your visitation, and a warning
in your ears, the Sword of the Lord is drawn against you, the Whirlwind of
his Wrath is gone forth; your builded wall shall fall, and the pillars of your
Habitation shall be shaken. God will gather his Flock out of your mouths, and
feed them in his own Fold, and your nakedness shall appear, and your deceits
shall be laid open, and your secret whoredoms shall be discovered; your
beginning was in Darkness, and your time is out of the Light, and your end will
be in destruction, now you have all time, prize it.

From him who is a Lover of all your souls, but a Witness against all your
deceit. Edw. Borough.
Written in Cork City in Ireland, as moved of the Lord concerning the
Shepherds and Flock, the Teachers and People in that Nation.
An Invitation to all the poor desolate Soldiers to repent, and make their
peace with the Lord, and their Duty showed them what the Lord requires of them.
TO all you poor desolate Soldiers of the lowest rank, who are scattered up
and down, in this desolate Land of Ireland, and live a careless and a desolate
life, without the Fear of the Lord, in Lying, in Swearing, in Drunkenness, in
Whoredom, in Oppression, and in the Wickedness of the World, and are past
feeling, and senseless of the Opperation and Power of God, careless of your
eternal happiness. The dreadful Day of the Lord God is coming, in Power the
Lord is risen, and the Wrath of the Lord is gone forth, with the strength of
indignation and fury will you be besieged, and fearfulness shall surprise you.
Repent of your transgressions, and fear and tremble before the Presence of the
Living God, who is Commander in chief over Heaven and Earth; prize your souls,
this is the day of your visitation, and make your Peace with the Lord: The
righteous Judge, the Lord, sees you in your darkness, and searches you in
your desolate obscurity, and his soul is pressed under your iniquities, and he
has not disrespected any of your persons or desolate places; but God is Light,
and has lightened every one of you with the true Light of Life Eternal, if you
love it, and be guided by it; or of death everlasting, if you hate it, and
disobey it, and walk contrary to it; that is the Light which convinces you of
Sin, of Lying, and Swearing, and Cursed-speakings, and Drunkenness, which are
the fruits of the cursed Tree, which cumbereth the Ground of the Lord, which
the Axe is now laid to the root of, to cut it down, and cast it into
everlasting burning: and while you act against this Light in your Consciences,
you crucify the Life of Christ Jesus, and are Enemies unto him, and Servants
of the Devil, and love your evil deeds, and Upholders of the Devils conquest,
which is the dominion of sin. This Light reproves you in secret of violence,
and false accusing, and all unjust words and actions which are contrary to God;
(...) turn your minds to the Light, which will lead you to repentance from dead
works, out of the broad way of destruction, which many are in (as Christ Jesus
says) and it will teach you in your places to serve the Living God, and to do
violence to no man, but to be Terrors, and Reprovers, and Correctors of all
violence, and of such who live in it: And it will teach you not to strengthen
the hands of Evildoers, but to lay your Swords in justice upon every one the
does evil: And it will teach you not to make War, but to preserve peace in the
Earth; and this is your Place and Duty required of you from the Lord Go^
Commander in chief, unto whom you must all give an account, and receive (...)
just Reward according to your deeds, everlasting punishment to him that do^
evil; but if you stand in the Fear of the Lord, your Sword will be a ter^ and
dread to them that fear him not, but live contrary to the Light in their own
Consciences, which Light if you love, it is your Command to march by* and your
Rule to judge by, and Weapon to fight withal, and your chief Commission for
duty.

And now you have all time take heed to your selves, go not on in your course
of evil, nor take not your pleasure in unrighteousness, but to the Light in
your Consciences take heed, it is your Teacher to God if you love it, or your
Condemnation from God if you hate it. And this is yo^^ Terms with the Lord,
prize the acceptance of his Love to your souls, and the Day of your visitation,
lest you perish in your rebellion eternally.

Written in love to your souls, Edw. Borough.
Written in Ireland at Caterlough.
A Warning from the Lord to you the Natives of the Nation of Ireland, who are
made a Curse and a Prey to be destroyed of your Enemies.
REpent, repent ye that remain from being devoured, whose days are (...)
stretched forth, that you may return to the Lord, from whom you are grievously
degenerated into filthiness, and uncleanness, being a cursed Brood, and are
become unhuman in your impudent shameless practices of ungodliness, and are
brazened in your filthiness, and cannot blush when you have done evil; the
Plagues of God, and his Wrath waits to consume you from off the face of the
Earth; you are shut up in blindness, and covered with darkness, which may be
felt; and you are as deaf Adders, void of understanding, and past feeling, and
given up to work all unrighteousness with delight, counting it your glory to
work wickedness, having sold your selves to commit sin; you have wholly slain
Gods Witness, and are become wild and brutish as the Beasts of the Field, and
untamed as savage Colts; the Indignation of God is against you, who are as dead
Trees, and withered Branches, and scorched Heaths, not sensible of good nor
evil, but as wild Asses, who neither fear God nor regard man: To the Light in
your Consciences wherewith Christ has lightened you, do I now speak: Gods
murdered Witness shall answer me, by which you are inexcusable; for with the
Light you know Lying, Swearing, Stealing, Murder, Drunkenness, and Whoredom are
Sins and Transgressions; the Light will let you see these abound among you, by
which you are reproved, and eternally to be condemned if you do not repent of
these your grievous abominations: And if you love the Light, and turn to it, it
will lead you out of sin, and out of your vain foolish Traditions, and
Immitations, and Sorceries, and Witchcrafts, which deceive your souls: And this
Light in your Consciences will change you into Soberness, and Humanity, and
will lead you into the Way of Life and Salvation, out of the way of Death and
Hell, wherein you walk to eternal misery. Therefore prize your souls, and the
dreadful God fear; and tremble before him ye profane Wretches, and cease from
your filthy, nasty, poluted ways of Idolatry, Lying, Swearing, Stealing,
Drunkenness, and such like God forbideth, with the Light in your Consciences;
and he that does these things shall eternally perish in condemnation for ever.

And this to you is a Warning, in pity to your lost souls, whose hearts are
desperately wicked, and set to do mischief; the Vengeance of God is against
you; the Light in your Consciences shall witness me, and justify the Lord in
the Day of recompense, when every man receives according to his deeds, the
Righteous unto Life, the Wicked unto eternal Wrath. Now you have time prize it;
the Light is your Teacher loving it, and your Condemnation for ever, hating it.

By one who suffers for the Seeds sake, waiting for the building of destroyed
Sion. EDWARD BURRUGH.

A Trumpet of the Lord Sounded forth of SION; Which gives a certain sound in
the Ears of all Nations, and is a true noise of a fearful Earthquake at hand,
which shall shake the whole fabric of the Earth, and the Pillars of its
standing shall fall, and never more be set up again. Or fearful Voices of
terrible Thunders, uttered forth from the Throne, to the astonishment of the
Heathen in all the Quarters of the Earth, who are not sealed in the forehead.
And is an Alarm, and preparation for War against all Nations where Gog and
Magog resideth. And shows the wounding Sword of the Mighty God, from whose
blow, the Kings, nor the Captains, nor the mighty men, cannot flee to escape.
Declared and written by a Son of Thunder, as a Warning to all the Inhabitants
of the Earth, where the great Image is standing, or any part of it worshipped,
speedily to meet the Lord by Repentance, that in the day of his fierce Wrath
they may be hid. With a Salutation to the Seed who are gathered into the Fold,
and with the Children of the King: The Tongue that was dumb sings a joyful
Song of Sion, in an unknown Language, which none can understand, save the
Redeemed of the Lord.
BY Order and Authority given unto me by the Spirit of the Living God, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the One and thirtieth day of the tenth Month, in the
Year of the Worlds account 1655. about the fourth hour in the morning, when my
Meditations were (...) my God, upon my B^d in Kilkenny City, in the Nation of
Ireland, at that time the Word of the Lord came unto me, (from the Righteous
Judge of Heaven and Earth, who was, (...) is, and is to come, who sits on
the Throne of righteous Judgment, judging Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues,
and Peoples, equally) saying, Write my Controversy with all the Inhabitants of
the Earth, unto all sorts of People, as I will show thee: By this same
Authority and Commission declared, this I send unto you, the Tribes of the
Earth, and this upon your heads shall stand for ever, to be witnessed by the
Light of Christ Jesus, in all your Consciences, in the dreadful day of
Vengeance, which upon you, O Inhabitants of the Earth, is coming. Prepare,
prepare to meet the Lord, O Nations, Tongues, and People, unto you all hereby a
Warning is come, and a Visitation from the Presence of the Living God, which
you are straightly required to put in practice, as at the terrible day of
dreadful Vengeance you will answer the contrary.

Given under my hand, and sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God who liv^^ for
ever. Through a Servant of the Lord. E. B.

O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, and awake, awake, awake, all
ye Inhabitants thereof, and give ear, give ear, unto the controversy which the
Lord has with you, Noble and Ignoble, listen unto the Word of the Lord; men of
high degree, and men of low degree, be not stout-hearted, nor stop not your
Ears, for the Lord has spoken; People of all sorts, and men of all conditions,
the Word of the Lord is toward you, even from the Princes and Nobles that
sit-upon the Throne, unto the Slaves and Bondmen, that are made a prey; The
Lord's Controversy is against you, and the mighty terrible Day of the Lord is
coming upon you, wherein he will plead with you, because of your Transgressions
which cannot be numbered, but do exceed theirs in former Generations, who were
cut off by his outstretched Arm. Therefore thus says the Lord, Now also will I
arise, as a mighty man of War, and will appear in my Majesty, to gather the
Nations, and to fan them, and to try them, in the wind of my Wrath, and to
purge them, and to refine them in the Furnace of my Fire, of Indignation, and
Jealousy. And this from my mouth is a Warning to you, and a Sound in your
ears, by authority from my Spirit.

To thee, Oliver Cromwell, called Protector.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against thee, because thou have not
been faithful to the end, in my Work, but have taken thy rest and ease and
pleasure upon thy high and lofty Mountain of Pride, and vain Glory, and have
set up thy self to be worshipped, exalting thy own Horn, and have not fully
given Glory and Honor to me, of that which I have done by thee, but in thy
heart boasts thy self against me, who has hewed with thee, and made thee an
Instrument in my Hand, to do my Will upon my Enemies; and now thou performest
not thy Vows made to me in the day of distress, but thou have broken Truce with
me; and now thou suffer grievous and heinous Oppression, and Cruelty, and
Tyranny to be acted in thy name upon my People, whom I have chosen, and elected
to exalt my Name by; by unjust Imprisonments, and grievous Persecution do they
suffer in thy name, which the Cruel-hearted make a cloak of for their cruelty,
and even such who have been thy Enemies, thy name is a cloak unto, to hid their
cruel intents, and wicked purposes against my People, whom they tread upon; and
this is not unknown to thee, and therefore the less excusable art thou in my
sight, and the greater will my Judgments be upon thy head, which suddenly I
will bring upon thee, except thou repent, and return to thy first integrity;
which if thou do, I will honor thee next unto my Chosen, and give thee the
necks of Princes to tread upon, and their Dominions for thy Inheritance;
otherwise thus shall it be done unto thee, if thou will not hear, and obey my
Voice, says the Lord.

To all ye his Council.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, because ye are one with
him, and every whit fully guilty of his Transgressions, and feed him and your
selves in the valleys of vain glories, with vain shows, and hopes; and your
endeavors are more to secure your selves from Mischief, and Plots, and wicked
Intentions, which remain in the hearts of the Rebellious against you, then to
defend and preserve the Innocent; for you neglect to take off Oppression, and
to ease the Oppressed; but make your Fingers as heavy as your Fathers Loins,
who were cast out before you; and the same Laws stand still in force, by which
Tyranny and Oppression is acted; and the same false Prophets you establish by a
Law, which deceive the Nations, and flatter you by subtle Speeches, and there
is no pure Reformation wrought in the Earth; but you with your power join with
the first Beast, who was wounded by a grievous blow of fury, to make War
against the Lamb and his Followers; and you seek to set up that which I am
about to throw down, and you are not ignorant of the grievous Cry of the poor,
under the burden of oppression laid upon them by your Laws, by which they
unjustly suffer the imprisonment of their Bodies, and the spoiling of their
Goods, and you suffer this wickedness to be done, and shut up your compassion,
and the hands of Evildoers hereby are strengthened, through your forbearance
they are hardened in their cruelty, and because you profess more of the Name of
the Lord, then some that have gone before you, and perform as little, the
greater is your abomination, and the deeper is your hypocrisy, and the greater
will my Judgments be upon your heads, except you speedily repent, and walk in
my Counsel, which if you do, honorable in Counsel will I make you, and your
Renown shall Generations to come exalt; otherwise, if you refuse my Word to
hear, I will make you a Reproach, and a Curse to Ages for ever.

To all ye Judges, and Lawyers, and your Train, and to all that handle the Law.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, because of your
abominations, for you are the very Actors of the allowed Oppressions; and in
judging for Gifts, and Rewards, and Bribery, some of you have exceeded all that
ever went before you, and many just Causes of the Poor have been neglected for
want of a large Gift; and many unjust Actions of the rich men have you pleaded
against Equity, for advantage to your selves; your Council have respected
Persons, and in Bribery and Gifts have you delighted, and thereby have made
your selves as Lords in the Earth, and have set your selves upon high Hills,
and you have followed the counsel of your own heatts, and your human wit and
learning, in seeking out the justness of a Cause, and in judging thereof; and
my righteous Law of Justice have you not regarded to be your Rule, but through
the policy and craft have you hidden the simplicity of the Law from the
Ignora^, in unknown Languages, and obscure Sentences; and your wills many times
have been your Law, and true Judgment have you turned backward, and made a Fe^
against Equity, that it could not enter. Some of you are guilty in a high
degree of that cruelty and tyranny which of late years has been acted upon the
Innocent; yea, you have grinded the face of the Poor, imprisoned the Harmless,
and laid heavy burdens and oppressive bonds upon the Guiltless, who have not
transgressed any Law, much less the Law of Righteousness; you have made my
freeborn Children your Slaves, and have highly attempted to sit Lords in my
Thr^ of Conscience, and some of them have deeply suffered by some of you, for
the exercise of their pure Consciences, because they could not Swear, or
worship and respect your Persons, nor pay Tithes (that grievous Oppression) nor
bow to your wills and lusts in things of the like nature of Cruelty: And you
are guilty in a gross sum, of upholding the false Prophet, which prophesies
Lies, and falsely, with flattering words of guile, and he covers himself under
your shadow, and under your unjust Law, which is his staff and strength, and he
ri^ upon the Beast, till you be both taken alive, and cast into the Lake of
everlasting Indignation. The Cup of my Vengeance will awaken you, and my Law
(...) for ever condemn you, and my Counsel of Equity shall plead against you in
the Court of Justice; and my eternal Judgment from my Throne of Righteousness
shall proceed in sentence of wrath, and my faithful Evidence, the Light in your
Consciences, which has been Eyewitness of your villainy against me, shall
testify against you, and shall accuse you guilty of everlasting Torment,
except you repent.

To all Astrologers, Magitians, Southsayers, and Wise men.
THus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, because of your
Witchcrafts, and Enchantments; you have dug deep as the pit of Hell, to hide
your counsel from the Lord, and have discovered your selves, in finding out
secrets to another, then me, in your natural Arts and knowledge you are
corrupted, the ground being cursed in which you stand. You have in Policy and
Witchcraft sold your selves into the power of Darkness, and your Original of
Science and Languages is the Serpent, whose Image and mark you bear; your
Wisdom is devilish, gained by the strength of corrupted reason, which is the
Habitation of the Serpent, whom you have chosen to be your Instructor, and
exalted for your God: There is a Secret sealed from you, and a Star whose
course you do not know, and a Sun eclipsed of which you make no mention, and a
Circuit of Heaven of which you know not the compass; and you cannot find out
the secret by Divination, but the discovery of it will be the discovering of
your Sorceries, and the making bare of your Enchantments; your knowledge is in
time, and leads not into the understanding of things everlasting, which are
without beginning: My flaming Sword is against you, and does divide you from
the Tree of eternal Life, of which you cannot touch and live: My Wrath shall
sweep you out of the Land of Peace, and my Eye, which sees you, shall be the
Star of Condemnation, and Darkness unto you, to the confounding of your Sun and
Moon for ever.

To all you Generals, Colonels, Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland.
THus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, for some of you are
woefully fallen from that Uprightness and Integrity which once was in you, and
you are abundantly waxed fat, and exalted through Victories and Deliverances;
now you kick against the Lord, that has handled you as Instruments in his Hand
to do his Will; and many of you who have been raised out of the dust, and are
set down in your high nest of liberty, in the lust, and pride, and filthiness
of the flesh, and vain glory, and fleshly exaltations abound, and with
greediness you divide the spoil; and some of you take more by your cruelty, and
hard-heartedness, then justly was given you in victory; and now you being at
ease, have forgotten many former straits and dangers delivered from; and in
your hearts you say, Our hand have gotten the Victory, and do not exalt the
Lord herein, who sometime eminently has appeared for you, your Enemies
themselves being Judges; and now you tread under foot, by your might and
beastly power, many of my innocent and harmless People, some of which have
served you in many trials, and now they being redeemed from that nature of
strife, you hate them, and do and suffer violence to be done unto them, and
regard it ^ot, and set it at naught; and though you have said, you have
labored for liberty of Conscience in your long travel of War, yet in the birth
you have turned your Victory into carnal and fleshly liberty to your selves,
and into bondage to your brethren; and many Promises have you vowed, which you
neglect to perform; and the same Oppression and power of Cruelty stands in
dominion under another Appearance and Member of the great Image, the Head being
but one; and you have only slain the Name, and live in the Nature, and while
some of you have been zealous to break down the Idols and Images without, and
herein have served the Lord; you are now become Worshippers of Idols within,
and of Images set up in your hearts, to the greater dishonor of the Lord, who
are turned into spiritual Idolatry, and more subtle Hypocrisy, and secret
whoredom, and herein also live in the nature of that which you cut down in the
name; and the Founder of Images is not yet confounded, and you are not the
least of all that are guilty (for it is not unknown to you) of that grievous
Oppression, and Tyranny, and Cruelty acted upon my servants, who in times past
have born a part of the burden with you in the heat of the day; and though some
of you see these iniquities abounding, and the neglect of fulfilling your own
vows, and are already ashamed of the Oaks which you have designed, and of the
Gardens which you have chosen, and now are accused guilty in your own
Consciences, for pulling down and setting up, one thing in the nature, though
different in the name, yet you are greedy of your Prey and Spoil, and do not
confess Truth against Oppression, being Branches of the same Root, lodging
amongst the Boughs; and thus are you fallen from your first integrity, into
pits and snares, and become one with the Harlot, and Partakers of the
Adulterer, murdering and crucifying the just, loving to be blinded by the God
of the World, for love to his Treasure: Mine Arm terribly shall come against
you, and my Force shall compass you about, and my Sword shall cut you off, and
with a mortal Blow I will wound you, and deliverance to my Chosen will I bring
another way; and though I have reproved Princes by you, yet you will I reprove;
and though I have chastened the Mighty and the Rebellious by you, yet you will
I correct, and all your might and power will I take away, and your weakness
shall appear, and dispersed shall you be before the Arrows of my Wrath; my
Alarm will I beat against you, in defiance of your power, and through you, by
my Weapon of War will I charge to your overthrow and defeat everlasting, except
you repent, says the Lord, in this day of your Visitation, wherein you have a
time given to make your peace, and to return to your first integrity, out of
your rebellion against me, that my hand may be toward you; for my great work
is yet to do, which I have thought to bring to pass, and this overturning was
but a making way for it; and yet again will I overturn, even you, and all that
oppose me herein; that my Son may reign in his Kingdom for ever, whose Bondmen
and Slaves ye shall be, if you submit not, before you be conquered. And this to
you is a Message for Reconciliation, sent from me, and sealed with my Spirit,
says the Lord.

To all the Priests, and Prophets, and Teachers of the People.
THus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, above all other, and my
Judgments shall be upon you to the uttermost; for you in hypocrisy, and
deceit, and abominations has exceeded all other that ever went before you, and
are less excusable then they, and more vile in my sight then they that have
been made an utter desolation; abominable, and loathsome, and hai^ous is your
filthiness in preaching for hire, and for gifts and rewards, and in making a
prey upon the People, through divining for money, even feeding your selves with
the fat, and killing them that are fed, and have woefully wasted the heritage,
and scattered the flock upon the barren mountains, where yo^ treacherously have
devoured them, and made merchandise of their Souls, and have cried, Peace,
peace unto the wicked, one of you building a Wall, and another daubing it with
untempered Mortar, you have not stood in my Counsel, but have erred from my
Way, and have not known my Judgments, but through covetousness have dealt most
wickedly, and profaness is gone forth from you into all corners of the Earth,
so that none could turn from his evil way, nor learn the Way of Righteousness
and Salvation; How shall it be declared and laid open? Your transgressions have
much more abounded then in former Generations; ye have shut the Kingdom of
Heaven against men, to the destruction of Thousands and ten Thousands, who have
perished under your Ministry, whom you have caused to err, and led them out of
the Way; and the blind Hypocrites have led the Blind, till ye both fell into
the ditch of perdition. It was your Generation of the same seed that put the
Apostles to death, and now you make merchandise of their words, and exceed in
hypocisie and double-heartedness; and have turned everyway according to the
changing of the power of the Beast: Some of you were Teachers for the King, and
Bishops, and were ordained by their Law, and your prayers have been to your
Idol-god, for all sorts from whom you could receive a Reward or be advantaged;
and you are now divided in many Sects, and Judgments, and false Opinions, and
have divided the People into diverse ways of Idol-worship, throwing down one
part of the Image, and setting up, and exalting another; and your Offerings,
and Oblations, and Prayers, and Praises has been a burden and weariness to my
Soul, says the Lord; and you now are at war in your minds one with another,
diverse in your Language (though but one Original) which is the womb of
Witchcraft, and your Kingdom is Darkness, and a heap of Confusion, under the
dominion of Death reigning; but you are at concord in War against me, and
against my Servants, whom I have chosen from among you, to bear witness against
you, and you are the most of all guilty of that great Persecution, and unjust
Suffering, and Imprisonment, through Tyranny laid upon them; for you stir up,
and interceed the power of the Beast thereunto, upon which you sit, till you
both be cast into the Lake: You are risen in all your power to manage War
against my Kingdom, which is appearing to make yours a Desolation for ever: The
Beast is risen in defense of you already; and you pray to your dead gods, and
preach to your ignorant People, against my Heritage; deceiving Thousands, whose
blood of you will be required, who are ever learning of you, but never able to
come to the knowledge of the Truth by you, being kept in infidelity and
blindness under you, whose blood you are absolutely guilty of; your rebellion is
the crime of Witchcraft, who cannot cease to do evil, for you have bound your
selves in the Covenant with Hell, and are at Agreement with Death while you are
upon Earth, and would bind the People with you in the same Faith (or rather
Unbelief) that none can be perfectly saved from sin while they live upon Earth:
But you are the filthy Dreamers, who do defile the flesh, and when you awake
you will be found empty of all Righteousness; your Cup is full of Fornication,
and of the Wine of Whoredom and Idolatry; my patience will be turned into fury
against you, and my Cup of Indignation is the assured Portion of your ^ot; and
blood shall you have to drink, as your Gift and Reward from me; and your
present pleasure shall be turned into howling everlasting; and your songs shall
be changed into Woe was the day: My Plagues shall remain with you upon Earth,
and follow you to the Lake, and your staff and strength in which you trust,
even the power of the Beast shall be broken with you, and be buried in the
Grave of everlasting contempt, to rise in reproach unto my Heritage for ever;
and my Fire of Indignation is already kindling upon you, which will burn
forevermore, and not be quenched.

To all you called Papists, to your whole Body and Head at Rome, the Word of
the Lord reaches.
THus, assuredly, says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, and my
Vengeance, and Wrath, and Fury shall for ever, World without end, be upon you,
though you pardon one another, yet will I not pardon any one of you, for your
grievous Adulteries and Abominations have surpassed all other Generations; in
the womb of Whoredoms your Children are conceived, begotten by the seed of
Adulteries, in the very strength of the man of sin, and at the Breasts of
murder and cruelty, you are nourished in sucking heinous and cruel Tyranny*
you are seated upon the highest Mountain of Oppression and Idolatry. Peter was
not your Predecessor, but the Devil himself you succeed, in blood, and envy,
and cruelty; and he is your rock, with whom you shall fall in everlasting
perdition, being upon him builded, in your whole body; and he is the Father of
your faith, received from him by succession, traditionally: And your Religion
is of Cain's antiquity, who was the Ancient in your Profession of offering
Sacrifice, and killing the Just; your Sword has been made fat in the blood of
the Innocent; you have sought to slay even the very likeness of Righteousness,
and have stood armed with cruelty against the Upright, waiting for the blood of
the Guiltless to assuage your thirst: And your seat at Rome, which once had the
Faith of Jesus Christ in purity, where Members of his Body inhabited, you have
turned into the habitation of Devils, and it is become the open Mother of
professed Whoredoms, which brings forth cursed Children of Witchcraft, and is the
abiding place of members of an abominable Harlot, and the Profession of Jesus
have you turned into cruelty against Jesus, and into the murder of him. Some
of you are made a curse already, and with Vengeance and Indignation shall the
rest be pursued, till your Body be rooted from off the Earth; you have been
strong in your Seat of Darkness, upon your seven Mountains of perfect
abomination, and none were able to encounter you in your strength of
Infidelity, but it shall be turned into weakness, and your whoredoms shall
appear, and your present honor shall be turned into contempt everlasting; for
whilst you say, You have wrought to merit Life eternal, your unbelief will
bring death everlasting, and your Works merit my Fire of eternal Judgment and
Condemnation; and while you have said, You eat and drink the Flesh and Blood
really, you have crucified his Life totally, and your consecrating of things
unto your Idol-god, has been your defilement and pollution in the sight of the
true God; to Images and Pictures have you bowed, and have worshipped the Saints
Days and Names, and bowed to their likeness of man's inventions, but have slain
their life, and trodden under foot their nature and glory, and buried their
righteousness and knowledge in the grave of your wickedness and ignorance; and
in imaginations have you rested, and in vain superstitions have you hoped,
honoring the Name of Christ, and killing his Life; the Womb of Darkness are
you shut up in upon Earth, and it will be your bed for ever in Hell and Death;
and your Purgatory will deceive you, and your cleansing will never come:
Defiled, defiled and loathsome are you in the pure Eye of Light, which the
secret of your deceit searches, and your darkness feels, and shall judge you
for ever. Rome, Italy, France, and Spain, and your Dominions, to all your
Kings, Princes, Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, Prelates, and Friars, and Nuns, and
whole train of Idolators, The Cup of my Vengeance is toward you, and the
Dreggs thereof you shall drink; and my overflowing Whirlwind of Wrath, as an
inresistable Flood is against your Banks, and my Fire of eternal Fury shall
burn through your Stubble; and my everlasting Light shall make search and
inquisition for the blood of my Elect, which is found in thy skirts. Thou
abominable Harlot of loathsome adultery, Tremble, tremble, at my dreadful
living presence, ye Worshippers of dead Images; the day of repentance is well
nigh past, your long Idolatry will my long patience turn into everlasting
Misery and Judgment; and Nations shall see your shame, and in the sight of your
Lovers shall you be tormented. And this from Authority by my Spirit of Glory is
sent you a Warning, and is the voice of a Trumpet, which gives a certain sound
against the mighty dreadful Day of the Lord, which upon you is coming, to make
you a Desolation for ever and ever; and the Eternal Decree is sealing against
you, never to be altered.

To all you called Protestants of the Eldest sort.
THus says the Lord, my controversy is against you, and my hand will be upon
you; you have a strong taste of the Bottle, wherein the Wine of Fornication is,
and your scent is leavened with the first vessel of abomination, you are seated
in darkness, pitched upon six of the first Mountains, under another Branch of
the first Tree (Ignorance) and are thildren of the first womb, begotten in
another appearance of the Whores Beauty, and are more comely in stature then
your eldest Brethren, and little is your difference to be discerned from the
first Beast in your appearance, and nothing at all in the ground; you say you
believe for Eternal Life, but your unbelief will bring upon you everlasting
death: your talking of Christ, and his righteousness imputed (which you
profess) will not cover your infidelity and filthiness, for you are in the
enmity against his Life; the working (of the first) for life, and your
believing for life, springs both out of one ground; and while you say you eat
and drink the Body and Blood of Christ in the figure, you kill and cruifie him
in the Substance, and art partakers of thy Sisters sins, in Whoredom and
Idolatry, and must partake of her plagues. Woe, woe, will be your Inheritance in
the Pit of Earth for ever, instead of a heavenly glory (which you dream o^)
above the Sky; I have armed my Armies to do my work herein, which has in part,
and will fulfill it, to break you to pieces, the intents of your heart have been
known to be always against my people, neither could you bear any appearance o^
me, but blasphemes my Name and Truth in every discovery; you have loved
darkness upon Earth; and in its Chains shall you be bound in the Lake for
evermore.

To all you that are called Presbyterians and Independents.
THe Lords controversy is against you, for you are a higher branch of the
first tree, deeper rooted in the cursed ground of fleshly and sensual wisdom,
and the Womb of your conception is the first Whores daughter, more comely
decked, and your Cistern holds the Wine of Fornication, at which you drink in a
measure her abomination, and where you say, you believe for Justification, and
applies the Promises for Savation; your works of Wickedness and Hypocrisy will
bring Damnation, and gains the promise of Condemnation, who are in pride, and
high-mindedness, and double-heartedness, which is the condition of that
promise, and you are found wanting every whit, the conditions of the Promise of
Eternal Li^e; you have reformed the outward man into the obedience unto another
likeness of the Truth, without the Life, and are as vile in the inward in
hypocrisy, and self-exalting, and has covered your selves with the Saints
words, and laid up more in store of the report of their riches, then your
forefathers, and now you are become Worshippers of the form and words of the
Saints, and are grown in the knowledge, more then some of your Fathers
Children; but in extolling the Saints words, you limit their Spirit, and keeps
in Death their Life, which was not of the World, neither in appearance nor
ground; and while you say you eat and drink the Flesh and Blood of Christ in
secret, and separate, you put him to death openly, and among the multitudes,
your hearts are full of bitterness against my Remnant, whom I have called; and
aloud you cry Heresy, and Error, and Blasphemes my Name, and loathes the
Honeycomb in your full stomachs; you worship the same God, as your
forefathers did, only in another appearance, more refined through stronger
wisdom, and appears in the reformed old man, thinking him to be the new man,
and deceives your Souls hereby, and are zealous in your blindness, in your
will-worships, and feigned humility, which is without the knowledge of God; and
you depend upon your imaginations, thinking to have life in the Scripture, as
they did which put Christ to death, and will not come to Christ that you may
have li^e; you are in the knowledge gathered from without you, which is
natural, and in it you are corrupted; and some of you are brutish in your
knowledge, and are thereby pufft up into pride and vainglory; your separation
from the World is sensual, and self-separation, and differs but a little in
your appearance, and nothing in the ground; for the cursed ground stands within
untilled and unbroken, and you worship God ignorantly, at a distance, and feeds
upon the report of a thing done many hundred of years ago, and your Faith does
not give you victory over the World, for it is set in your hearts, and the
vanities of it without is followed, pride, and oppression, and fullness: Some of
you are hot and furious in your blind zeal, and cannot endure sound Doctrine;
your fruits will wither, and all your knowledge will perish, and all your hopes
and expectations will fail, and all your praises and prayers, and all your good
works brought forth in your own wills, in that nature in which the enmity
lodges, is a lame and a blind Sacrifice, and of Cain's nature, which God
accepts not; you are in the liberty of the flesh, and the daily Cross of
Christ you do not know, but lives daily to the World, and dies not to it, and
your knowledge of Christ is without you; by what such a Prophet, and such an
Apostle spoke of him; and the witness of the operation of his Spirit and Power
you have not in you, nor his sufferings you do not know in your life, but by
your life make him to suffer in you, in his Life; the horrible filthy thing is
committed amongst you, and your Teachers are perfect in the false Prophets
steps, and (some of you are as bruit Beasts in their knowledge, gathered in by
vain study and humane learning, through Philosophy and vain deceit,) and have
large Quarters from which they seek their Gain, and through Coveteousness with
feigned words make merchandise of souls, and are complete in Balaams way of
Idolatry, following his Error, loving the Wages of unrighteousness, teaching
for filthy Lucre, devouring souls for dishonest Gain, by trading with the
Scriptures, and selling their Imaginations upon them for money, gaining many
thousand of pounds a year thereby, having stolen the Saints words into their
unclean hearts, uttered forth by them for advantage to themselves, when the
Lord has not sent them, nor spoken unto them, nor ordained them for his
service; but their Call and Ordination have been by man, and their work and
testimony of themselves, and have not profited you at all, and yet you have
loved to have it so; but what will you do in the end thereof? Even you that
have been helped, and they that have helped shall both fall together in the Day
of the Lord's Recompense, which will fall grievously upon you, and none shall
be able to deliver you, but miserable Comforters, and Physicians of no value
shall all be unto you, and your long applied Promises shall suddenly fly away:
No Peace from God is to the Wicked, neither do I sow Pillows under your Elbows,
but to the Light in your Consciences (I commend these things) which Christ has
enlightened every of you withal; which shines in Darkness, and you cannot it
comprehend, nor in it believe, but at it stumbles, and by it shall be broken;
which if it you loved, it would teach you in the Spirit the Living God to
worship, and would condemn all your set forms of worship in the imaginations;
the Light is given you of Christ Jesus, unto Life Eternal, or unto condemnation
everlasting; when the Hand of the Lord is upon you, remember you had Warning;
and when you are in the Lake, and in the Pit, remember you had a day of
Visitation upon Earth: The Light in all your Consciences shall witness Gods
Judgments to be just, and your mouths shall be stopped.

To all you that are called Anabaptists.
WIth you also is the Controversy of the Lord, for you are Children of the
same seed, more purged in the Fire of blind Zeal, and begotten in the
transforming of the Serpent, into more secret hypocrisy, and deeper subtilty;
your covering being larger, the greater deceit and abomination lodges under;
Death reigns among you, and your Kingdom is situate in the Mountains of
exaltation, and you feed abundantly in the Valleys of pride and vain glory,
and are nourished with the bread of prosperity; you are grown high, and great
in your number, and have joined your selves for advantage, and glory in your
strength, having through Policy and Craft, and bowing to the beastly power,
highly exalted your own Horn, and by Flattery have gained much of your
dominion, which you hold in possession by the Law of guile; many simple Ones
have by your curious color, and bed of fair pretenses been deceived to commit
Adultry with your Image, brought forth in the likeness of the Saints God; by
imaginations from the Saints words you worship the Practice and exercise of the
Saints, with the same mind that the Papists do worship their Names and days:
You allow not Idols without, nor a vain conversation in the World, but you are
stric^t in observation in your outward conformity, in your self-righteousness,
which is your greatest sin; you are clothed with the Saints words and
practices, which you have climed up in your own wills to obtain, not having
entered in by the Door; and while you say, you eat and drink the Flesh and Blood
of Christ in the Saints manner, showing forth his Death till he come to
Salvation; you kill him as the Heathens do, till he appear unto Condemnation;
and you show forth daily that you cruci^e him in the World, eating and drinking
to your selves condemnation: you say Christ dyed only for you as Elect but your
works make manifest that he dies by you as Reprobate: You take up a command
from the Letter, and imitate the Apostles (some of you in a lower, and some of
you in a higher degree) in that mind and nature which in the Apostles was
crucified; and you say Christ commands it, when the Letter does but declare it,
and you are not led with the same Light which gave forth the Commands declared
to observe them, but say, in such a Verse of such a Chapter, such a Command is,
not having received the Command by the same Spirit. Here you are proved to be
them which use your tongues, and say, he says it, when God has not spoken
unto you, but as you read it without you, as the false Prophets may do the
words of the true Prophets; and thus you are in the Witchcraft, as they were,
Gal. 3. who take on things in your own wills, and observe Commands without from
the Letter, thereby drawing from the Teachings of God within by the Spirit; you
are zealous as they were, for the Traditions and Figures, and cannot see him,
which is the end of all that which perishes with the using, so you are not
dead with Christ from the World, who are yet subject to Ordinances which are of
the World: They that obeyed Christ, and followed him, were led by the Spirit,
and not by the Letter; for they were not Ministers of the Letter, but of the
Spirit, and such were judged to be in error; and this is your condition, who
say, such are Breakers of Christ's Commands, and Makers void of the Scripture,
and Destroyers of the Ordinances, who witness Christ the Substance, and him to
be King, and Judge, and Lawgiver, and in whom, and upon whom the Scripture is
fulfilled, and so it established, and the Commands of Christ kept, which are in
Spirit, and his Law daily walked in, which condemns sin. And this is not
contrary to the Scripture, but a fulfilling of it in Principles, in Doctrines,
and in Practice, and in Conversation: The Apostles were sent to preach the
Gospel to every Creature, and they were all led by the same Spirit, and did not
go before it in their own wills, as you do, neither did one go from the Command
which had been given to another, using another words, and excercising
themselves in another practices, when the Lord had not commanded; but such
they bare witness against, which did use their tongue, and transform themselves
into the likness of true Prophets, and Apostles, as you have done, and are in
the love of the World, and only separated in the appearance, and not in the
ground. You stumble at the ^ight, and therefore know not the Door of entrance,
nor where the Commands of Christ are to be received, and the Will of God to you
is to be known; and so your obedience is the conformity in your own wills, to
that which was the Will of God to another; this Sacrifice is also lame and
blind, and God says to you, Who has required this at your hand? For if you
have observed and done all those things, which the Declaration of the Law and
Gospel does require, you are unprofitable Servants, and yet one thing do you
lack, the dying with Christ, and the Sufferings and Cross of Christ is not
known; but in the liberty of the flesh you are, and not in the condition of the
Promise to Life Eternal. Friends, you have ru^ into the form of Godliness,
without the Power; into a Church which is not in God, but of the World; into a
Baptism which does not wash away sin; for you live in sin, and plead for it,
while you live upon Earth; into a Communion which is not with God, which no
unclean thing can enter into, for the Proud and Coveteous partake with you; and
while some of you have said, they that preached for Hire have been
Antichristian, you your selves are fallen into the same abomination, taking
Gifts and Rewards, and large somes of Money, and upholding such who do it; Here
you are unjust to your own Principle, and are for condemnation with the Light
in your Consciences. Let shame cover your heads, ye Hypocrites; your covering
will not hide you, nor your high talking of Christ without you, so long
professed by you, will not justify you, while you are found disobeying this
Light in your Consciences, which Light is one with God, with Christ, and with
the Spirit in its measure; and it does convince you of sin, and is a command to
you, and would lead you (if you walked in it) from all iniquity, which is the
Will of God to you; and to that mind which is carnal, which rules in you, the
Commands of Christ which are Spiritual, are not given, nor can be received; but
say, Lo here, and Lo there Christ is to be found; with the Light you are
comprehended, which if the least measure of it you did own, it would lead you
to the Baptism inward of the heart, and to the Church which i^ in God, whereof
Christ is the Head in every Member, and into the Communion with God, and to
follow the Lamb of God wheresoever he goes; and out of your imitations, and
liknesses, and strife, and contention about the words given forth from the
Spirit; who are in your own unity, in Division, and several Meanings, and
diverse Constructions, and Judgments, and several ways of Obedience and
Worships, and Belief, which by your imaginations you draw from the Scripture,
which is the Declaration but of the one God, and one Truth, of one Obedience,
and of one Faith; and thus you exalt the great Image of many mixtures, your
selves being a chief Member of his body: You say the Scripture is your Rule,
but are divided into Opinions and Conceits contrary to the Scripture, every one
worshipping that which you imagine from the Scripture, not being in the Unity
of the Spirit, which gave forth the Scripture, which is one, and not divided in
Obedience, Worship, or Faith; and while you say the Scripture is your Rule,
your lives are squared by the spirit of the Devil, and hewn out into Pride and
Hypocrisy, and love of the World.

And to you who are called Free-willers, who say Christ died for All.
HErein you affirm that whereof you are ignorant, which may be true in Christ,
but a Lie unto you; for you are not dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the
World, but are alive against him in the World; they for whom he died, are dead;
and they who yet live put him to death. Free Will unto the ways and fashions,
and vanities of the World stands in you, and you know not the daily Cross of
Christ, which is unto man's will; nor what it is to follow Christ, and obey
him, which is contrary to man's will. You say, He that is condemned, it is
because he will not believe; this is true in Christ but not in your carnal
apprehensions of the natural man, in whom there is no power to believe. He that
has an ear, let him hear. There are some true desires among you, but your
minds are not truly informed, to the fulfilling of your desires; and your minds
are outward, and apply peace to that which is for condemnation. Your reason and
wisdom is corrupted, and cannot receive Truth, but call it error, and this is
your sin. Death over you has passed, and reigns over you, as over all men, and
your knowledge is in time, and you cannot hear of things which were before the
World was; your wisdom is sensual, and your comprehension is strong, and the
little simplicity in you is betrayed, by the subtilty which has dominion in
your Governor; Your Crown must be laid down; and Fools must you become, before
you be truly wise, or can be crowned with the Lamb. And among the rest,
Remember you had warning, and a Day of visitation before you were destroyed;
and this shall be by you witnessed in the day of the Lord.

To all you who say you wait, and believe, for the Coming of Christ to Reign in
Person upon Earth.
HEre you the Lord's Controversy which he has against you. The Way of his
coming is not prepared, but Rocks and Mountains are standing, and Valleys are
not filled up, and rough and crooked is your present way; your hopes and
expectations in that ground wherein they spring will wither and fade away as
the Grass; for your hope of his coming has no whit purified you, as he is
pure; for you are in the flesh, and in the liberty of it, which is Rebellion to
his Reign; and Christ is kept in Prison, in exile with that mind, and the Devil
is yet at liberty working in your earthly members, and leads you captive into
his covenant in his government, in seeking your selves, and to strengthen your
selves in the Kingdom of the World; and murmur that any should be above you,
and that is he, which put Christ to death, and will not have him to reign in
his Power over the Earth; and to you, what purpose is it to desire the day of
his coming? for with wrath will he come, and with vengeance will ^e appear, and
will break your Kingdom like a Potters vessel, for suddenly will he come, but
your expectation will be prevented, for his Reign and Kingdom is not of this
World. Your high nature stands, and Satan is not bound, nor one of the days of
the thousand years; for his limit is not yet come; your minds are outward, and
they are your own thoughts, which are vain, and you know not of what Spirit you
are: The Sufferings of Christ must you know, before you can see him Reign; and
through his War must you strive before you can obtain his Victory; and him must
you own, in his convincing you of sin, before you can witness his reign in
Glory upon Earth over sin.

To all you that are called Ranters.
THe Controversy of the Lord God is against you, your Seat is in the mystery
of iniquity, and Satan transformed into an Angel of Light is your god, and
King, and the Kingdom of the second Beast is your Dominion, your deadly Wound
is falsely healed, and Satan thereby has enlarged his Government; you continued
not to the end, but the Prince of Darkness is more strongly entered, and your
latter end is worse then your beginning, and your last end will be the worst of
all; while you have scorned self-righteousness, your selves have been
impudently poluted with the spiritual Wine of Whoredom; and though you have
cried against, and abhorred the form of Religion, your selves have been in the
highest power of Iniquity, sold to do wickedly, and given up to commit sin with
greediness, glorying in your shame, and are become vain in your Imaginations;
your foolish hearts being darkened, because when ye knew God, you glorified him
not as God: The womb of your corruption is the wel-favoured Harlot, begotten by
the false Prophet; Plead with your Mother, for she is an Adultress, and has
abundantly gone after other Lovers, loving their Bed of Adultry, where ever
she saw it; naked shall she be stripped, and set as in the day that she was
born, and no Mercy shall be to you her Children: You had a Convincement under
the Law, and were brought under condemnation some of you, but as the viperous
Generation, you have fled the wrath, and now are become Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, and turn the Grace of God into wantonness (which largly to you
appeared) which would wholly have sanctified you, if i^ it you had walked; but
having slain the Witness of God, you now are in the cursed peace, following
Drunkenness, and cursed Speaking, and Swearing, and beastly Lusts, and beggarly
Vanities, sporting your selves as in the day time; and you are the Crucifiers
of Christ afresh, and Putters of him to open shame in the sight of the Heathen:
And while you speak swelling words of vanity, your selves are the Servants of
corruption, and of sin in the highest degree, and free from Righteousness in
the least measure, doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and being bound in
the Chains of darkness; and your professed freedom is devilish, stolen by you,
and is not the Freedom of the Son of God, purchased through death; you never
came through the Law, but by your Oaths, and Drunkenness, and Profaneness, have
cast it behind your backs; you that are in wantonness do kill the Just, and you
that are in pleasures are dead while you live, and you that live in fleshly
lusts, are in War against your own souls: Iezabel is your Prophetess; and the
Dog that is turned to the Vomit again, is your example; and seven unclean
spirits worse then the first, are entered upon you, that is your Parable, and
your House is become the Den of Robbers, which was once the House of prayer;
the Hand of the Lord is against you, and his Breath will kindle the torment of
Tophet upon you, and everlastingly shall it burn upon you, and shall not be
quenched; and your professed love shall be turned into my Wrath and Fury, and
sin shall you find in its Vengeance, though you have seen none in the action;
and my Witness which you have slain, to gain peace, shall arise to your
everlasting trouble, says the Lord; and your mirth shall be turned into
everlasting sorrow, and your communion in unrighteousness shall become your
unity in the just indignation of wrath; and your liberty enjoyed in the World
shall be turned into your bondage, in the ^ake of Fire; and your wisdom and
knowledge shall rot in the pit. and your righteousness and uprightness which
once was in you, shall never be mentioned to you, for your own iniquities shall
you bear in the Day of the Lord: With the eternal Light you are comprehended;
your beginning which was in judgment, and your time which is in false peace,
and false liberty, and love, and fleshly joy, and your end, which will be
everlastingly miserable: And though you speak of the Light, and what it once
wrought, yet being from it, turned into Darkness, bringing forth fruits of
Darkness and unrighteousness, the Light is your eternal condemnation; and
because you are the highest stone in the Building of mystery iniquity, the
greater will be your fall into the Ditch of deeper perdition: you have been the
greatest dishonourers of the true God, and in the way of the upright are you a
stumbling unto this day: your state is read, and your portion is foretold, and
this prophecy shall not fail, but upon your heads shall be fulfilled.

To all you that are called Seekers and Waiters.
THe Lord has many things against you, and his Controversy will be with you;
you are the highest in the Image of many mixtures, and your Tent is pitched in
the Plains of feigned humility, and your goodly building stand; upon the Sand,
repaired and beautified by the scattered stones, gathered out of the ruins of
the former Cities of confusion; among you there is a simplicity, and a calm
spirit, for you have been poured from vessel to vessel, and your scent is not
so strong as the former, neither is your growth so perfect in the mystery of
iniquity, as by appearing in so perfect a shape of the Serpent; you seek not at
the true Door, nor wait not at the Gates of Life, and your seeking will end
before life eternal you find; for you with the rest, stumbles at the
Foundation; and in him who is the Light of the World, and enlighteneth every
man that comes into the World, you cannot believe; you are airy in your words
and knowledge, and speak of that which through death you never obtained; your
knowledge is high, but it arises out of the cursed ground, which is not
removed in you; Form; outward you deny, but your Form is inward, and your
chiefest Idol is in your heart; and while you say you eat and drink the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, in the Substance you slay him in his least measure, and
your wills prophecy a false peace, which will be turned into true trouble; and
when you speak, the man's head is covered, and the woman's head is uncovered, and
this is a shame, that the woman has not power on her head: your Seeking and
Waiting is of your selves, and in your own time, and the Lord is not all, and
in all among you, for your Mother is not the Lords wife, but married unto a
Harlot, and your seed is mixed with strange Children: A Prophet was your
Father, and a Whore brought you forth, and your Profession will wither as time
passes away, and your covering is too narrow, and your righteousness no more
regarded then your sin; for the Spirit convinces of it, as of sin; with the
Light everlasting your height and depth is comprehended: And this to you is a
Warning, for a Preparation to meet the Lord, and to put away your other Lovers.

The Beast which all the World wonders after (but they whose names are written
in the Lambs Book of Life) has many Heads, and many Horns.
ANd the great Image set up in the Earth worshipped by Nations and People, is
of many mixtures, and it shall fall before the little Stone, which strikes at
the Bottom; All your several Forms, and diverse appearances outward, and
different Judgments and Opinions, will stand you in no stead in the dreadful
day of the Lord which upon all flesh is coming, and hastening in its glory. Woe,
woe will be the end of all profession, when Christ comes in his own way,
contrary to all your divided expectations, and groundless hopes, He was before
the world was, and does and shall reign for ever, when it is not: and in this
his day will the Lord God set up an everlasting Kingdom, of whose Government
and Dominion there shall be no end, but it shall abide for ever, and your
divided Kingdom of the Beastly power and authority shall be dashed to pieces,
never more to be found; and your Mountains shall be burned, and your
righteousness and your sin shall meet in the Pit of everlasting Wrath,
receiving the Sentence of eternal Judgment, from him that sits upon the Throne
of infinite Power and Glory; and your rich Treasures shall be spoiled in a Day;
and your sun and light shall be darkened at Noonday, and all your goodly
Buildings shall be thrown down, and shall become the Habitation of Dragons: I
have viewed you all in the eternal Light, and you are weighted in the Balance
of Equity, and all your wise Builders stumble at the Foundation, and at the
Cornerstone; and Christ Jesus is become an offense unto you in his Light, by
which he has enlightened every man that comes into the World, of which you are
unbelieving, and therefore shut up in darkness and confusion, groping as blind
men, being many Branches of one Root, planted in the barren cursed ground of
enmity: And though you are divided as Herod and Pilate, yet do you join your
selves in one Body, to war against the Lamb and his Followers, who cannot bow
to your great Image; and you are listed in the Records of Gog and Magog,
against whom the Lamb is risen, and his Followers come forth, having the Bow
and Sword, conquering and going to conquer, and will make you a Desolation for
ever: All your Sacrifice is corrupted, and the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is
weary with your Oblations and Offerings; your hearts are far from him, and your
hands are full of blood, and the Just lies slain in every corner of your
Streets; and the Earth covers the blood of the Innocent, and the Slain
cries, How long Lord, how long? But he has heard in an acceptable time, and
will come forth in his Might, and will slay, and his Hand shall not spare, and
will wound, and his Eye shall not pity.

Awake, awake, ye Careless and Slothful, that have laid at ease in the dark
night of Slumber; and Come out, come out ye Upright-hearted, and separate your
selves, and touch no unclean thing, nor no longer partake of their Idolatries
and Enchantments: The Lord is now coming to gather his own, and to make up his
Jewels of the Despised; and his Angels are gone forth to Reap the Earth, to
bring in the Wheat, and to bind the Tares in bundles, for the fire of
everlasting Fury; and Babel shall be thrown down, and the great Whore shall be
rewarded, which sits upon the Nations, and Tongues, and People; and the Dregs
of the Cup of Wrath shall be wrung out unto her, and the Kingdom of the man of
sin shall utterly be laid waste, and every Subject shall be utterly driven away
into everlasting captivity of Vengeanee; and all your Sects, and Opinions, and
many Ways, and Forms, and Worships shall become heaps of Confusion for ever,
And your talking of Christ without you, so long and largely professed by you,
shall not save you, nor justify you in another World, who are found Enemies
and Actors against his Light, present in the World, which is but one in you
all, at which you all stumble, and by which you shall all be broken, and which
shall grind you to powder, and be your eternal Condemnation, in this World,
and forever; which Light shines in your darkness, and convinces every one of
you of your sin; which Light if it you love, is your Way to Peace with God
Eternal, and will lead you into one Truth, to be of one heart and one mind, and
to serve one God with one accord, in loving him with all the heart, and your
Neighbor as your self, and this is Sacrifice of the living God only accepted.

And to you, all sorts of People, my Conscience do I clear, to the Light in all
your Consciences (which is but One) without respect to your Persons, whether
you hear or forbear; And this to you all is a Warning, and A Trumpet sounded
out of Sion; your many gods and Idols to forsake, and your Forms without power
to turn away from, and all your graven Images set up in your hearts to cast
away: And this is the Word of the Lord to you all, which upon you all shall be
fulfilled, and by you witnessed, when the Book of your Conscience is opened,
and your eternal judgment rewarded by the just Judge, that sits upon the Throne
of true Judgment, judging nations, and People righteously.

TO all you who are in the Light of eternal Life, which does comprehend the
World, who are born from above, of the Immortal Word, which does live for ever,
who are not of the World, nor of the many Opinions in Divisions, but of one
Heart, Soul, and Spirit, Worshippers of the one living God, with whom there is
no change, nor shadow of turning, who are not known to the World (though by it
scornfully called Quakers) even you does the Lord also remember with
everlasting Kindness, and infinite Love, of whose beginning and end there is
none, and whose height and depth, measure, and limit cannot be found out; for
you has he chosen above all the Families of the Earth, to place his Name
among, and to stablish his everlasting Covenant with, of Righteousness and
Peace forever; and Redemption, and Salvation to you is come, Judgment and Mercy
in you is met, Righteousness and Peace in you has embraced each other; In the
womb of eternal Love undefiled was your Conception, begotten by the Word of
immortal Life, unto the Inheritance incorruptable, whereof you are Heirs of the
faithful Promise, made free by the Son, through the slaying of the enmity upon
his Cross, whereby you are nourished up into Immortallity, to reign over Hell,
and Death, and the Grave for evermore: With thoughts of eternal Love are you
remembered, and read in the Lambs book of Life, recorded by the eternal Spirit,
and of the Lord cannot be forgotten: Your Mother is a Virgin unspotted, and
your City is new Jerusalem, come down from Heaven, and glorious, and full of
Pleasure is your Dwelling place, there is no need of a candle, for the Lamb is
the Light thereof, and the Temple therein: Your God is no Image, nor your
Worship no Imgination, nor to the great Image you do not join, nor his power
has no dominion over you; but the Yea and Amen is your Covenant, and the I am,
whom there is none besides, is your God, and he that lives forever is your Rock
and sure Defense, and Salvation is appointed your VValls and Bulwarks, Gladness
is sown for you, yea, everlasting Mercies shall you reap, and your long
mourning shall be turned into everlasting Rejoicing, and your present Heaviness
into durable Joy; your Waters shall be sure, and your Bread shall never fail,
your Fullness shall abound, and your Plenty shall be enlarged, never more to
hunger nor thirst, but your little Seed shall become a great Nation, and the
whole Earth shall be replenished thererewith, and your despised Government
shall rule over Kingdoms, and your Laws shall all the Nations of the Earth
become subject unto. Ye are no part of the Image of Idolatry, but your
beginning is the little Stone cut out without a hand, and it shall fill the
Earth, and become a great Mountain, whereupon the Fowls of the Heaven shall be
refreshed, eating the flesh of Kings and Captains. You are found faithful in
your Trials, and the glory of the World cannot steal away your Hearts; you
cannot be moved, for your feet are set upon a Rock: Satan you scorn, and the
glory of his Kingdom you utterly disdain, upon his power you tread, and your
feet trample under foot his majesty and renown. Your King reigns for ever, and
of his Government and Dominion there shall be no end, but the uttermost parts
of the Earth shall be given for a Possession to him; his Scepter is
Righteousness, and his Law is Equity, and his Statutes are full of Justice and
Judgment. And thus says the Lord of Hosts, your God and King, Because you have
been found faithful, and have not loved your lives unto death for his Names
sake, and for his Glories sake, but have continually abased your selves, and
laid down your Crowns, that you might honor him; therefore you will he honor
and exalt, and will establish your Kingdom in peace forever; and all that
rises up in judgment against you shall be consounded and condemned, and his
Hand will be against all your Adversaries, to their overthrow, and dishonor
everlastingly. You have loved Righteousness and Judgment upon Earth, and your
Path has been in Equity, and you have born the Affliction and Storm with
patience, and have endured with joy the Burden of the Oppressor; you have been
tried to the bottom, and have been found Innocent and without Guile, before the
Throne of God, clothed with the Garments of Uprightness; your Light is the
Candle of the Lord, and your Life and Glory is the Possession of the Most High.
Babylon is given you for a Prey, and the riches of Egypt is given you for a
Spoil; and you are freeborn Children of the Seed Elect, the first Fruits unto
God, and unto the Lamb; your Purchase is obtained through death, and your Crown
of honor is purchased through suffering; and the glory of Babylon is no whit
equal, for thou excellest in Beauty and Virtue, Whereunto shall thy Beauty be
compared? O thou fair and comely Virgin! unto whom shall I liken thee? O thou
choice and freeborn Daughter of Sions King! thy long travel of sorrows in the
womb of Anguish has brought forth Children of a comely stature, thy Babes are
truly lovely, upright, and faithful-hearted; thy Young Men are noble, bold and
valiant, chosen of thy God, and Victory is with them; thy Virgins are perfect
in Beauty, pure, and undefiled, and no spot in their Garments; thy Old men are
lively and honorable, and steadfast in the Path of Righteousness, and their
gravity shall be truly respected; thy Body is perfect in the Lords Record and
Remembrance, and with an eternal Crown of infinite Glory shall the Righteous
Judge honor thee, because you have delighted to do his Will, and have kept his
Covenant undefiled, which abides with you for ever, sealed and signed unto you
by the Spirit of Promise, decreed before the World was. All Nations shall call
you blessed, and of your fullness shall they partake: Who is like unto you? A
People saved by the Lord, elect, and chosen, and redeemed out of Kindreds,
Tongues, and People, and have a name better then of Sons and Daughters. Praise
ye the Lord, and Glorify him for evermore. Young Men and Maidens, Old-men and
Children, and all that breath, Praise you the Lord, for thereunto are you
called, and for this cause are you brought forth: Clap your hands, and sing for
joy of heart, your Redeemer is the holy One, and your Maker is your Husband; I
know you, and to you am I known; and I read you within the Vail, and do behold
you, the Train of the Most High filling his Temple: Follow him forever, and let
his Name be testified of throughout the Earth. Make War in Righteousness, and
prepare your selves to do his service; Let not your hands be slack, neither be
you sloathful in our Lords Design, but wound the Head of your Enemies, and
manage War against Gog and Magog, throughout all Generations; Ride on and
prosper tread down the fenced Cities, and enlarge your dominion, and let the
Children of Strangers, of the Seed of Esau, be your Slaves and Bondmen; and
fill the Earth with your precious Seed, and sow it in the morning, and in the
Evening withold not your hand; though you are despised of men, yet the Lord
has made you truly honorable; in his Glory you appear, and his Righteousness
is your clothing, which will never wither; and though some of you for a moment
suffer Bonds for his Names sake, yet you are free everlasting, and are not
ashamed of your Testimony before the Princes and Nobles of the Earth. O Sion!
thou art desirable, because of thy Beauty, and thy Dewlling Place is situate
in a very fruitful Hill, and thou feedest in the Valleys of fat Pastures of
eternal Pleasures, where nothing that defiles can enter, nor no Devourer
treads on thy Mountain, nor no Lions Whelp treads in thy Path; it is the
Way of the Ransomed of the Lord, who has blotted out thy Transgressions, never
more to remember thy Sins, thou Seed of Jacob. The Lord is your God for ever,
while you be his People. Therefore walk before him in Righteousness, and let
his own works praise him, and give him of his own, and glorify him with it
eternally. Be low in thy heart and be not exalted because of thy Beauty and
Riches, and glory not but only in the Lord: Be diligent in thy mind, and watch
against all thy Enemies, and be not of a careless heart: Eat not of the Vine of
Sodom, nor drink not of the Cup of Whoredoms; give not thy strength to Strange
women, nor let not thy desirable Beauty be overcome of Harlots, but keep thy
self undefiled, and mingle not thy Seed with Strangers; but be fruitful in thy
pleasant Land upon thy beautiful Mountain, and bring forth abundantly unto thy
God, who has turned thy Wilderness into a fruitful Field, and taken away thy
reproach of Barrenness; in Conversation upright and blameless do thou daily
appear; in Praises, and Honor, and Fear do thou abound, and let thy God be thy
Teacher* in his Light and Truth for evermore, that thy Enemies may see and be
confounded, and may behold, and be ashamed before thee, unto whom thy Rock of
defense is a stumbling Stone of Offense, wherewith the Kingdoms of the Earth
shall be dashed to pieces, and broken as a Potters Vessel before thee.

Come forth in thy Beauty, and appear in thy Glory to the Nations. Arise,
arise, why should thou sit as alone, as in obscurity and darkness
undiscovered? Let the Princes of the Earth see thy excellency, and appear
before the Nobles in thy Robes of perfect Honor, wherewith thou art decked,
and trimed, as a Bride pleasant unto thy Husband: Do thou judge among the
Judges, and give thy counsel among the Prudent, and appear in thy Authority
before Kings and Princes: All the Dominions of the World are not equal in
Treasure and Wisdom unto thee, but all the Children of Whoredoms shall see
their shame, and be laid naked when thou appearest in thy purity; The Nations
long for thee to be partakers of thy virtue, therefore show thy self, and
appear, that the rest of thy Flock which yet remain upon the barren Mountains
may come in unto thy Fold, to rest under thy Shepherds Power.

O Sion, thou art prepared of thy God, to beat the Mountains to dust; thou art
fitted for his Service, to thresh the Hills: Make no tarrying but come away,
spread thy self into every corner of the Earth, for the Upright thirst for thee
abundantly; who lie under the oppression in the Land of Darkness, which may be
felt, from whence thou art freed into the everlasting Light; And why should
thou, O Sion, lie at Rest, while thy own Seed, the Children of thy Womb are
oppressed, groaning in the captivity, under the Uncircumcised who have driven
away thy Remnant, and scattered it from thee? Put on strength, O Arm of the
Lord, for thy Heritage has no other Helper, nor none that pitieth her: And
shine forth thou Seed of Jacob, and bring in the Kingdoms of the Gentiles to
partake with thee of thy everlasting Substance, and lay out thy self to gain in
thy holy Seed out of the power of Aegypts King; O think upon and remember thy
own former Bondage, while thou was thy self Captive in a strange Land; and let
thy Bowels be filled with compassion toward thy own Mothers Children; and be
not straightened in thy help and deliverance; for thy God has given thee an
Instrument with Teeth, to beat the Rocks to powder; he is not wanting unto thee
in Power and Wisdom, thou chiefest Son of his Love. Give up, give up to obey
his Voice, and love not thy life unto death, till the Seed of thy Inheritance,
and the blood of thy Chosen be avenged upon the head of Iezabel, who has slain
thy elect in all Generations, and nourished her self with the blood of thy
Innocent.

Call upon thy God, and awake him to Vengeance, to smite and to slay thy
Adversaries, and to consume their Habitations from off the Earth, who have been
too strong for thee, Why should thou not come forth in the power of thy
Judgments; to judge the Earth in Righteousness, and to exalt thy name in thy
Glory, which all men have despised, and seen no Excellency in? And thou O Sions
King have been as a Stranger, and unknown in the Earth, and thy Treasure has
been wasted amongst the Harlots, and empty to this day have thou returned, from
gathering fruit of thy Vineyard; for sloathful and abundantly idle have the
Laborers been in the Harvest and it is time for thee to arise and work; for
thy Law has been made void, and thy Statutes and Judgments have been
neglected, and all the Princes of the Earth contemn thy Laws, and count the
Sons of thy chosen Heritage as Slaves and Bondmen, and decree unrighteous
Decrees, and seal them in the pit of their unbelief, upon the Mountains of
their rebellion against thee.

How long Lord? How long? When will thou appear to lay their honor in the dust
of confusion? Is it not the fullness of thy Time which thou have promised? How
long shall the Remnant of Sion sit as a Widow, bemoaning her Children? Thy Host
and Chosen wait for commission from thee to do thy Will; that thou who art our
God, and our King, our Judge, and our Lawgiver, whom our souls have chosen,
may forever be exalted in thy Majesty and Throne of Justice and Judgment, and
thy Camp wait to see the honor of Kings and Princes overthrown by thee, and
thy Dominion set to rule over their heads; that all Nations and Kingdoms may
become subject unto thee, and the Kingdoms of this World may become the Kingdom
of thy Son forever and evermore; and says my Soul, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

By one whose name is truly known by the Children of the same Birth, but
unknown to the World, though by is called, EDWARD BOROUGH.

A 1656
DESCRIPTION OF THE State and Condition Of all Mankind upon the face of the
whole Earth. And a Discovery unto all, showing what man was in his Creation
before Transgression, and what he is in Transgression; how he is become a
degenerate Plant, bringing forth cursed fruit, to the grieving of the good
Husbandman, who is thereby provoked continually against the Works of his own
hands, to destroy that which he has made, because it is defiled through man's
Transgression. Also the Way of Restoration, of Salvation, Redemption, and of
Life Eternal, is here declared unto all the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the
whole world, that all may come to the knowledge of the Creator, and to have
fellowship with him again, from whom all the Children of men are separated in
the state of enmity, and are ignorant of him, and drove from his presence. This
is to go abroad into all the Earth, through the whole world, as a Call and
Visitation unto all mankind, that they may hear and consider their condition,
and may return from whence they are fallen, and may be restored again to serve,
and worship, and glorify the living God, who made Heaven and Earth, and all
things therein.
THis is chiefly to go abroad into the dark parts of the World, among those
called Heathens most especially; but its service reaches to all men and people
upon the face of the Earth: And out of love unto the Creation, and to all
People in the World was it written, and is it brought forth in public, that
all that have ears to hear may hear; and it is to be translated into several
Languages by any who are moved of the Lord thereunto; for of a truth the Lord
is risen among us, and God has given the Word from his Mouth, and many are
they that publish it abroad through the World.

TO all the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the whole World, this is the Word of
the Lord God, the Power that made you, and that made Heaven and Earth, and all
things therein, your State and Condition consider, How that you are all drove
from God your Maker, and from the knowledge of him and of his Ways, which are
Life and Peace, and are in Darkness, Blindness, and Ignorance, separated from
that Power that made you, and in the enmity against it, and are Enemies to it
in all your ways and words, where the sorrow, anguish, woe, and trouble is. But
the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Power by whom all things were made,
who is called Christ Jesus, has lightened every one of you with the true
Light, which shines in your hearts in darkness, to give you the understanding
of the knowledge of him that made you, and of his Salvation, and Redemption,
and of eternal Life, if you love the Light with which you are all lightened.
And first, The Light measures every man's state in true Judgment, and with it
you may all see your selves in the state wherein you now stand, which is a
state separated from God; and the state wherein man was created, which was
blessed.

Therefore search, and consider your State and Condition in him, that is the
Light of the World; of the dust of the Ground were you made, and into man was
breathed the Breath of Life; from the living Power which formed all things; and
man was made a living Soul, and brought forth into the World in the Image and
Likeness of the Power that made him, every one in particular that be come into
the World, for Male and Female in the Image of the Creator created he them,
without sin or evil: And man was a noble Plant, wholly a right Seed, planted
with the choicest Vine, and placed in Paradise, the Garden of the Creator, and
there was set to bring forth Fruit, and to glorify and honor him by whom man,
and all Creatures were made; for man was made perfect and upright, set in the
Counsel of his Maker, without sin, or spot, or evil in his sight, and was the
glory of the Creator, and was made for his glory; and Power and Wisdom was
given unto man to rule and govern in Dominion, in Righteousness, and in Wisdom
over all living Creatures, and was Lord over all things, and had rule and
authority over all the Creation, and was Steward over all things which the
Creator had made, who made all things for man, and made them subject unto him,
to be ordered and governed by him, and used to his Glory by whom they were
made; and in that day when man was in the Counsel of him that made him, and was
subject to his Will, he was blessed above all Creatures, and unto him were
(...) Creatures blessed, and not any thing was evil that was made, but good in
hi^ Sight that made it, and good unto man that was to use it, he being brought
for^^ in the Image of the Creator, and had a measure of his Wisdom, and his
Power to teach him, and to lead him in the exercise of all Creatures, and was
in perfe^^ freedom over all things, to rule in the Wisdom of God. And this was
the sta^ of man before transgession, which state was blessed, and not subject
to the cu^ of misery, or sorrow, nor trouble, nor torment; but man disobeyed
the Power that made him, and went from its Counsel, and contrary to its Will,
and griev^ it, and vexed it, till it became his Enemy to fight against him, and
to curse him* for he had transgressed against it, by feeding on that part which
he should not, with the knowledge of things, and so became wise, and lost
Uprightness, and touched that which the Power that made him had forbidden, and
so his mind and heart adulterated from the Creator, into the visible glories,
pleasures, and things which were less then himself, and so he became
unprofitable to his Maker, by transgressing against him, and only profitable to
himself, to feed, and nourish, and delight and please himself in the outward
Creation, and forgot the Power that made him; and thus being with his mind
turned into the Earth, there the evil entered; and the Devil overcame him with
his temptation, and the power of the earthly darkness gained dominion over him,
to sway his affections, desires, and lusts into vanities of the Earth; and he
lost his dominion over the Creatures, and they gained dominion over him, to
serve and worship them, and to please himself with them, who became captive
with his mind, to be ruled by them in vanity and in evil: And thus man became
unprofitable to his Maker, and unfruitful in the Garden, and kept it not
undefiled; and being turned from the Covenant wherein he was set; into his own
willing and desiring in the outward Creation, the evil defiled him, and he
became evil, and a fruitless Tree that cumbred the Ground, and an enmity was
placed in him by disobedience, and all things became evil to him, and the door
of all misery and sorrow was opened, and let in the curse upon him inwardly and
outwardly; for he became dead in transgression to the Life and Power, and
Wisdom of the Creator, and every moment was subject to die in this World also.
And through transgression of the Power that made him, he was cast out of the
Creator's Garden, and out of his Love, to labor under the curse, in
unprofitable Ground, and also out of his own dignity, and honor, and dominion
was he cast, and became Heir of death and Child of wrath, and an Enemy in his
mind unto the Creator, and an enmity was placed in him against the Power that
made him, and rebellion in his mind from which all the works of unrighteousness
proceed, and innocence was lost, and man became hurtful to himself, and to all
Creatures, and grieved continually the Power that made him, and was drove from
the presence and feeling of his Creator, into insensableness: And in this state
unto this day are all ye the Sons and Daughters of the first Adam, in the
enmity against the Power that made you, every moment transgressing it; and
death reigns over you all, and the power of Darkness rules in you all, and the
Law of sin, and death, and transgression are you all subject to, and led
captive in your minds, affections and desires, at the will of the power that
leads into transgression, called the Devil; and in that state you are all
strangers to God, and are without him in the World, and ignorant of the
knowledge of his Ways, and are in the perishing state for want of Knowledge,
and subject to the curse of the power which you transgress, and are Heirs of
his Wrath, having no part of the Inheritance of Blessing; for a vail of
Darkness through sin has overspread you all, and covered you all from the
sight, and hearing, and feeling of the Creator, and of the mystery of his Glory
and Wisdom; and every one in particular, and none excepted of all the Children
of Adam upon the face of the whole Earth, but all have sinned and transgressed,
and death reigns over all, and blindness of heart has possessed all, and all
have fallen short of the glory of the Creator, and all men are concluded (by
his Spirit) to be under sin, and Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Corruption,
and in disobedience, and rebellion to the Life that gives all men a Being: The
whole World, and all People in it, without exception of Tribes, Generations or
Nations, this is the state and condition of all the Sons of men; all flesh has
corrupted his way upon the Earth in his sight that made it, and the wickedness
of man is great in the Earth, and the imaginations and thoughts of every man's
heart are evil continually, and grieve the Creator; for the whole Earth is
filled with violence through man's transgression; And now not any Stock or
People have privilege one above another, to Redemption and Salvation, and to
the Kingdom of Peace and Glory, but Jew and Gentile, Wise and Foolish, Noble
and Ignoble, Male and Female, all People without exception are in
transgression, and by the line and measure of true Judgment are shut out from
the Knowledge of Life and Salvation, and of the Inheritance of the Father, in
that state of enmity wherein every man in the World is fallen into; and by one
the Offense came, and so death upon all men, which reigns in the hearts of
all, and opposes the Life of the Creator; and everyone is imperfect in the
sight of the Lord, blind, deaf, dumb, lame, and without the sense of the Power
of him that made him, and brought him forth; his Eye sees not, for it is
covered with a vail of darkness; neither does the Ear hear, for it is stopped;
nor the Tongue speak; nor the Understanding perceive any thing of the Secrets
of the Lord; but all are separated and divided from the Tree of Life, and are
cast out from his Presence by whom the World was made, into blindness of heart,
and to the loathing of your selves, and are more ignorant of your Maker then
the Ox is of his Owner, or the Ass of his Masters Crib; for you know not him
that gives you life and all good things, and that upholds you by the Word of
his Power: And this is his Word unto you all, You are all under the power of
Satan, and subject to his will, acting in iniquity and in evil, bringing forth
the fruits of death from that ground in which you now stand, which is cursed
and your Maker has no pleasure in it; for your fruits grieve his Spirit that
made you, and vex his Soul that brought you forth; for man is degenerated into
the plant of a strange Vine; and brings forth wild Grapes and cursed Fruit
which are of a bitter taste unto the Lord's Soul, who planted all things for
himself, who is the good Husbandman; but the whole Earth is corrupted, and all
Mankind in it, and man is not now acted, nor led, nor ruled in his heart by the
Power that made him, which gives him all good things; but the power of Satan,
the Serpent, the old Dragon, which deceived from the beginning, who is in the
enmity against the Life of the Creator; he acts man, and rules man to the abuse
of all Creatures, and to his own destruction; and every particular man is
liable to the wrath, and to the curse, and to everlasting woe, and misery, and
torment from his Maker, in that state of disobedience whereinto all mankind is
fallen, not one upon the face of the Earth excepted from transgression, and so
from misery; nor none privileged one above another unto happiness, but as I
have said, Male and Female, who were made in the Image of their Maker in the
first Creation, but now every man in the whole World is in the enmity against
the Life of the Power that made him, and is a Child of wrath, and shut up in
blindness and unbelief, under the Devils power, which power abode not in the
Truth, but is out of the Truth; and all mankind is left in this condition
without Help, or Helper, or Deliverance, or Means, or Way of Salvation from
himself or any other Creature upon the face of the whole Earth, but is a Sheep
without a Shepherd, straying and wandering in the thoughts of his own heart
after vanity, and that wherein there is no profit to the Lord, nor to his own
Soul, but death and sorrow in all his ways, having forsaken the Fountain of
living Waters, and gone a whoring after other Lovers, and defiled himself, and
so brought destruction upon himself, by his own doings; who abounds in all
Evil, Lying, Theft, Murder, Envy, Strife, stealing; and Whoredom, and such
like, which are the fruits of the Ground that is cursed for man's sake. But now
unto all People, the Sons and Daughters of Adam, the first man that ever was
made, Though you be thus fallen into misery by transgression, and helpless from
your selves, or from any other Creature, yet has the living God, the Power
which made you, and which you have transgressed against, ordained and prepared
a Way to be restored and healed, and to be brought to the enjoyment and feeling
of the Creator, from the disobedience, and from the curse, and misery, unto the
blessing and happiness; and unto all mankind in particular is prepared a Way
out of Death unto Life, out of the loss which every man has received in
Transgression, to Salvation, and Redemption, and Deliverance out of the
captivity and bondage, which all are fallen into, into liberty and freedom, to
serve his Maker, and to glorify him; for he has not been served nor
glorified, but grieved and vexed by all men on the Earth; and so he has
brought misery and the curse upon all, by forsaking them, and leaving them
under the Power which made them not, to be led and guided by it in rebellion
unto destruction. And now this same Power by which man was made, is man's
Restorer, and Deliverer, and Redeemer, and Savior, though he has transgressed
against it; for when there was none to help no^ to save of any creature upon
the face of the Earth, the Arm of that Power which made all things stretched
forth it self to save the Creatures which were made; and that same Power which
is transgressed is the Redeemer of all mankind, though it is offended, and
burdened, and pressed as a Cart with Sheaves, by transgression against the
Creator; and that is the Power which works out Salvation and Deliverance by
slaying the enmity, and condemning iniquity, and removing the cursed ground out
of man's heart, that the evil fruits may cease, which it brings forth; and by
this Power all must be saved that ever are saved and delivered from wrath. And
this all men have been ignorant of, and not felt, nor known, nor tasted of the
Life and Power of the Creator, though it has been near unto every one; and all
men and Creatures live move and have their being by it, and sustenance from it;
and yet man transgresses it, and grieveth it, and is not led by it.

Therefore all People upon Earth, consider your condition and state, and
hearken to the Power that made you, a measure of which moves in the hearts of
all mankind upon the face of the Earth; and it moves against the evil, and
against the defiled and transgressing part in every man's heart that is come
into the World; and this Power by which all men were made, and which they have
transgressed against (a measure of it from the Father is made manifest to all
mankind upon the face of the Earth, and convinces of the evil, of Murder and
Adultry, and such like; and condemns the works which are evil in every
particular man, whether Heathens or Christians (so called) and unto all People,
here is the Way to be restored into covenant with your Maker, a measure of his
Power in you, secretly moves upon you, and calls to you to return to it, to be
led and guided by it, in fear, and obedience, and subjection to it, from which
you have been driven, and against which you have transgressed; and this Power,
the Creator, has sent his Son into the World, and given him a Gift unto all
mankind; and he has given Light and Understanding to every particular man to
know Good from Evil, Truth from a Lie, Right from Wrong, Justice from
Injustice, and Equity from Falsehood: And this Power of the Son of God in you
does witness to you, and accept you, when with it you be guided, and when
according to it you speak and act; and it justifies the good, and the right,
and the equal, and excuses all men in that from condemnation; but against
Lying, and Wrong-dealing and Deceit, and Injustice it testifies, and when you
do these things, you transgress against that Power that made you, which should
save you, and justify you, and excuse you, and with it you are accused and
condemned; and it brings trouble upon you, and the curse of misery and sorrow:
And this Power in you will search your hearts, and try your reins, and let you
see your thoughts, and make manifest unto you the state and condition of
mankind, who is become Enemy to his Maker, in following that which brings
death, upon which the Wrath remains, till there be a returning unto the Power
by which man was made, a measure of which (as I have said) moves in the hearts
of the Sons and Daughters of Adam in all the World: And now if every one of you
do turn your minds from the World and from the glories and vanities thereof,
and from the evil which has possessed you in thoughts and actions; and if you
stand still for a moment, from willing and desiring to your selves, and after
the World, this shall you find secretly moving in you, which shall draw you
toward the Creator, to enjoy him, and to see his Glory, which none that are
still in transgression against him can ever partake of, or behold; and if to
that you hearken within you, and heed it, and follow it, which witnesses to
that Power that made you, to be great, and mighty, and wonderful, this will
show that you are short of his Glory: And it will condemn evil in you, in all
thoughts, words and actions, which proceed out of the cursed ground, in which
the Creator has no pleasure; and this will take away the vail which is spread
over you all, and open the blind eye, and unstop the deaf ear, and bring you to
hear, and see, and understand the things which are eternal, which belong unto
your peace; and if you all come to be guided by that which moves in you all
against evil, it will lead you up to its self, to be renewed and changed (out
of the evil and from under the Devils power, under which every man has been
subject, which power has been out of Truth) into the Image and Likeness of the
Creator, and to be restored to his Inheritance, to enjoy Rest and Peace forever.

And this is the Word of the Creator of Heaven and Earth to you all, and to all
mankind, this is the way unto Redemption, and Salvation, and unto the Blessing,
out of all Sorrows, and Troubles, and Afflictions, and Torments, and Woes, and
Miseries; which are the Portion forever of all that disobey this Power which
moves against evil in you, which is the Power of him that made all men and
things which move in your hearts against all that which the Creator never
placed in you, but which are fruits of Darkness. I say unto you all, This Power
in you must you own, and believe in, and follow, and be guided by it, and bea^
its condennation, and judgment upon all that which is contrary to it, if ever
you be restored to the blessed State; and all Anger, and Wrath, and Murder, and
Lying, and Dissembling, and Whoredom, and Drunkenness, and Brutishness, and
Beastliness, and Wontonness, Backbiting, and Theft, and all these things
whatsoever must be condemned in you; for who act these things are Enemies to
the Creator, and are led by the Power of Darkness which is the Destroyer of
you, soul and body, and the cause of the curse upon you, and the ground of all
sorrow, and sufferings, and afflictions, and troubles which come upon that Part
in you which is in transgression against the Power of God; for there is a birth
born of the flesh which brings forth, and goes after fleshly ways, fleshly
joys and delights, and pleasures, and fleshly words, and vanities, which
murder the Just, and blind the Eye, and grieve your Maker, and this birth must
not inherit eternal Life; but all that ever do inherit must be born again of
another Seed, and into another Nature, where all the former things are passed
away; for all glories of this World will wither, and all your joys and
pleasures will come to an end, and you will be left miserable and wretched.

Therefore, Oh Earth, Earth, and all the Children of Adam in the whole World,
be Awakened, be Awakened, and stirred up to consider of your state and
condition, for the Creator of all things is risen to gather his People up to
himself, and his Voice sounds abroad through the whole World: If any has an
ear to hear, let him hear, Terror and Vengeance is against all the Rebellious,
and to Judgment must all come before the Maker of all things, to be judged by
him according to the Power which moves in every man, which is just and equal,
and witnesses in equity, which is a measure of the Power that made the World,
and all mankind unto it shall confess, to its greatness, to its justness, and
to its authority, and to it must all the Children of Adam bow, and before it
tremble; and he that has done good, and lived in Meekness, and Soberness, in
the Truth, and in Justness, in all that which is good, and not in any evil,
shall receive Life, Peace, Rest, and Glory from the righteous Judge, the Power
by whom the World was made, and he shall be excused from all condemnation; but
he that has done evil and transgressed against the Power of God by which he is
upholden, who is degenerate, and brings forth rudeness, wildness, and
wickedness, he shall receive tribulation and anguish, and be deprived of
happiness in this life, and forever: And all who do not own the measure of the
Power of the Creator in you to be guided by it, such do neglect and reject the
day of your visitation, and shut your selves out from the Glory of God, and are
unworthy of Life and Peace; but all that ow^ this, and are subject to it, the
Power of his Son, who is the Maker of all things and do follow it, this will
reconcile you, and slay the enmity, and bring you into unity with the Creator;
and this will lead you out of darkness, out of death and evil, and all the
ways thereof, and will save you from all the effects thereof, and you will be
excused and justified in the sight of the Creator. Therefore all People upon
Earth consider, this is the day of your Visitation; the Way of Life and of
Death is set before you, the Way unto Peace, and the way of Trouble. Prize the
day of your Visitation.

This is to go abroad through all the World, to all the Sons and Daughters of
Adam; it is a Warning from the Creator and Maker of all, by a Friend unto all
People, and a Laver of their souls.

HEre is the Estate and Condition of mankind described, whereby in the sigh^ of
the World all may come to understand how all the Sons and Daughte^^ of the
first Adam are degenerated, and subverted, and fallen from the state wherein
man was created in the beginning, who was blessed of his Creator, being brought
forth in his own Image and Likeness, to rule in dominion over all living
Creatures, and to use them to the Glory of the Creator; and in that day man was
not subject to the curse of misery, or sorrow, or vexation; for that door woe
was not opened for the curse to enter, but man was altogether blessed in the
state wherei^ he was brought forth, until by disobedience unto the Power that
made him, another Power gained dominion over him, even the seed of enmity
placed it self in ma^s heart, which prospered by man's rebellion, and became a
great Tree of bitterness, bringing forth much fruit in the hearts of all the
Children of Adam, to the vexing, and grieving, and dishonouring of the Spirit
and Life of God the Creator, even to the making void of his Purpose in creating
man, who created him for his Glory; but man disgraces him, and dishonours him
altogether, and brings forth fruit not accepted, but grievous, and of a bitter
taste; and the Lords Soul has been pressed as a Cart with Sheaves, under man's
Transgressions, who has backslided, and revolted, and turned aside for a thing
of naught, and has cast himself down from his excellency of Dominion into
shame and dishonor, daily provoking the Long-suffering of the Lord, and
wearying his Goodness,; and he has been provoked to cut off the Works of his
own Hands, which Satan has entered into, and defiled and made loathsome and
abominable to the Maker; for Satan has made man barren of all good, and
fruitful in all evil, and he is wholly subverted into another end in all his
works, then wherefore he was created; he that reads let him understand (the
Creator of all things planted a Vineyard, with the choicest Vine, his own
Image) and he dressed the Vineyard, and watered it, and he came to look for
Fruit in the season, and behold the Vineyard it was degenerated into strange
Plants, and brought forth only wild Grapes, and sower Grapes, and crossed the
expectation of the good Husbandman, for the fruit of his Vineyard was loathsome
to him, of an ill Smell, and of a bitter Taste, and his Soul was not satisfied,
but grieved, who labored for himself, that he might gather Fruit of the Plants
which he had planted with the choicest Vine; but behold, the Vineyard (all
mankind) was barren of good Fruit, and no pleasant Fruit could the Husbandman
reap to himself, but the Vines were degenerated, and all brought forth wild
Grapes, and sower Grapes, which the good Husbandman has no pleasure in, but is
vexed thereby; for his Vineyard is barren of all good Fruit, and the fruits of
unrighteousness have abounded, whereby the good Husbandman is provoked to fury
and indignation against the Vineyard which he had planted, being become
degenerate Plants, and strange Slips; this a Parable and describes the
Condition of all Mankind: If any have Ears to hear, let him hear, and read
himself, how he was planted in the Image of his Maker, but is now degenerated
and turned aside from Truth and Righteousness, from all good, and from the
ways of Peace, out of the Love and Pleasure of his Maker, and is now in all
evil, in deceit and unrighteousness, and in the Ways of sorrow and trouble,
and in the Makers displeasure; and the Seed of Enmity rules in him, and is
suffered to be King in the Wrath of God, and must be taken away in Gods
displeasure and anger; for that is not the anointed of God, but is in
rebellion against his Authority, and breaks his Law, and transgresses his
Commands, and must be condemned into perdition; for all cursed Fruits do spring
forth from that seed, to the vexing and grieving of the Lord God, injustice,
oppression, deceit, hypocrisy, false-heartedness, lying, murder, whoredom,
theft, envy bitterness, perverseness, devouring one another, covetousness,
idolatry, and all manner of evil which gives an ill savor, and a corrupted
taste, and a loathsome sight in the Presence of the Lord God, who made all
things, Oh, how abominable are all the ways of man become unto his Maker, who
has no delight in any of his ways, nor pleasure in any of his works! Oh, how
is the Lord grieved, and his Soul from day to day oppressed, and his
Long-suffering provoked by the ways and works of his Creatures which he made
for himself! but they are become the Devils, and subject to the power of the
enmity; and all man's works are brought forth in that nature which is evil, and
out of that ground which is cursed, his good works are not accepted, and his
evil deeds are condemned, all which springs forth of one root of bitterness and
enmity, which is in the displeasure of the Creator: Oh Earth be awakened, and
all ye Sons and Daughters of Adam call to mind your state and condition, and
repent, and return before Destruction, when no time of repentance can be found.

Hearken to Instruction, and let your Ears be open to hear; here you may all
hear and understand the Way to Restoration, to be restored and recovered out of
this condition, and out of this enmity, and from under this curse of misery and
destruction; for a Way has God prepared unto all mankind; and is making it
manifest unto the whole Earth, that the Sons and Daughters of Adam may again
know their Maker, and have fellowship with him; and this Way is but one, which
is ordained for all People upon the face of the Earth, of what Tribe or Nation
soever: And all that come to the knowledge of the Creator must walk in this
Way, which is called Christ Jesus, who is the Son of the Creator, the second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, and by him all
things were made, and without him was not any thing formed that was brought
forth; he is the Restorer, the Redeemer, and the Deliverer; for he cannot be
overcome of the evil, but overcomes and treads down all the Powers of
Darkness, and Death, and the Devil, which rise against him in all the World;
and the Creator has so loved mankind, though he has transgressed against him,
and grieved him, yet he has given his Son into the World, into all Nations,
without respect of Persons or People, to be the Savior of all that believe in
him, and receive him, that they may come out of Death and Darkness, from under
the Devils power, and may be translated, and changed, and renewed out of sin,
and death, and ignorance, and rebellion, and out of the Kingdom of the Devil,
into Truth and Righteousness; and into the Kingdom of God. And this Restorer
and Savior, the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, has lightened all mankind,
every one that comes into the World is lightened by him, that every one may
follow him, and be guided by his Power and Wisdom; and every one that does
receive him; sin, and iniquity, and transgression is condemned; and the seed of
the enmity is cast out by his Power, which is revealed against all
unrighteousness, and he subdues it, and works it forth of the hearts of all
men, and so reconciles man again to his Maker, to have fellowship with him: And
this Restorer, the second Adam, comes to be revealed within every man, who
executes true Judgment upon the Transgressor, and binds under the rebellious
nature, and death and condemnation passes upon the seed of enmity, and all its
fruits; upon the Devil, and all his works; upon him that is born of the flesh,
and all his ways; his joy is turned into mourning, his pleasures into sorrow,
his glory and rejoicing into sadness of heart, and the life which he has lived
comes to be crucified, and the ways which he has walked in comes to be hedged
up, and no more followed; and his strength is turned into weakeness, and all
his ways and pleasures fade and perish, and the Birth which is Immortal comes
to be brought forth, which is not of this World, but Heir of the Creators
Inheritance, who has no glorying under the Sun, nor no pleasure in the glory
of this World, which passes away, but lives unto God in all things, and brings
forth fruit unto the Father, and is replanted into the living Vine, and is
leavened into a new lump, and placed in the Garden of God; all the old Garments
are put off, and old things are passed away, the Devil is cast out, the blind
Eye is opened, and the Vail is taken away which has been spread over all, and
the deaf Ear is unstopped, and man is again returned unto his Maker, and hears,
and sees, and understands the things which are eternal, which belong to his
peace; the Fear of God is set up in his heart, and Gods Secrets are revealed
unto him, and he is become the Glory of his Maker, to praise him, to glorify
him, and to magnify him for evermore, being restored again unto God's Image,
and guided with his Power and Wisdom, and has received dominion and authority
from his Maker, to reign and rule over all Creatures, and to be exercised in
all things to his Glory by whom they were made; he is not in bondage to any
Creature, but in liberty over it, and the Creatures are become his Servants,
and he servant to his Maker, and the Earth yields its increase unto man; the
Curse is removed, and the Blessing restored in the Covenant of Peace and
Righteousness, where all Creatures come to be enjoyed; the covenant of Death
and Hell being broken and disanulled, where the curse stood, and stands in
all the World where the restorer of the second Adam is not received, who moves
by the measure of his Power against the evil in the hearts of all men; and he
knocks at the door of the heart, that he may be received, and come in, and
dwell with the Children of men, whose delight is with the Sons of men; and
every one that opens to him, and hearkeneth to his Cry, who calls by the
Light, and moves by his Power, by him they receive Life and Peace, and Fullness
from the Father; and are raised from Death to Life, and redeemed from under the
power of Satan to the Power of the Creator; all evil in the ground, and in the
fruits, judgment goes upon it all, and condemnation: And thus mankind comes to
be restored again to God his Maker, to be the Children of God, and Heirs of his
Inheritance, and is no more of this World, but redeemed by Jesus Christ out of
Kindreds, Tongues, and People, out of respect of Time, Place, Creatures, or
Things, and sees through all Creatures, to be before the World was, beyond all
the glory of this World, to the Glory of the Lord; and here is the praising,
and singing, and rejoicing, the living, and walking in that Life which cannot
change, and in the World of which there is no end; and here a greater Glory is
known then the first man's glory, a greater State then that which was overcome
of the Devil, a greater Dominion then that which was lost, this Dominion never
can have an end; Death is swollowed up of Life, all sorrow and anguish is
swollowed up of rejoicing; all tears are wiped here, and there is no more
sorrow; the quickening Spirit is felt and witnessed, which has quickened again
to God; God's Tabernacle is with men, and his Dwellingplace with the Children
of men, and that is felt, and seen, and tasted, which was before the World was,
before any Creature was made; and the whole World is comprehended, and man's
state in his first Creation is here known, what it was; and man's state in
Transgression is also known, what it was; and man's state restored again, is
also witnessed; and the difference perceived betwixt the first Adam, which was
overcome of the Devil, though he was innocent and without sin, and bore the
likeness of his Maker, and of the second Adam, who cannot be overcome of the
Devil, whom Satan has nothing in, who is the express Image of the Creator it
self.

He that has an ear to hear, let him hear; Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, it has not entered into the heart of man that which the Father has
revealed by his Spirit, things not lawful to be uttered, of which there is no
declaring, that which is Infinite, Endless, Eternal, and in this I shall end.

By one who has measured and viewed in true Judgment the condition of all
Mankind, who is a Lover of Souls, and a Friend to the Creation of God, known in
England by the name of, EDWARD BOROUGH.
London the 6th of the 3d Month, 1656.
Truth Defended: OR CERTAIN ACCUSATIONS ANSWERED; CAST Upon us who are called
Quakers, by the Teachers of the World, and the People of this Generation. WITH
A clear Discovery who are the false Prophets, and when they came in; and how
they may be known, and who they are that deny Christ, and that preach another
Gospel; and who deny the Scriptures, Churches, Ministers and Magistrates,
whereby the Magistrates and People of this Nation may see they justify that
which the Scripture condemns, and condemns that which the holy men of God
justified, and may read their example, and our example through the Scriptures.
The Epistle.
To all you who call your selves Ministers of the Gospel, and all People in all
Relations under what form of Worship soever in England, or in all the World,
wh^ profess your selves Christians.
THe mighty day of the Lord is come, according as he promised of old, and this
day is witnessed, wherein he is establishing his Mountain, and exalting it
above all Mountains, and is gathering his People which have been scattered in
the dark and lo^^ Night of Apostasy, which Christ and his Apostles saw coming
into the Church then, and has had dominion long over the World, and has
reigned till now, and reigns n^^ in all the Professors in all Forms every
where. But now the time is come wherein the Kingd^ of the World are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and thousands witness it to the praise
of his everlasting Name. And therefore the Nations are angry, and (...) P^inces
of the Earth, because Michael one Prince is arisen to plead with all who make
(...) against him. And now Herod and Pilate, and all Jerusalem are in an
uproar, and Amm^^ and Amaleck, and the Egyptians, and the Philistines are
joined now against him. And all you who live in Forms, and know not the Power,
do now persecute and join your selves t^gether, being in the same nature as the
Persecutors of old, which were born after the Flesh. And now you Sons of
Bondage, and of Hagar are to be cast out; and now you are all (...) manifest
that you are in the Flesh; for all your Bows are bent, and all your Arrows are
(...) at a People which are accounted by you as the filth of the World, and as
the offscouring of all things, whom the World calls Quakers, in whose
foreheads is written the Name of the living God; and unto you I say that make
war against them, and now take part with the Drag^^ against the Lamb, you shall
all drink of the Cup of Fury and indignation of the Lord, (...) unto the Living
God who is holy and jealous for his own Glory and Name, which has manifested
his Mind and Will by his eternal Spirit unto us, shall you all bow and stoop.
For now the Lord has rent the Vail of the Covering which has been spread over
(...) the Nations in all Professions; and you are all seen by the ternal Eye
which is opened in thousands, even all from the highest to the lowest* who have
stol^n and painted your selves with (...) ^ens words. And all your Images which
you have set up, and all your traditions from ^en, in which you have walked,
are all seen to be stubble, and ^ill not abid^ in the day of the Lord. And all
your Churches which you have gathered together by imitation from the (...)
shall all be scattered; and there you all are* for you all deny Revelation, and
say it is ceased; and so you call the Letter the Light and the Word: but with
that which was before the Scripture you are seen and judged, even with that
which shall endure for ever. And seeing you have cast reproach upon the Name of
the God of Hea^^^ and Earth whom we wor^^ip, and which you call delusion* for
the truths sake are we moved to lay open your ^akedness, that you may be judged
by that which you say is your rule. Here in this Little Book thou who have any
honesty in thee, or any desire of truth, and wilt search the Scripture, thou will see th^^ (...) the teachers of the world in all Forms, and all Professors
ever cried out (who had but the Form) against them who had the Life and Power,
as you all (...) now against them who Worship God in the Spirit, and have no
confiden^e in the flesh: and therefore in this following Disco^rse which (...)
written by the same Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, thou shall see who
are the false Prophets, and who they are that preach another Gospel, and who
they are that deny the Scriptures; and thou may see when the false Prophets
came in, and who they are clearly proved to be, by their own rules. And all you
who call your selves Magistrates and Christians, you may see your selves to
hold up that which Christ, the Prophets and Apostles cried o^^ against, and
Persecute them who stand in the counsel of God, and them th^^ Declare against
all the deceit, as the Holy men of God did: and so you are the beast which
holds up the false Prophets and those whom the Scripture declares against. God
is arisen to d^ to pieces all them who withstand him: and therefore come out of
Babylon, ^^d out of all your painted forms, and come to own the first Principle
which will change your minds, even the Light of Christ which he has
enlightened every one withal; and by it you shall see what you are doing. Now if
you deny this, you deny the Cornerstone, and you stumble and shall be broken,
and by th^^ which you call natural shall all your Image of gold and silver, and
all your mixed invented worship be dashed to pieces, and (...) for the Pit*
Therefore all be silent and speak not evil of those things you know not; for
now you are all seen, you who say you are ^^ws and are not, but are of the
Synagogue of Satan, and your voice is known, for none is turned from the evil
of his way; and therefore is wrath coming upon you to the utmost.

A Lover of your Souls, but am a Witness against all your deceit. F. H.


Whereas we are accused by the Teachers and People of this Generation, That we
are false Prophets, and Deceivers; and that we deny the Christ which dyed at
Jerusalem; and that we preach another Gospel then the Apostles preached; and
that we deny the Scriptures, and the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; and that we
hold Free Will, and establish Self-righteousness, and teach People to act in
their own strength to obtain Life; and that we deny Churches, Ministers, and
Magistracy.

To all these false Accusations I Answer. It is no new thing, nor no strange
thing to the Children of Light, who are separated from the World, and worldly
Worships; and from the works of Darkness, to be accused falsely, and to be
standered, by being called Deceivers and Seducers, by the Generation of chief
Priests and Pharisees; in which Generation are the Teachers and Professors of
this Age, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power. Christ was called a
Deceiver and a Blasphemer; and the Apostles were called Movers of Sedition,
Heretics, and Turners of the World up-side down* by them who professed in word
what Christ was in Substance, and what the Apostles witnessed, and so it is
now. We who are scornfully called Quakers, do live in, and declare forth, no
other thing but the Substance of what the Priests have preached upon, and the
Pofessors have talked upon in their carnal minds by their imaginations. He is a
false Prop^^^ and a Deceiver which has not the Word from the Mouth of the
Lord, but takes that which the Lord spoke to Another, and calls it his, and us^
his Tongue and says, The Lord says it, when the Lord never spoke to him: And
here are the Teachers of the World themselves guilty of that whereof they
fal^^y accuse us; for they take the Prophets words, Christ's and the Apostles
words to talk upon, but have not received the Word from the Mouth of the Lord;
and their prophecy and preaching would soon be ended if they had not the
Scripture, which is other men's words, and that which was spoken to others, to
spe^^ their imaginations from: And these are the false Prophets and Deceivers,
which run, and are not sent, which speak to others, pretending they be sent of
God* but walking contrary to all that ever God sent to declare his Name in for
Generations, and so are known to us by their fruits, having no example from the
Prophets, Christ, nor his Apostles for their practice; but do walk in the
example of the false Prophets of Israel, of the Scribes and Pharisees, and of
the false Brethren. O foolish People which have eyes and sees not, which have
hea^ and do not understand: Is the Lord changed from what he was? Were they
fal^^ Prophets and Deceivers in Isaiah's time, which he was sent to cry out
against, which sought for their Gain from their Quarter? And are not your
Teachers false Prophets now, which act the same things? Were they false
Prophets and Deceivers in Ezekiel's time, which (...) was sent to cry against,
that fed themselves wi^^ the Fat, and clothed themselves with the Wool, and
made a Prey upon the People? And are not your Teachers false Prophets and
Deceivers now, which (...) the same thing? Were they false Prophets in Micahs
time, which he was sent (...) cry out against, which preached for Hire and
divined for Money, and cry^^ peace to them that put into their mouths but
prepared war against them that (...) not? And are not your Priests false
Priests and Prophets which act the same things Were they Deceivers of the
People in Christ's time, which he cried woe again* which were called of
men-Masters, and which had the chief Places in the ^blies, and which stood
praying in the Synagogues, and went in long Robes, (...) which loved greetings
in the Markets; And are not your Teachers Deceivers of the People now, which
are found acting the same things? Were they false Teachers and false Brethren
in the Apostles time, which they declared against, which through coveteousness
with feigned words made merchandise of the People, and went in the way of
Balaam, for Gifts and rewards, and preached for filthy Lucre, and which Paul
saw come and coming in his days; which were proud men, coveteous men,
self-willed, and fierce men, heady, high-minded men, having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power, which always taught People, b^^ none were
able to come to the knowledge of the Truth under their teaching? A^^ are not
your Teachers false Teachers now, who walk in the same steps? To ^^e Light in
all Consciences I do speak, which will witness the truth: A sottish and
ignorant People, which cannot discern who the false Prophets, and Deceivers*
and false Teachers are; the Lord is the same that ever he was, and his Spirit
(...) no whit changed. Was it once an abomination to the Lord in the false
Priests and Prophets of Israel, to seek for their Gain from their Quarter, and
to feed themselves with the Fat, and clothe themselves with the Wool, and make
a Prey upon the People, and to preach for Hire, and to divine for Money? and
are not these things and they that uphold them abomination to him now? Did the
Spirit of the Lord in his Servants declare against these things then, and
against them that up^ them then; and must not the same Spirit, where it is made
manifest, declare agai^^^ these things, and against them that uphold them now?
Was it once an abomi^^tion in the sight of Christ in them, to be called of men
Master, and to have (...) chief places in the Assemblies, and to stand praying
in the Synagogues, etc. and are not these things an abomination to him now in
whom they are upheld? D^^ Christ cry woe against such things, and against them
that upheld them then; and must not the Spirit of Christ, where it is made
manifest, cry woe against such things, and against them that uphold them now?
Were these mar^s of false Teachers then, to make merchandise of the People, and
to go in the way (...) (...), for Gifts and Rewards, and for filthy (...) and
to be proud, cove^, ^eady, high-minded* self-willed, and fierce men? And are
not they false Teachers now which bear these marks? Did the Apostle give
warning to beware of such, and to turn away from such? and must not the same
Spirit where it is made manifest give warning to beware of such, and to turn
away from such now? We witness to have received according to measure, the
Spirit of the Prophets (...) which they spoke* and the Spirit of the Apostles
by which they spoke, which is, Christ made manifest in us, and happy are all
they that receive our Testimony. For by the same Spirit of Christ we do declare
against these abomination^ now, as the holy men of God did then* for God and
his Spirit is the same as ever was, and what he once ^a^ed he hates forever;
and no other Christ do we ^^clare forth, which we witness to be made manifest
within, but that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, which suffered by the chief
Priests and Elders of the People; he was and is the true Christ, which said, He
was the Light of the World; And was the Light which had enlightened every man
that comes into the World; and which said, Except a man would deny the World,
and take up his daily cross, and follow him, he could not he his Disciple; And
which cried woe against them which were called of men Masters, and that had the
chief Places in the Assemblies, and that stood praying in the Synagogues, etc.
and they who denied him to be the Light of the World, and which too^ not up the
Cross, and which were called of men Masters, and had the chiefest Places in the
Assemblies, and stood praying in the Synagogues, and went in long Robes, these
were Antichrists, and ^ere acted by a contrary spirit then the true Christ.

And here again, I charge all the Teachers and People (in the presence of the
Lord God, who deny Christ to be the Light in every one, which reproves for sin)
and who are called of men Masters, and stand praying in the (...) and go in
long ^obes, and who uphold such things, and who take not up the daily Cross of
Christ, but live at liberty in their wills and desires, that they are
Antichrists, and that their spirit is not the Spirit of the true Christ, which
dyed at Jerusalem, but the spirit of a false christ, and so they are guilty of
that themselves, whereof they falsely accuse us* and the same Christ do we
witness which the Saints of old witnessed, whose blood cleansed them from all
sin, and in whose Power they had power over sin, death, and hell.

And here again I charge the Teachers and People, who say, That the Saints must
not be cleansed from sin, nor cease to commit sin while they are on the Earth;
That the Christ which they profess is not the Christ which dyed at Jerusalem,
but a spirit contrary, and not the Christ which the Saints witnessed; and all
the People are blind which cannot see these things.

Did the true Christ once say, He was the Light of the World, of every man that
comes into the World? And is that his Spirit in the Teachers and Pr^ssors now,
which say, Every man has not the Light of Christ in him? Was that the true
Christ which said, Except you take up my Cross daily you cannot be my
Disciples? And is that his Spirit in the Teachers and People that has its
liberty, and live in Pride, in Lust, and Vanity* and their own Wills? was that
the true Christ which cried woe against them that were called of men Masters,
and that had the chief Places in the Assemblies, and stood praying in the
Synagogues, etc, And is that his Spirit in the Teachers and People which act
and uphold those things: Was (...) the true Christ which the Saints witnessed,
by whose Blood they (...) cle^sed from sin, and had power over sin, and is that
his Spirit in the Teachers and People, which says, The Saints must not be
cle^sed from si^ (...) (...) to c^t sin while they are (...) Earth?

Oh blind and ignorant People! who cannot discern between the (...) Christ and
Antichrist, which is contrary to Christ, and which leads now to act and speak
contrary to what the true Christ once acted and spoke: and no other Gospe^ do
we preach, but that which the Apostles preached, which they received not from
nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, which was contrary to man,
and which suffered by man for the preaching of it; who preached to the Spi^ in
Prison to redeem the captives, and by which the fleshly man was judged in the
(...) that man might live according to God in Spirit; and this Gospl we witness
to have received not from man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, which is
contrary to man, for which we are persecuted and suffer by man: neither do w^
speak to the wisdom and reason, but we preach to the Spirits in Prison, that
the fleshly man may be judged in the flesh, that man may live according to God
(...) the Spirit; this will many witness with us, that by the preaching of our
Gospe^ liberty is brought to the captives, and the fleshly man is judge, and
the Spirit which was in Prison is set free.

And here again I charge the Teachers of this Generation, That their gospel
which they preach is not the Gospel which the Saints preached, but another
gospel, and they are guilty of that themselves whereof they falsely accuse us;
for they have received their gospel from man, and by man, from the Printers a^^
Stationers, and are made Minister of it by the will of man, at Schools, and
^niversities; and their preaching is in the will of man, a limited time and
place neither do they suffer by man, but are set up with man, and feed the
wisdom (...) reason of man; and the fleshly man is not judged, nor the captives
redeemed (...) their gospel, which they preach; here they are accursed which
preach anot^ gospel, as says the Scripture: And ye are a blind and ignorant
People which cannot see these things; Did they that preached the true Gospel
receive it contrary to the will of man? and can it now be received by the will
of man? Did they which preached it suffer for it by man? and can they now who
preach it, be^ up by man, who live in the same persecuting nature? Did the true
Gospel o^ judge the fleshly man,) and lead to live according to God in the
Spirit? and do^ it now give liberty to the fleshly man, to live after the flesh
in the lust of it, (...) the Teachers and Professor of this Generation do, who
profess the Gospel, (...) are discovered not to be come to the Law? And the
Scripture we own to be (...) true Declaration of the Life which they lived in
which spoke them ^orth; and (...) the same Spirit from which they were spoken
(which we have received) do we (...) to our seals, that they are ^rue; and the
Scripture is ours, who walk in the Life (...) it; proud men spoke it not forth,
nor they that sought for their gain from the^^ quarter; nor they that preached
for hire; nor they that were called (...) men master, but persecuted them that
spoke it forth, and denied it when it was spoken.

And here again, I charge it upon the Teachers and Professors of this
Generation, that they deny the Scripture, and are guilty of that themselves
whereof they falsely accuse us; for they say, None must be perfect upon the
Earth; when as (...) Scripture declares of such as were perfect upon Earth: And
they say; None (...) be free from sin; when as the Scripture declares of such
as were free from sin, and were the Servants of Righteousness: They say, Christ
has not enlightened every (...) the Scripture says, He is the Light of the
World, and has enlightened every one etc. can they now who live in the same
persecuting nature, and walk in the (...) steps as they did which persecuted
them who spoke forth the Scripture (as the Te^chers and People do) own the
Scripture in Truth? Their professing of the Scripture is as theirs was, which
made a great profession of it in the outward appearance, but put him to death
who had the Life, and was the Substance of it: They then, as the Teachers of
the World do now, denied the Spirit and Life which gave sorth the Scriptures.

And the Ordinances of Jesus Christ we own and witness, Preaching, Praying,
Baptism, Communion, Singing, and whatsoever was ordained for his Saints to
practice in Life and Power; we witness these things in the eternal Substance,
having passed through the earthly figures, which was but to stand for its time;
by the Eternal have we been led, by the Command of it within us, and got by
tradition from the Scripture without us, And we deny all such who have taken up
these things in their own wills, by conforming the outward man to the outward
Letter, and have not entered in at the Door.

True Preaching we own, and do witness, in which is the Cross of Christ, and
the Power God unto Salvation or Condemnation, it is foolishness to the World,
and its wisdom, now as ever it was; and we deny all speaking of imaginations
from the Scripture, which is in the wisdom of the World, and which stands in
the will of man limited to a set time, day or place.

Prayer by Spirit, and in the Spirit we own and witness, which is not limited
to a time and place: And we deny all the Worlds formal customary Preaching and
Praying for a pretense.

Baptism we own and witness, which is, With one Spirit, into one Body, into the
Death of Christ: And we deny all Baptisms which are imagined and imitated, by
conforming the outward man to the outward Letter, which is but a likeness of
the the true Baptism.

Communion we live in, which is, In the Light by the Spirit, which will endure
eternally: and we deny the Worlds imitation, which is in word and declaration,
and visible carnal things which will pass away.

Singing which is with the Spirit and with Understanding, of the redeemed of
the Lord, we own and witness; but the Worlds singing in Rhyme and Meeter, proud
men singing, That they are not puffed in mind; and profane men singing, That the
Law of God is dear to them; this singing we deny, for it must be turned into
howling, the Lord has said it.

And here again, I charge it upon the Teachers of the World, That they deny the
Substance and Power of what Christ commands his Saints to practice, by
upholding their own imitations, and so deceiving the People; but where the
Substance is witnessed, the figure is denied, and the false imitations are
discovered and denied: And man's free will we do deny, for the will of man shall
never enter to God, but leads out from God into the lust, and into the flesh,
and, keeps in the power of the Devil; and man has free will unto that which is
evil, but not to that which is good; and all who follow Christ the Light of the
World, must deny their own wills, and take up the Cross of Christ, which is to
the will, and walk in the Light, contrary to the will, in the strait Way which
leads unto Life, which is out of the will of man, in the Will of God, which the
will of man does resist and oppose. And I charge it upon the Teachers and
Professors, who do not witness the daily Cross of Christ, that they live in
their own free will, and holds it up, and are led by it, into pride, and
coveteousness, and lusts of the flesh, which stand in the will; and here they
are guilty of that themselves whereof they falsely accuse us, living in their
own free will, and walk not in the daily Cross of Christ.

And Self-righteousness we have denied, and have seen it in the same Light
which Isaiah did, to be as filthy Rags; and we declare against it, and against
them which live in it; for self must not be saved, it is accursed from God, it
is wholly unrighteous (and makes the best of actions so) and is, and must be
cast out from God: Christ Jesus made manifest and revealed in us is our
Righteousness, and self is judged and condemned by him, who is made unto us
Righteousness; neither do we teach People to labor in their own strength to
obtain Life, but do direct People to the Light of Christ within them, which
walking in, will be strength to them to lead them to Life; the Light which is
of Christ, to which we direct all to wait in, to be taught by; it will lead out
of self-righteousness, and from under the power of self, to witness the power
of God, to lead, and to act, and to witness Christ Jesus revealed, the
Righteousness of God. And the Church which is in God, which is the Body of
Christ, whereof Christ is Head, we witness, and are members of it, gathered and
joined by the eternal Spirit, and not by tradition in the wisdom of man. And we
deny all the Worlds Churches, whereof they were made members by visible things
without, and gathered by traditions (and not by the Spirit) whereof the Serpent
is head (and not Christ) and which is the body of antichrist, some of which
commits Idolatry i^ an Idols-temple; and the ministry of this church we deny,
for it stands in (...) will of man, and the Ministers of it are such as all the
Servants of the Lord witnessed against: the Churches, the Ministry, and the
Ministers are contrary to God; but the Ministry which is to the Seed, which is
out of the will of man, we own and witness, which ministers Life unto life and
Death unto death, and divides the Word aright, judgment to the fat and to the
strong, and feeds the ^gry, and loses the Bars of wickedness, and breaks not
the bruised Reed, (...) quenches not the smoking Flax; this Ministry we deny
not, but are Friends unto it; and who are Ministers here, we have union withal;
but proud men, and such as are called of men Masters are cast out of this
Ministry, and are Mini^ to the body of antichrist, and know not the Mystery of
the Ministry of Jesus Christ, which is to the Spirit in Prison.

Magistrates and Magistracy we deny not, but do give respect unto for
Conscience sake; for who bears the Sword of Justice, who use their power to be
a terror to the wicked, and for the praise of them that do well, are Ministers
of God; and we desire that there were more Magistracy here, and that the
Magistrate would more use his power, to be a terror to Liars, to Swearers, to
Drunkards, to Railers, to false Accusers, and to proud Men, and Oppressors,
this (...) are Friends unto; but to such as act by their own wills in corrupt
Laws, and (...) thereby violence to the Innocent, and strengthen the hands of
Evildoers, we cannot be subject, but choose rather (then to transgress the Law
of God, whi^^ is written in our hearts, by submitting to such men's wills and
laws) to suffer by the corrupt wills of men, under corrupt laws for a moment.

And thus I have answered those false Accusations which are cast upon us, and
(...) declare it to be the same spirit in the Teachers and People of this
Generation which accuses us, as it was in the Scribes and Pharisees, which
accused Chr^ and his Disciple; and this the Scripture witnesses unto; as they
did unto him, (...) would they do unto us.

A further Answer to that Accusation of being false Prophets, and Deceivers.
JEsus Christ prophesied and said, That in the last days should many false
prophets arise, which should deceive many, and if it were possible the very
Elect. Now the Teachers and People of this Generation do say, That we (who by
the World are called Quakers) are those false Prophets and Deceivers which
Christ prophesied of. Of this their false accusation have they, Drunkards,
Liars, Swearers, and all the ungodly People in every profession to witness
them; but their Accusation and their Witnesses we do deny, though they preach
it among the People for doctrine. And now in answer to this false Accusation
and Slander, I am moved to write a little, and shall to that Principle of God
in every man's Conscience clear my Conscience, and declare what I know from God
concerning those false Prophets; who they are, when they came in, and how they
may be known; and shall leave it to every honest heart to consider of,

The Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ saw the same false Prophets which
Christ prophesied of to be come, and coming in their days, before a Quaker wa^
heard of: John said, By that they knew that it was the last time: for, said he,
Even now are there many Antichrists and false Prophets gone out into the World;
such were they who confessed not Christ to be come in the Flesh; and they were
of the World, and spoke of the World, and the World heard them.

Now here I charge it upon the Teachers of the World, that they are of that
Generation which went out into the World then; for as they then confessed not
Christ to be come in the Flesh, so these uphold those things which were under
the Law, which was before Christ came in the Flesh outwardly; and so confess
Christ not to be come in the Flesh, and so they are Antichrist* They uphold an
outward Temple, and an outward Worship, and take tithes, as the Priests under
the Law did, as a Type and Figure of Christ, but when he was come, and
sacrificed, these things (which were to stand for a time) were put to an end:
and none who witnessed Christ come, and were sent by him to preach the Gospel,
did uphold those things, but witnessed forth the Substance, and denied the
figure; they denied the outward Temple, and witnessed they were the Temples of
God, and that God dwelt in them, and denied the outward worship, and witnessed
the Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth within them, (for they who worshipped
without, worshipped they knew not what, as they do now) and they denied to take
Tithes, but lived of the Gospel; and said, They that preached it, should live
of it; but the Teachers of this Generation are of the World, living in its
pride, lusts and vanities; and they who live in the same worldly nature uphold
them, and hear them. John also said, Every spirit that confesses not Christ to
be come in the Flesh, is Antichrist. And here I charge it upon the Teachers of
the World, that their Spirit of Pride and Covetousness, and Envy, and
Hypocrisy which rules in them, is the Spirit of Antichrist, and confesses not
Christ to be come in the Flesh; for where he is made manifest, and come in the
Flesh, this spirit is destroyed; For, (as says the Scripture) he was made
manifest to destroy the works of the Devil. Paul was also a Witness of the
false Prophets and Deceivers which Christ prophesied of in his time; for he
gave warning to beware of such, and to turn away from such whom he saw then
come, and coming in, but came more fully in after his days; he said of this
sort, They were lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, heady, high-minded,
fierce men and dispisers of those that were good, given to filthy lucre, and to
pleasure, and were false-Accusers, and Blasphemers, and without natural
affection, and unthankful, and unholy, and taught silly women, who were led
with diverse lusts, but were not able to come to the knowledge of the Truth by
their Teaching: they were men of corrupt minds, and reprobat^ concerning Faith.

And here again I charge it upon the Teachers of the World, that they are of
that Generation which came in then; for they are Lovers of themselves, they
take money of poor people, to whom they are more able to give; and they are
proud and covetous men, that go in their Ribbons and Cuffs, and gaudy attire;
and they preach to them where they can get most money; and some takes money of
them, and sues them at the Law, to whom they preach not at all: they are heady
and high-minded men, for poor people bow to them in the Streets, and call them
Masters: They are fierce men, and despise those that are good; if any speak
against them, (of the truth) they are fierce against, and despise such: and
they are given to filthy lucre, and are lovers of pleasure, for where they can
have most money, there they will abide; and they live in pleasure, in idleness,
and lust and vanity; they are flase-Accusers, they will call them Deceivers,
which are not; and that Blasphemy, which is not; and they are Blasphemers, and
without natural affection.

They say the Letter is the Word, and the Scripture the Light, which is
contrary to Scripture, for God is the Word, and Christ is the Light; and they
will suffer the rude multitude, and some will set them upon it, to hale, beat,
and strike out of their Assemblies, which is without natural affection: They
are unthankful and unholy; they have great sums of money from the people, and
are not thankful, but compel them by a Law to pay them; and herein they are
unholy by their actions which are declared, which is oppression; and they teach
always, but men and women are ignorant still, and none able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth by them; and they have a Form of godliness; they profess
the Scriptures, That the Children of the Lord are to be taught of the Lord; and
that Christ said, Take no thought what to eat, nor what to drink, nor wherewith
to be clothed; but who witness themselves taught of God, and that they need no
man to teach them; and that take no care what to eat, nor what to drink, nor
what to put on, and so witness the promise of God, and abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, these you call Deceivers, and idle and careless persons, and thus deny
the power of what they have professed; and herein their minds are corrupt and
reprobate concerning Fa^ith for Faith is the Substance, and purifies the heart
from these things which they are guilty of. And Peter and Jude also were
Witnesses of those Deceivers and false Prophets which Christ prophesied of, in
their time; for they saw such were come, and coming, which should bring in
damnable Heresies, and through covetousness, with feigned words, make
merchandise of the people; they walk after the flesh, in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise Government and Dominion; presumptuous are they,
self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; they speak evil of
things that they understand not; they have eyes full of adultery, and they
cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable Souls; an heart they have, exercised
with covetous practices; cursed Children, which have forsaken the right way,
and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam, who loved the Wages of
unrighteousness, they themselves are the Servants of corruption; ungodly men,
turning the Grace of God into laciviousness, and defile the flesh; these are
Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their own lusts, and their mouths speak
great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage;
these be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

And here again I charge it upon the Teachers of this Age, that they are of
that Generation which came into the World then; for they have brought in, and
do uphold damnable Heresies, telling people, That sprinkling Infants with water
is the Baptism into the Faith; and that singing David's Experiences in Rhyme and
Meeter, is singing to the glory of God; and that a House of Stone is the Temple
and Church of God; these are damnable Heresies: and they do through
covetousness make Merchandise of the people; if they can get more money at
another place, thither they will go; and thus people are their Merchandise:
they wal^ after the flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness; they walk in pride and
in lust; and some of them will be drunk, and lie, and swear, and talk
uncleanly; and they despise the Saints Government and Dominion (for they walk
in the ways of the World, in the Customs and Traditions of men, and follow
their own wills) and whom the Spirit of God governs, and has dominion over,
follows Christ for their Example, whose Government and Dominion they are under;
but they live in pride, lust and vanity, and according to the flesh; and herein
they despi^^ Government and Dominion, and speak evil of this Dignity, and of
the Mysteries of God revealed in his Saints, which they know not, nor
understand not, calling it Error: They are presumptuous and self-willed; they
have presumed to call themselves Ministers of Christ, and all the Towns where
they live, must serve, and be subject to their wills; and they are adulterated
from God after honor and riches, and the vanities of the World; and they
cannot cease from sin themselves; for they say, None must cease from it while
they are on the Earth; and herein they beguile many Souls; for, till sin be
ceased from the Soul, it is beguiled; they have a heart exercised with covetous
practices, and they follow the way of Balaam, and go for gifts and rewards, and
love the wages of unrighteousness: they take money of poor people for
sprinkling Infants, and for burying the Dead, which are covetous practices:
they take money for Hens and Eggs, and for Smoke passing up the Chimney, which
are unrighteous Wages: and thus they have forsaken the right Way of God, and of
all the Saints which spoke forth the Scripture; and in these things they are
Servants of corruption, and are ungodly men, and turn the Grace of God (which
shines in their Consciences, which shows them their ungodly ways) into
laciviousness; and through the lust they defile the flesh: and many of them
will murmur and complain for want of Wages, even to spend upon their lusts; and
they speak great swelling words, speaking of the fame of Christ, of his Life
and Death, and Resurrection, but cannot witness by the Spirit of Christ within
them, what they speak of him; and they have men's persons in admiration because
of advantage; some of them had the Bishops in admiration, and some the King in
admiration, and now they have others who bear rule in admiration; and thus they
deceitfully have twined to admire men's persons, only because of advantage; many
of them have separated themselves, none who are not of their Judgment must join
with them in their worship; but ^^ither they, nor their Separates have the
Spirit of the Living God, but do deny (...) infallible Spirit; and they are
sensual in their ways, practices and wisdom ^^d these have deceived many, even
whole Nations.

And here you see plainly when the Deceivers and false Prophets came in; they
were come, and coming in, in the Apostles days, and then was the Prophecy of
Christ fulfilling and fulfilled: and the Apostle suffered under Tyrants, and
were put to cruel deaths, and then they came in more fully; for since the
Apostles days has been a great Apostasy, and many Forms of Worship, and Ways
of Religion have been imitated from the Letter through imaginations, and but
one Generation of Teachers, though one above another, in the comprehension and
sensual wisdom, and at enmity one against another, though all in one birth and
nature. But they are all discovered by the Light, Praises (from all that know
God) to him for ever.

Since the Apostles days has darkness been spread over all, though the Lord
had some which he preserved for himself in the midst of Apostasy and darkness;
who the false Prophets are which Christ prophesied of, to every honest heart
and single eye may be known: Christ said, By their fruits should they be known;
and the Fruits of the Teachers of the World are plainly made appear to be the
fruits of Deceivers, and not of the Ministers of Christ; none have gathered
Grapes nor Figs from them.

And thus I have cleared my Conscience in the Presence of God concerning the
false Slander and Accusation which the Teachers and People of the world do cast
upon us; and to that in every ones Conscience it is made appear, who they are
to whom this Accusation justly belongs.

Woe unto all you who strive against the Lord, and justify that which the holy
men of God, (which spoke forth the Scripture) in the Scripture declared
against; and which condemn that which the holy men of God in the Scriptures
justified, and witnessed for: You who live in Pride, in Coveteousness, in
Double-dealing, and in Hypocrisy, and in the Lusts of the flesh; you strive
against the Lord God, and against the Light of God, which is in your
Consciences, which shows you these things to be sin: You resist the drawings of
the Father, which would draw you by the Light to follow the Son. Woe and
Desolation is to come upon all you who will not be taught by the Light of
Christ Jesus, which he has enlightened you withal; which Light all the Holy
men of God were taught by, who gave forth the Scriptures, but do set up
Teachers without you, such as all the holy men of God, the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles declared against.

Oh blinded, stiff-necked People, which are not ashamed to call such Ministers
of Christ, and of the Gospel (and by your corrupt Wills and Laws to defend
them) which seek for their gain from their quarter, and which feed themselves
with the Fat, and clothe themselves with the Wool; and which preach for Hire
and divine for Money; and prepare War against them that put not into their
mouths: here you justify such as the Prophets of the Lord were sent to cry
against, and deny Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Micah, to be true Prophets; for if you
did believe that they spoke from the Mouth of the Lord, the Word of the Lord,
and understood what they spoke, then would you not uphold them which act those
things which they declared against; for that which was abomination to the Lord
then, is abomination to him now; and that Spirit which declared against these
things then, cannot uphold them now.

And here the Teachers and People are tried, not to have the same Spirit which
was in the holy Prophets of the Lord, but the spirit of the false Prophets,
acting by it that which they acted, which the true Prophets cried against; and
thus by upholding that which the Lord sent his Servants to declare against, you
strive against the Lord, ye Magistrates and People. And you are not ashamed to
call such Ministers of Christ which (walk in the same steps, and that act those
things that they did, which Christ, cried woe against) are called of men
Masters, and have the chief Places in the Assemblies, and stand praying in the
Synagogues, and go in long Robes, and love greetings in the Markets, as they
did: here you justify such as Christ cried woe against, and deny that Christ
spoke the Truth, what was the Mind of his Father, or understood it not; for if
you did believe that he spoke the will of his Father, then would ye not uphold
these that act the same things which he cried woe against; And he changes not;
that which he once cried against, the same spirit where it is witnessed, cries
against the same things. And here again the Teachers of the World are tried,
not to have the Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who act that which they acted, which he cried woe against: And herein
Magistrates and People strive against the Lord God, by upholding that which
Christ cried woe astainst; and such who are Ministers of Christ, and walk in his
doctrine, and in the same steps which he and his Apostles walked in, witnessing
for that which they witnessed for, and against that which they witnessed
against; them you call Deceivers, and false Prophets, and accuse them for
Vagabonds, and wandering Beggars, and idle and careless Persons; and that they
have left their Families, and carelessly wander up and down. And herein you
Magistrates and People strive against the Lord, by persecuting, and slandering,
and false accusing, and condemning such as the Scripture justifies, and the
Servants of the Lord which spoke forth the Scripture do witness of to be true.

What would you have called Christ, who had no where to lay his head? He was no
vagabond, nor idle, nor careless Person.

And what would you have called the Apostles and Ministers of Christ? who had
left their Families and Callings, and went up and down, and had no certain
dweling Place, but went from City to City, and cared not for the World; nor
what to eat, nor what to drink, nor wherewith to be clothed; this they did, and
yet were no Vagabonds, nor idle, nor careless Persons, but abode in the
Doctrine of Christ: they were hated by your Generation, as we are now by you;
and they were called, Pestilent Fellows, and Movers of Sedition, and Heriticks,
and men of erroneous Judgments: And they said, They were Troublers of their
Cities, as you do now call us false Prophets and Deceivers. I do declare this
Generation to be the same which persecuted the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles, as it does persecute us; for by the same Power we stand, as they did,
and by the same Power we are commanded and acted, as they were. And to the
Power by which we stand, and are commanded, shall all the power of men, and of
the Earth bow, and be subject.

O all you Magistrates and People, consider of your blindness and ignorance,
who do absolutely justify and uphold such as the Scripture declares and
witnesses against, and do condemn and persecute such as the Scripture justifies
and witnesses of, and do put them out of your Synagogues, and Villages: Search
the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles Writings, in them you may read your
Example, and our Example.

In Jeremiah 20. You may read how Pashur the chief Governor, when he had heard
what Jeremiah had said, smot him, and put him in the Prison, and in the stocks,
and dealt wickedly with him: Now Jeremiah is our example, who had the Word of
the Lord, and spoke freely; sometimes in the streets, and in the Gate of the
Lords House, and feared no man's face, but prophesied against the Priests and
false Prophets, which used their Tongue, and had not the Word from the Lord,
but was given to lightness and covetousness: And Pashur, who smote him, and put
him in the Prison, is your example, whose measure of wickedness you fulfill, in
doing as he did; and by your oppressions is the sufferings and reproaches of
Jeremiah fulfilled in us, who is made a derision daily, and a scorn to the
wicked, since we spoke in the Name of the Lord, as Jeremiah was in that
Generation of Evildoers, who is your example: Also in Amos 7. you may read how
Amaziah the Kings Priest sent to the King of Israel, and they conspired against
him; and Amaziah forbad Amos to prophecy any more at Bethel, for it is the
Kings Chapel, and the Kings Court; and said he, The Land is not able to bear
his words. Now herein Amaziah the Priest, and Jeroboam the King, who were both
Persecuters, is your example, who takes Counsel against the Innocent, and
thrusts out of your Countries, and Cities, and Towns, and makes Laws against
the Servants of the Lord, and forbids us to speak any more in your Courts or
Chapels, and beats, and persecutes us, and do say, The Land is not able to
bear such things as are spoken and written by us: And Amos, who was no Prophet,
nor Prophets Son, but a poor laboring man is our example, who was innocent,
and spoke the Word of the Lord against the Songs of the Temples, in the Chapel
and in the Kings Court; and his example does witness to our practices, as the
example of the Wicked in their wickedness, do witness your practice, whom you
succeed in oppression.

And also you may read through the Scriptures, how the children of God, who
were called of him, were hated and persecuted by the seed of Evildoers, they
slew the Prophets, and persecuted them that were sent unto them: David was a
Scorn, and a Reproach, and a Hissing to his Enemies; and Job was mocked of his
Friends, and counted a Madman; and many of the Servants of the Lord suffered
cruel deaths under the Hands of the Oppressor: and they that were Sufferers,
and were mocked, scorned, and persecuted, are our Example; and the Mockers and
Persecutors are your example: Christ and the Apostles in their time were
S^fferers; and you may read how Herod and Pilate, and the Officers, and chief
Priests caused Christ to suffer unjustly, by Imprisonments, and Scourgings, and
Sufferings, and reviling^, though no evil could be justly laid to his charge;
and he is our Example in the like things, and as they did unto him, so you do
unto us, as being of the same Seed, and th^^ he said: And Herod, and the cruel
Officers, and chief Priests are your example, of whose seed you are brought
forth, fulfilling their measure of wickedness and cruelty, in this your day and
time, and oppressing the just with cruel bonds of iniquity. And you may read
how the Apostles were persecuted through the whole Book of Acts, and put out of
their Towns, and Stoned (some unto death) and were forbid to speak any more in
the Name of Jesus, and were thought to be men not worthy to live upon the
Earth, were called, Pestilent Fellows, and Movers of Sedition, and Turners of
the World upside down; and these were our example, who had left their Callings,
Countries, and Relations, and gave themselves to be spent for the Lord's sake,
and declared against the false ministry, which preached for Hire, and Gifts,
and Rewards; and against them that had the form of Godliness, but not the
Power; and went into the Idol Temples, and declared against them, and against
their outward traditional worships: In these things and many more, we follow
them as an Example, even as you follow the wicked in their cruelty and
oppression, Nero, and Festus, and Caesar, and such like, who were Enemies unto
God, as you are, and brought forth the same works as you do, being of the same
nature, and following their example; so that now as ever, He who is born of the
flesh persecutes him that is born after the Spirit: And the wisdom of this
World is enmity against God, and cannot receive the things of God's Kingdom:
Therefore repent, when you have read your example of wickedness, then read your
example in the cursed end of wrath from the Lord God, which came upon the
Persecutors of old, as it will come upon you.

The Vengeance of God you cannot flee, his fierce Wrath will come upon you, and
Weeping, and Howling, and Lamentation, and Misery will be your Portion. O
tremble to think upon your ignorance; To what purpose have you made a
profession of the Scriptures, who ^tifie those things, and those men which it
plainly declares against; and condemns those practices and those men which it
plainly witnesses of? Repent, and take warning betime, before the Decree of
the Lord of Host be sealed against you; for I have cleared my Conscience, in
letting you see your own ignorance and blindness, ye Magistates and People: And
thus you are left without excuse, whether you will hear or forbear.

By one who is a Labourer in the Vineyard, who is not known to the World,
though named of the World, EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE TRUE FAITH OF THE Gospel of Peace Contended for, in the Spirit of
Meekness; and the Mystery of Salvation (Christ within the Hope of Glory)
Vindicated in the Spirit of Love, Against the secret opposition of John Bunyan
a professed Minister in Bedfordshire. Or, an Answer to his Book, called, Some
Gospel Truths opened, etc. W^ in also he has mixed many Lies and Slanders, and
has secretly gainsayed the Way of Truth, and Doctrine of Salvation, under the
account of Error and Heresy, as the Generation of chief Priests ever did. Or,
A Return of Truth in simplicity, in the denial of his false Accusations, a^ his
dark Vail of false Reproaches taken off, and the Innocence of the Upright
appearing. With some Queries given forth for him to answer, that Truth may
further app^ and Deceit may be ashamed, where ever it is found.
READER,
UNto whom this may come, especially you in Bedfordshire, for whose sake,
chiefly, t^ sent forth, after the false Reproaches of a professed Minister
among you, who has (...) called himself in his Title, Unworthy, as is proved
in this Return; wherein the (...) hearted may see, that I have not striven for
Mastery, by multitude of words, nor many (...) Arguments, to obtain a name, but
in simplicity of heart have born my Witness against (...) Lies, and Vindicated
the Truth as it is in Jesus; not in a curious mind, but in the simpli^ of the
Gospel. And unto you that are honest, in any measure toward God, and toward
(...) I leave this and his to be judged, with an impartial mind, and what is
made manifest to be T^ let it be owned by you; and this is the end wherefore it
is given forth, that Truth may be (...) braced, and Deceit condemned, and the
Light of the World may be followed, which leads (...) eternal Life, and without
which there is no Salvation.

E. B.


HOw long ye crafty Fowlers will ye prey upon the Innocent, and (...) at him
secretly? How long shall the Righteous be a Prey to your tee^^ ye subtle Foxes
who seek to devour? The just One (against whom yo^ Bow is bent) cries for
Vengeance against you in the ears of the Lord yet you strengthen your hands in
iniquity, and gird your selves with the zeal (...) Madness, and Fury; you think
to swallow up the Harmless, and to blot out t^ Name of the Righteous, that his
Generation may not be found on Earth: Y^ shoot your Arrows of cruelty, even
bitter words, and makes the Innocent your Mark to prey upon: You despise the
Way of Uprightness; and Simplicity, and the path of craft and subtilty you
tread; your Dens are in Darkness, and your mischief is hatched upon your beds
of secret whoredoms. When will you cease to grind the face of the Poor, and to
oppress the Humble, upon whom you tread in your vain glories, and outward shows
of Holiness, as though you were the blessed People? And you are exalted above
Innocence in your feigned Hypocrisy, and subtilty, and yet are found out with
the searching Eye of the Lord, who knows your thoughts afar off to be wicked,
and your purposes to be vain; and as with a Whirlwind will he scatter you,
and your name shall rot, and your memorial shall not be found; and the deeper
you have dug the Pit for another, the greater will be your own fall, and the
more miserable your desolation, which comes upon you suddenly, in a day you
expect not: How are the Innocent, and he that is departed from iniquity become
the Table-talk of the Profane, and the Song of Drunkards? And how are we
become the study-work of the Wise, and of the Learned, and their subject of
wicked doctrines: Surely the Diviner is gone mad, and the Wisemen are become
Fools, and the heart of the Disobedient is set to do evil; but the Lord takes
our part against our Enemies, and therefore are we preserved, and our Enemies
shall be confounded, and Liars and Slanderers shall fall together, and the
Innocence of the Innocent shall shine in its Beauty, and the vails of
Reproaches, and Slanders, and false Accusations shall be clean removed in the
day of our God; and for a moment we are willing to submit under the present
suffering, by slanderous tongues, that we may reign for ever. It is not unknown
to many, how that in this day wherein the Lord has made known his Power, to
the gathering of his People, and to the bringing forth of his own Seed to
inherit the Land of Peace; how that the powers of Darkness, and the strength of
Hell is risen, and joined in a body to make war against the Lord, and to
prevent his purpose; and men are sorely disquieted, and all is on an uproar,
and to defend themselves they are come forth, to vindicate their interest in
the region of Darkness do they appear; and because their Kingdom is deeply
invaded with the face of a deadly Enemy, therefore they have put on their
strength, and fortified themselves, and showed their strength and force under
several colors; some in open Persecution, Imprisonments, and Beatings, and
cruel Oppressions, and some in Scorning, and Backbiting, and open Lying, and
Slandering; and others appear in the Garments of deep dyed Hypocrisy, and
Smite secretly, and Shoot in the Twilight, between Profession and Profaneness,
and forge secret Slanders, and Lies, and seek the Life of the just One: And
thus poor desolate Zion is compassed about with Enemies, and they lay siege
against her, to make her an utter destruction (How long Lord, how long? hear
and consider.)

And John Bunyan, and his Fellow, who have joined themselves to the broken Army
of Magog. Now in the heat of the day of great striving are not the least of all
guilty among their Brethren, of secret smiting the Innocent, with secret Lies
and Slanders; who have showed themselves in defense of the Dragon against the
Lamb, in this day of war betwixt them: And though some of their Party, which
have showed themselves before in the open Field have come off with loss and
shame, and disadvantage; yet needs must the rest appear till they have filled
up their measure of wickedness, and so be made a perpetual curse for ever: and
they must spend their strength till shame and confusion overtake them, and they
be left without hope or stay, in the ditch of deep perdition, never more to
rise up again.

Friends I have viewed your discourse, and numbered up part of your work, and
this is the sum thereof, A corrupted Grain of little value of Babylons
Treasure, and if a Merchant of your traffic gain it, he cannot be the richer,
yet does your King (the Prince of Darkness) accept your labor, and your
substance; for had you been more learned in his subtilty, and more stockt in
his craft, a larger portion; and more to the purpose might have been brought
in, but with such as you had, or could procure, from your Neighbors are you
come, and have gained a report, and a name in the record of Mischief against
the Lamb, and his Followers, whom you have made your subject to treat Lies upon.

And for the sake of the Simple I have taken in hand to return a few words in
answer to you, in those things (at least) wherein you mention the Quakers; who
being falsely accused, and slandered by you in many things; I am bound in the
Law of Righteousness, as a Friend unto them, (at least) to vindicate their
innocent Cause against your reproaches, which may be as a stumbling stone in
the eye of the upright; and though I know not your faces, yet your spirit is
tried and your generation is read at large, and your stature and countenance is
clearly described to me; to be of the stock of Ishmael, and of the seed of
^ain, whose line reaches unto the murdering Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees;
and though you profess Christ in words without you, yet are you found Enemies
to him revealed within his Saints (without which there can be no Salvation) and
this I find the subject matter of your discourse, and the length of your
tedious travel: I shall not transcribe your whole matter, only the heads of
some particulars I shall draw into a sum, and write a few words thereunto, not
in a large manner.

And in the first Epistle have spoken something, As of God and man together,
making up one Christ, who is the Savior, etc. then thou shamelesly say, This
is quite contrary to those commonly called Familists, Ranters, Quakers, and
others, etc. Either deny Christ to be a real Man without them, blaspemously
fancying him to be God manifest in their flesh; or else make his human Nature,
with the fullness of the Godhead in it, to be but a type (...) God, to be
manifest in the Saints, etc.

1 Answ. Here thou have (as thy Forefathers, the chief Priests and Persecuto^^
did) numbered the Innocent with Transgressors; Quakers with Ranters, between
which there is no more union and likeness, then between Light and Darkness,
good and evil; and thy secret subtilty more appears, and the wickedness of thy
Slander, because thou have joined in thy Accusation such who may be guilty with
the Guiltless; for the Ranters I will not justify, neither at present the
Familists, except I better knew their Principles; nor any others will I
vindicate, who are guilty (...) thy Accusation: Though thou art condemned for
numbering the Innocent in thy Accusation, and falsely have secretly slandered the
Guiltless, who are free from thy Slanders herein: But yet further I say, If
thou dare lay thy charge only upon the Quakers, write thy meaning in
plainness, and bring testimony of thy accusation, and thou may receive a
further Answer; and cease to smite with secret Slanders in the dark, lest thou
be condemned in the Light with the guilty, for numbering the Innocent with
Transgressors, and charging the Guiltless with the Guilty. I dare not plead for
Ranters, Quakers, and others, till they be separated, lest I should justify
the Wicked and condemn the Righteous, but thy wicked heart has joined them in
accusation, that thy Slander may be covered, and some ground thou may have in
appearance for thy wicked tongue, who has hatched mischief against the Upright.

And thy second Slander is like-unto the first, where thou again unjustly
numbers the Quakers with some high-flown People, and say, These high-flown
People are i^ this very like to Familists and Quakers, undervaluing the Lord
Jesus Christ, God Man, and though they speak much of Christ, yet they do not
savingly and rightly lay him for their Foundation, etc.

2 Answ. The sum of this broken confusion is thus much, Two Slanders upon the
Quakers undervaluing the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and not laying him as a
Foundation, etc. though thou will not through thy subtilty separate the
Guiltless from them who may be guilty in thy Accusation, yet now must I in
simplicity, in my return to thee, and cannot but openly charge thee to be a
secret Shooter of Mischief against the Righteous: We prize the Lord Jesus
Christ God Man to be precious unto us, and unto all that do believe, and have
owned him alone to be the Foundation, whom God has laid for Salvation unto the
ends of the Earth, and in his Light are we saved, and therein do walk; and
because hereof are we hated by thee; and the Generation of Hirelings, and false
Prophets, who speak much of Christ without you, but knows him not in you the
hope of Glory, and take back to thee thy false Accusations, for thou art fallen
in the Pit which thou have dug for another, a slanderous tongue dwells
within thy house, and Christ Jesus the Savior, of all that believe, is thy
Condemner, who believes not, but art found a Liar, and a false Witness,
slandering unjustly, and by thy unbelief, and wickedness herein, undervalues
Christ Jesus who is pure and holy, and is the Foundation of Righteousness and
Peace, and not of Wrath and works of Darkness, wherein thou art builded in thy
works of Mischief.

And for the rest of this first Epistle, I shall say little to it, only thus
much is the mind of the Pen-mans spirit, secretly smiting at the Doctrine of
true Faith and Salvation (to wit) Christ Jesus within, and directing altogether
without, and afar off, and saying in his heart, who shall ascend, and who shall
descend, and is not mindful that the Word of Faith is in the Mouth, and in the
heart, and thus much I say, if they be Reprobate who have not Christ in them,
then is it the most profitable doctrine, and thing of greatest concernment to
seek for him, and to find him within, seeing many can speak of him without, who
are manifest Enemies to him in their hearts and works; and thus much to John
Burtons Epistle. Let him go learn what this means.

The next thing that I shall mind is this, in the second Epistle, where a
Question is asked, Who are the men that at this day are so deluded by the
Quakers, and other pernicious Doctrines, but those who thought it enough to be
Talkers of the Gospel, etc?

This man appears to be of the same spirit with his Fellow, and will more
abound in Lies, in respect of the number, then he that went before; and the sum
of this transcribed is, That the Quakers are Deluders, and thou have joined
them with a Thief also, and numbered the guiltless with the guilty, and have
shot secretly in the dark, and far missed thy aim; for thy bare words are no
true witness, and thou must not both slander, and be Witness thy self; though I
perceive thou may have the witness of all that walks in the broad-way to
evidence falsely for thee. And this is no new invented Lie, for it has been
ever; the Children of God were counted Deceivers, as in the Scripture we have a
cloud of witnesses, and Christ Jesus our Lord was counted so by thy Generation;
and as they did unto him, so must you do unto us, and must fulfill their measure
of wickedness, as Christ has said.

Answ. And this is my Answer in full, That way which thou calst Heresy, and
delusion, do we worship the God of our Fathers, and are not ashamed of the
Reproaches for his Name sake.

Then further thou say, They be such kind of people who at this day are
carried away with the Quakers, namely, loose Ranters, and light Notionists, and
here and there a Legallist, which were shaking in their Principles, etc.

Answ. The Substance of this is as much as the wise Scribes and Pharisees said
concerning Christ, None believed in him, said they, but a company of poor
people, which know not the Law, which were accursed; and does any of the Rulers
believe on him? Friend, though some of all sorts of people be brought to God,
yet thou seemst to be offended herewith, that the wicked should be turned from
his wickedness, which is no evidence against us, that we are Deceivers, but an
evidence against thee, in thy wicked slander, who has brought forth thy Lies
without fear, as though thou should never in this life be put to prove them,
nor in the time to come should ever answer for them. But the Ranters, and
light Notionists, and Thee we do deny, in that state wherein they and you do
stand, till you turn to the Lord by repentance; and whatever you have been in
your profession or practice, if you turn from your iniquity; we dare not deny
you.

And whereas thou give this Character of a Notionist, Such a one is puffed up
in his fleshly mind, and advances himself above others, etc. This is thy own
condition, and thou have read thy own Character, who art pufft up in thy lies
and slanders, and advancest thy self above the Innocent, who exceeds thee in
faith toward God, and in good works toward men, and whose conversation is in
Heaven; but thine is among the Hirelings, under the Marks of all the Deceivers
of old, as may afterward appear.

Then thou goes on, and sets down some of the Lies which thou say the Devil
perswads those men to believe.

And first, That Salvation was not fully and completely wrought out for
sinners, by the man Christ Jesus, etc.

Answ. Friend, the Devil has persuaded thee to believe Lies, which is a degree
higher, A Slander is more then a Lie. This Accusation is clearly false,
wickedly cast upon us; for there is not salvation in any other, nor is it
wrought by any other, but by Jesus Christ fully and completely it is brought
forth by him unto every one that believes, who receives the Testimony of it in
themselves; for if thou have no Testimony of it, but without thee, the Pope and
his Idolaters have as much as thou, and may be more; take back to thee thy Lie
again with shame and confusion.

Then thou goes on, and say, This is another of his Lies wherewith he
deceives; bidding them, follow the light that they brought into the World with
them, telling them that this light will lead into the Kingdom, etc.

Thou have here mixed Truth and a Lie together, this is falsely laid down (The
light that they brought into the world with them) but this is the Truth of God,
and no Lie of the Devil, That to follow the Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he
has lightened every man that comes into the world, and it will lead into the
Kingdom of Peace and righteousness; for, says Christ, I am the Light of the
World, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light
of Life; and this is that which thou would fain call the Lie of the Devil;
and therefore to cover thy wickedness and impudency, thou have changed and
mixed the terms of words, that thou may have a ground for thy Slander; but
thou art seen and comprehended, and thy folly appears.

Then thou say (we say) It will convince of Sin, Swearing, Lying, Stealing,
etc. of Sins against the Law; and this thou make a thing of little account,
to be convicted of sins against the Law, by the Light of Christ; for there is
nothing else that does convince of sin. (mind that) And this Light thou seems
to acknowledge every man has, and this Light I do affirm to be the Light of
Christ Jesus, and to bid People follow this; the Light of Christ to lead into
the Kingdom can be no Lie of the Devil; for he which convinces of sins against
the Law leads up into the fulfilling of the Law; and though thou and thy
Generation would leap over the Law, yet must the righteousness of it in
Judgment be fulfilled upon you, and by Christ Jesus in you, if ever you receive
the Salvation to your Souls. Learn wh^t it means.

Much more thou ramblest over, which I pass by, as being not pertinent to the
thing in hand; but Fools love to be meddling, though little to the purpose, and
as I have said, thy Maker will not blame thee, for thou have brought in of thy
chiefest substance, though it be but as Clay, and as Dirt (at least that of it
which is against the Quakers;) and the substance of many Pages following is
this that I have gathered, denying (or at least opposing) Christ revealed
within, and in opposition to this quotes many Scriptures, of what he did in his
own Person, which Scriptures I own, and the Truth which they bear witness of;
yet must we be^^ witness, that without the Revelation of Christ within there is
no Salvation: However, so much is or may be spoken of him without, as the Pope
can do as well as thou, yet are you found to be one Generation, persecuting the
Life under the ze^l of profession of the words.

Then the next thing that I mind, is a Question which thou have asked thyself.

Do not the Scriptures make mention of Christ within, etc?

And I shall ask further, Does not the Scripture witness that all who have not
Christ within, are Reprobates? But thou have proved deceitful in answering thy
self, and shuffled, and I may much fear thou will not be faithful in answering
mine, however it rests upon thee to answer it, or to stop thy mouth.

Then the next thing is thou say, This design of deceiving, the Devil
carries o^, by pretending if they follow what is made known to them from the
Light within.

Answ. I observe all thy whole purpose is a secret smiting against the Light
within, which Christ has given to every man; and thy whole work is to render
his ^ight odious. But this I further answer. The design of the Devil in
deceiving souls, is thy own, and I turn it back to thee, but this is truth as
it is in Jesus. He that comes to eternal Life must follow and walk in what is
made known by the Light of Christ within.

And thou say, Beg of God to convince thee by his holy Spirit, etc.

And thus thou utterest thy confusion, sometime treating for it, and sometime
against it, secretly smiting the Just, mixing the Truth with Lies, that thereby
thy Slanders may be covered, and thy deceit hid.

The rest of thy Epistle I pass by, being from the same spirit which thy Lies
are from; and thy Lying Spirit the Children of God cannot own, and therefore
must needs deny that which proceeds from it. And thus much in answer to thy
Epistle.

Sixteen of thy first Pages are filled with this (to wit) proving that there is
a Christ, and that he was promised, and that he was waited for, and expected,
etc. To all this I shall say nothing, except thou had proved it in opposition
to some body; for what is Truth I own by the Spirit of the Lord, as it is Truth
in Christ; but as it comes from thy lying spirit, I do not so well own it; I
own the words, and I deny thy voice, and this is my Answer.

Only I find thee wresting some Scriptures, whether through subtilty, or for
want of wit, I shall not judge, especially this have thou increased, Revel. 13.
8. and faisly say, The Blood of Christ was shed before the World was; and it
is, Since the Foundation of the World; betwixt which is great difference, the
one being a very Lie, and the other very Truth.

Then thou go on proving, That he is the Savior that was born of Mary, etc.
which thing we never denied, and therefore I need the less to answer thee,
except thou had spoken it in opposition to us, which I find thee not
altogether, until the thirty seventh Page, where thou again secretly smitest,
in mixing some Truth with thy Lie.

And thou say, How horribly are those deceived, who look on Jesus to be but
a Shadow or Type?

This is thy Lie, I know not any who do it, and yet thou say, Of something
that was afterward to be revealed, etc.

Answ. This has some truth in it, which is this, The same Christ which was
born of Mary, which wrought Righteousness in his Person, by doing, and
suffering; which was and is the Substance, was afterward revealed in the
Saints: And this is no horrible deceit, to witness Christ revealed, or to wait
for him to be revealed within. Then thou say, When he was come, then was an
end put to the Law, etc. And here I ask a Question, Did Christ Jesus put an end
to the Law for them who yet live in the transgression of the Law? or does be
justify that which the Law condemns before the work of the Law be finished?
What is the meaning of the Scripture, Not one tittle shall fail, till all be
fulfilled? What assurance have any that it is fulfilled for them, who are yet
transgressors of it in themselves? An Answer to this may satisfy the simple.

Then thou go on and say, How are they deceived that think to obtain
Salvation by following the convictions of the Law, which they call Christ, etc?

Answ. Here thou confessest the Law convinces, then it is not put to an end,
or fulfilled, or taken away, because it yet works; and it is no deceit to mind
that which does convince of sin, to lead to Christ, to take sin away; for the
Scripture says, The Law is a Schoolmaster, to bring to Christ; but thou art
in the deceived state, who healest up falsely, and daubest with untempered
Mortar, and would teach People to apply the Promises unto Salvation, while
they are in a condition of damnation, condemned in the sight of God by the
Light in their own Consciences, nor will not own that which discovers sin; and
how then can they own him that takes it away, and purges from it by his Blood?
which thou say is done, but have no more witness of it, by the fruit of
ceasing to commit sin, then the Pope has, who lives in your sin; then how is
it taken away?

Then thou say with an impudent Tongue, Its not of works, least any man
should boast, as these fond Hypocrites called Quakers would do.

Answ. Thou Slanderer, When did thou hear any of the Quakers boast, or see
them live in Hypocrisy: God shall judge thee thou deceitful heart; but further
I answer by a Query, Will that faith which is without works justify? And must
not every one receive according to their deeds; he that does good, Life, he
that does evil, Condemnation? but such is thy feigned fancy of Faith, who
seek to be justified by it, whilst thou bring forth the fruits of
unbelief.

Then thou speak of living by Faith, which as thou say, Is to apply the
Lord Jesus Christ, his Benefits, as Birth etc.

I say, if to talk of him was Faith in him, and to live by his Faith, then few
would want him; for many have gotten the words which are without the Life of
Righteousness through Faith, and to live by Faith; says not who shall ascend or
descend to fetch Christ for Salvation; neither does it say, When shall he come
from afar ot save his People, but Faith speaks thus, What says the word of the
Gospel, which is within the heart, as thou may read in the Scripture of
Truth; had thou but an ear to hear, but thou say, Lo here, and Lo there,
false Prophet like.

Then thou say further, How are they deceived who own Christ no otherwise
then as he was before the World began, etc?

Answ. Here thou have discovered thy self more plainly, Did not the Saints own
Christ Jesus the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, for Salvation; and is
there any other Christ then he who was before Abraham was, and is he not now
glorified with the same glory, (mind the same Glory) which he had with the
Father before the World was, according as he prayed? is this deceit, or is it
thy grievous ignorance to call it so, to own him as he was before the World was
for Salvation? thou ignorant man, that was the very Christ the Son of God, who
was equal with the Father, which was in the beginning, and in time was manifest
in Bethelem, and calls himself the Light of the World; thou had better have
said nothing, then by multitude of words to lay open thy shame: Friend that
spiritual Rock whcih the Fathers did eat and drink of, which followed them,
that Rock was Christ the Salvation.

The next thing that I take notice of, is thy exposition upon that Scripture
Job. 4. 3. And thou say this is the meaning, Every Spirit that does not
confess that the Christ that was with the Father before the World was, did in
the appointed time of the Father come into the World, took upon him a Body, and
was very Man, as well as very God, etc.

Answ. If every spirit be of God which does in words confess this, then is not
the Pope himself antichrist, seeing he confesses as much of this (it may be
more then thou do) neither can thou justly condemn us for denying this; for
we do confess it with our hearts, and not only with our mouths, as thou and
the Pope does. But Friend, Is every one saved that says, Lord, Lord? nay, it
is only he that does the will of the Father, and who in many Nations do not
confess this to be true, and yet there are but few in all Nations in the Way to
Life, that shall be saved by Christ Jesus; and it is not much better nor more
accepted to confess Christ in words to be come, and yet in works to deny him,
then it is both in words and in works to deny him; the one is wicked in
Profaneness, the other is wicked in Hypocrisy; the one is a Liar, the other is
a false Witness, and whether of these are most vile, let them who are spiritual
judge.

Then thou exhortest, To receive no Christ except God's Christ, etc.

To this I say, The Christ of God is a Mystery not known to the World, and this
is he which was in the beginning, whom God gave into the World, to be the Light
and Savior thereof, even he is God's Salvation unto the ends of the Earth; and
unto him he is Light, and shall be Salvation and Redmeption where his Person
never came; and yet it cannot be said, Here is the Place where the Son of God
is not. Let him that reads understand.

Then thy next thing is, proving many things concerning Christ, which I pass by
as not having any thing therein against the Quakers, only in one particular,
where thou numbers again them with the Ranters, so that I pass by also, lest
thou should say I justify the Ranters, and do rather choose to let the
Innocent lie under the suffering of thy reproach, whose innocence will appear
when thy black vail of Lies is taken away.

Then the next thing I mind is, where thou seems to reprove the Quakers for
wresting the Scripture, John 1. 9. whereby thou say, They split themselves,
and endeavor to split others, etc.

Answ. Wresting is thy own, and not ours, for we take the Scripture in plain
words, without adding or diminishing, as our enemies shall witness for us. Then
how wickedly do thou say we wrest it, when we neither add nor diminish. But
thy folly must appear by thy much meddling.

And then thou take in hand to speak to the thing, and thus thou say; Every
man, as he comes into the World, receives a light from Christ, as he is God,
etc.

Answ. What less have thou said then we, except thou will say, he has not
lighted man as he is Christ, and so divide the Father, and the Son, which is
error; for what the Father does, the Son does also, and they are equal in power
and operation, and cannot be divided.

Then thou say, This Light is Conscience, that some call Christ, though
falsely.

Answ. Them I leave for thee to reprove, and do deny them, and thee together;
if thou have not falsely made a Lie of some Body, and told thy own Lie, through
the wresting of their words, let the Light in thy Conscience judge.

Then thou say, This Light will show a man there is a God, and will discover
the eternal God by his works, and it will reprove of sin, and make sin
manifest, and by it the unregenerate man is able to know the sins against the
Law are sins against God, etc.

Answ. Also this will the Light of Christ do, wherewith he has enlightened
every man to Salvation, or condemnation, even that Light of which we declare:
so that thou have said no less hitherto, then we in this particular and the
Scriptures say. They saw the Eternal Power and Godhead, by that which was made
manifest of God in them, (mind, in them) which once they knew of God, but
turned from it; and the Scripture says, That which reproves of sin is the gift
of the Spirit of God, John 16. and also the Scripture says, That which makes
manifest sin is Light, and whatsoever is reproved is made manifest by the
Light, even the true Light the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. And the sum of all
this which thou would reprove in us, is no more then the Scriptures bare
witness of, and which thy self has uttered and confessed. And Friend, do
thou know this Light that is given of Christ and God, unto every man, is
sufficient in it self for Life and Salvation unto every one that believes? if
thou say it is not, wherein is the blame, in God, or in this Light, or in the
Creature? show if thou can.

Then thou again say, This light surely is that wherewith Christ, as he is
God, has enlightened every one that comes unto the Word which does convince of
sin.

Answ. Thus far thou art forced to confess Truth, (I think against thy mind)
and thus far in words only we agree as in this particular; then why do thou
say, By wresting that Scripture, John 1. 9. we split our selves, and endeavor
to split others, seeing thou thy self have confessed no less then thou callst
wresting in us. I reckon up thy confusion, and leave it for thee to read, and
them to whom this may come.

Then thou say, The neglect of this (Light) will be sure to damn, though the
obedience to the Law will not save them, etc.

Answ. Here again thou have confessed truth. If the neglect of the Light will
be sure to damn, as thou confessest; then I say, surely it is not good to
neglect it, that must needs follow, deny it if thou can; therefore the sum of
thy words is the same with us, that every one mind the Light of Christ Jesus,
least they be damned for the neglect of it. And Friend, to the second part of
the clause, I say, the Law must be obeyed, and the righteousness of it
fulfilled within thee, if ever thou come to Eternal Life; if it be not, thou
cannot escape damnation. Learn what this means,

Then further thou say, Though Christ does give a Light to every one that
comes into the World; yet it does not therefore follow, that this Conscience
(or Light) is the Spirit of Christ, or the work of Grace wrought in the heart,
etc.

Here thy confusion is seen at large, who would seem to divide between the
Light of Christ, which thou confessest is given to every man, and the Spirit of
Christ, and the Grace of God. However thus far I say, the Light of Christ given
to every man, is not contrary to the Spirit of Christ, nor to the Grace of God,
but one in their nature; and a man cannot possibly love one of them, and hate
another; neither can any obey one of these, and disobey the other; therefore
are they one in the union, leading in the same way unto the same end. And where
does the Spirit of Christ give light, or the Grace of God work, or lead, if not
in the Conscience? And can there be any surer thing for the Creature to look
to, to walk to Life, or to come to God by, then the Light of Christ in the
Conscience, which thou confessest every man has that comes into the World?

Then thou say, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Athiest, etc. have that that does
convince them of sin, yet are so far from having the Spirit of Christ in them,
that they delight to serve their lust, etc.

Answ. This Query I ask of thee, Do they or thou, or any man serve sin or your
lusts, because Christ has not given you light to discover your sin, or because
you hate that Light that is given? answer me. And surely by this which does
convince of sin, is every man in the world inexcusable, so it works for God in
all men, either to justify or condemn. And tell me, is not the Spirit or Light
of Christ the only thing which does convince of sin? Or does any thing convince
of sin contrary, or besides, or without the Spirit of Christ? if nay, then it
must needs be that it is from, or by, or something of the nature of the Spirit
of Christ, which is in the Heathens. And the sum of thy doctrine is no less in
the profession of thy words, then what we say; then why do thou condemn us?
But it seems thy tongue speaks one thing, and another thing is in thy heart,
and this is Hypocrisy.

Then thou say, Those that are alive to sin have not the Spirit of Christ,
etc. But I say it is given to every man, though every man receives it not; and
it strives with the wicked man, though he follows it not. And some other vain
Arguments thou usest to prove, That every man has not the Spirit of Christ,
which I pass by; only thus much I leave with thee, till thou provest the Light
of Christ (which thou confessest every may has) to be contrary to the Spirit
of Christ; I shall say every man has that which is one in union, and like the
Spirit of Christ, even as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to its
measure.

Then thou go on, and say, That the Devil might be sure to deceive (or to
that purpose) he says, Turn thy mind inward, and listen within, and see if
there be not that within thee that does convince of sin, etc.

Answ. Thou have confessed that the Light within which convinces of sin is the
Light of God and Christ; and now thou say, the Divil, to deceive souls, bids
turn to mind the Light within, which does convince of sin; thou have, lied of
the Devil: Oh thou blind Priest! whom God has confounded in thy language; Was
ever such a thing spoken, That the Devil can deceive any by the Light of
Christ, or that he uses any such doctrine. Friend it is the Voice of the Gospel
to bid listen within to the Light, even to the Word of Faith, within the heart,
as Paul preached.

But thou further say, They are ignorant of the Gospel, who clasp in with
these Motions of the Light within, (or Conscience) which does command to
abstain from the evil, and to practice good.

And here thou have showed thy blindness and ignorance, more then can be
uttered, as though the motions of the Light of Christ in the Conscience, which
command to abstain from evil, and to practice good, were another thing then the
Light of the Gospel: what, and how does the Light of the Gospel work, if not in
the Conscience, and to command from evil, and to practice good? Surely thou
preachest another Gospel then Paul preached: for his Doctrine was, Abstain from
all evil, and follow that which is good, and listen to the word within in the
heart; but this Gospel thou deniest, and so must needst preach another Gospel,
and so art the accursed, as Paul says.

Then thou say, Thus the poor Soul is most horribly carried away headlong,
etc. into the belly of Hell, etc. thus much is the sum, by turning the mind
within, to the Light which does convince of sin, and listening thereto, and
clapsing with the motions in the Conscience which do command to abstain from
evil, and to practice good, and closing with something within (which thou have
confessed is the Light of Christ) hereby, or thus is the poor Soul carried
headlong, and at the end of its life does fall into the belly of Hell, as thou
say.

Let shame cover thee, if thy heart be not altogether hardened; was ever such
Doctrine preached? surely, malice has carried thee out of sense, else thou
would not have uttered these things, but it is answer enough to reckon thy
confusion up into a sum, and I leave it to every honest heart to read, and
judge thereof.

Then thou further say, The Devil counterfeits the works of Grace, and makes
the Soul believe, if it will be led by what is made known unto it, by the Light
or Conscience within, it shall do well.

Answ. Woe unto thee that callst good evil, and evil good; Art thou not ashamed
to utter thy mind so wickedly, and impudently? does the Light of Christ within
deceive? or is not this Christ's Doctrine, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me shall have the Light of Life; and he that walks in the Light
stumbles not? and this shamelesly have thou called the Doctrine of the Devil;
but if ever thou know God it must be by following, and by being led with the
Light within, which God has made known unto thee, else the Light is thy
condemnation eternally.

Then thou say, The Devil counterfeits the new birth, by persuading it is
wrought by following the Light of the World, etc.

Answ. This Doctrine is as wicked as the former, and from as lying a spirit;
but answer me, By what is the New Birth wrought? and how, if not by following
the Light of Christ in the Conscience? is there any other way to God but Christ
Jesus, who has lighted every man that comes into the World? and whereas thou
beginst to scorn, in thy vain mind, at living upon Bread and Water, and wearing
no Hatbands, and not speaking except the Spirit moves, etc. The Scorner and the
Liar go together, the Lord rebuke thee thou false deceitful heart, and lying
tongue; it grieves thy lust to know any to live upon bread and water, and it
torments thy pride, that any should forsake their pride; and it is easily known
of what spirit thou art, and that thou go on in thy own will, before God
leads thee, and scornst to wait till the Spirit of God moves upon thee, or
scornst them that do wait; but thou runst, and art not sent, like unto thy
Forefathers; and therefore thou do not profit people at all.

Then thou accusest us of sad Blasphemies, and horrible Doctrines, but namest
nothing, and so slanderst without witness; and take back thy own words, for
they belong to thee, as is sufficiently proved in this Answer to thy Book, let
the wise in heart judge: And thou have said, Thou wonderst, that the ground do
not open and swallow us up, or else the Devil fetch us away alive, etc. And
this most fully discovers thy spirit to be without the fear of God in any
measure, who utterst such wicked Language, for which thou have no example among
all the Children of God; and is not this horrible Doctrine, and little less
then sad Blasphemies? It is answer sufficient to gather up thy confusion, and
send it thee to read; if there be any honesty in thy heart, repent, and cease
thy wickedness, lest God smite thee with a Curse, and make thee an Example of
Destruction.

Then thou go on, and have asked thy self a Question; Is it not the Spirit
of Christ that does make manifest, or convince of Sin? The Question is good,
but thou have consounded it in thy Answer, and not answered plainly, but have
covered Truth under the vail of thy many words: Thou say, There are two
things that do make manifest, and convince of Sin; first, the Law; and
secondly, the Spirit of Christ. I query further, Does any thing convince of sin
contrary to the Spirit of Christ? if not, then that which does convince of sin
is like unto, or one in the Union, or something as good in its Nature as the
Spirit of Christ; and thou instancest in Judas, whom thou say was convinced
of sin by the Law, without the Spirit of Christ; to which I say, the Law of God
is spiritual, and is not contrary, but one with the Spirit of Christ in its
union, (at least) and that which let him see Christ to be innocent, was not
words, syllables without him, but must needs be within him; so if I should say
the Spirit of Christ was not in him, yet was the Work of the righteous Law of
God written in his heart, which is spiritual, and Christ Jesus was not without
his own testimony in Judas, which is Light, by which Judas was, and is
condemned eternally; And though Judas was at the same time possessed of the
Devil, as thou say, yet there was that within him also, which disquieted,
and tormented the Devil, which discovered the Devil with his works, by which he
saw his murderous mind, and the Blood of the Just One, I say; it needs must be
contrary to the Devil, and to his works, which condemned him; I call it the
Light of God, which is spiritual, call it what thou can.

Then thou go on, and seems to show a difference betwixt being convinced by
the Law without the Spirit of Christ, and the convincement by the Spirit of
Christ, but art confounded in thy discourse.

I say the power of the Law of God is spiritual, and though thou make a little
thing of it to be convinced by the Law, of sins against the Law, yet I make it
a thing of weight; And this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, and men love darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are evil;
and the Law is Light, as says the Scripture; and Christ is come to discover
and reprove sin; and I put thee to prove in all the Scripture where any such
thing ever was distinguished, as something to convince of sin, without, and
besides, or contrary to the Spirit of God; and till thou provest it, thus far I
have answered thee concerning it.

Then thou say, Though some say, they are not only convinced of Sin, but have
gotten some power over it, to abstain from those things forbidden in the Law;
yet thou further say, This may be done as those blind Pharisees, called
Quakers, think they do, and be but natural men, etc.

Answ. Thou perverter of the right Way of God; how long will thou go on in thy
uncleanness, uttering thy wrath against the Simple? It seems, to get power over
sin, and to abstain from those things forbidden in the Law is a thing of no
value with thee; but is it not further then thou ever came? let that of God
in thy Conscience judge and answer, and show me if ever any natural man did it
throughout the Scripture: And as for the Pharisee, it is thy own, I return it
to thee again; thou art called of men Master, and have the chief Seat in the
Assembly, and standst praying in the Synagogues, as they did in Christ's time.
Friend, how fain would thou clear thy self to make others guilty; but the
guilt stands at thy door, and rests upon thy own head, and I rather choose to be
of that profession which abstains from those things forbidden in the Law, and
to have power over sin, then to live in the transgression of the Law, and under
the power of sin: Yet talking of belief in the Son of Mary, whose Name (Mary) I
may have ground to judge thou worshipst as the Papists do; and the same I say,
much as Paul did, The uncircumcision of such who keep the Law, shall condemn
thee, in thy false faith, who breakst the Law.

Then thou again confessest, That Christ, as God, has enlightened every man
that comes into the World with the Law which does convince of Sin; but to this
I have spoken, so shall pass it, only mind the Scripture which thy self have
quoted, The Law is Light, then the Light is the Law, and gives the knowledge of
sin. Then thou say, If the Spirit of Christ convince thee of Sin, then it
convinces of more Sins then against the Law. And to this I say, It seem there
is some sin, against which there is no Law, by thy confused Story, or that the
Law is not against all sin: Friend, show, if thou can, any sin which is not
against the Law; if thou can not, Repent, and cease thy confusion.

Then thou speakst against self-righteousness, but have forgotten to reprove
thy self, of thy Lying, and Slandering, and false Accusing; and it is thou that
preachest another Gospel then the Apostle preached; he directed every one to
the Word within, in the heart, and turned to the Light within, from darkness;
but thou directs altogether to a thing without, dispising the Light within, and
worshipping the Name (Mary) in thy imaginations, and know not him who was
before the World was, in whom alone is Salvation, and in no other. Then thou
say, The Light convinces of Sins, but of no other then Sins against the
Law; as though there were some sins which were not against the Law; but to that
I have spoken.

And thou say, It does not show the Soul a Savior, or Deliverer, etc.

Answ. Thou art here in a Lie, for the Light which comes from Christ does
manifest a Savior, and Deliverer, and nothing else; for if the Light of Christ
does not show Christ, what then can, unto every one that walk in the Light?

Then the next thing thou provest is, That God only is our Savior, there is
none beside him, etc. But how contrary is this to that in page 42. where thou
say, They are wickedly deluded, who own Christ no otherwise, but as he was
before the World was, for Salvation: For if God be the Savior, and there is
none beside him, then it is no delusion to own him as he was before the World
was; and thus I sum up thy confusion and contradictions, and leave them for
thee to read.

The next thing I observe is, where thou art proving the Resurrection, and
slanderest the Quakers with making light of it; but yet again wickedly numbering
them with other Infidels, that thou might have a cover for thy slander; but I
put thee to prove, where they made light of the Resurrection; or else prove thy
self a Liar in the sight of all Just men; thou secretly slanderest, but proves
nothing.

Then thou have raised a Query from Ephesians. 4. 10. but have not answered it;
though many words thou have uttered, yet little to the purpose; and I return
thee the same query again to answer; and many other things, and Arguments thou
have made, to which I shall say little, only mind thee of thy carnal
sottishness, who speakst of Christ to be four or five foot long; let shame
cover thy Lips, thou blind Sot; when did thou see Christ in that length? have
thou not here spoken of that which thou know not, and art a busy body
intruding into things, whereof thou art ignorant, but Fools love to be meddling,
to manifest their own folly, among whom thou art; and much more stuff, which I
pass by, as not worth naming; only thy malice is against the Kingdom of Heaven
within, and utters thy carnal sensual knowledge of the things of God, which thy
imaginations shall never know.

The next thing I observe is, where thou reckonst the Quakers to be the false
Prophets which Christ speaks of, which shall be before his coming, and to be
the Scoffers which walks after their own hearts lust which Peter speaks of.

Answ. To which I answer; those false Prophets which Christ spoke of, came in,
in the days of John; For, says he, by this we know that it is the last time;
for now are there many Antichrists; and this was before a Quaker was heard of;
And if we should diligently search, we should find thee in their steps, through
feigned words, through coveteousness, making Merchandise of Souls, loving the
wages of unrighteousness, and such were the Scoffers, which Peeer speaks of,
among whom thou art found, in thy practice, among them who are preaching for
hire, and love the error of Balaam, who took gifts and rewards; and Christ has
said, we shall know you by your Fruits; and the same Fruits that ever were
brought forth among the false Prophets of old, grow among you in many things I
could instance; but he is wholly blind that sees you not. Before thou wast
accusing us of drinking water, and now thou accusest us of walking after our
own lusts; but such is thy confusion, thy wrath overcomes sense.

Then thou speaks of some who told thee to thy face, thou usedst conjuration
and witchcraft, because what thou preachedst was according to Scriptures, etc.

To which I say, Let the guilty be reproved, for we deny thy Accusation to be
true upon any of the Quakers, which some may think thou speakst of; so thy
Accusation rests between thee and them, and we are clear; for every Truth which
the Scriptures bear witness of, we do own, and do not condemn any for preaching
according to the Scriptures.

Then the next thing I observe, is thy crying so loud against Christ within,
which indeed is the only thing, without which there is no Salvation; for,
Except Christ be in you, you are Reprobates.

And this also I observe from thee, as having traced thy path unto the end, and
numbered thy work into a total sum, which is a secret smiting and obscure
shooting against the Manifestation or Belief of Christ within, which there can
be no Salvation without, as I have proved; and in words only I find thee
exalting Christ without, and worshipping the name of (Mary) like the Pope, I
have good ground so to judge.

And whereas thou call the Doctrine of Christ within false Opinions, and
take^^ in hand to discover it, as in Page 203. I say to all honest men, who
have but any knowledge of the Letter of the Scripture, thou art hereby
sufficiently discovered, who callst the chief thing, which is the chief unto
Salvation, and without which can be none, false Opinions; God shall judge thee,
thou wicked heart; and much more I need not say, but shall leave this to the
view of any that are honest to judge; so have gone through thy Book, and passed
by many things; only I have spoken to that in which thou have treated any thing
upon us; and the Truth I have cleared from many Lies and Slanders, and thy Vail
of false Reproaches is rent, and our Innocence does partly appear, and thy vail
of Hypocrisy is a little removed, and thy deceitful heart weighed and seen:
And as for the rest of thy Book whicg I have not meddled with, thus much I say
of it, I suppose you will confess it was all given forth by one spirit, and it
is proved some of it is given forth by a lying spirit; then let the Reader
judge what the rest of it can be; though the words be true, yet is thy spirit
false, and at the best, what thou have said, is but bearing false witness (as
to thy self) of a true thing; I own the words, and I deny the voice; and here I
deal plainly with thee.

Thou then askst a Question; Does not the Scripture speak of Christ within?
unto which I further add, answer it as thou can.

Does not the Scripture say, Christ is within except you be Reprobates? And is
not this thus much; all are reprobate but they in whom Christ is within? Answer
i^ plainness, and darken not knowledge by words without wisdom. And toward the
end I find thee making up the sum of thy wickedness with this, numbering the
Quakers with Ranters, Sin, Death, and the Devil: I will not bring a railing
Accusation against thee; but the Lord rebuke thee thou unclean spirit, who have
falsely accused the Innocent to clear thy self from guilt; but at thy door guilt
lodges, and I leave it with thee; clear thy self if thou art able. And thy
wicked Reproaches we patiently bear, till the Lord appear for us: and we are
not greater then our Lord, who was said to have a Devil by thy Generation; and
their measure of wickedness thou fulfils, and art one of the Dragons Army,
against the Lamb and his Followers; and thy Weapons are Slanders, and thy
Refuge is Lies, and thy work is confused, and has hardly gained a name in
Babylons Record; and by us (so much of it at least as is against us) is cast by
as our spoiled prey, and trampled upon in all thy reproachful speeches, who
art unclean, and of more price to us is thy hatred and envy, then thy love can
be, except the g^und were better in which you stand.

Now a few words I may write in Answer to the Queries in the end of thy Book,
which thou directst thus Some Questions to the Quakers, or a few Queries to
those possessed with a Spirit of delusion in this Generation.

Question 1. If (say thou) that every man has a measure of the Spirit of
Christ within him; why say the Scriptures, That some are sensual, having not
the Spirit, a^^ Christ says, The World cannot receive it? John 14.

Answ. Some men are sensual, and have not the Spirit, because they received it
not, and some cannot receive it, because they believe not in him from whence it
comes, yet is the measure of the Spirit given unto every man to profit withal,
as the Scripture says. And it is given to within him, to reprove him of sin,
but few do receive it; and when thou can learn to distinguish between a thing
being given, and a receiving of such a thing, then thou may be answered in
thy self. It is one thing in God to give the Spirit, and another thing in the
Creature to receive it: He gives it to many that receive it not, to follow it
and to be guided by it: thus far I answer, and let them that are led with a
spirit of Delusion answer thee further.

Qu. 2. What is the Church of God redeemed by, from under the Law; is it by
something that is done within them, or by something done without them? If it be
redeemed by something that works in them, then why did the man Christ Jesus
hang upon the Cross in Mount Calvery, without the Gates of Jerusalem, for the
sins of his People, and why do the Scriptures say, That through this man is
preached unto us forgiveness of sins? etc.

Answ. The Church of God is redeemed by Christ Jesus, which is revealed within
all that believe; and Christ Jesus wrought in them mightily, and it was he that
wrought in them to will and to do; this is plain according to Scripture. And
the man Christ Jesus was hanged upon the Cross on Mount Calvery, because they
wickedly judged him to be a Blasphemer, and through their envy persecuted him
to death, because he bore witness against them; and as in their account he
died, and hanged upon the Cross for an Evil-doer, and this is one ground (at
least) why he hanged upon the Cross; and the Scriptures say, That through this
man is preached the forgiveness of sins, because there is no other that can
forgive sin, nor the blood of any other thing that can take away sin; but the
Blood of God, as it is written. And thus far I answer: If thou will have more,
seek it from them who are led with a spirit of Delusion.

Qu. 3. What Scripture have you to prove that Christ is, or was crucified
within you, risen within you, ascended within you?

Answ. There is no Scriptures that mention any one of our particular names; and
thy Query is raised from thy misunderstanding of us, so I judge; but Christ is
within us, that we dare not deny; and he is the Lamb that was slain in the
streets of the great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, (mind
spiritually) and he is now risen, and ascended, this we know through Faith in
his Name: And I leave thee to receive a fuller Answer from them that are led
with a spirit of Delusion (if they will give it thee.)

Qu. 4. Is that very man that was crucified on Mount Calvery, between two
Thieves, whose Name is Jesus, the Son of Mary, is he the very Christ of God, ye
or nay?

Answ. Yea, he is the very Christ of God, which was before the World was, by
whom the World was made, who was made manifest from Mary's womb, and was
persecuted to death by the Scribes and Pharisees, in whose steps thou treadst,
in asking subtle Queries to ensnare the Innocent, as they did; read thy
Example, and thy self to be an Enemy to the Christ of God.

Qu. 5. Is that very Man, with that very Body, within you, yea or nay?

Answ. The very Christ of God is within us, we dare not deny him; and we are
Members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his Bone, as the Ephesians were:
They that are led by a spirit of Delusion shall answer the rest of this thy
Query, if they will.

Qu. 6. Was that very Jesus that was born of the Virgin Mary, a real man of
Flesh and Bones, after his Resurrection from the dead, out of Joseph's
Sepulcher, ye or nay? for the Scrpiture says he was, and if so, then did that
Man go away from his Disciples, and not into them in his Body, as the
Scriptures declare? or did he with that Body of Flesh go into his Disciples, as
some fond Dreamers think?

Answ. What the Scriptures speak of Christ we own to be truth, and own him to
be what the Scriptures speak of him, and all men's imaginations of him we deny,
and their fals^ interpretations of the Scriptures concerning him; and let the
fond Dreamers who are in their thoughts be reproved; for we dare own nothing to
be truth but what the Spirit of the Lord bear^ witness of according to the
Scripture, thus far I anwer in behalf of the Quakers; let them who are led with
the spirit of Delusion answer the rest which concerns themselves.

Qu. 7. Has that Christ that was with God the Father before the World was, no
other Body but his Church, if you say no, as it is your wonted course? Then
again I ask you, What was that in which he did bear the sins of his Chrildren;
if you say it was his own Body on the Tree, then I ask you, whether that Body
in which he did bear our sins, was, or is the Church of God, yea, or nay? Again
if you say he has no Body but his Church, then I ask, what that was that was
taken down from the Cross, etc?

Answ. In this thou have not only queried, but Slandered; therefore first thy
Slander I do remove, It is not our wonted course to say, that Christ has no
other Body but his Church; thou art herein as in other things, a false Accuser,
but we say the Church is Christ's Body: And it is sufficient for Salvation to
know Christ Jesus to be head in us, and over us, and our selves to be Members
of his Body, and what thou intendst by making so many foldings in one Query; it
may be judged is to ensnare, and in that thou answerest thy self for us in
something, that thou may have a further ground to lay a deeper snare; we do
deny thee, and thy spirit, and see thee to be only feeding in thy imaginations
upon the report of things without the Life, and thy religion stands in
disputes, and controversies, and querying, and many words; but our Religion
stands in the exercise of a pure Conscience toward God and toward man,
whether we speak or be silent

Thus I have answered thy Queries, or so much of them as concerns us; and as I
have said, if thou will be further answered, go seek an Answer from them who
are led with a spirit of Delusion, and let them answer their part, or else be
thou unsatisfied; for I shall not answer them to satisfy thee, nor I may not
feed thy Serpents wisdom, nor subtilty, which cannot receive of the things of
God, not understand a reason of the Hope of Christ in us, if we declare it to
thee: For all throughout thy Book I do observe it is that which thou strikest
against, even Christ within, which is our Hope of Glory: And it is that Mystery
which long has been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest
and declared. And though the wise of the World cannot receive it, but speak
evil against it, yet is it dear unto us, and so much more precious, because
despised by such as thee, and thy Generation. And such things are a testimony
to us, and against you; and go thou with them that are led with a spirit of
Delusion, for you are one in Nature, and the Children of God, who are redeemed,
cannot but deny you together.

Some few Queries propounded for John Bunyan to answer.
Query 1. Whether is any man justified by Christ Jesus in the sight of God, but
he that follows Christ? and is it not a work to follow him, yea, or nay? and
what is the sight of God?

Qu. 2. Whether will that Faith justify a man which has no works, seeing the
Apostle says, Faith without works is dead? and what is that which works Faith,
and where is it, within or without?

Qu. 3. Whether any man is justified, but he who is born of God, and whether
does he that is born of God commit sin; and is that within the Creature, or
without him, which works the new Birth?

Qu. 4. If Christ has lightened all men as he is God (as thou confessest) then
whether has he not lighted all men as he is the Son of God; and is not the
Light of God sufficient in it self to lead unto God, all that follow it, yea,
or nay?

Qu. 5. Whether it is not the same Light in him that hates it, as it is in him
that loves it, John 3. if there be a difference in the Light, show it wherein
it lies, whether in its nature, or otherwise?

Qu. 6. Whether it is possible that any can be saved without Christ manifest
within; if no, then whether it is not the Doctrine of Salvation which is only
necessary, to preach Christ within; and it is not the whole Mystery of
Salvation, God manifest in the flesh?

Qu. 7. Whether is it not possible that many may profess as much of Christ
without, as thou have said of him, and yet be damned; and if this be the faith
to profess him born, dead, risen, and ascended without, then is there any
Unbeliever in England, seeing all in the outward sound believe, and profess as
much as thou have said, yea or nay?

Quer. 8. Whether has that man faith in Christ, who is not changed in the
Nature? and is not the Liar and Slanderer an Unbeliever, and of the cursed
Nature, yea or nay?

Quer. 9. Whether does any man receive Christ, who receives him not into him?
if not, show how Christ can be received? and whether many do not profess him,
which never received him?

Quer. 10. Whether to preach for Hire, for Gifts and Rewards, and to Divine for
Money, and to make Merchandise of People, for so much a year for preaching to
them, is not true Marks and Signs of a false Prophet, or can any give truer
Signs of the false Prophets, then Isaiah, and Micah gave yea or nay?

Quer. 11. Whether must not the Devil be chained before Christ reign? and what
is that which chains him? and whether art thou come to one of the days of the
Thousand years, yea or nay?

Quer. 12. Whether do thou know any Christ, or preach or profess any Christ,
who has not lighned every man that comes into the World with the true Light of
Life, or of Condemnation? and is he not a Deceiver that exhorts People for
Salvation to any other thing then the Light of Christ, yea or nay? And how has
Christ enlightened every man in the World, if not within him?

These Queries, with some more in my Answer, I put forth to thee, that Truth
may be cleared from all Slanders of envious tongues, and shall leave my work
and thine to be weighed in the Balance of Righteousness, to be considered of
by every honest heart to whom they do come, and God shall be the chief Judge
betwixt us in his day.

A Postscript.
ANd now seeing we have taken in hand to discover and lay open the deceits of
Deceivers, that all men may come to the knowledge of the Truth and be saved,
and led out of the snare of the crafty Fowlers; these things further we shall
add, which are contrary to the Doctrine of the true Gospel.

First, John Burton said in a Discourse with some Friends, That Christ had two
Bodies, and one of the Bodies was out of the sight of the Saints.

Secondly, John Bunyon said, Christ's second coming (...) not his coming in
Spirit, for his coming in Spirit is no coming.

Thirdly, John Bunyon said upon, Discourse, Of the Word of God being in the
heart, in the presence of diverse People, That there was nothing in him, nor in
any man to be taken notice of.

Fourthly, One of their Brethren said, That Christ and the Word of Life were
two things.

Fifthly, Some others of the same Members, in the Market of Bedford said, That
they scorned that Light which we (meaning the Quakers) speak of, which is the
Light that convinces of sin, which Light they confessed to be in every man, in
the same discourse which was with some of them called Quakers.

Much need not be said as to the laying open of these particulars, for by the
words themselves the wickedness and ignorance of the broachers of them are
fully seen, to every one who is spiritual, and to them I leave this to be
judged; only this I shall further say, They have not spoken only that which
cannot be proved by Scriptures, but some of the particulars are also contrary
to the Scriptures, and are damnable Doctrines of Devils, as might be largly
laid open, in the third and fifth particulars. But I delight not in raking in
such unsavory Stuff, but do trample over it, and return it to the Authors.
Having summed up their Wickedness into a Sum, I leave it for to be weighed by
themselves and others; and if any question the truth of the particulars charged
against them, sufficient Testimony may be given by such who were ^a^ Witnesses.

By one who has chosen rather to suffer affliction with the despised People,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, EDWARD BOROUGH.

Stablishing Against Quaking Thrown down and overturned, and no Defense found
against it. Or an Answer to a Book (called, Stablishing against Quaking) put
forth by Giles Firmin, a professed Minister in Essex. WHEREIN His many Lies,
and Slanders are rebuked and witnessed against; and all his thirteen Arguments
confounded, and clearly confuted; and he manifestly proved a false Prophet in
several particulars; as in his Call and Maintenance: And while he has thought
to discover the Prince of Darkness in others, he is found secretly lodging in
his own house, and powerfully working in him; and is found truly guilty himself
of that whereof he falsely accuses the innocent People, called Quakers, who are
Gods faithful Witnesses, against this subtle Generation, though for a moment
they are a Prey to the seed of Evildoers, and a Reproach to lying Tongues.
THe Lord from Heaven, in this his day, is risen and come forth, to make War
with all his Enemies, being the fullness of time, wherein his purpose is to cut
down, and destroy the man of sin, by the power of his coming; and he must
reign, whose right it is; and of his Kingdom and Government there shall be no
end, and Nations shall flow into it, and Kings shall lay down their Crowns at
his Feet, whom God has appointed to exalt in his Throne of Righteousness and
Judgment; and the war is proclaimed in his Name, and the Standard of the Lord
is set up before him, to gather together the Nations, to fan them and to try
them; and to search and to seek out his own, where they have been scattered in
the cloudy and dark day, and a prey made upon them, by every wild Beast of the
Mountain: But the Lord has opened his Ear to the cry of the Just, and his
Bowels are filled with compassion, toward the Seed of his Inheritance, whom no
man regards to take pity upon, but are altogether hardened in their
iniquities, and become equal with the Oppressor; therefore in Judgment is the
Lord appearing, to work the purpose of his Heart, and to fulfill the intent of
his Mind, and will not spare to punish the transgression of the wicked upon his
own head; and is already clothed with the Garments of Vengeance, and clad with
Zeal as with a Cloak, and has proclaimed Indignation in the face of the
Ungodly; and his Enemies, against whom his wrath is kindled, is joining battle
with him; and Gog and Magog is prepared, to resist the day of Recompense; and
the whole body of Darkness, from the head to the tail is risen to gainsay the
Lord, and strive in confusion together; and their armor clashes one against
another, and they overrun each other, through the confusion of their blind
understanding, and they will not be persuaded unto Reconciliation, but goes on
in rebellion till they be left without strength, as a wounded man, who shall
never more vise again, nor recover his deadly blow; for the strength of Egypt
shall fail in the midst of it, and the Warrier finds not his hand in the day of
his necessity, but terror is upon his loins, and fearfulness in his heart, and
the wrath remains upon him; and wisdom is become madness, and prudence is hid,
and the wise men of this Generation are become foolish, What do ye mean? Ye
that have gathered your selves together, all ye Sects and Opinions, and ye that
profess the Law of Righteousness, Is your Religion turned into Envy and Wrath,
whereby you would slay the Upright? You have made Lies your refuge, as your
last defense to cover your selves from the Storm; but your City is besieged,
and fear shall compass you about, and the refuge of Lies shall be swept away*
For, in vain, and to no purpose do men strive against the Lord, and without
effect (as to that which they intend) do they gather themselves together, and
band themselves in deaths covenant, to war against the Lamb; for the more you
strive the more you are entangled and the deeper your pit is dug for
another, the greater is your own fall into it; for the purpose of your hearts;
and the intent of your wicked minds does the Lord make void, and turns them
upon your own head; and strongly are you bound in your own snare, which you
secretly lay for the foot of the Innocent, to make the Upright a prey. How long
ye men of the Earth will ye (...) counsel together against the Lord? How long
shall the Righteous be a prey to your teeth, to shoot your Arrows of Cruelty
and Reproach against? When will you give over your Oppression, and Violence,
wherewith you think to spoil the tender Grape of the Lords Vintage, and to
devour the Seed of Jacob from off the Earth, that you may rule in the kingdom
in peace? When will you be weary (...) your wickedness, and cease from your
deceivings, seeing the Lord makes you a Curse in whatsoever you take in hand?
You travel in wrath, and bring forth nothing; you strive all the day long, and
gather nothing but stubble, and the fire kindles upon it, and makes it a heap
of Confusion in a moment* When will you learn wisdom, and refrain your selves
from vanity? Do you think to persist in the way wherein you walk? can you
overcome the Lamb? or can you bring to naught the purpose of the Most High?
Will you make your selves equal with him, and will ye gainsay the working of
his Power? Nay, you shall fall into everlasting confusion, and the remembrance
of your destruction shall not suddenly pass away: for the purpose of the Lord
shall surely stand, and his Counsel shall (...) be made void; for you are but
suffered for a moment, till your measure be ^ull, and your transgression be
finished, that you may be cut off for ever, and ^^id waste as the Wilderness*
Long has been the night of Darkness over all Nations, wherein you have played,
and sported your selves, as though no eye had seen you, and your works of
cruelty had laid hid in your bosoms, but now they do appear, and the day has
made you manifest, and the Light has discovered you, and now ye are tried, and
weighted, and searched; and the Fire of the Lord is kindled upon all your
works, and the end o^ them is confusion and misery; and in sorrow shall ye lie
down, and no eye shall comfort you, nor no Physician shall heal your bruise;
for with a grievous blow will the Hand of the Lord be upon you, all you who
pervert his Way, who have joined your selves in battle against the Lamb, and
his Followers; some of you smiting the Innocent with your hands, and some with
your tongues, and in your envy deal cruelty with the Lord's Chosen, who are
become a Proverb and Prey to the wicked, and as a Butt to shoot at, against
whom you bend your Tongues, and speak bitter things, even from the head to the
tail; the whole body of Darkness is prepared to war, and every member of the
great Image is stirred up in its strength, thinking to prevail through
subtilty, against the innocence of the Simple, and Lies are become o^^ Enemies
refuge, and their trust is in a broken Reed, which fails their confidence and
hope; and we are preserved under the shadow of the Almighty, and we are
delivered out of the snare of our Enemies, and through suffering for a moment,
shall reign for ever and ever over the Beast and his Image.

And unto thee Giles Firmin I do write a few words, in answer to thy Book,
caled, Stablishing against Quaking; who have helped up the measure to fulfill
the wickedness of the wicked in adding thy Lies, and Slanders, and Reproaches
unto thy Brethren, and have cast in thy Mite into the heap of Babylons
Confusion, and ^ast set thy seal against the Lord's People, and have put to thy
hand in the record of Sions Enemies; Whom do you thus strive against? And
against whom is your ^ury thus kindled? What are you doing in your drunken fits
of fury, wherein you stagger with the wine of Envy? Surely when you are sober
you will consider, and when you are come to your selves you will be ashamed,
and will not open any more your malice and wrath which has drownded your
honesty and civility; and ^n your knowledge you are as bruit Beasts, which are
to be destroyed; you do but ga^her your selves together that you may be
scattered and broken to pieces; you are ^uffered to heap up your confusion, in
Lies and Reproaches, that the Lord may make you ashamed, and judge you out of
your own mouths.

And Friend, what have thou done, and who have thou established? the wicked ^n
his wickedness, and the unclean in his filthiness, and have hardened the hearts
of the ungodly by thy Lies and Slanders, least they should turn from their
ungod^iness, and be saved from their sins, and so against quaking for
transgression have ^hou stablished them herein; and this will be laid to thy
charge in the Day of ^he Lord, who healest up the Wound slightly, and criest
Peace, Peace to the wick^d, unto whom the Lord has not spoken Peace: And
Friend, thou art the man ^n whom the Prince of Darkness is discovered, which
now works in thee, and from him have thou sent forth thy pack of Reproaches
against the Innocent, and ^leadest thy own cause, and judge hereof in the
sight of men, and have sought ^he praise of men, and not the Praise of God; and
so seek to obtain a good re^ort by flattery, and not by faith; and this
sufficiently appears in thy first E^istle, wherein thou have given flattering
Titles unto man, and in vain hypocri^ie have fought a proof to the authority of
thy Book, thinking thereby the more ^o make it of force to do the work, which
thou intendest by it; even to ^oyson the simplicity of the Upright, and to
devour the woman which brings ^orth the Man-Child, by casting floods of evil
Speeches and Lies after her, but ^hy flatteries are of no worth to thee, nor
thy subtle words of guile avails thee ^ot herein; for in the Light thou art
seen, and by it tried, and thy snare which ^hou, have laid will fetter thy own
foot, and the mischief thou intendest is fallen upon thy own head, and whilst
thou have thought to discover the Prince of Darkness in another, thou have
covered and cloaked him in thy self, under thy feigned words of flattery; but
through that vail he is seen, and unto all men shall be made manifest, and the
Spirit of the Lord does judge him, and thy Rock of flattery shall not cover
thee from the Wrath of him, whom thou have set thy self to oppose.

And in thy second Epistle thou say, Thou made one Sermon, to discover
this Generation (meaning the Quakers) and thou, say thou, found good success
of it.

Friend, thou have more fully discovered thy self, and that abommation which
lodged in thy heart secretly, which thou have not let out into open view, then
thou have in the least measure discovered us, or detected us, or justly
reproved us, in Doctrine or Conversation to be contrary to the Saints in
Generations past, who are our cloud of Witnesses, as being guided by the same
Spirit according to the measure as we have received; but this is rather a
discovery to all the Upright that were of God, because we are spoken all manner
of evil of, falsely by thee and thy Generation, who are sufficiently proved in
all your ways and worships, to be of the Generation of them that ever
persecuted the righteous Seed of God: And as for the success, thou have found
little profit thereof, for the Judgments and Wrath of God will succeed thy Lies
and Slanders; and this shall thou find, and they that are deceived by thee
shall perish together, and this will be the reward of thy duty, which thou
say called upon thee now to speak. And seven of thy first Pages have thou
filled in pleading for thy own kingdom, and unjustly justifiing thy own cause,
in Preaching for Hire, and in Divining for Money, and in seeing for thy Gain
from thy Quarter, false Prophet like; it well appears that sometime thou have
been bit upon thy sore, and searched where thy guilt has lodged, and now thou
have endeavored to heal up the wound, and cure thy self, and have brought many
arguments, and have sought to clear thy self by guile (...) not by innocence;
and have gathered many Scriptures together, which as the supposest might make
for thy purpose herein by preaching of them: How f^ would thou blind the eye
of the Simple, that thou might always act thy ab^ mination, and not be seen;
and even as Satan brought Scripture against Christ so have thou against the
Truth, and to uphold thy iniquity.

Thou say, It is the great clamor of the Quakers, that you are no Ministers
of Chri^ Isa. 56. 2 Pet. 23. Ezekiel. 34. Mich. 3. 5 Tit. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 34. 5
because you Preach for Hire; Divine for Money, and are Covetous, etc.

This is true, and I will add much more, which thou have spared, You are greedy
dumb Dogs, and can never have enough, every one of you seeking for yo^ Gain
from your Quarter, and through Coveteousness make merchandise of Sou^^ and make
a Prey upon the Flock, and feed your selves with the Fat, and cloa^^ your
selves with the Wool; and cry, Peace, Peace to them that put into yo^ Mouths,
but prepare War against them that do not; and are given to filthy (...) cre,
and love the Wages of unrighteousness, and go on headlong in the Error (...)
Balaam and Cain, having the Form of Godliness but denying the Power; bei^ heady
and high-minded-Men, and false Accusers, and proud Boasters, and Lovers of
Pleasure more than God, etc. Much more also is true upon you according to
Scripture; for whatsoever the true Prophets and Apostles declared, as (...)
giving a description of the false Prophets and Apostles, by their works and
sig^ the same way may truly be said upon you, as being every whit guilty of
what^^ ever was charged upon them by the Spirit of the Lord; so that all thy
wresting^ Scriptures will not clear thee and thy Brethren, who have, some of
them, said as (...) as thou can say, in this particular; but Truth stands
unmovable, and you (...) altogether discovered, and made bare and naked; and
your shame does appear^ thy answer to this which thou call, The Quakers
clamor.

Thou say, False Teachers may and have preached freely; then be sure free
Te^ could not prove you to be true Ministers, etc.

Reply, Thou and this Generation of Teachers exceed such in abominati^^ who
have not yet so far transformed your selves like unto true Ministers, as (...)
teach freely; and your condemnation will be the greater, insomuch as you exc^
them in wickedness; and it is confessed, that free Teaching would not prove
(...) to be true Minsters, for you are false, and deceitful in every account,
and (...) nisters of Antichrist, under many considerations more then one; as in
your Ca^ and Worship, and many other things: And thus thou have laid open thy
own (...) ly, that thou may be judged out of thy own mouth. For in the
Margent the say, The Quakers teach not freely, for at one Town thou hear,
that one of the Qu^kers had about five Pound gathered for him.

Friend, This is a Slander and a false Accusation, and thou have heard and
believed a Lie (if not made a Lie) and thy Lies will be no refuge for thee in
(...) Day of the Lord; for I testify against them and thee, and him to be no
Qu^^^ who acted such a thing, if any such was acted. Then thou go on, and
draw^ many vain conclusions and arguments to no purpose; and bring the
Scriptu^^ 2 Cor. 11. 8, 9. and think this for thy purpose, because of the
word (W^ges) and now boastest as though thou had overcome; but all this will
not clear the from guilt, nor prove thee to be a Minister of Christ; he reaped
where he had sow^, and not of the World; he eat the Milk of the Flock, and did
not by a Law co^ pel People to pay him, as thy Generation does; neither was he
chargeable to any, as you are, but made the Gospel of Christ free; and used not
his liberty in the^^ things, but you go beyond the liberty of equity, and by a
Law obtain your Maintenance, oppressing the Poor to make your selves rich;
living in Pride, Idleness, and Fullness; but Paul did not thus, but was in Cold,
Hunger, and Nakedness; and the Wages he took was not to do himself service, but
them, as it is evident* So Paul's example herein will not cloak thy filthiness,
nor cover thy shame; hewas a Minister of the Spirit, and did sow spiritual
things, and was no Hireling, as the false Prophets, who through coveteousness
made merchandise of souls; and this is thy example, and not the practice of
Paul, whom thou would fain make like unto thy self; but he is justified, and
thou art condemned in the Sight of God, whose work is not of his nature; he
gave freely and might reap where he sowed; but thou make a Covenant to reap
before thou sowest, and sowest not, and so deceives the People.

Then thou say, We provide for our selves (when we wander up and down) men
must provide us Lodging, Food, etc. Are not People bound to provide for you, as
well as to entertain us, etc.

Thou always pleadest thy own cause, and so had thou need; for the Children
of God cannot plead for thee, but testify against thee: It is Christ's
Doctrine, Into whatsoever House ye enter, eat such things as are set before
you; but it was never his Doctrine, Take so much by the year; and if they will
give you such a Sum, preach to them; this is the Doctrine, Way, and Wages of
Balaam, in which thou art found. Many other Scriptures do thou wrest, and
many a vain Argument do thou make unto this purpose.

And thou say, He that will be a Minister indeed, will say, He finds all
little enough.

For shame cover thy Lips, and stop thy Mouth; thy stuff stinks with raking in,
who say, That men cannot be sufficient Ministers without Arts, and such poor
blind stuff, of which I am ashamed, and pass by it as not worth the mentioning.
Then thou go on in the matter of Tithes, seeing the Rule and Law of
Scripture will not fully bear thee out in thy wicked practice of pleading for
Hire; (...)go to the Law of the Nation, and so the Gospel which you preach
will not ma^n you according to the Apostles Doctrine; but by a Law are
maintained, through the grievous oppression of the Innocent, as is witnessed in
this Nation; and thou art put to all thy shifts, though but beggarly some of
them, to blind Peoples eyes, so that you may have your Hire; and in thy
Arguments thou pleadest, That Tithes are no man's own, but the Ministers, etc.

But I say, if poor men did not labor, and improve their time, and strength,
and money, you could have no Tithes; so that if the Land was not tilled through
poor Peoples labors you might go without; so Tithes are not paid out of the
Land, but out of men's labors thereupon; and so you rob poor men's labors, and
not the Land, that you may live in filthiness.

And thou say, Care is taken for you already many hundred Years before you
were born, in setting an Estate. etc.

Yea, the Pope settled Tithes upon his Priests, whose Generation you are of; a
poor shameless shift to plead such things, leaving the Rule of the Scripture,
and defending your selves both in your Ministry and Maintenance by a Popish
^aw, which was the supreme Power in the Nation when Tithes were first
established in England, but neither the Rule of Scripture, nor of the National
Law will make your works justified; all People shall see your nakedness, and
God will make you ashamed of your way: And as to particular, Had we lived in
the primitive Churches, when the Magistrates were Heathens, etc.

This I shall answer by a Question, Does not the works of some of the
Magistrates in England (I do not say all) prove themselves rather to be
Heathens than Christians, by their unjust imprisoning of the Innocent without
^ch of any Law, and so to be rather Destroyers of the Church (which is the Body
of Christ) then careing to preserve it, and also in giving treble damage to
the Hirelings for Non-payment, thereby wasting and making havoc of poor men's
Estates, as is in many places to be witnessed, and these are they who are most
zealous for you, some of them I leave this Question to be answered, which being
but truly answered, will discover whether you who by oppression take Tithes,
(...)^ho o^^ of the exercise of a pure Conscience cannot pay Tithes, and so are
Sufferers, and you Oppressors are Carriers on of the designs of Hell and Rome,
as in thy eleventh Page thou speak.

Then thou say, So much for the Ministers Maintenance, etc.

Yea, more then enough, but that thou might lay open thy own folly,
therefore wast thou allowed, that thy shame might be fully laid open, and thou
uncovered, who have acted thy part as others of thy Brethren before thee, in
pleading your own unjust cause of Idolatry, to uphold your grievous Oppression
of Tithes and set Maintenances, under which at this day many thousands do sadly
groan, and not pitied by you; but though you regard not, the Lord God does and
will avenge their Cry upon your heads, who have made your Ministry and Religion
the most grievous Oppression in this Commonwealth, and so are fallen into
greater abomination than the Heathen, and are higher than they in ungodliness,
and deeper in subtilty; and go to the Heathens, and they will shame you; and
take thy own counsel, and practice it, as in thy tenth Page: And much more of
thy stuff I pass, thus much is sufficient to discover thy deceit in this
particular.

Then thou go on, and from thy Text thy observation is this, It has been of
old, and it is the practice still of the Prince of Darkness, to transform
himself into an Angel of Light, etc.

To which I answer, It is proved by the Scripture, that it has been of old his
practice, and it is proved upon thee, that it is still his practice; and thou
art the man upon whom thy observation stands true, who art in thy good words,
and fair speeches, and pretenses, transformed only in the appearance, and not
in the ground, out of gross wickedness into secret hypocrisy, and so make an
Image without Life, and so as Iannes and Iambres, art resisting Truth; yet art
thou seen and comprehended, though thou say, Satan is never less seen then
when he acts as an Angel of Light; which I suppose thou speak by experience,
as being acted therein, undiscovered to the Simple, because of thy hypocrisy.

In thy Page thirteenth, thou say, that The Scriptures are the true Light.

Here thy blindeness and error is discovered, who speak herein contrary to
the Scripture, which says, Christ Jesus is the true Light, 1 John 9. Here th^^
would exalt the Scriptures in the Seat of Christ, and thereby deny him, in
saying the Scripture is that which he only is, and nothing else, (to wit) The
tr^^ Light of the World; which lighteneth every man that comes into the World;
and the Scriptures are a Declaration of him, and not him.

And thou go on, and say, Because these Quakers ^each People they must do
justly, do no body wrong, nor Lie, etc. some take it for granted they come from
Christ, etc.

But this thou snuffest at, and make light of, by which is easily discerned
of what spirit thou art; the Scripture witnesses, He is a Minister of Christ
that tur^ from Darkness to Light, and from sin unto God; and could we but wink
at sin, and cloak it as you do, and cry Peace, Peace to them that walks after
the imaginations of their own hearts, then should we be loved, and not hated of
the World.

And in thy fourteenth Page, Thou reckonest us with the Friars and Popish
Generation, but them and thee we do deny, and that holiness and righteousness
which is in the will of man; for because we cannot run to the same excess of
riot with you, you think it strange; and therefore thou accusest us (as with a
matter of fact) That we drink water, and fast, and wear no Lace, etc. That
which tho^ would make us abominable in by the sight of men does our innocence
and uprightness appear in, in the sight of God, and his Children.

Then thou go on in thy confused language, and in that which thou call
thy use, Take h^ed that you be not deceived.

To whom do thou speak, to them that are in the Truth? If tho^ speak to
thy own flock, thy word might have been, Search, lest you be deceived; for we
know the whole World lies in wickedness, and this Generation under the
deceivableness of a blind Ministry, which leads not unto God, but keeps in
Darkness, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

And in thy Page ninteenth, Thou have put forth a Question, which is, How shall
we know this transformed Angel of Light, etc?

To which I answer, Where he rules he is not known nor discerned, for the god
of the World has blinded the eye which should make him manifest; and this is
true in thee, who art led by him and perceivest it not, and art doing his work
and understandest not; but the brightness of the coming of the Son of Man in
the Children of the Father, has discovered him in the World, and in thee; and
though thou woulst fain put him among the Quakers, yet he is found in thy own
house; thou endeavourest to prove thy Accusation by vain consequence and false
conclusions; but our Assertion is proved by the Spirit of God, and stands upon
thy head, and shall be witnessed by the Light in thy own Conscience.

Now something in answer to thy Arguments, and false Conclusion. And thy first
Argument is, That the Light of the Quakers will not admit of, nor endure the
Trial, therefore the Light of the Quakers is the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. Thy proposition and ground of thy Argument is a Lie, and so thy
conclusion is to no purpose; for we deny not a Trial, but exhort People
thereunto, that they search the Scripture, to see whether these things be not
so, and are tried by the Scriptures in Doctrine and Conversation, and proved to
be simple thereby, to be in the Truth as it is in Jesus, and are testified of
in Scripture by the Holy men of God, who are unto us a Cloud of Witnesses, in
our Faith, and Life, and Sufferings, and Trials, etc. Friend, thou have fained
a Lie upon us, and have confuted thy own Lie; this is an easy way to prove us
Deceivers, if it would stand in trial; neither is thy proof, That w^ do deny
trial, any wit to this purpose, as I. N. against F. Harris, Page the tenth,
which thou quotest, let the honest hearted read; but subtly have thou wrested
the words, to bring thy false Conclusion and Lie about, to take place among the
ignorant People: Thy Lie is condemned, and thy refuge is taken away, and thou
art left naked for the Destroyer.

Thy second Argument is, The Light of the Quakers puts out the Light of
Nature; therefore their Light is the light of Satan, etc. Thou say by the
Light of Nature, thou meanest the inward Law; which God set up in the heart of
all mankind, ch^^king many sins against God and man, etc.

Answ* What blind confusion is this, which is uttered from thy dark mind? no
whit savory, but stuff hardly worth stirring in, and quite contradiction to thy
own words, Page fifteen, where thou chargest us with directing to the Light in
the Conscience, which thou call Natural, but we call it Spiritual, and this
is it which cheeks the sins against God, which thou say our Light puts out,
and that we preach any thing for Light which puts out this light (which is the
work of the Law of God written in the heart) this Argument is also a Lie, and
so thy conclusion is made void likewise; but that the Knowledge, and Wisdom,
and Prudency of the natural man, which is corrupted, must be put out, this we
own; and the Quakers Light, which is the Light of Christ, shall confound the
Wisdom of the World, and be no transgression against God, nor from a light of
Satan, but of Christ; and the proof of thy Argument is, as thou say, W^ deny
honor to all Superiors, and seem to be greatly offended with the word
(Thou) quoting many Scriptures against it, but let the wise in heart judge thee
herein; none of all these Scripture, will prove that ever any of the Saints
gave flattering Titles unto men, or spoke (You) to a particular Person, which
thou art to prove, or else thou say nothing, that the word (Thou) to
Superiors is any denying of honor due unto them; and herein thy conclusion is
also false, being the foundation of thy Argument is a Lie; and thy Argument
made up of confusion, saying, That Light is Natural, which is the inward Law
set up in the heart, checking the sins against God and man, this is one Lie;
also saying, That our Light puts out the Light, This is another Lie: Friend, if
Lies would prove us Deceivers, thou would accomplish it; How easy a thing it
is for thee to confute thy own Lies, when thou have made them?

Thy third Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light (viz.) which teaches men to
forsake the Scriptures, setting up a spirit in man, which shall not be examined
by the Scriptures; therefore, it is the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. The first part of thy Argument is a very Lie, and also the last, as thou
have laid it down; our Light teaches not men to forsake the Scriptures, but
into the fulfilling of them, to walk in the Life of them; and it teaches to
exalt the Spirit of God in man above all things, and in its fruits and
opperation may be examined by the Scriptures, but it self is the Searcher of
all things, even of the deep things of God; and this is not the Light of Satan
but of Christ, which teaches men into the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and to
exalt the Spirit in man which gave forth the Scriptures, which is the trial of
all spirits; and whatsoever conclusion be gathered for an Argument, whereof a
Lie is the foundation, as of this, the conclusion must needs be vain, and a
Lie, like its foundation. And in thy proof of the major position, thou say,
The Scriptures are left by God, to be your Light and Rule, etc. And the
Scriptures say, Christ is the Light, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, (and so
the Rule) and so thou have set up the Scriptures above Christ, and by thy lying
spirit crosses the Scriptures; but thou art accustomed to Lie, and so art
expert therein: And thou say, Christ bids you se^^c^ the Scriptures, John 5.
39. It is true, he bids the Pharisees, who had not Christ Word abiding in them,
and who had not heard God's Voice, nor seen his Shape, but persecuted Christ,
them he bad search the Scriptures; and justly have thou thr^^^ in thy self
among the Pharisees, and so art an Enemy to Christ, according to thy own
confession: And for the proof of the minor position, thou have not at at (...)
proved by any way of the Books quoted thy proposition, That the Quakers Lig^^
teaches men to forsake the Scriptures, etc. Let the wise in heart judge. And
thou say, But to speak truly, The Quakers make nothing of Scriptures, etc.
This is the very falsness, and of thy lying tongue, and no truth in it; and a
Question here I ask, Whether he be the more guilty of forsaking Scriptures
which live the Life thereof, and in the fulfilling of them by the Spirit, or he
that talks in words of them, and makes a trade thereof, but lives in Lying and
false Accusing, and Pride, and vain Glory, and the filthiness of the Flesh?
This Question being answered, will open the understanding of the simple, and
our innocence thereby will appear from all thy grievous slanders, and wicked
wrestings of our words. As in Page twenty five, in thy false conclusion of this
particular, thou say, The Quakers divide the Spirit from the Scripture, etc.
Yea, the Spirit, and the Scriptures are low things, though they bear wit^ to
the truth of each other, thus are they divided, That every one that has the
Scriptures has not the Spirit, and this is no error, nor from a Light of
Satan; but thy Lies are from the Darkness of Satan, and not from the Lig^^ of
Christ.

Thy fourth Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light (viz.) which makes the
Scripture cross it self, and that in things known by the Light of nature;
therefore the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. This is also false in the foundation, and thy Arguments and Confusions
made without effect: Friend, whilst thy foundation is a Lie thy Building wi^
not endure, be sure of that; the Scripture was given forth by one Spirit, and
bears witness unto one thing, and does not cross it self in the Light of the
Spirit that gave it forth, though to thy carnal wisdom it may seem so: And for
the proof of thy minor proposition, thou say we quote that Scripture, James
2. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of Persons, etc. to
overthrow all respect of Persons, etc. Does this at all prove that our Light
makes the Scripture to cross it self? Where is it said in the Scripture, Have
the Faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of Persons? Such a one thou must
bring, or else thou have said nothing to this purpose: And thy second Scripture
is, That we say as Christ said, Swear not at all: Will this Scripture being
quoted by us, prove that our Light makes the Scripture cross it self? What
blind confused stuff is this which proceeds from thee, thinking to make us
odious and vile, but thou have the rather made thy self ignorant and blind in
the sight of all the Children of Light, who comprehend thee in thy subtilty;
and as to that of Swearing, which thou have strived in thy Argument to prove
the Lawfulness of it, thou have thereby made thy Argument against Christ's own
words, who says, Swear not at all; and thou art he whose Light (or rather
whose Darkness) would confound the Scriptures, to blind the eye of the Simple;
and thy conclusion stands true upon thy self; hence thy light is the light of
Satan, not of Christ. And thou say, The Quakers bid men be guided by the
Light of God within, etc. How does this contradict thy own words, page twenty
second, where thou say, The Quakers Light puts out this light, the inward
Law set up in the heart, etc. when will thou be ashamed of thy ignorance, and
stop thy mouth in the dust?

Thy fifth Argument is; Such is the Quakers Light, viz. which takes men off
from that Rule which is perfect, and cannot err, and sends them to be guided by
a Light which is imperfect, and may and does err; therefore the Light of Satan,
etc.

Answ. Have thou given up thy self wholly to lies, and to make them thy refuge?
thy work is to make a Lie, and then to confound it; this is an easy way to
prove us Deceivers, as I said; and in the proof of thy minor Proposition, thou
have fallen short of proving what thou take in hand, and say, The Word of
God is perfect, but the Quakers do not send men to the Word, etc. This is
false, we preach the Word, and send men to it; even that Word of Faith which
the Apostle preached, which is in the heart, and in the mouth, and that Word is
perfect, and errs not, and this we send men too, to be guided by it, and to
receive faith in it; then thou say, The light of Conscience is imperfect,
and may err, and takes accasion to speak of that Scripture, 1 Ioh. 8. but to
what purpose I know not, except thou would prove that Light of Christ to be
imperfect, and err, which we say has lightened every man's Conscience in the
World, and is a perfect Rule in the Conscience, where man is guided by it; and
this Light leads up unto Christ, to exercise the Conscience, and he to rule
King and Lord in the Conscience, and so to make Conscience one with him in the
unity; and this is true wisdom, and no folly as thou accountst it in thy
blindness, page twenty nine: Then thou go on, and have intimated a falsity
from I. Ps Query, and then confutes thy own Lie; I. P. does not say, every man
is lightened with a saving Light; but asks the Question to be answered, which
for the simple sake, here I do answer, Christ has lighted every man in the
World with the true Light, which is saving Light to every one that believes
therein, and condemning Light to him that believes not, yet is the Light true
Light, and no error nor imperfection in it; and they that hate it are such as
know nothing of Redemption, Justification, etc. and a great part of England is
in that conditin, though they have heard the report, yet they know it not in
truth and righteousness; and this Light is in the World, and the World knows it
not; yet does not this confute that he has lightened every man that comes into
the World, as thou would ignorantly make it appear in the same page: Then
thou say, If you speak of reason and understanding, so Christ lights every
one, etc.

Here thou have confessed Truth with thy lying Spirit; it is the purest reason
that every man should serve his Maker, and act nothing contrary to his Maker;
this the ^ight of Christ lights unto, and leads unto; and it is the best
understanding that gives a man to understand the Way of eternal Peace and Rest
for his Soul, if he love the Light, and lets him understand when he acts
against his Maker, etc. and this has Christ lighted every man unto; Then thou
say, Conscience may err, and provest it from Paul's example of persecuting:
If Conscience be not guided by the Light of Christ, it erreth; but it was not
the Light of Christ in Paul's Conscience which led him to persecute, but his
thoughts and imaginations, which were in the high mind above the Light in the
Conscience; then many false conclusions from our words have thou drawn, through
thy wresting of them; thou say, as in all our books, the word of God written
is made of no account, etc. thy lying tongue will God rebuke, the Scriptures we
account of, and set them in their Authority, and bring them as a Witness
against thee, and all thy ways, who art out of the Life of them, thinking thou
do God service in speaking evil of his people; and thy Rules by which thou
walkst, is proved by thy works and words to be imperfect and erroneous, and thy
darkness is of Satan, and not the Light of Christ.

Thy sixth Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light, that it destroys the
institutions of Christ; therefore is the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. Have thou no foundation but a Lie to place thy. Argument upon? surely,
thy time is near an end, because thou have no refuge but a lie to fly unto.

Thy major Proposition is not altogether sound, for that light was the Light of
God, and of Christ which commanded circumcision, and the seventh day to be kept
a Sabbath, and the Worship in the Temple, which was instituted by God, etc. And
that was the Light of God, and of Christ also, which led the Disciples from
these things, to deny them, and bear witness against them, and yet no offense
in God, nor no contradiction in the Light of Christ; but this to thy dark mind
is a mystery sealed, and I leave it as a Parable to thee.

Then for the proof of, thy minor Proposition, thou instancest, That we de^^
Baptism, and breaking of Bread; yet dare thou not contend for sprinkling of
Infants; (that imagination of man, and no institution of Christ.) But make
use of the Baptist herein, unto whom I perceive thou art an Enemy; what poor
shifts art thou fain to run unto now, when thou art likely to be discovered,
and rambles up and down, wresting our words to blind the eyes of the simple?
for you that live in your filthiness, yet professing the Supper of the Lord, it
is made manifest you eat and drink your own damnation, and discerns not the
Lords Body and while you are of the World, and not come to Repentance, you have
nothing to do to speak of the Institutions of Christ, which was to his Church,
to be practiced therein only, and not among the Children of this World; so thy
darkness is of Satan, and not of Christ, and thy Conclusion it is to thy self.

Thy seventh Argument is; Such is the Quakers Light, viz. Which denies agre^
Work of Christ in the hearts of them who believe in him; therefore it is the
Light of Satan, etc.

Answ. What have thou nothing but a Lie in thy mouth to ground thy Discourse
upon, and to draw thy Conclusion from; we deny not the work of Christ in the
hearts of them who believe; the proof of this minor position makes it not at
all evident, when thou have wrested our words as much as thou can, much less
if the simplicity of our words were used; so it being a Lie in the ground, I
need no^ much pluck down the building, for it falls of it self, as being not so
firm as upon the Sand; for we hereunto exhort, that every one may know and
witness the work of Christ in the heart to change and translate, and to give
power over the World: But among thy many blind Arguments thou say, Thou
deniest that the Righteousness of Christ whereby a Believer is justified does
dwell in him, etc. The Scripture says, Except Christ be in you, you are
Reprobates; and where Christ is, there is his Righteousness, for they are not
divided; and the Word of Faith, which is the Righteousness of Christ, is in the
heart, as Paul says: but I have cause to think thou art not much ashamed of
being proved a Liar, because thy impudency has overcome simplicity and
honesty; for when thou have committed abomination, thou can not blush, nor be
ashamed; but thy shame will the Upright see.

Thy eighth Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light, (viz.) which teaches men
^o omit their duty to God; therefore it is the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. Thou Enemy of God, when will thou cease thy Lies, and to pervert the
right way of God? we teach no man to omit his duty, neither does thy witness of
thy minor Proposition stand any whit for thy purpose; we are our selves daily
exercised in Prayer unto God, and omits it not, as thou falsely accusest; but to
bear Testimony against the Sacrifice of the Wicked, prayer, self-righteousness,
etc. that it is abomination, and not accepted of the Father, this is no whit to
the purpose of teaching men to omit their duty, as thou falsely accuses us; and
thy multitude of vain Arguments are to no purpose herein; and thou shows a vain
wonto^ spirit. at I. Ns words, whose Exhortation is to wait for the Spirit,
which we testify no man can be heard, or accepted of God in what he does,
without it; and this is the Duty of the Children of God, to wait upon the
Father to be led by his Spirit, and he who is without the Spirit, has not
received Christ Jesus; and though thou scornst at this, yet of it we are not
ashamed; and thy false conclusion is like thy foundation, both to be condemned
with the Liar.

Thy ninth Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light (viz.) which teaches men to
say, they have no sin; therefore the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. In the proof of thy major Proposition, thou say, The Light of Christ
does teach, that all his People are freed from the dominion of sin; and Christ
Jesus no where says, That any are free from the dominion of sin, who are not
free from the committing of sin; but the contrary he says, He that commits sin
is John 8. 34.
the Servant of sin; and such a one is under the dominion of it, where he is
Servant, sin is Lord; so he who is redeemed from the Dominion and committing of
sin, and cleansed from all unrighteousness, by Christ Jesus through his Blood;
if he says he has no sin, he is no Liar: but if before confession and
forsaking of sin, he says he has no sin, he deceives himself, according as
the Scripture witnesses unto both these conditions, 1 John 1. 8, 9. Again, He
that is born of God sins not, as the same Apostle says; and if he that sins
not, says he has no sin, he is no Liar, but his Light is the Light of Christ,
and not of Satan: And thy blindness is seen in that thou say in effect, as
though some may be free from the dominion of sin, and yet not free from the
committing of sin; if thy Light teaches thee thus, it is contrary to the Light
of Christ, which gave forth the Scripture; our Light teaches from the
committing of all sin, and gives dominion over all unrighteousness, and of this
Light we are not ashamed: This is the strength of thy Argument, which is
answered; so much of the rest I pass by, only may mind thee of thy confusion.
Thou say, Where s^n has no dominion, that man is perfect, etc. And thou
allowest that the Light of Christ teaches men that they are freed from the
dominion of sin; and it is proved that none are free from the dominion of sin,
but who are saved from the committing of sin: And the sum of thy doctrine is no
more then that which thou would make error in us, though sometimes thou art
railing against Perfection, and sometimes owning it under some particular
accounts, not under all; and so one while builds up, and another while throwest
down, and so art in Babylon. Thou say, There are thousands of perfect men in
England, etc. yet thy false conclusion is, because we hold Perfection,
Therefore is our Light the light of Satan, etc. I leave it to the simple mind,
to read thy confusion, and shall rake no longer in it.

Thy Tenth Argument is, Such is the Quakers Light (viz.) Which teaches men to
revile, and throw filth upon the true Ministers, and true Churches of Christ;
therefore it is the light of Satan, etc.

Answ. This Foundation is another Lie, and thy Arguments are to no purpose; We
revile not, neither do throw filth upon the true Ministers and Churches of
Christ; Thy proof of thy minor position gives not evidence of thy assertion;
let the wise in Heart judge: So much need not be said, because both thy
proposition and thy proof is false; Does I. Parnel, telling Of the Churches
being in God, etc. prove that we revile and throw filth upon Ministers? etc.
What blindness is this? but yet this will be the Question, Who the true
Ministers and Churches of Christ are? for we judge it not, (neither does the
Lord) to be reviling and throwing filth upon the true Ministers and Churches,
to call you greedy dumb Dogs, that seek for your Gain from your Quarter, and
can never have enough; and Hirelings, Isa. 56. Mich. 3. 5 Ezekiel. 34. Ier. 5.
Tit. 1. 11.
that preach for Hire, and divine for Money; and Devourers of the Flock, who
feed your selves with the Fat, and make a Prey through Covetousness upon the
People; acting the horrible filthy thing, which Jeremiah cried against; and to
call you evil Beasts, and Slow-bellies, which teach for filthy Lucre, as ^^^l
did: And much more such like may truly be spoken of you, by the Spirit of the
Lord, and no railing against the Ministers of Christ, no more then the true
Prophets, which spoke the same Language: for who act those things which the
Prophets of Christ and his Apostles declared against, are no Ministers of
Christ; and here we find you in the steps of the false Prophets, and Scribes,
and Pharisees, and false Apostles; (if any ask the particulars, I can give
testimony hereof) so that we make a great difference between reproving and
condemning false Teachers and Hirelings, and reviling the true Ministers of
Christ; prove your selves to be true Ministers of Christ, and we shall join
with you; otherwise we must set to our seal against you, for your abominations,
and shall as justly deny your Idol Temples, and Worship therein to be the true
Churches of Christ, as we deny you to be Ministers; for your works do make you
manifest, even your wickedness is discovered; what rudeness, and wildness, and
pride, and vain glory is among you; and Christ never had such a Body, who were
made up of such Members; but I do the rather pity your blind People than you,
for you are the blind Leaders of the Blind, and shut the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, and enter not your selves, nor will suffer others, This is true
upon you, and so are proved to be the Generation of Vipers, and Serpents, and
Hipocrites: This is no reviling, but the Language of the Spirir of God, which
Christ once spoke to such as you; (I speak of thee and thy Generation) and we
own and honor the true Ministers and Churches of Christ, and revile them not;
but deny you, and bear our witness against you. Then thou say, See what is
required by the Apostles Example, to bring you into the Ministry, and prove you
have it not. To which I answer, You have not the call of the Apostles, who were
called by the imediate Spirit; none of you dare own this that I have yet heard
of; neither have you received your Gospel as they did, by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ; and thou have confessed it. In Page fifty one, thou say
plainly, You own no such Revelation; and so have manifested thy self, to be
without the abillities of the true Ministers, in these two particulars, and
many more, which might be mentioned; and also in that which the Apostle says,
He that preaches the Gospel shall live of the Gospel. Now by an outward Law you
are maintained, through oppression of the Innocent, as before I have proved;
for if you had not a Law to defend you in your Maintenance, you might starve or
beg: So your gospel does not maintain you, but the Law of the Nation, through
oppression of the People. And the Apostle preached Christ Jesus to be the Light
which has Lightened every man that comes into the World; and this you deny:
And much more migh be testified against you wherein you are not only short, but
contrary to the true Ministers of Christ. Th^^ thou shamelesly pleadst for the
ordination by the Bishops, which I shall pass by, as not worth minding to set
pen to paper about it, and in conclusion thou say, The pleadst not for every
particular Minister, etc. neither do I plead against any one Minister of
Christ, but against hirelings for which thou pleadst, and so thy darkness is of
Satan, and not the Light of Christ; take thy Conclusion to thy self, for unto
thee it belongs.

Thy eleventh Argument is; Such is the Quakers light (viz.) which brags of the
infallible Spirit, and yet cannot speak good sense or reason, therefore is the
light of Satan, etc.

Answ. This is also false, and a Lie; whom have thou heard brag, by word or
writing, of an infallible Spirit, but the Spirit of God we say is infallible,
and that Spirit we have received in its measure; but thy Lie I bear witness
against, and thee the father of it: And thou say the Spirit of God speaks
rationally, and sense; and thou say Satan also can speak likewise; then that
can be no clear discovery or difference betwixt them, if they speak alike: And
thou say further, Seeing the witty Jesuits cannot do the business, now try if
foolish Quakers can do it, etc. Thou art herein divided from some of thy
Brethren, who has as unjustly as tho^ accused us to be Jesuits; but any thing
you will say which may make for your turn, to uphold the Kingdom of Satan; but
your Lies and Reproaches are unto us great riches, and our innocence will the
Lord bring forth in his time, and your wickedness shall fall upon your own
heads in a moment: but thy proof of thy minor position testifies no such thing
against us, as speaking rational, or nonsense; so thy position is false, that
we brag, etc. And thy proof is not for thy purpose, th^^ we cannot speak good
sense or reason; so in thy whole business thou art found a Liar, and the Liars
Portion is the Lake; this is truth, and no reviling; only I perceive thou have
got a catch by some Scriptures being misplaced, and not truly quoted, which may
be the Printers fault, for ought I know: But all that ever thou have spoken
proves not the truth of what thou have asserted, let shame cover thy face.

Thy twelfth Argument is; Such is the Quakers light, (viz.) which affirms sound
Believers walking (Evangelically) in obedience to Gods Commandments, to be in a
state of Condemnation; therefore it is the Light of Satan, etc.

Answ. Thou being near at an end, have left the greatest Lie to the last; When
will thou be ashamed, and stop thy mouth? thy testimony of Lies is well nigh
finished, and thou bindest up the sum with an abominable one; yet thou
confessest in thy Margent, We do not say thi^ in many words, but by
consequence, etc. Here let all men take notice of thee, who have accused us
with a thing; and yet confessest we say not the thing; thou have fully
manifested thy self, we need go no further to lay thee open; but thou say,
By consequence, etc. Friend, if thou mighttest be the Interpreter of our Books,
its like thou would deal deceifully as thy Generation has done with the
Scripture; but we write not our Books, and leave them for to be expounded by
thee, but they are as they speak, simple plain Language to the ignorant, that
thy may be instructed; thou have manifested thy skill, in wresting our words,
sufficiently; we allow thee not to be our Interpreter; we testify, he who is a
sound Believer, and walks in obedience to the commands of God, is in a
justified state in the sight of God; but we put a difference betwixt condemning
sound Believers, and speaking plainly in reproof of sin, as if we tell the Liar
his portion will be the Lake, and the Proud he shall be as stubble before the
fire, and the Wicked shall be cast into Hell; and that no Coveteous, Unclean,
Whoremongers, Drunkards, etc. shall never enter into the Kingdom of God: This
Language is not a condemning of the sound Believers, neither is it so accounted
in the Sight of God, though falsely judged by thee, and we stand to the Judgment
of him, and not unto thy false Slanders. And thou further say, and desire
the Quakers, But to tell thee of one man in the Word of God, Heb. 12. 21. Ier.
23. 9. Psalm. 88. 15.
(meaning the Scriptures) who was Holy, who embraced the Quakers Doctrines,
Principle, and Practices, etc.

David was holy, Moses was holy, Ieremiak was holy, with many more testified of
in the Scripture, that were of the same Faith with us, and of the same
Doctrines, and Principles, and Practices; for themselves were Quakers, as their
own Writings make manifest; and had thou been in their days, thou would
have spoken no less evil of them then of us; for it was such as thou who spoke
evil of them, and persecuted them; and hence I do conclude thy spirit to be the
spirit of Satan, and not the Spirit of God,

Thy thirteenth and last Argument is against our Shaking (as thou call it)
and it is manifest to every one (thou say) whence it comes, etc. And railest
much against it, and shufflest off, and kicks against the testimony we give out
of the Scripture, bringing the like examples of the Servants of the Lord. And
thou say, We abuse the examples of Daniel, Moses, and David, to defend these
diabolical actings, etc. God shall reprove thy lying Tongue, and rebuke thee
with the reproof of his Judgments; yea, many more than these named can we bring
to witness for us, in the same actings of the Power of God. which thou most
wickedly call Diabolical, and leavest the Reader to observe thy foolish
Story, to which in its place I may answer.

Then thou go on, and ramblest over a great deal of stuff from an Author
like thy self, who wrote a Book against us also, and whose testimony is no
better then thine, as being of the same spirit (against the Seed of God) with
thee, and his testimony and thine are both for condemnation; thou quotest his
Lies to prove thine, as though his words were of authority with the Scripture;
but wrechedness and subtilty lodges under your tongues; and though you be of
several Opinions and Judgments in your Worships and Ministries, yet are you
joined, and against us, as Herod and Pilato; and if it was not such a things as
would make for thy wicked purpose, thou would scorn to make use of his
words, to prove thine; but the shift of the subtle Fox, which would devour the
Lamb, is taken notice of in all his actings.

Then thou say, No you own no such revolation, (viz) by the foregoing words,
(...) you were taught the Gospel by the revolation of Jesus Christ.

And here let all men take notice of thee, to be one that was never sent of
Christ, but one who knows not God; for as Christ Jesus says, No man knows the
Father, nor the Son, but he to whom the Son reveals him: And thou having denied
the Revelation of the Son of God, have shut out thy self from his Knowledge:
For shame talk no more of the things of God, but let thy mouth be stopped from
making mention of his Name, especially on the account of being a Minister; all
that know God or the Gospel are ashamed of thee; some of thy own Brethren will
not own thee herein* some of this I have laid open before. Then thou go on
saying, The pretended revelation of the Quakers, do cross an Article of Faith
and Rule of Obedience in Scripture.

This is not the least of thy Lies: I deny the Slander; the same Truth, and
Faith, and Obedience as ever was witnessed in the Holy men of God, which
declared forth the Scripture, we own, and bear witness of, and no other: The
Revelation of Christ in us, in Faith and Obedience is witnessed by Paul, who is
our Example; and thou art the man whose spirit is contrary to Scripture, as is
clearly made manifest, and in thee the man of sin is revealed, and the Light
which should discover him is veiled; and I may truly say of thee, as thou
falsely have said of us, Surely the Devil is the Author of thy work. Then in
thy conclusion thou say, Much more might be gathered out of their Books,
whereby it may appear by what spirit these Quakers are led; by the spirit of
Satan, scarce trasnformed into an Angel of Light.

Now, to all the honest hearted, unto whom this, and thine may come; even to
thy own Hearers, at least unto such who have but moderation in their spirits;
and to that measure of God in their Consciences I do appeal; that they by it
may judge whether thou have more discovered the spirit of Satan, in us, by any
thing which thou have in all thy Books justly proved against us to be evil, or
sin, or error, (except thy Lies and Slanders may stand for a testimony) or in
thy self: who have slandered us unjustly, and wrested our words deceitfully,
and spoken many (...) grievous untruth of us; and I say to all who read this,
and thine, let them observe with an impartial mind; and try all things, and
hold fast that which is good; and let not the envy of the wicked one so prevail
over you, but search all things with the Light of God, according to the
Scriptures, before you judge any thing, least your zeal in your hasty untamed
minds and spirits betray the honesty, which may in sobriety be instructed, and
you informed the Way of Salvation, which now the Lord of Heaven is discovering
to them that seek him in truth and sincerity: And because the Purpose of the
Lord is to reveal his Glory, and to discover and condemn the secrets of the
well-savoured Harlot, who has sat long as a Queen in the Earth, deceiving
Kingdoms and Peoples; therefore also is Herod and Pilate joined together, and
Gog and Magog is risen in their Power, to resist the Counsel of God, and to
disannul his Purpose; but in vain do they strive, and weary themselves to no
advantage; for Sions King shall reign, and Jerusalem shall be built, and become
the praise of the whole Earth; and Nations shall partake of her Glory, and the
Armies of Alients shall flee and be discomforted: And all the Lies and Slanders
of the wicked one, shall return upon his own head; and the pit which the wicked
digs for the Righteous, it shall swallow the wicked up, and his foot shall not
escape the snare: so that I testify unto all People this one thing concerning
Jesus, Him has God given a Light into the World, a Judge, and a Reprover of
all the works of wickedness; and with his Light every man that comes into the
World is lightened, with the Light of Life all that believe, and with the Light
of Condemnation all that believe not: If you every one turn in your minds from
the vanities of the World, unto the measure of the Light given you, a present
Teacher in the Ways of God; this Light will be in you, to direct your steps in
Righteousness and Peace; for as it is written, The Lord is the Teacher of all
his People, and all the false Teachers and Hirelings will be denied; and the
Scribes and Pharisees, and their leaven, will be born witness against, and the
old man with all his deeds will be put off, and* the new Man will be put on,
which is the Likeness and Image of the Father; and then will you witness the
Life of the Scriptures, and in you they will be fulfilled, by the Spirit that
gave them forth, which Spirit all the Sons of God are guided by; and this
Spirit the World cannot receive, no further then to be reproved by it of sin,
and condemned for unrighteousness; and to every one who has in the least
received a measure of the Spirit, and is guided by it; to them only I leave
what I have written, and the Writing answered to be judged, as in the sight of
God, with an impartial mind. I have not striven for mastery through subtilty
and deceitful speeches but in innocence I have written to vindicate the Lord's
Truth, from the Lies of his Enemies who make i^ their work (...) render the Way
of Truth odious, lest their deceits should be laid open, and they judged. And
this same Giles Firmin has done his part sufficiently herein, who has not
ceased lying and slandering, from the beginning to the end of his Book, unto
which I might have written much more, yet desire not to multiply, words with
such as are impudent, and cannot (...) when they have done evil* but to the
main Particulars, a few to each of them I have written, passing by much
unsavory stuff proceeding from a light vain spirit, (as is easily discernd by
the Children of Light) who has made both Foundations and Arguments very Lies,
and has laid things to our charge, which we never knew, nor by word or Writing
was ever declared; but thou Giles F. have filled up thy measure of wickedness,
according to thy ability; had thou been more subtle, thy work would have been
more deceitful: Therefore repeat of thy wickeness, and go not on in thy
perverse, way of uncleanness, lest thou be cut off with an utter destruction,
and repentance be hid from thy eyes.

And to the foolish babbling story, in the end of thy Book, I do Answer, thou
say a Minister now in Essex gave the Narration, etc. but have deceitfully
concealed his name, and so he and thou well may, as being ashamed thereof, in
laying, slanders too foolish to subscribe his name unto: Yet is Thomas Tillam
known, his name and nature; whose Testimony is like thine, and a Minister like
unto thee; who was, and is known in all the Parts about Hexam to be a deceitful
Fellow; one who preached for Hire, and sought for his Gain from his Quarter, as
is well known; who also made merchandise of souls, through coveteousness with
feigned words. And though T. Tillam be or was an Anabaptist, and contrary to
thee in his Opinion, yet if he will but give a bubling Slander against us thou will belieive him, and call him a Minister; but his wickedness is well noted,,
who for wickedness and filthiness, was cast out and denied of the Assembly
whereof he was the Pastor; and stands this day as one cast off by them, who are
a little more honest than thou and he, though yet Strangers to us, and Opposers
of us: And now in that your deceits are discovered, you flee to any bubble for
a strength, and make Lies your refuge, and yet justify your selves and condemn
the Innocent. And thy last Story is an abominable Lie; and a man that has
honesty in either hand or heart, would be ashamed to utter such things; but in
plainness of speech, thy Lies and Slanders I do deny, and unto thee I do return
them again, with true Judgment upon them, and dare not flatter thee, nor speak
peace unto the wicked; but to the Light of God in all Consciences I do stand
clear, by it to be justified, when all the wicked are condemned.

By a Friend to Isreal's Commonwealth, called, EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE Crying Sins Reproved, WHEREOF The Rulers and People of England are highly
guilty; WITH Additions to their own Confessions held forth by them in a
Declaration of their own, bearing date Septem. 23. wherein these three Nations
are called to a Day of solemn Fasting, etc. With meek Exhortations to this
present Parliament, that they take heed to themselves, lest they make the
Guiltless to suffer upon the account of Blasphemy or Error, etc. while the
Evildoers go free, and the false Prophets defended.
HOw long, how long shall Gods righteous soul be grieved, and his (...) Spirit
vexed with the vain oblations and offerings of them whose hear^^ are far from
him, even after their Idols, and in their covetousness, and earthly honors of
this vain world, while they honor with their lips and profess love with their
mouths in outward observances? How long Lord shall thy Enemies lean upon thee,
and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? while they oppress the Innocent, and make
a prey upon the Upright, and tread thy glory underfoot, and despise thy Law and
Ordinances, and set at naught thy Children, and causes them to suffer grievous
burdens, under heavy hands of cruelty, every one smiting with the fist of
wickedness? Will thou be pleased Lord with a Sacrifice of the unclean hands,
given unto thee from polluted hearts, offered upon the Altars of men's own
precepts in set times? Will thou be worshipped in men's i^ventions and
traditions, in a set day, of hanging down the head like a Bull ru^^ for a
moment? Can thou accept a fast appointed by the will of man, while t^^ bands
of wickedness are not loosed, nor the Oppressed set free? And will thou be
found in a way decreed by the Children of men, whose way is corrupt before
thee? Yea, Lord God, men seeks, but not in thy own Way; and they call upon
thee, but not in thy Spirit; and they press toward thee, but not at thy door;
they ask of thee the Ordinance of Justice, and they delight in approaching to
thee, and they are as a Nation that works righteousness, yet does their, sins
cry aloud in thy ear, and their Oppression and Backsliding calls for Vengeance
upon their own heads: When will ye be wise ye Rulers, and learned you Judges of
the Earth? for now the jealousy of the Lord burns like fire, and his wrath is
kindled more then a little, and yet you do not trust in him; but in the day of
your Fast you find your own pleasures, and in the day of your humiliation you
hearts are lifted up in vain glory, and you presume in his Presence, and call
him Lord, but does not that which he commands; for the Oppressed is not eased,
nor the Captive is not freed, nor the hungry fed, nor the naked clothed; the
Lords soul is wearied with you, and your Offerings unto him are as if you cut
off a Dogs neck, and your Incense is unto him as if you blessed an Idol; you
neglect the Fast which God has chosen, and make unto your selves a Precept and
a Day, in which your work is not accepted, whilst your fear toward him is
taught by your own precepts, and they that fear the Lord mourn for you, and
they that know his Way wish good toward you, that your eyes might see and your
hearts understand that which belongs to your peace; but you despise the reproof
of Instruction, and choose your own ways, and do that which is high in the
sight of your own eyes; and you weary the Lord from day to day, and he is
pressed under your iniquities as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves: And shall not
his Soul be avenged upon you, and upon such a Nation as this, whose fear
toward him is taught by the Precepts of men, and whose Worship of him is
exercised in the vain Traditions of their own inventions? Hear ye Deaf, and
look ye Blind, behold the Lord's Hand is upon you, and you know it not; his
Judgments are nigh you, and you are not aware, but exalt your own horn, and
some of you seek unto your selves a Kingdom to rule in oppression over the Poor
and Needy, who cry to the Lord day and night under the heavy hand of cruel
burdens, which lie upon the Innocent, but you will not touch them with one of
your little Fingers: Woe is me for you, for your destruction comes upon you as
an armed Man, and your desolation as an unresistable Flood; for you regard not
the oppression of the Poor, but make it a thing of naught, you that pass by:
Hear and consider ye Parliament of England, ye are something concerned herein;
if you mean to be established loose the oppression of the Innocent, and let the
Oppressed go free; for this the Lord requires of you more then your Oblations
and set days of Humiliation, wherein you make a show of repentance to the
Lord, and hang down the head for a day like a Bulrush, when your hearts are not
truly upright to the Lord.

A Declaration I have viewed, proceeding from you, as the first work of your
hands; and therein you declare your selves to these three Nations, in seeming
relentings before the Lord [I wish your hearts were as you profess] and first
you say, Such has been the outgoing of God for his People in this our
Generation; that non^ as men but must say, It is marvelous in our eyes; and
none as Christians but must cry out, It is the Lords Doings.

Unto which I shall answer, Indeed true it is, that the outgoings and dealings
of the Lord has been, and are mighty, and are wonderful in this Nation, even
for his People, which now are trodden upon, and oppressed, to the shame of some
of you; and indeed some of you were partakers in a good degree of his Power and
Outgoings with you, while you stood in his Counsel, and then it was marvelous
in your eyes, and you could cry out, It is the Lords Doings. But Friends, will
you consider how you now stand, and into what ye are fallen; so as that instead
of being the Lords People, you are turned Enemies to the Lords People, and he
is departed from you, and hardly goes out with you any more: While ye were
little in your own eyes ye loved Justice and Judgment, but now you are exalted
and lifted up, and have forgotten the marvelous doing of our God; and Judgment
is turned backward; and Equity is fallen, and the hand of oppression is laid
heavy upon the Lords Servants: Oh, that you would lay it to heart before the
decree be sealed against you, when no time of repentance can be found by you.

And further you say. [He] the Lord has always been a ready Help in the time
of need, and never did his poor Servants seek his Face in vain, neither did he
ever lend a deaf Ear to the voice of their weeping.

To which I answer, Verily its true, he is always a ready help for us his
Servants in time of need, neither did we ever seek his Face in vain, even when
we lay under the grievous oppressions of the Enemy; nor you your selves (some
of you) sought not in vain while your hearts were upright with him, but had the
Deliverance desired by you out of the hands of all your Enemies, and their
necks to tread upon, but it is not so now, inasmuch as you are become va^
formal Seekers, and Hypocritical Fasters; and a deaf Ear will the Lord lend to
you, and to the voice of your weeping, till you remove the Oppression from off
the neck of the Distressed; and you shall seek his face and find no answer from
him, for the Vision shall fail unto you; and though you howl unto him, and ca^^
upon him, yet will he hide his Face more and more, and leave you to your
selves, and will not regard the voice of your crying; and though you have found
him a present Help in time of trouble, and of your need in the day of your
Integrity, yet trouble and destruction shall come upon you, and no help from
him shall you find, till you return to him with all your hearts and spirits,
and lay down your own crowns, and exalt him the Lord of Glory, who is now
appearing in Power.

And further you say, In the midst of Such unequalled and signal Mercies, how
gre^ has been and is your ingratitude and unfruifulness.

To which I answer, Truly have you spoken, to your own shame; for your
ingratitude and unfruitfulness exceed many that went before you, which justly
were cut off for the very sins of which you are highly guilty; and more may I
add unto your confession, How great has been and is your Oppressions, a^^
Pride, and Vainglory, and Self-exaltings, and hypocritical Fastings, and
Confessions with your mouths, when your hearts are far from the Lord; yea,
(...) your Mercies have been unequalled, so your sins cannot be numbered, as
thou^ you sinned that grace might abound, or did evil that good might come; or
to^ liberty to your own hearts lusts, from your former Mercies and Deliveranc^
received.

Then further you say, Should the Lord say unto you, as once he did unto
Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone; that same Sentence would be
your ^^sert; as insensibility is your crime, so it might be too justly made
your punishment.

Answer, Yea verily the Lord may say so unto you, many of ye Rulers (...)
England are joined to Idols, let them alone; and that same Sentence is your
^sert, but insensibility is not wholly your crime; for you have had a day of
vi^tation from the Lord, in warning of you by the mouth of his Servants, and
y^^ are not altogether unsensible of your crime of great Oppressions, and false
Worships, and Idol Shepherds Oblations, which you are joined unto, and your
punishment will justly be the same; for the time comes that it shall be
Darkness a^^ Night upon you; and you shall seek the Word of the Lord but shall
not (...) it; for God will smite your Idol Shepherds, and break down your Idols
Alta^ of vain Traditions; and the Lord will leave you to your selves to wallow
i^ Darkness, and in the way of Death; and the Servants of the Lord shall le^
you alone, and shall no more weary themselves with seeking to reclaim you.

And further you say, Who has been melted with Mercy? Who has been broken b^
Judgments? A sinful Nation; A People laden with iniquity; A seed of Evil-do^^^;
Children that are Corrupters: They have forsaken the Lord; they have provoked
the ^ly One of Israel to Anger; they are gone away backwards; Why should ye be
stricken (...) more? ye will revolt more and more. And further you say, As
those sad words do C^^racterise us as filthy as those of Judah; so if that sad
destruction should also be our doom, (...) could not but acknowledge the Lord
is righteous in all his Ways.

Answ. Verily few of you have been melted by Mercies, or broken by Judgments,
but are a sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, a feed of Evildoers; and
ye have read your own Character fully; for you have forsaken the Lord, and are
Children that are Corrupters, and are gone away backward, an^ provoke the Holy
One of Israel to Anger; and true it is, Why should you he stricken any more, or
warned? For you will revolt, and turn aside more and more; how truly have you
numbered up the sum of your own state, even to your shame and confusion of face,
and to the justifying of the Lord, when he in Vengeance appears to judge you,
and even assuredly that sad denunciation will be your doom, and the same
Judgments shall overtake you when the Seed is gathered out from among you, even
desolation of Cities, and madness of Prophets, and God will smite you together
with confusion, and you shall not bring forth deliverance in the Land, neither
shall the Nations have peace in your days, while you revolt when you are
stricken, and persecute the Innocent when they warn you.

And in the day of your recompense, you shall indeed confess to your
condemnation, that the Lord is righteous in all his ways; and further you say,
How deeply have you grieved your God, in not mourning as you ought, for that
profainness and b^^^^^ness that is so ripe amongst you, even under such means
of knowledge and grace, and in not being sensible under, nor making a
sanctified use of those rebukes you have of late received.

Answ. Yea, you have, and do daily even in your set days, and times of Fasting,
deeply grieve the Lord God, in not mourning and fasting, with a heart prepared
to the Lord, but even in hypocrisy, and even for strife and debate: indeed
ignorance, and profaneness, and barrenness abounds among you, and you are ripe
therein to be cut down for the fire, even the more ye are inexcusable, because
you have neglected the Messages of the Grace of God, and means of knowledge
from the Mouth of the Lords despised Servants, whom you have persecuted, even
in cruelty, some of them unto death, and have imprisoned others unjustly, while
your false Prophets and Diviners have been set up by you, who have daubed you
with untempered Mortar; and you have made your hearts unsensible, by heardening
your hearts against reproof and rebukes, which some of you of late have
received; the Messengers of which rebukes have been evil and shamefully
entreated in your Towns, Steeple Houses, and Highways, and elsewhere in your
Dominions; and how should you but be ignorant, and profane, and barren, while
you cannot receive the Message of Light, but stumbles at Christ Jesus the Light
of the World, and cannot believe in the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has
enlightened every one of you, which is the way to knowledge, and to receive
righteousness into your Souls, and therein to be fruitful to the Lord.

And you say, Every individual man has help^d to fill up the m^^sure of their
s^; First, in not improving ^erc^^s so fully as might h^e been to ^is glory
from (...) they were received.

I answer, Indeed I believe not one of you may be excused in the sight of God,
but are all guilty in filling up the measure of transgression, and even i^ not
improving mercies to the glory of God; for had you improved the great mercies
of your Deliverance and Conquest over your Enemies, the Nations had been in
peace and rest before this day; but you strove to glorify your selves, and
sought a Kingdom of Riches and Honor to your selves, and who might be the
greatest and the highest, to the pleasure of some, and to the grief of others;
and you improved mercies to your selves, and not to him that gave them; and
therefore is your Dominions filled with distractions, and fears, and troubles
are on every side, and your Dominions are as broken Vessels that cannot be
joined together, but are full of wickedness, and false Sects, and
Idol-worships, and in your own Councels are you filled with confusions: and
thus it is justly come to pass upon you, because of your transgressions.

Again you say, In the s^^ neglect and w^^t of Activity, Resolution and
Integrity in Magistrates, and others empowered therein, for the punishment and
suppression of Vice and crying Enormities.

I answer, True, it is a sad neglect; and want of Activity and Integrity in the
Magistrates has been, and is, to punish and suppress vice; and therefore it
abounds in all fullness in the very Streets, and it has been wholly contrary;
for Vice has gone at liberty, while the Magistrates, and such who have been
empowered, have been active, and full of rigor, and no neglect found in them
to punish (or rather to oppress and suppress) the Innocent and Meek of the
Earth, and even they have done violence to the Harmless, witness most parts of
Prisons this day in England, how many have been beat and abused, and haled, and
knocked down with Staves, in the sight of some of the Magistrates, and how many
have been imprisoned for passing on the Highways, and through their Towns,
and some for declaring against Vice and crying Enormities, which one day must
be laid to yours and their charge; for a sad neglect has been for want of
Justice and true Judgment, and they that have been empowered, have turned their
power against the Lord, and have been active to lay their Sword upon the
guiltless, while the guilty have gone free, witness many who have been beat in
your Steeple Houses by violent men, and afterward committed to Prison, while
the Peace-breakers and Violent have gone free; and indeed it is time to lay
these things to heart; for till you purge your selves from these iniquities,
you shall never be established, nor your Dominions in peace; for these things,
and such like abominations are you filled with distractions, and fears compass
you about, and that justly from the hand of the Lord, as the Light in your
Consciences shall answer in the dreadful day of account, which comes suddenly
upon you.

Again you say, In the abominable blasphemies vented and spread of late through
the Apostasy of, and the abuse of liberty, by many professing Religion.

Answ. No doubt but Blasphemy is a crying sin, whereof the Land is guilty, if
you were able to judge thereof but rather indeed this cause is not rightly
stated; for you call that Blasphemy, which is Truth, such is the grievous
ignorance of some of you: And this, I am sure, is your greater sin, condemning
the guiltless, rather then suffering the guilty in this particular. Friends,
beware, lest your judgment be so corrupted, that you call evil good, and good
evil, and thereupon approve the evil, and reprove the good, being given up to
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind; and such were the sins of the Rulers
in Israel, who persecuted the true Prophets under the account of Blasphemy, and
such like, and approved of the Prophets that prophesied falsely, and of the
Priests that bore rule by their means; for the People loved to have it so, Ier.
5. My soul wishes that you Rulers may be wise, and ye Judges may be learned in
this particular, lest you go in the way of your forefathers to destruction,
persecuting the Innocent without cause, through false judgment of the way of
Truth, which may be called by you Heresy and Blasphemy, who in the blindness
of your minds cannot discern of the things of God; for in that way which the
wisdom of the World calls Heresy, do we worship the God of our Fathers: and
verily, so much the more I may warn you herein, to take heed for the time to
come, because you have some of you been highly guilty of this transgression of
late, even in condemning the guiltless concerning this offense; so that thus
for you I may more truly state the particular, In the abominable violence and
oppressions acted of late upon the Innocent, and them who have worshipped God
in the Spirit, through the wickedness of some Rulers, and the abuse of liberty,
by them, which have professed love to God and his Way, through the false
judgments, and unsavory opinions of many, who have called Truth Error, and the
Way of God Blasphemy: And this is your sin, of which, if you that are guilty
repent not, and turn from it, and beware of it for time to come, your honor
shall fall into the dust, and your fall shall be more deeper into confusion and
destruction then any that have yet gone before you; for of late the Lord
powerfully has begun to work, and to vent his Truths through the Mouths of
his Servants, and to bring out of the Apostasy and Blasphemies (which has
reigned since the days of the Apostles) the true and pure Religion, which
stands in the exercise of a pure Conscience.

Again you say, In the little love and tenderness which is even amongst
Professors themselves toward one another, who whilst they contend for things
disputeable, lose the which is certain, even charity; without which they become
as sounding Brass, or tinkling Cymbals.

Answ. This is also your sin, and the sin of the Nation, want of love and
tenderness in Professors toward God, and one toward another; and that love
which appears, is but the show, and in the form and likeness of things, and not
from the true ground of love and peace; and these are they that hate the Light,
and walk not in the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has lighted every man that
comes into the World, in which the unity of the Saints does stand, and in which
their love is one to another; and they that are out of the Light, are without
charity, which is the bond of perfection; and these that know not the Light of
Christ, to guide them in the Ways of God, are in all their profession, and
words; and actions, as sounding Brass, and as a tinkling Cymbal, and these are
they that are in the Disputes, and Contentions, and Strife about the Letter,
drawing their own Consequences and Deductions from it, in their own wisdom, and
knowledge, and sensual understanding, and those lose the Substance, and know
not that which is certain, Christ Jesus in them, to be Ruler over them; but are
as dry Trees, to be plucked up; and all their Profession will wither, and all
their pretended love will perish, and their show of things in the outward
appearance will be confounded, who know not the Light of Christ to guide them;
which Light is the ground of true love and tenderness, and brings to the
knowledge of things certain, out of the contention of things disputable.

But further you say, In allowing difference in Forms, more power to divide
Christians, then Agreements in fundamentals has to unite them, one of the
dangerousest and fruitfulest seeds that has been sown by the envious One.

Answ. Christians are they that follow Christ Jesus, who are not so only in
name, but in practice; and they are one, and cannot be divided as they walk in
the Light which comes from Christ, who is the Foundation, or Fundamental
Principle of the Religion, which is not in Form but in Power, agreeing in the
Foundation, and in the whole building: But Friends, you seem to charge the late
Powers of the Nation, if not your selves, yet some part of your Body, which now
are in power, with great things, with no less then to be Satan's Seedsmen; for
if allowing difference in Forms be the dangerousest and fruitfullest Seed that
ever was sown by the envious One, as you say it is; then who do you blame,
either the foregoing Parliaments, of which some of you have been, and so
cannot be clear from that evil, or the Protector himself? and this seem to be a
very great charge upon him (whose judgment is appearingly to give allowance
unto difference in Forms) to be the Seedsman of Satan, or to allow the envious
One to sow the Seed which you call dangerous; it is not Christians that are
divided, but the Sects and false Opinions, men of corrupt minds.

Thus much in answer to the words as they are laid down: but I rather choose to
speak to the mind or intent of the Penmans spirit of your Declaration, which
implies an inclining to be against many Forms, and to bind up all into one
Form of Worship; and so thereby, though some which is evil would be shut out,
yet would the true spiritual Worship of the Saints above all assuredly thereby
be excluded, and the tender spirits of People, who truly seek God, would be
oppressed: But keep your selves from that evil, I warn you, lest you be broken,
and never bound up; and lay no Law, nor make no Law upon Religion; but let
Religion defend it self; only lay your Law upon Peace-breakers, and violent
men, and bind not men's Consciences to a Worship by your Precepts, either made
already, or by such as may be made; if you ease the Oppressed, so God will
establish you in peace, if you fulfill his Will herein.

Again you say, In not being fully sensible, though the Lord in the depth of
his wisdoms and righteous Judgments has for some years last past been
overturning several Authorities in these Nations, and has, as it were, been
pouring them from Vessel to Vessel, he has been pleased ever since his people
publicly contended for his Truths, still to set up Rulers who have allowed
them the free exercise and profession of them.

Answ. Indeed you are not sensible of the righteous Judgments of God in
overturning several Authorities in the Nation; and therefore you go in the same
abominations as they did who were overturned, till you also be overturned, as
they were: But take heed to your selves lest you be more then poured from
Vessel to Vessel, even spilt in the dust of misery, and never more gathered
again. Your last part of this particular is false, for we that are in the pure
Religion, and in the Exercise of our pure Consciences, have not from some of
you our Liberty, but are cast into Goals and Dungeons, and banished out of yo^^
Towns and Cities some of us, by some that have been Rulers set up; if this be
doubted by you, examine through your Nation, true testimony may be given; so
that here you have spoken better of the Rulers then indeed it is, and would
make the Nation believe untruths to establish you; though I condemn not all,
but my words are toward the Guilty, that they may repent, lest they perish in
their iniquities, and be cut off in their transgressions, and the Curse be upon
you all for the sake of some.

Again you say, In that Athiestical and lukewarm Spirit, too commonly a^gst
you, whereby not only the Form, but also the Power of Godliness is reproached,
and accounted as a vain thing; but also too many have fallon from their first
love, and others este^ themselves rich whilst they are miserable poor, and
blind, and naked; sins which ^e the highest aggravated, by being committed in
Countries where the glorious Light of the Gospel shin^s clearest.

Answ. This you have confessed truly to your own shame, in the sight of other
Nations; your spirit is not only lukewarm unto Righteousness, but it is too
^^mmon among some of you to be zealous and hot in persecuting the Way of
Righteousness; and indeed many of you are grossly fallen from your first Love
and Integrity, and thereby the Power of Godliness is not only reproached by
you, but persecuted and counted vile, and they that live in it oppressed; such
is your zeal in your dead Form, some of you, that even you count the true Way
and Worship of God madness; and you are the men that esteem your selves rich
while you are miserable, and blind, and naked, and your sins are aggravated the
more and higher, because God gives you warning daily by the mouth of his
Servants, who hold forth the Light of the glorious Gospel, and bears witness
unto your faces against your Abominations and Idolatries committed by you, yet
for all this you continue in your iniquities, and evil entreat the Messenge^ of
Peace unto you souls, and are the men indeed which are Athiestical, ev^^ many
by their work, saying in their hearts there is no God, and as truly as yo^ have
confessed your sins, so must you confess the justness of the Judgments of God
upon your own heads, if you return not unto the living God, and own the day of
your Visitation.

Again you say, In being more dissatisfied that you have not obtained all you
aim^d (...), then thankful that you have obtained so much as you now enjoy.

Answ. Verily this is not the least of your sins, but exceed some others; f^r
you aim at that which you shall never obtain till you be thankful, and walk
worthy of what you enjoy; and this is the way, Ease the Oppressed, and take o^f
the yoke of the Poor and Needy, and of the Lord you may be heard; and seek not
your own honor, for that is the ground of dissatisfaction and unthankfulness
among you, and the cause why you abuse the Mercies which you do enjoy, having
lost the sense of the former dealings of the Lord with you.

Further you say, All which, with other the grievous sins of these three
Nations ca^^ aloud upon all the good People in them, to lie low in the sight of
our offended God; and b^ Prayer and Humiliation (away which in our deepest
distresses we have found both our D^ty and Comfort to tread in) to seek to
appease his Wrath; and that he would be pleased f^ his own Names sake to remove
whatever accursed thing there is found amongst us; and the as he is our God, so
we may be his People.

Answ. Indeed, many more grievous sins are highly abounding in these three
Nations, your own oppressions, and self-seeking honors, and vain glories in
your self-performed righteousness, with your persecution of the Innocent by
grievous unjust Fines and Imprisonment, not regarding the cry of the Poor,
which lie under the heavy hand of Oppression, of you subordinate Rulers; these
abundantly add to the measure of the iniquity of these three Nations, all
which abomination cry aloud for vengeance upon the heads of some of you rather
then for humiliation; for sin cries not for humility, this is your ignorance;
but the good People of God do lie low in his sight, whom you highly offend
every day; and they lament you, and suffer under your iniquities, though you
reward many of them with pers^^ution, and hard censures of cruel dealings, till
of which your wickedness you repent, and turn from it, all your Prayers, and
Humilations, and set Days of seeking God in your rebellious hypocritical
hearts, shall never appease God's Wrath, but the rather shall add thereunto,
and kindle it more abundantly against you: Away with your vain Oblations, and
false divining Prophets; they are a weariness to the Lord, and his hand is
against them, while your hearts are not upright before him; and though
sometimes some of you have found God near in deep distress when you called upon
him, even when your hearts were in a measure upright with him; yet in vain you
now set your selves to seek him, and your cry he will not hear; nor his Wrath
shall not be appeased; for you have truly confessed the cursed thing is amongst
you, even the Idolatry of the deepest nature, both in Teachers and People; and
till you repent and remove every burden from off the Innocent, the cursed thing
cannot be taken away; but for his Names sake, which is Equity, and Justice,
Judgment must he bring upon your heads, and unto you he will be a God of
Vengeance, and unto him shall you be a People of his Curse, except you break
off your sins by Righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the
Poor.

Further you say, and this you desire, That he will infatuate the Counsels, and
defeat the designs of those that labor to exalt themselves against the
Interest of his Son and his People.

Answ. Friends, you or some of you are the men that seek to exalt your selves
(and not it) and therefore against the Son of God and his People; instance the
unjust suffering of many of God's People, who know the Son in them to rule them
under your Laws upheld by you, and acted in by some of your selves; and you say
in your hearts you will not have this man to reign over you, for you own not
the Bringers of that Message, but uphold your false Prophts, which speak smooth
things to you, and cry Peace while you follow your own ways; and verily,
herein you go to seek God against your selves, to your own destruction, as
being some of you the very men guilty of the Abominations which you set and
propound to your selves in your Humiliation to pray against: Your Eyes are
blind, and your Hearts unbelieving, and ye know not what you do; and your own
Counsels and Designs, or so much of them at least, as are against the Innocent,
are sure to be infatuated and defeated, and you shall receive from the Lord the
answer of your requests upon your own heads; for you labor against the
Interest of the Son, while you seek to bind any man's Conscience to this or that
Worship.

Again you say, That he will be pleased in a most special manner to vouchsafe
his Presence to those who are entrusted with the Management of the Affairs of
these Nations.

Answ. If you do his Will, and fulfill his Ordinances of Justice and Equity
toward all men, not seeking your selves in any thing, but the Lord in all
things, and wait on him in his Light, by which Christ lightneth every one of
you, to be guided thereby in all your ways, then his Presence you may enjoy in
a special manner, in the managing of all Affairs to his Glory; but if you keep
not the Conditions of the Lord in seeking his Honor only, and in denying your
selves, his Presence you shall not find with you, but shall be filled with
desolations and contentions; and the Nations over whom you are entrusted shall
not have Peace nor Deliverance in your days, but they under you shall have
Confusion and Oppressions, and the special Pretense of the Lord shall not be
shown to you or them; and remember this is a Warning to you.

Again you say, That he will appear, the Mighty Councellor experimentally unto
them.

Answ. If you stood in his Counsel, and walk in uprightness of heart before him
in the Light of Christ Jesus, then will he appear to be mighty in his Counsel
with you and for you; otherwise you shall be given up to follow the counsel of
your own hearts, which shall never bring forth good, but evil to your selves,
and to your whole Nations; and this shall you know experimentally by the Light
in your own Consciences.

Again you say, That he would in all things spirit you unto the Work unto which
you are called, and give you unity among your selves, even the best Unity, that
of the Spirit, in the best Bond, that of Peace; that as you are a People
abounding in Mercies, so you may abound in returns.

Answ. The work is great unto which you are called, and shall hardly be
accomplished by you, except you receive the Spirit of the Lord, to be ruled
therewith in your own hearts; for if you rule for him, you must first be ruled
by him, [Mark] and ordered with his Light, which will condemn every evil
affection in you; and this is the Spirit of Unity in the best Bond of Peace,
which is most precious, which brings forth a humble walking with the Lord in
all righteousness before him; and being led every one in particular with this
Spirit, and united to God, and one to another, in not seeking your selves, but
the Lord: This is the Way where God's Blessing is received, and a^ returning
unto him of praise for his Mercies; but I wish you are not rather adding sin
unto sin, and fulfilling the measure more and more of your transgresssions,
till the Wrath of the Lord break forth against you to confound you forever.

Again you say, And that at last through the unwearied goodness of our God
these three Nations, after such memorable revolutions, may be settled upon the
sure foundations of Truth, Mercy and Peace, and his People henceforth being
delivered from their Enemies, may serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of their lives.

Answ. Verily the goodness of God has been unwearied to these three Nations,
in many respects it appears, and many memorable revolutions has come to pass
in this last Age, even in cutting down one Power and Authority of Oppression
after another, till many great Mountains are removed, and the Nations levelled;
and the Lord is now bringing his great Work to pass i^ overturning once and
again, till his Reign and his Kingdom be exalted over all in Truth and
Righteousness; and if you shorten not your hand in your Oppositions and
Persecutions, your selves shall also be overturned, that God may in
Righteousness settle these Nations (which remain as a wavering Leaf, and as an
ungirded Vessel, full of strife and distraction, fears and jealousies) eve^
among your own selves, unsettled in your Ways and Thoughts in Truth, Mercy and
Peace; but in Gainsayings, and Oppositions, and Confusions, stand tottering
like a rotten Hedge; and the Proud are exalted, and the poor are despised, and
they that love Sion are set at naught; and verily you go not the way to settle
the Nations upon the true Foundation, but backslides from the Way of Truth:
Which is the Foundation, upholding of iniquity, and establishing the false
Prophets and Diviners by a Law; and such whom the Lords wrath is against, who
upholds the horrible filthy thing, and abominations of the Earth; and confusion
is upon them, till they be overthrown, never to deceive the Nations more?
Therefore hear ye Deaf, and look ye Blind, and understand ye Hard-hearted, love
Truth, and Mercy, and Peace in your own hearts, and and depart from Iniquity;
and cast away your Idols, and cease from evil, and learn to do well; and put
away the evil of own doings, and turn to the Lord in this the day of your
Visitation, and to the Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he has lightened you;
take heed thereby to be guided every one in particular, in fear and tenderness,
toward God, and toward man; not ruling in Tyranny and Oppression, nor making
Laws in your own wills, according to your own thoughts, as some that went
before you have done, till they were cut off, as you are Witnesses, who were
made in the Hand of the Lord their Executioners; and if you follow in any
measure their Example of Wickedness, take them for an Example in a cursed end;
in love to all your Souls this I write, and not to shame you in your
wickedness, but rather that you may repent, and that you may know how to
exercise your selves in the Law of God toward the Nations, and that every
Burden may be removed, and the Oppressed may go free, and the Bands of Iniquity
may be broken; and this is the Fast accepted of the Lord, required of him from
you, which if you observe with your whole hearts, a Blessing will the Lord made
you unto the Nations in this present Age, and unto your selves for evermore;
but if you hearden your hearts against the Lord, and tread in the steps of your
forefathers, and seek to limit the Holy One, or to bind the tender Consciences
of the People of God, then shall you fall into their perdition, and be
swallowed up in everlasting confusion, and your Memorial shall stink in
Generations to come, and shall be a hissing among the Heathen Kingdoms, and
deliverance will God bring another way unto his People, to your overthrow, if
you walk not in the Counsel of the Lord.

And whereas upon the considerations and purposes aforesaid, you have ordered,
that a Day be observed and kept for solemn Humiliation, and seeking the Face of
God, through the mediation of Christ, in England, Scotland and Ireland. To
which, in much tenderness of spirit I desire to say, That if you seek his Face
in the hardness of your hearts, and in the way of your own precepts, while the
yoke of the great Oppressions in the Nations are not broken from off the neck
of the Poor, his Face you shall not behold, though you seek it, but in vain
shall you weary your selves, and shall travel without issue, as to that which
you desire, and his Countenance shall be hid from you, till he show his Face
for evil against you, and not for good; and to you it shall be said, To what
purpose are your Oblations, and your solemn Meeting? Who has required it at
your hands? even your own doings and appointed Altars of Inventions, which the
Lord cannot accept from you: Therefore give ear ye Mountains, and listen ye
tall Cedars; if you establish the false Prophets, which makes a prey upon the
people, through covetousness, and which acts the abominations of Israel, in
preaching for Hire, and divining for Money, and in crying peace to the wicked,
by a Law, and maintain them through the oppression of the Poor, in the crying
Oppression of Tithes, or otherwise imposing such things upon the tender
Consciences by any Act or Statute made or allowed by you, God shall not hear
your cry, nor answer your request, nor ever establish you in peace, nor the
Nations over which you are set likewise, if you make a Law, or allow such a one
to be acted, which any way may tie or limit the Spirit of the Lord in any of
his Servants, from reproving the abominations of the Times in Rulers, Teachers,
or People, in your Streets or Temples, or places otherwise, at any time
whatsoever, the Lord will not hold you guiltless; nay assuredly, if you do but
hide your face from the Suffering of such, who through the wickedness of some
under you, may be afflicted upon such an account, you shall not be altogether
Innocent, but Gods hand shall be upon you likewise: If any for Conscience sake
deny to Swear, upon any account, according to the former vain Customs of the
Nations, trained up thereto in ignorance and blindness in humane traditions,
and thereupon suffer Imprisonment, or Fining, or otherwise howsoever, by any
Order from you, or any subordinate Powers, you shall be guilty in the sight of
God of that suffering the Innocent in such a cause; much more shall you be
guilty, if by any means, in any cause, upon any condition, men be compelled by
any Authority of this Nation to swear; likewise, if any suffer for not bowing
the Hat, or Knee to any of you, or any of your Judges or under Officers, and
thereupon be accounted Transgressors, the Lord shall account such things
Oppression from your hands, and Tyranny and Cruelty, and you shall not escape
unpunished; as the Lord lives, these, and many more Abominations cries for
Vengeance against some of you, who have had your hands deeply dipped in such
Oppression; and therefore to you this is a Warning to break off these sins by
righteousness, and these evils by true repentance, lest your Fasts prove only
for Strife, and to smite with the fist of Wickedness: Clear your selves, and
wash you hands from these Abominations, lest the fruit of them be given you to
eat for Food; and let this, oh ye Rulers, be acceptable council unto you, that
the days of Happiness may appear, and the long expected and waited for day of
Liberty may yet dawn through this dark night of Bondage which overshadows your
heads, that you cannot behold the glory of the Son, and herein shall you be
established, and we shall have cause to bless the Lord for you, and with you;
otherwise you shall never be renowned; but all your counsels and purposes shall
fail, and be cursed of the Lord, and evil shall be upon you, and upon the
Nation for your sakes.

And all you that fear God, listen and give audience, and let the fear of the
Lord be before your eyes, and keep your selves pure from the iniquities which
the rest love to drink in; and though your power be shorter, and your vote
lower then the uprightness of your hearts desire, yet unto God be faithful, in
bearing your Testimony for him, and against all that which, with the Light of
Jesus, yo^ see to be contrary to him, and be awaked unto Righteousness,
Judgment and Mercy; the Light is springing over your heads, and the day of the
Lord is dawning out of darkness, and a Seed is sown in your Dominions which
cannot be roo^ed out, till it have overspread the Earth, with the precious
Fruit thereof; and though it be striven against to be plucked up, yet shall the
Branch and Root thereof be everlastingly renowned; for it is of the true Jew,
and he that falls before it shall never more rise up again.

And this is by a true Lover of your Souls, in faithfulness to God given forth
(...) your sakes who fear the Lord. EDWARD BURROUCH

A 1697
Measure of the Times, AND A Full and Clear Description of the Signs of the
Times, and of the Changing of the Times; and of the Reign of Antichrist, who
has long reigned, and of his downfall, which is at hand; And of the Kingdom
of Christ, which is now setting up in the Earth. Showing unto all People in all
Nation what the State of things have been in Ages past, and what the State of
thing are at this present day; and also, what shall be the State of things
hereafter, which suddenly comes to pass, the time is at hand, for times, are
changing, and renewing, and the Kingdoms of this World shall be translated into
the Kingdom of the Son of God. And also here is manifest, concerning Teachers
of this Age, and the Root from whence they sprang, who are manifest to be of
that stock of false Prophets, which Christ prophesied of should come, and which
the Apostles saw was coming in their days, and how that the night of darkness
has been upon all, for many Generations: and how that the Beast has reigned
over Nations and Kingdoms, and his false Prophet has deceived the whole World,
who have all worshipped the Beast, and wandered after him, who have warred
against the Saints, and overcome them, and the whole Earth has been made drunk
with the Abominations. And also, The Restoration is described, which shortly
comes, wherein Christ shall Reign, whose right it is, and shall change Laws
and Decrees; and the Lamb shall be the Light of all Nations, and there shall be
no need of any other, light, when the Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of Christ, and he alone shall bear the Government, and no other King;
for he shall rule all Nations with his Iron Rod; and the Kingdoms of the Beast
shall be overthrown, and his power subdued, and they that have given their
power to him shall be ashamed, and all the Kings of the Earth shall lay their
Crown^ down at the feet of the Lamb, and the numberless number of the Saints is
gathering, and the Dominion shall be in their hands, and their King shall
possess the uttermost parts of the Earth.
THe Lord has opened my heart to declare; and the words of my mouth shall be
the words of Truth, and of a good Understanding, to every one who has an ear
to hear; whose ear the Lord has opened to hear, and understand things of old,
and the state of things as they have been in Ages, and Generations past; and as
now the state of things are at this day. Hearken and consider, and let your
ears be open to Instruction; For the Word of the Lord is toward you, that your
hearts might understand the things that belong to your Peace, now in your
days, before the time come that they be hi^ from your eyes, and your eyes be
darkened, never more to perceive, but you le^^ to perish, and to dye with the
Uncircumcised.

Behold* and give ear, ye Inhabitants of the World; see and consider, in what
state you are fallen; even in a time of Darkness and Apostasy, wherein thick
Darkness covered all the World, and a vail of Ignorance the faces of all
People: Death has reigned King over all, and the Cloud of thick Blindness has
lain on the hearts of all men. O how has Darkness, Blindness, and Ignorance
covered all men, even as a Cloak and a Garment? How has the Eye been blinded,
the Ear stopped, and the Heart hardened? So that the Lord God, and his Way, his
Truth, and Salvation has not been manifestly known, heard, not selt, nor
witnessed, for Ages and Generation: the words thereof have been professed, but
the Life and Power thereof has not been enjoye^; But men have been deceived
with the Form of Godliness without the Power, and cheated with a likeness of
things without Life, and have sought the living among the dead, and worshipped
Idols, which have been without sense and understanding; and with lying
imaginations, and feigned likenesses, has the carnal part (which ruled in
People above the Seed of God) been fed, and with shadows, and outward
appearances, and the soul has been starved.

Alas, alas! woe is me, because of these things; my heart within me is broken,
and I am perplexed. The shadow of Death has been the lodging Place of all
People, and the vail of Ignorance has been a Covering, and the darkness of
Heart has been followed for a Law, and a blind Understanding has been the
Guide (...) Ordinances and Statutes, and Death in the beastly power has ruled
as King in all the Dominions of the Earth, and in all men's hearts; and men have
been without the Wisdom of God, even every eye blind, and every ear deaf, and
^ry tongue dumb, and every heart corrupt and void of understanding, and every
(...) lame, and all men have been altogether imperfect; for the living God has
bee^ as a Stranger unto the Children of men, less known by men then the Own^
the Ox, and less perceived then the Crib by the Ass, and all flesh has
corrupted its way before Lord.

Woe is me! when I consider how man, who was planted with the chosen (...), even
God's Image, and was a noble Plant, is degenerated into the Plant of a strange
Vine unto God, and bring forth wild Grapes, and sower Grapes, w^d the Lord's
Soul loathes; and thus has the Vineyard and the Plants the rewarded the
Husbandman, with Fruit of a bitter taste, and with the reward corruption; And
man is condemned in his transgression, for want of the K^ledge of God, more
then the Ox and the Ass.

Pride, Covetousness, Lust, and Envy, Backbiting, Lying, Drunkenness, W^dom,
Theft, Murder, and all manner of evil and sin against God, more the^ can be
expressed, is abounding and superabounding among men in this Ge^eration,
Iniquity is grown to the full, the measure is up, and the number o^
transgression is sealed, that the Lord may arise; who has been pressed as a
Ca^ with Sheaves; and now is the Lord arising, and he has said, Ah, I will
ease^ of my Adversaries, and be avenged on my Oppressors. And Vengeance belong^
to him, and he will repay, and will destroy the Vineyard with the Plants and
Fr^ thereof, and the Briars and Thorns shall be consumed; and he will lay
waste, an^ devour, and confound all his Enemies in a day, when his Indignation
goes sorth, and his Sword is made bare, and his Purpose comes to pass, in
rooting out t^^ oppressive seed of Evildoers, which have filled his
Habitation, (wherein he shol^ dwell) with cursed Children, and a brood of evil
Births.

In the days of Christ and his Apostles was the Hand and Power of the (...)
felt, and the Lord gat himself a Name, and a Glory; and he caused his m^lous
Light to spring forth, and his Day to dawn, and the Day was manifest tha^ many
Prophets and Wisemen had desired to see, but was not in their time fee^ by
them, and his Power was made known, and his Arm was made bare in the sight of
many Nations; and in that day his Glory was spread abroad, and ^is Truth and
Way was exalted, and his glorious Gospel was declared through (...) Earth, and
the sound of his mavelous Works went forth into all the World Judgment and
Mercy was known, and Righteousness and Peace was witne^ among men, and Life and
Immortallity was brought to Light through the Gospel; and the Word of Life by
which all things were created, and by which they stand, was handled, seen,
felt, and tasted; and the Lord God in that Age was known to dwell with his
People; and to walk in them, and his Covenant was established with many, and
his Promises were fulfilled; Redemption, Deliverance, and Salvation was
revealed, even Christ Jesus the Son God, the Prince of Peace; And Righteousness
was made manifest in the Sons of men, and revealed in many who saw God's Glory,
and were Witnesses of his Majesty and Dominion, and were gathered unto him in
the Bond of Peace, and were his Sons and Daughters, and were led by his Spirit
in all his Ways of Truth and Righteousness. And many went forth into the
World, and declared through Nations the things of Gods Kingdom, which was come
to them, and was discovered within them; and the Lord God spoke from Heaven by
his Son unto them, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and with Power.
And the Lord was with them whom he called, and made them Wise, and their Word
powerful, and their Message effectual, and their Weapons, were mighty through
God, and strong Holds were subdued, and the Powers of Death and Darkness were
subjected, and the Hearts of thousands were turned to God, and the Gospel was
preached in power through the World, and many were brought to God, out of
Darkness into Light, and from Satan's Power unto God. And the Earth was filled
with Light, and the mighty, and the wise, were confounded, and the bonds of
cruel oppressions were broken, and they that set themselves against the Lord
and his Way were confounded, and scattered, and brought to naught, though they
were many in that Generation.

How did all the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, Elders of the
People, and Rulers, and Governors lift up themselves in the Pride of their
hearts, and took counsel together, and persecuted the Innocent, and put to
Death and Imprisoned the Children of the Most High? How did they in the days
of Christ persecute and seek for his Life, till they had taken it from the
Earth, by their subtilty and wickedness? The Apostles and Ministers of Christ
were persecuted, some were put to death, and others suffered grievous things
for the Name of Christ, and were made a Prey and a Spoil unto Destroyers, whose
wickedness increased against the Way of God, till it was fulfilled in its
measure, and the Wicked with their work were dashed to pieces; and the Lord
gave his Way, and Truth, and Servants dominion and power over all his enemies,
and whole Nations were brought to the knowledge of God and his Ways, and his
Name was glorious, and his Kingdom was exalted in the Earth, and many were his
People, who were gathered by him, and his powerful Word through the mouth of
his Ministers, whom he ordained and called, who were Fishermen, and such like,
who were chosen to fulfill his Will, and to do his Work, and not many Wisemen
of the World were called, but God chose the foolish things to confound the wise
then, as he does now; and such were honored by the Lord, and Bearers of his
Name, and of his Message, and Glad-tidings, though they were contemned of men;
yet unto such he gave the authority to overturn the wise, and to out-reach the
wisdom of this World, for they were learned of the Father, and had the
knowledge of his Ways, though they were unlearned in the Arts and Crafts of
men, which stand more in policy and subtilty, then in the Fear and Wisdom of
God; and in that day the Lord was with his People, while his People were with
him, and he loved them while they stood in his Counsel, and he gave them
dominion over all their Enemies, and they were a Terror to the whole World,
while the Churches stood in the dread and terror of the Lord of Hosts; yea, all
bowed under them, and their feet trod upon the high places of the Earth, and
they were blessed of the Lord above all People, even till they waxed fat, and
were increased in treasures, and thought they had need of nothing, and then
they forgot God, and rebelled against him, and became perverse in their ways,
and grew into strange Idolatries and Errors, and left the Way of Truth, and
cast God's Law behind them, and the Power of Godliness ceased, and the form
grew, and it was exalted more then Power, and love waxed cold when iniquity
abounded; and men became Lovers of themselves, more then of the Lord; and the
Lord and his mavelous Works which had been brought to pass were forgotten,
and hardness of heart and unbelief entered, and then false Prophets and
Antichrist came in, which Christ had prophesied of, and established the form of
Godliness without the Power, and subverted many (even whole Houses and
Countries) from the simplicity of Christ Jesus; so that many became insensible,
and grew past feeling of the Power and operation of God, and their minds became
blinded, and their ears stopped; and God was grieved who had brought up
Children, and they forgot him, and rebelled against him; for the Churches
became corrupted, and lost the Life and Power of God, and the Holy Ghost, and
became Idolaters, and Worshippers of Idols: and as you may read, Paul
prophesied that many should depart from the Faith, and give heed to seducing
spirits, and the doctrine of Devils; and grievous Woves should enter, not
sparing the Flock, but seeking to devour it, and would make havoc and
merchandise of Souls, through coveteousness and filthy Lucre; and perilous
times would come, wherein there should be a Form of Godliness and not the
Power; and in that Generation before, and soo^ after his decease, this came to
pass and was fulfilled; and as you may read in the Revelations, the Churches
grew into Superstitions and Idolatries; and the Chuch of Ephesus had lost her
first Love, and her Candlestick was to be removed, and so it came to pass; and
some in the Church of Smyrna were in the Blasphemy, saying, they they were
Jews, and were not, but were the Synogogues of Satan; and the Church of
Pergamos, some of them held the doctrine of Balaam, and to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit Fornication, and some held the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, which God hated, and against them would the Lord fight with
the Sword of his Mouth; and the Church of Thyatira suffered that Woman,
I^zabel, to prophecy and to teach, and seduced the Servants of the Lord to
com^it Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and she and her
Lovers were to be cast into a Bed of torment, and her Children should be killed
with Death, and all the Churches should know, that God searched the reins and
the hearts, and every one should receive according to their deeds; and the
Church of S^ had only a Name to live, but was dead, and her work was not
perfect before God, and upon them would the Lord come as a Thief, and they
should be in Darkness, and not know what hour he would come; and the Church of
the ^^odiceans were lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, and the Lord would spew
her ou^ of his Mouth, for she was wretched, miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked, and the shame of her nakedness did appear: And if any had an ear to hear
they mig^t hear; these things were spoken by him that lives for ever, the First
and the Last, the Beginning and the Amen; so that hereby the Lord's Soul was
vexed and his Spirit grieved, and his Wrath was suddenly kindled against them,
who were Revolters and Backsliders from his Way of Salvation, which he had made
manifest to them, through the mouth of his Servants; so that his Fury went
forth against them to overthrow them, and to break them to pieces, and they
being turned from his Law and from his Statutes, he gave them up unto their own
hearts desire, and brought in the Heathen upon them, to confound them, who
broke them assunder, and trod down many of their Cities, and gained great Parts
of their Dominions, and made them Slaves by multitudes, and overthrew their
Worship, and subjected their Power; even the Turks, and base uncircumcised
People, made a Prey upon them, and possessed their Habitations, and set up
abominable Idolatries in the Place where God's Honor had dwelt; and their
Dominions and Treasures without became spoil to the teeth of Devourers; for
they having lost the Terror of the Lord, he brought up the Heathen to be a
terror unto them, whose power was mightier then they, and overcame them, they
being without the power of God; and they justly came upon them, according to
the Purpose of the Lord, because of their backslidings: And others of th^^, who
were not so given up to the will of an outward Enemy, yet were they given up to
strange Idolatries and Subversion, and setting up Images, and worshipping that
which is not God, but abomination to him to this day; so that the holy City,
which had been full of Glory; was given to the Gentiles to be trodden down; and
under their polluted feet has it been stamped, and to their mouth has it been
a prey, for such a time, even since these things came to pass unto this day, as
you may read; and the Beast and false Prophet has ruled in oppression, and the
great Whore has made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornication; All
the great Men, and Princes, and Nobles, and all the People upon the Earth have
been made drunk by her, and touched her uncleanness, and ever since the day
wherein the backsliding entered she has sat upon Nations, and Kindreds, and
Tongues, and People, and has been decked in diverse colors, to deceive the
hearts of all people; and all Nations have been deceived by her, and the Beast,
and his Power, whose Dominion has been great, has upheld Wickedness, by a
Law, and established Idolatry by Decrees; and all have been out of the Way, and
wandering in Blindness and Darkness, even the whole World have worshipped the
Beast, and gone after the false Prophet, which sits upon the Beast, and his
power protects him, till they be both overthrown into perdition, and cast alive
into the Lake, which now the Lord is coming to do in Power and Dominion; and
great Babylon is coming into remembrance before the Lord, and as she has done,
so shall it be done unto her; her Children is dashing against the stones, and
her Offspring is withering away; and the Darkness is vanishing, and the Sun is
appearing, and the Beastly Power shall be subdued, and the false Prophet
confounded; even the old Dragon shall be bound, and chained, never more to
deceive: for the Beast has had a long reign, with his false Prophet, who have
prophesied Lies, and false Divinations, and led away the minds of all People.

For mark, and consider, Christ Jesus, who came into the World with gladtidings
of good things, even with Peace and Salvation; he said the glorious day was
come, and even that day which many Prophets and Wisemen had desired to see;
but had not seen; the earth was filled with light, as I have said, yet he
farther prophesied, and said, that the night should come, when no man could
work; and that in the last days false Prophets should arise, and deceive many,
and should come into the World, and should cry, Lo here is Christ, and lo there
is Christ, and if it were possible should deceive the very Elect; and the
Apostle John in his time, who had been an Eyewitness of Jesus, and had
handled, and tasted, and felt the Word of Life, and had been with Jesus, and
bore a true testimony unto him; in that very Age and Generation he saw the
false Prophets and Antichrists come, and coming in, and aluded to the very
sayings of Christ; By this we know, said he, that it is now the last time, for
there are now many false Prophets and Antichrists gone out into the World; they
were not of the true Apostles, but went out from among them (being gone out
from the Light in their own particulars) and beguiled the hearts of the simple,
by good words, and fair speeches, and went in Balaams way for Gifts and
Rewards, and in Cains way to Envy and Murder, as you may read in the Scripture:
So that in John's time, the false Prophets, which Christ foretold of, were come,
and they did deceive many, according as Christ had said, and they drew many
from the Ways of God, and subverted many from the Way of Truth, and made
havoc of the Flock, and were grievous Wolves, according as Paul said; and
truth began to perish from among men, and the Power thereof ceased, and the
Apostasy came in, and the form was set up for a season; so that John farther
saw, and said the whole World went after the Beast and false Prophet, (whom he
saw before was come, and worshipped the Beast, and his Image) but a few whose
names were written in the Book of Life: And, as I have said, the whole City,
with the outward Court, was trodden down by the Gentiles foot, and darkness
surprised all, and wickedness abounded more and more, and the night came upon
all, as Christ had prophesied, and the Beast grew in his dominion, till there
was hardly any man left to bear witness in the Truth, and in the Power of God,
unto the Name of Jesus; but all was subverted into dead Forms, and Shadows, and
Likenesses without Life; and the Lord left the Earth, as it were, and covered
himself in the Darkness, and became a stranger in the World, and did scarce
openly speak by Vision, nor Dream, nor Prophet, but all were in the dark, and
Ignorance abounded, and Superstition was exalted; the Saints Spirit, and Life
which they were in, and guided by, was lost, and then they began to worship the
Saints Names, and Days, and Words, without the Life and Power; and that Nature
and that same Seed which had persecuted the Saints to death, and gainsayed the
Power, and lost the holy Ghost, turned it self into the profession of the
Saints Words, which were left upon Record, and conformed it self into the
Saints Practices, without the Life, Power and holy Ghost. And having lost the
Power, from which the Scripture was given forth, and not being guided in the
Life which they were in, which spoke it forth; then from the Scripture, in men's
own conceptions, and thoughts, and by their reason, without Gods Spirit, they
set up Likenesses, and Images, and Sects, and Forms, and many Heads, and many
Horns grew upon the Beast which all the World worshipped and went after, for
they had lost Christ the one Head, wherein the Union stood, and grew into
Idolatry under the many Heads which were upon the Beast, who had many Horns,
which pushed one against another, as it is witnessed unto this day; do not the
Papists and Protestants (so called) and other Sects risen out of them, push one
at another, to break and tear one another? and these have many Heads: The Pope
he is a Head; and the others they have a Head, which every one bows down under
his own Head; the Pope will not bow to the Protestants Head, nor will the
Protestants bow to the Papists Head, the Presbyterians and Independ^, and
Anabaptists, and the rest, every one of them bows to their own Head, and will
not bow to another Head; and all these with their Horns push one against
another, to rend one another; and all these are from Christ, and know not him,
the one Head of the whole Body, and the one Horn of God's Salvation unto a^
People; for Christ which is but one is the Head, and the Horn, which all the
Saints, who are now gathered out of this Apostasy and dark Night, unto whom the
Light again is risen, worship Christ the one Head, and know him the one Horn,
which pushes aganist the Devils Kingdom, which has long been set up, and rul^^
in the Earth among all these, who have many Heads and many Horns, who are a^ of
them (the very chiefest) but in the night fallen, in the Apostasy and Da^^ness,
since the beginning of the reign of the Beast, and the coming in of fa^
Prophets, which came in, as I have said, when the Churches backslided, with the
Whore also, who has made all Nations and People Drunk with the Wine of be
Fornication; and the Beast has reigned over all Nations in his Dominion and
Authority, and the false Prophet has prophesied through all Nations.

And all these came in since the days of Christ; for he prophesied that i^
should be so, as it is come to pass; and they were coming in, in the days of
the Apostles, as you may read, Paul saw them coming, and largely describes
their Character in several Epistles. And Peter, he saw them coming in, and
described them, what such they were, and should be; and Jude he saw them also;
and John more fully then any, both in his Epistles and Revelations, as I have
^^^^ed at.

And when the Apostles were taken off the Earth, some by cruel Deaths, and
others were banished, then they sprung in more fully, and grew through all
Nations; and to this day has the Beast, with his many Heads and many Horns
ruled in Nations, and been worshipped, and his false Prophet has ever since
been defended, and has riden on the Beast through Nations, and has deceived
Nations with vanity and error; and at this very day the Nations and People are
deceived, and lie under Darkness in the slavery and bondage under the authority
of the Beast, and subject to the doctrine of his false Prophets.

And as I have said Darkness has been over all, and fancies and likenesses
without Life have been bowed under, and the Power being lost, the Form has
been set up, one after this sort, and another after that, according to men's
vain conceits and apprehensions upon the Scriptures, and not according to the
manifestation of the Spirit of God, which fulfilleth the Scriptures, and brings
to live the Life of them.

So in diverse Colors, and in diverse Appearances, and Robes in several forms
and shapes of Garments has the great Whore been decked, who has sat upon the
Beast, having the false Prophet serving as a Boy or Servant, to do whatsoever
the Whore lists; and the false Prophet, this Servant of the Whore, under the
power of the Beast, has moved and turned as the Beast would; and according as
the Whore has changed her self into other Garments, and Colors, even so has
the false Prophet changed his Doctrine, and Prayers, to please the Whore, and
to keep people under the Government of the Beast. Its known, in this our day,
that some who preached and prayed for the King and Bishops, do now preach and
pray for others, even for them who destroyed the King and Bishops; so the false
Prophets with all his Children, are but the Whores Servants, who has made
drunk Kings, and Princes, and great Men, and People, and Nations, with the Cup
of Fornication, and Abomination, in the several Sects and Forms of Worships
which have been set up without the power of Godliness; for the Baptism of the
Spirit being lost, and not known, then from the Letter by imaginations, were
several sorts of Baptism brought forth, as sprinkling of Infants, that dark
folly, and vain vanity, which all these Nations have been deceived withal, by
the exercise of the false Prophet: And when the Gift of the Ministry, through
the holy Ghost, which the Ministers of Christ had, was lost, and not any more
^eceived, then began men to make Ministers, by natural Learning, and Arts, and
Languages, and humane Policy; and when the gift of preaching by the eternal
Spirit was lost, through the coming in of the Apostasy, then began men to study
from Books and Writings, what to preach, and say, not having the holy Ghost
received in them, without which none are Ministers of Christ; [mark that] and
when men had lost, through ignorance, the Knowledge of God dwelling in them,
and that their Bodies were his Temple, and that he dwelled and walked in his
People, then began they again to build Temples without, and to set up their
false worships in them; for having lost the sense of Gods true Worship, which
the Saints worshipped in, in the Spirit, and in the Truth, then they began to
worship in set Days; and set Times, and set Places, and outward Observances,
which is not the worship of God in the Spirit, and in the Truth, but
Superstitious and Idolatrous; and when the Word of God was not received
immediately from his Mouth; nor the Gospel by the revelation of Jesus Christ,
as it was in the days of the Apostles, then (darkness being come in) they used
their tongues, when the Lord had not spoken to them, as the false Prophets did
before Christ's time; and long have they said the Letter is the Word, and that
the Letter is the Gospel, and that it must be received by the Scriptures, and
by natural Learning, and Arts; and that none can be Ministers of Christ, but
such who are learned in the Languages, and knows the Original of Scriptures,
Latin, and Greek, and Hebrew, nor any of these have received the Gospel by
revelation, or the Word of God from his mouth. And when singing in the Spirit,
and with the Understanding was ceased, and not known, then began People to get
the Form of singing of David's experiences in Rhyme and Meeter; and when the pure
power of Godliness was lost, which was in the days of the Apostles manifested,
and known, then in the Apostasy the deceit grew into the Form of every thing
which the Saints had enjoyed in the Power, and so were Shadows set up instead
of Substance, and Death instead of Life, and the Form without the Power, which
in many Branches sprang forth, some into one appearance, and some into another;
but all under the power of the Beast, with his many heads and horns defended;
and until this day, since the days of the Apostles, thus it has been, and
those very Teachers, and supposed Ministers, which now are in this, and other
Nations, are of that very Root which sprang forth in the days of the Apostles,
and they are under the dominion of the Beast, and moveable like unto the great
Whore; and this may easily be proved, that they are of that Generation of
Teachers, and false Prophets, which Christ prophesied of should come, and which
the Apostle saw was coming in, in their days, and of those which John saw the
world to run after; for Christ said, That by their fruits they should be known;
and the Apostles they described their fruits, and them by their fruits; and so
we seeing their fruit to be the very same now, which the Apostles described was
the fruit of them that then were come, and coming; from whence we do conclude,
according to sound judgment, that these very Teachers are of the same
Generation, and Branches of the same Root which sprang forth then.

And in Paul's Writings you may read, such they were whom he saw, of whom he bad
people to beware, and said, perilous times would come, and men should be
Lovers of themselves, Covetous, Proud, Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents,
Unthankful, Unholy, without Natural Affection, false Accusers, Fierce,
Despisers of those that are good, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures, more
then lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power; and
such, of whom people were ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; for people were laden with sins, and led away with
diverse lusts; and these did resist the Truth, as Iannes and Iambres, who
withstood Moses, by making likenesses without Life, and they were men of
corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the Faith.

Now it is plain, that these Teachers in this Generation are of that very Stock
which Paul describes; such he saw would come, and such we see are come, and by
their fruits we know them, as Christ said; and Paul's words are fulfilled; for
these Tea^hers are lovers of themselves, and covetous, and proud, this is plain
to all people; and Blasphemers, who denies Christ to have lighted every man
that comes into the World, and therefore they deny Scripture, and so are
disobedient and unholy men, and without natural affection, who, many of them,
have caused the Innocent to be imprisoned, and some have died in Prison, and
they the chief cause of this; and this is without natural affection to the
Creatures; and they are false Accusers, and Liars, and fierce in their Books
and Preaching, as is manifest through all this Nation; and they greatly despise
those that are good and prepares war against such as do not put into their
Mouths; and they a^^ heady and high-minded, and lovers of vanities and
pleasures; this is evident without proof; and they have a Form of Godliness:
they say all should be taught (...) God, but when any comes to witness it, and
deny their teaching, they cry again such as Heretics, and thus they have the
words, and the Form, but deny the Power; and they are ever teaching, twenty,
and forty years, and more, but no^ able ever to come to the knowledge of the
Truth by them, but all in blindness a^^ darkness still; and people cries out,
who have been learning many years from them, that they do not know the Truth;
and its plain, that these Teachers are of that sort, that Paul spoke of, who
brings none to the knowledge of the Truth people that follows them are laden
with sins, and led away with diverse lusts; (...) these have, and do resist
Truth every whore; they deny that Christ has lights every man that comes into
the world, and so resists Truth, and denies Scripture and the truth, as you may
read, John 1. 9. And they are corrupt minded, ever wicked Persecutors, and
Suers at Law, and earthly minded, and covetous, and oppressors, and are wholly
rebrobate concerning the faith: and thus it is plain that the root of these
Teachers was springing in the Apostles days, and has grown ever since in this
dark night of Apostasy, and has filled the Nations.

Again the Apostle saw that many should depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in hypocrisy, havi^^
their Consciences seared as with a hot Iron Now these Teachers are of the Stock
which is departed from the true Faith; for they are without true Faith, and
reprobate concerning it, who are in iniquity, and sin, and the works of the
World, which are evil; now Faith purifies the heart from all this; but their
hearts (...) not purified, but polluted with Covetousness, and preaching for
Hire, and Persecution, and Envy; and therefore they had not Faith and so are of
that Generation which departed from the Faith, after the Apostles time, which
they (...) would come; and these do seduce, and their Doctrines are of the
Devil, who denies the Truth which the Scripture bears witness of, and say,
Sprinkling Infants (...) water, when they are two or three days old, is
Baptism into the Faith of Christ; this is the Doctrine of the Devil, and Lies
they speak in great numbers, and in hypocrisy, and write them forth to the
World in great hypocrisy, with feignedness, and pretense of holiness; and its
plain, many of their Consciences are seared: How do many of them cause the poor
people to suffer grievous imprisonment, and spoiling of their Goods, to the
ruin of Families almost, for their maintenance, as Tithes, and such like; which
if their Consciences were not seared they could not do; also some of them cried
to the rude wicked People, in their Idol-temples, Fight Lads for the Gospel;
and many who have born witness to the Truth, and against their deceits, have
been beat, and abused, and knocked down, as for dead, in their presence; and
their consciences are absolute seared, else they would tremble at these things.

Also the Apostle Peter, he saw false Prophets would come in, 2 Pet. 2. And
false Teachers, who would bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them; and many should follow their pernicious ways, and through
covetousness, with feigned words, they would make Merchandise of people; and
they would walk after the Flesh, in the lust of Uncleanness, and despise
Government, and be presumptuous and self-willed, and not afraid to speak evil
of Dignities, and they would speak evil of things they understand not, and
their hearts are exercised with coveteous practices, and were cursed Children,
and they sport themselves with their own deceivings; and these had forsaken the
right Way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaa^, who loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness; and these are Clouds that are carried with a Tempest,
and they speak great swelling words of vanity, and while they promise to others
liberty, themselves are the Servants of corruption: and such were Scoffers, and
Mockers, which would come after the Apostles days, and they would walk after
their own lusts.

And now according to this Prophecy of Peter, who saw false Teachers coming
in, he gave these Characters of them, whereby it does plainly appear that this
Generation of Teachers are they, and of that Stock which then came in; for
these bring forth the very same fruits which they did, which he spoke of, and
we know them by their fruits, as Christ has said; for these have filled the
World with damnable Heresies, as holding forth, That sprinkling Infants with
Water, is Baptism into the Faith of Christ; and that a Steeple-House is the
Church; and that singing David's Experiences in the World, among wicked People,
in Rhyme and Meeter, is singing to the Praise of God; and these are damnable
Heresies, even to the denying the Lord that bought them; for they deny the
Light of the Lord Jesus Christ given to every man, to be the only Teacher, and
the only Guide of man; and they that do deny the Light of Christ, with which
every man that comes into the World is lighted, to be sufficient to lead to
Christ, and to the Kingdom of God, (as these Teachers in this Age do) they deny
the Lord that bought them; and many, even whole Nations, all the World, as John
saw in the Revelations, have followed their pernicious ways, and run after
their Idolatry and pernicious ways of Superstitions; and they do make
Merchandise of souls through covetousness, with their feigned words; for where
they can make their Bargain to have the most money, there they will preach, and
no where else; and if any will give them more the next year, they will sell
that People, and go to another, for very covetousness, by feigned words; and
they do walk after the flesh, in the lust of Pride and Covetousness, which is
uncleanness of the flesh; and they despise the Saints Government and Order; for
they will not suffer the Saints to prophecy one by one in their Assemblies,
according to the Saints Government, but do despise that, and persecute it by
the government of the Beast, unto whose government they are subject, and not to
the Government of Christ and the Saints; and thus they are presumptious and
self-willed, presuming to afflict, and cause the Children of God to be cast
into Prison, and suffering them to be beat, and abused by their Flock, out of
their wicked self-wills; and they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities,
and do speak evil of the Ways of God, and of his Truth, which they understand
not; and their hearts are exercised with covetous practices, and are cursed
Children; for they make poor People, that have but ten Eggs, give them One, and
that hardly can get any Fuel for the Fire, pay them a Fenny for the smoke;
with many such other exceeding covetous practices, as suing men two hundred
miles to answer for three Shilling, claimed by them for Tithes.

And these sport themselves in their vanity in their own deceiving, and when
they have oppressed People for their Wages, and make People pay them for who^
they do no work, and force Wages from them that never hired them, which ar^
unheard of coveteous practices; they sport themselves in their pride and
lustf^lness, and they are out of the right Way, and gone astray from the Ways
of God, which are holy, and are in the way of Balaam, who went after
unrighteous Wages, who sought for enchantment against Israel, as these do; and
these lo^^ unrighteous wages, by taking maintenance from People by force, unto
whom is nothing owing by them; and these are carried with a Tempest of every
Wi^d, according as the Powers of the Earth blow; these are carried sometimes
under such a Government, and sometimes against it, and so are Clouds carried
abo^t, and are unsettled on the foundation; and they speak great words of
Christ, God, and the Scriptures, which are but words stolen by them, because
they are not spoken by the spirit of God, but by a lying spirit; and they
promise to others liberty, that they shall receive the Kingdom of God after
death, and that Christ has taken away their sins, with such like Promises of
liberty, but themselves are the Servants of corruption, living in Pride, and
Hatred, and Coveteousness, and these serve sin; and are Servants of corruption;
and they are Scoffers, and Mockers, and Walkers after their own lusts, as it is
evident in all men's sight; so that according to the Judgmen^ of Truth, we judge
these Teachers of this Generation, (...) be of the same root which then sprang
forth; for these bring forth the same frui^s as they in that time did; and in
the Apostasy they have overspread the whole World: And also the Apostle Jude
gave a Description of them, according as Peter had done; he saw certain men
creeping in, who turned the Grace of God in to Wantonness; and they were filthy
Dreamers, and know nothing but wh^^ they know naturally, as bruit Beasts, and
in that they corrupt themselves; a^^ they have gone in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam; a^^ they are Trees whose fruit withers;
raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering Stars; they are
Murmurrers and Complainers, walking after their own lusts, having men's persons
in admiration, because of advant^, and these separate themselves sensual,
having not the Spirit; and of this s^ which Jude describes are these Teachers
in this Generation, whose fore-fathe^ crept in, in the Apostles days, and
these are their cursed Children, which (...) abound in these Nations at this
day; and they are filthy Dreamers, studdying f^r what they speak, and dreaming
without the Spirit of God an hour in a Pulpit, and what they know it is
naturally, by natural Learning and natural Arts, and i^ that knowledge they are
also corrupted, in Pride, and Vainglory, and Vanities, like bruit Beasts in
their Apparel, and Practices, and not like Ministers of the Gospel, nor
Saints; and they are in Cain's way, in Envy, and Murder, and Wrath abounding,
no People like them; and they do run greedily after Balaams Error, ^or Gifts,
and Rewards, and unrighteous Wages, which they run after greedily; and they are
Trees which bring forth cursed fruits, which will wither and fade away; and
they are like proud raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their sha^ in Lies,
and Slanders, and cursed speaking in public and private; and they have no
Habitation in the Firmament of God, but are wandering Stars, and so^^times in
one Opinion, and sometimes in another, but the blackness of Dark^ is reserved
for them, and the Judgment of the great Day; and they are Mur^ rers and
Complainers, and can never have enough, but seek for their Gain fr^ their
Quarter, as the false Prophets did in Isaiah's time; and they have men's p^sons
in admiration, because of advantage to themselves, bowing and worshippi^ men's
persons, who will advantage them in their Wages, or Hire, and Maintenance,
begging favor of the Magistrates, and having their persons in admiration, that
they may have their advantage in oppressing poor People in Tyt^; in this their
wickedness is hard to be expressed: and these have separated into
selfseperation, some into one Form gathered, and some into another, but a^^
sensual, and in the wisdom which is from below, and without the Spirit of God.

And thus it is proved that these Teachers of this Age are of the same
Generation in their practices, which Jude described to be creeping (...), in
his time. And further the Apostle, 1 John 4. he saw that the false Prophets and
Antichrists, which Christ prophesied of to come, were come in his days, and
said, Many false Prophets are gone out into the World, which is the spirit of
Antichrist, whereof you have heard, said John, And even now already is it in
the World, and they were of the World, and the World heard them; and so are
this Generation of Teachers, who succeed them that went forth into the World
then; these are of the World, in its ways, Pride, and Wickedness,
Covetousness, and Envy, and all Evil; and they that are in the evil of the
World, in wickedness, hear them, and maintain them; so that according to John's
Description, these Teachers of this Age are of that same flock which came in
then; and John further saw, that all the World was gone after them, and
worshipped the Beast which was then risen, and run after the false Prophet,
which then came in, and sat upon the Beast, and its plain that the World is all
run after them, unto this day, which is a day of bringing back again from the
false Prophet, and from under the power of the Beast; and the Beast, and his
Image, and the false Prophet, and his Divinations must down to the ground; and
according as John farther prophesied, The holy City which had been trodd^n down
under the Gentiles feet, for such a time, should again be gained, and the
Saints should have the Dominion, and the old Dragon should be chained, and
Christ sh^^ld reign, and his Kingdom should ^e set up in the Earth, and the
Tabernacle of God should be with men; and this is the day that the Lord is
restoring again the Way of Peace, which long has been lost, and the the Power
of God is again witnessed, which has not been known for Generations.

So that of things spoken this is the sum of Truth, and the Word of the Lord
God to all People on the Earth; that in the days of Christ and the Apostles,
it was a glorious Day of Light, and Life, and Power; and the Lord gathered a
People which honored his Name, while they stood with him, and in his Counsel
walked; but since the days of the Apostles has been an Apostasy, and Darkness
over all, and a Subversion upon all, and Night has been over all, wherein no
man could work, as Christ said; and Forms without Power have been estabished,
the pure Way of God has not been known in its purity; so that this time
wherein all are fallen, is a time of ignorance, of the reign of the Beast,
which all the World has wandered after, and a time wherein the Gentiles feet
have trodden down the holy City; and a time wherein all the World runs after
the false Prophet, and are deceived, and made drunk with the Wine of the Whores
Fornications.

I say this is the time wherein all the men of this Generation are fallen, and
the Scripture is fulfilled; the Night wherein no man can work is upon the
World; and further this is the time of Antichrists dominion, who has exalted
himself in the Seat of God, showing himself to be God; and long has he reigned
with the Beast, and the false Prophet, even since the days of the Apostles;
and these same Teachers of this Generation, which now are in the World are
manifest by their fruit, to be of that generation, of that seed, and stock of
false Prophets, which Christ prophesied of, should come in the last time after
his days; and which most of the Apostles saw coming in, in their days; by
their fruits I say they are known; for these bring forth the same fruits, and
bear the same Marks which those described did, in their time; so we see
Christ's Prophecy is fulfilled, who said they should come, for they are come;
and the Apostles descriptions are fulfilled on these, for these Teachers are
such as bear the same Characters as is proved, as they said they should bear
that would come; and long have the Nations been deceived, and kept under the
worship of the Beast, running after the false Prophet.

And we see John's Prophecy is fulfilled, who said, that The holy City was
given to be trodd^n under the feet of the Gentiles; for so we see it has been
for many Generations; and also we know, the time is now approaching, that the
dominion of the Beast is near an end, and the holy City shall the Saints
possess, and the Gentiles shall be driven out of it, according as John said,
who wrote the last of any of the Apostles, and gave ful^ testimony of these
things, which I have declared ^f (viz.) of an Apostasy, and reign of the Beast,
and false Prophet, and a Subversion from the Ways of God, and this has been,
and is come to pass: Also ^e prophesied of the gaining of the holy City in
again to the Saints, and of a restoration, wherein new Jerusalem should be made
manifest from Heaven, and sho^^d again be adorned, as a Bride for her Husband,
and the Saints should inhabit it, and the Tabernacle of God should be with men
upon Earth, and the Lord would dwell for ^^er with his People, and this day is
approaching nigh at the doo^, for the Fig Tree has blossomed, and we know it
is near at hand, the Summer wherein the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed
unto all Nations, and they shall (...) that he is the Lord God Almighty, that
will take Vengeance upon the great Wh^^e, who has made all drunk with the Wine
of her Fornication.

And now after the long night of Apostasy and Darkness, which has been vp^^
the face of the Earth, is the Lord appearing, and his Day dawning, and his
Lig^^ breaking forth as the Glory of the Morning; and the Kingdom of God is
revealed, and his Dominion is setting up, after the long reign of the Beast,
who ha^ had his Power, and his Seat, and his great Authority from the Dragon,
after wh^ the whole World has wandered, and him has worshipped, who has been
saying w^ is like unto the Beast, who is able to make war with him? His mouth
for many Generations has been opened in blasphemy against God, and his Name;
and he (...) made war with the Saints, and his power has overcome them, [Mark]
overco^ them, and then himself has reigned, and the reign of Christ for many
years (...) not been known, but over Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations has the
Beast had po^er, and over them has reigned for many Ages; and all that dwell
upon the F^ have worshipped him, whose Names are not written in the Book of
Life; (...) Earth has been caused, and them that dwell therein to worship the
Beast, and (...) his Wonders he deceives them that dwell on Earth, and as many
as would (...) worship the Beast and his Image, the Beast has had power that
they should be^led, and many has he killed, who would not worship him, and are
persented; and both Small and Great, Rich and Poor, Free and Bond, have rec^ed
the Mark of the Beast, and the number of his Name, which is the number (...) a
man; he that reads let him understand; these things have come to pass, (...)
been fulfilled since the Apostles days, in this night wherein no man could
wor^ which Christ said would come; but now the forty and two Months, which ti^
the Beast and his Image was to continue, and so long was his Power to remain
(...) make war, and to overcome the Saints.

I say the time is well nigh expired and finished, and the Lord God Almighty
and the Lamb is risen to make war against the Beast and his Image, who has
reigned over the Kingdoms of the World, and the Judgment of the great W^
comes, who has sitten upon the Beast, and drunk the Blood of the Saints,
(...) with whom the Kings of the Earth (since the days of the Apostles) have
com^ted Fornication; and all the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk
(...) the Wine of her Fornication; and all the Merchants of the Earth have been
ma^e rich through the abundance of her delicacies; and she has sat upon the
scar^ colored Beast, and her Cup in her hand has been full of abominations,
and (...) ness, of her fornication, and her name is Mystery Babylon, the Mother
of Harl^ and all the Kings of the Earth have given their power unto the Beast,
and committed Fornication with the great Whore; and she has sat upon people and
multitudes, (...) nations, and tongues, (since the Apostles days) and even
some, who have hated the Whore, and fulfilled the Will of God, and made the
Whore naked, yet they gi^ their power also to the Beast, until the Word of God
be fulfilled.

Consider these things you that have an ear to hear; but now the mighty Day
(...) the Lord, and the Judgment of the Whore is approaching, wherein she shall
be rewarded according to her Works, and doubble shall be given into (...) Cup,
and as she has loved blood, so shall blood be given her to drink, and the
Merchants of the Earth shall lament her, whom they have waxed rich by, who
(...) glorified her self, and lived deliciouslly, and has said in her heart; I
sit as a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall not see sorrow; but now the one day
is dawning wherein her Plagues shall come, death, and mourning and famine, and
she shall be utterly burned with fire, for strong is the Lord that is risen to
judge her; and the Kings and Merchants; and all the Inhabiters of the Earth,
shall lament her, and cry, Alas, alas! and now are they beginning, for the hour
is come that her judgment comes, and all her Merchants, who have trafficked
with the Souls of men shall partake of her Plagues, who have partaked of her
sins, and lived deliciously with her, and the fruits that her Soul lusts
after shall depart from her, and all things that are dainty, and goodly, shall
depart from her, and she shall find them no more at all when her judgment
comes, and in an hour all her riches are come to naught, and all her Merchants
at Land and Sea shall lament her; even her that has ruled over Nations, and
sat as a Queen for many Generations, ever since the days of the Apostles,
until this day; yea, all that have wandered after her, even the whole World
shall lament and bemoan her; and such as have served her, and made Slaves of
the Souls of men by Merchandise and Traffic, shall bewail her, and their gain
shall cease for ever; for in one hour shall she be made desolate, and her glory
shall fade, and her beauty shall wither, and the Beast that has carried her
shall utterly faint, and the false Prophet that has wrought Miracles in their
sight, and deceived the Nations, shall be cast into a bed of torment with her,
and the Beast, and the false Prophet shall be taken, and cast alive into the
Lake of Fire, to be tormented for ever, day and night, World without end; and
the Whore, in whom has been found the Blood of the Prophets, and of the
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth, and the Beast who has
caused all that dwell on the Earth to worship him and his Image, for many Ages,
and the false Prophet, who has deceived the whole world, and many Nations, and
made them subject unto the power of the Beast, by his Miracles which he has
wrought in the sight of men; these shall be plagued together, and tormented
together; for the false Prophet and the Beast has sent forth their unclean
Spirits, like Frogs, unto all the Kings of the Earth, and unto the whole World,
to gather them to Battle, with their Armies, to make war against him that sits
on the white Horse, even the Son of God; and this is the false Prophet which
Christ prophesied of to come, which long since came, and has served the Beast
and the great Whore for many Generations, and many, even all Nations have been
deceived, as Christ said, and led aside, and blinded, and bewitched by him.
And, as I have said, these Teachers of this Generation are of them, of their
Root and Offspring, which long have flourished on the face of the Earth.

But the day is at hand, that the Heaven, and the Holy Apostles, and Prophets
shall rejoice over the Whore, and over the false Prophet; for the Lord comes to
avenge us on her; and as she has done, so shall it be done unto her, now in
this day wherein Jerusalem shall be builded again, and the holy City which the
Gentiles have trod under foot for forty and two months, which time is expired,
and near an end, accounting from the days of the coming in of the Apostasy,
until this day, if any have an ear to hear let him hear; this I have received
from God I say the holy City shall be measured, and the Gentiles cast out; and
she shall be adorned, and as a Bride for her Husband shall she be prepared; and
Gods Tabernacle shall be with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall
be his People; and God himself will be their God, and all tears shall be wiped
away and there shall be no more death nor sorrow; for the former things are
passed away, and all things shall be made new.

And what I have said are the faithful Sayings of God; every one that is
athirst shall drink of the Water of Life freely; and he that overcomes shall
inherit all things, and shall be called the Son of God, and shall dwell in the
holy City, which long the Gentiles foot has trodden under, which shall again be
adorned, and prepared as a Bride for her Husband; if any have an ear to hear
let them ^ear. And the Glory of the Lord is risen, and his Day is breaking
forth more abundantly, and the Lamb is given for a Light, and all Nations that
are save^ shall walk in the Light of the Lamb, and the King of Righteousness,
(who has been long fled into Egypt, while Herod the Beast, which has sought
his life, and driven the woman into the Wilderness, has reigned) shall again
be set upon the holy Hill of Sion, and rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, and
trample upon the necks of all his Enemies; the Nations have not for many Ages
been ruled by hi^, but the Beast, who has ruled over Kindreds, and People, and
said, Who has be^ able to make war again the Beast, and to the power of the
Beast has all Nations be^ subject, and the Dominion of Christ has been
trodden down and despised, and (...) holy City has been laid waste, and his
Princely Power has not been felt, nor witnessed in the Kingdoms of men for
Ages and Times, nor him the one head; and the one horn has not been known, but
many heads and horns have been exalted, a^^ all Nations, and all the Princes,
and Kingdoms of the Earth have been subject (...) the Rule and Law of the
Beast, and to the Divinations of the false Prophet, and dark^ has been over
all, and God has been as a stranger in the Earth, as one not known he has
been worshipped ignorantly, and the inscription every where has been (...) the
unknown God; but now after all this the glorious God of Truth has appeared,
and great, and mighty has been his Hand and Power in this our day, in rais^g
(...) a righteous Branch out of the Root of Righteousness, and in gathering his
scattered People up to himself, who have been scattered by the Idol Teachers,
and deceived by false Prophets, and made a prey upon by the wild Beasts of the
Forest. O how have the People been made a prey upon by their Teachers, and
greedily devoured by (...) Shepherd, who have sought themselves, and sought for
their gain, every one f^ his Quarter? for many Ages how have people been led
blind, by their blind S^pherds, and none to this day come to the knowledge of
the Truth by them? (...) these have run, and were not sent, and therefore the
people have not b^ profitted at all; as it was in Ieremiahs days, so it is
now, no profit (...) people in the knowledge of the Ways of God, but leanness,
and barr^^ness, and as the Teacher, so his People, all out of the way, in
profaneness, (...) wickedness; and profaneness is gone forth from them into
many Nations, y^ the Lord bringing back his Inheritance, which have been driven
away into the desolate Wilderness; yea, and the Lord has caused his Light to
shine out of darkness; and unto them that have sat in darkness, and in the
shadow ^f death i^ the mavelous Light risen, that the Glory of the Lord may
be revealed, and God Tabernacle may be with men; and the holy City is
preparing, as a Bride for her Husband, and Darkness shall flee away, and Sorrow
and Sighing shall no more be known, but Life and Immortality shall again be
brought to Light, as it was in the days of the Apostles.

This I have received from God; and the Lord shall be known to be the God of
his People; and for this cause has he called and chosen faithful Witnesses,
(...) given his powerful Ministry by the gift of the holy Ghost, as it was in
the Apostles days, and now many are called to declare abroad the things which
we (...) heard, and seen, and handled; and the Gospel of Christ is received by
the Rev^tion of Gods eternal Spirit, and Son in our hearts; and the power is
made manifest, and the form of Godliness without the Power is denied and
judged; and Christ the one Head is exalting, and the one Horn of Gods Salvation
is revealing and the many Heads and many Horns must be broken to pieces, and be
confound^d in this the day of the Lord; for his purpose is powerful in carrying
on his o^^ work against all his Enemies; so that none are able to hinder. But
they that set themselves (even the Beast and his Power, which is now struck at)
whose Kingdom is invaded, has raised the force of his power, and the policy
of his arm; yet shall they be confounded, and no formed Weapon shall prosper
against the Lord and his Way, who is now risen to avenge himself of the Beast
and his power, and the Whore, and her Fornications, and the false Prophet, and
his Divinations, which all must in^ the Wine Press of Gods dreadful Wrath to be
trodden; and all that worship the Beast, and repent not, shall partake of the
Plagues of the Beast, and of the Whore; and though the false Prophet gathers
Gog and Magog together, to fight against the Lamb, and to compass the beloved
City about, yet he shall, and them that he gathers, be broken to pieces, and
driven as dust before the Wind, and as Stubble before the Fire; for the purpose
of the Lord shall stand. Great Babylon is come into remembrance before the
Lord, to reward her according to her deeds; and the Lord will cause his Truth,
and his Salvation to be known in the Earth, and his Name and Power is declared
in the hearts of his People, to the overturning of all unrighteousness, and
though every horn of the Beast push against this, and every Head, with his
Members, set it self against it, yet the Counsel of the Lord shall not be
disannulled, nor made void; for the Scepter and Dominion of his Son shall be
exalted over all the Earth, and the Princes of the World, and the Kings of the
Earth shall lay down their Crowns, and become subject; for the Kingdoms of this
World shall be changed; and shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ; the Kingdom of the Beast must down, and the princely power of Darkness
must be overthrown, and Laws, and Times, and Things, and Powers of men shall be
overturned, and overturned, till he come to reign in the Earth, whose right it
is to reign over Nations and People: And because of this the rage of the
Heathen has been great, and the counsels of the Wicked many, and strong, from
the profane Drunkards to the chiefest professed Teachers of this Age; even all
the whole Body of the Beast has joined it self against the purpose of the
Lord; men of all conditions, from the highest to the lowest, have armed
themselves with Mischief to offend the Way of Truth.

This is written, as moved of the Lord, to go abroad through the Nations, that
all may understand concerning the times, and the changing of times, how that
the Beast has reigned in Dominion, over Nations, Tongues, and People; and all
have worshipped the Beast, and gone after the false Prophet: here all may come
to a good understanding what has been, and what is, and what shall be; how
that when the Power and Government of Christ was lost, through departing from
the Faith which ruled in the Apostles days, then the whole World was as
unstable in Ways and Judgments as a Sea; then out of the Sea one Beast arose,
and another after him arose out of the Earth; and all have been caused, both
small and great, bond and free, to worship the Beast, and the Image of the
Beast; yea, all the Dominions of the World have for many Ages been subject to
the power of the Beast in all things, and not known the Worship and Power of
God, and the pure subjection to him; but the Kings of the Earth, and all her
Princes have given their power to the Beast, and have received their authority
from him, and acted thereby many of them in great unrighteousness, in
injustice, and oppression, and cruelty; in pride, and rebellion, and vain
glory; in quarrelling one with another, to the murdering thousands of
thousands; and this has all been brought forth under the power of the Beast,
and by it; and his Heads and Horns have exalted themselves one against another,
and smitten one onother, and the great Whore has made them all drunk, and all
People upon the Earth, with envy, pride, wontonness, and all unrighteousness;
this has been since the Apostles days, in this Night of Apostasy, wherein the
whole World has been subverted by false Prophets and Deceivers, and the
Kingdom of Christ has not been known upon Earth for many Generations, but the
Beast has been established in his Throne of Rebellion against Christ Jesus;
his Decrees have been Laws, and Statutes, and he has made wa^ against all the
Saints, and overcame them, and reigned over them until this time, and trodden
down their City, and defaced their Glory; but the blood of the Just has cried
day and night, under the Altar, the Souls of such as have been slain for the
Testimony of the Word of God, have cried day and night, How long Lord, how
long, when will thou avenge our Blood upon the heads of our Enemies, even the
Beast, the Where, and the false Prophet? and this has been for many Ages, even
while the Kingdom of Antichrist has been set up and advanced through the
World, and his Power and Authority has reached over Nations, bond and free,
from the Prince on his Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghill, even all have been
subjected under the power of the Beast; that nature having ruled within every
particular, has given him the Authority without over all, and admired him, and
said, who is able to make war with him. Antichrist has ruled over all, by
injustice, oppression, and Tyranny in unrighteous Laws, and through wicked
decrees, old Pharaoh-like, he has laid heavy yoaks, and oppressive bonds upon
the Just; for who would not be subject to him, he has had power to kill them,
and none was able to gainsay; such has been the greatness of his power, and
the strength of his dominion over all, that none have been able to make war
against him, he has been admired in all the World, not any Nation excepted
where the government of Antichrist has not born rule, and there have been none
left to bear witness against him, or to stand up against him; for the faithful
Witness^^ have been slain in the Streets of the great City, which spiritually
is called, S^ and Egypt, and all them that have dwelt upon the Earth have made
merry (...) their dead Bodies, and rejoiced in their Iniquities over the Slain,
and been without a Reprover, and not tormented, nor troubled, but have sent
gifts one to another, because they have slain them, who have tormented them
that dwelt upon the Earth; and the government of the Beast has been enlarged,
and the whole World have wandered after him, and been in subjection under him,
for many Generations; even f^^ forty and two months, he that can read let him
understand; so long has it be^ given him to make war against the Saints, and
to overcome them, and it has been given him to reign over all people in the
Wrath of God, and in his anger, bec^^se of the Rebellion of all the Earth, and
all people in it, but he shall be taken away i^ Gods displeasure who reigns in
his anger over the Nations, who have forsaken the Lord, and was given up to the
Power of the Beast, to be subjected in Slavery, and Bondage, in Pain, Sorrow
and Misery; and through Deceit, Craft and Policy, and Oppression, and by the
Wisdom of this World, and natural Ar^^, and Knowledge, his Government has long
been established, and his Domini^ has been upon Earth; Times, and Laws, and
Things, and Powers of men have been in his hand, to change, and subvert, and
overturn into his own Ima^ and to transform them like to the Beast; none upon
Earth, has bought, or s^^d, or judged, or given evidence, or been respected in
all the World, that (...) not had the Mark of the Beast, and the number of the
names of Antichrist; rich and poor, small and great have receive his Mark, as a
Seal of their subjection to the Beast, whose many heads, and many horns, have
subjected all by the force of his arm, and he has blinded the eye, lest men
should see him, and cast darkness over all faces, and the false Prophet has
deceived many, a Christ has said, and all the Earth has been wandering in the
Wildern^ of Wickedness, and the Long-suffering of the Lord has been wearied,
and he continually provoked to destroy the Nations, who have followed
Antichrist, who has showed himself in the Seat of God, to be God, and has sat
in the Seat of God, in the Seat of Justice, Righteousness, and of Mercy, and
the Abomination of desolation has long stood in the place where it oug^^ not,
for many Ages, and length of Times; and his many Heads, and many Horns has
swayed the World, through the terror of the Beast, who ha^ made all worship
him, and they that would not, he has killed, who has carried the great Whore,
who has made all men without exception, and all Nations without respect to
any, wholly drunk with abomination, and all has staggered, and fallen into
grievous iniquities, and the Dragon has stood ready continually to devour the
Child of Righteousness as soon as it was born, and the Woman has been forced
to flee into the Wilderness, that has brought i^ forth, and has fed there for
so many days, and for a long season has the L^^d been blasphemed, even the
Name of God, and his Tabernacle, and them th^^ dwell in Heaven.

But now has the Lord considered, and looked down from his Habitati^n, and of
a truth he is risen, and has taken to him his great Power, that he may reign,
and put all things under his Feet, and subdue the power of the Beast, and
Antichrist; and all their Government, and Rule, and Laws, and Decrees shall be
overthrown, and confounded, and all their worship shall be broken; for great
Babylon is come into remembrance before the Lord, to render her according to
her works; the Lamb is now risen, and advanced with his Bow, and his Sword, and
he is going forth Conquering, and to Conquer the Beast, and all that have
worshipped him: and they that are with the Lamb are called, and chosen, and
faithful, and they love not their lives unto death and they shall overcome him
by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of his Testimony; the Dominion of the
Lamb is setting up, and his Power is made manifest; and the Stone cut out of
the Mountain without hand is a dashing at the feet of the Image, and against
the Beast, and his Power, and against all his Laws and Decrees is he risen; and
he will change Times, and Laws, and Powers, and the Kingdoms of this World
shall become the Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever; for now the Spirit of Life from God is entered into the Witnesses
which have been slain, and they begin to stand upon their feet, and great fear
falls upon the great men of the World, and the Devil is cast out into the
Earth; who has sitten in Heaven, in the Temple of God, and deceived the whole
World, and his wrath is great against the Saints, and against the Lamb, because
he knows his time is but short; and the Man-child shall grow; and shall rule
the Nations with a Rod of Iron, if any man has an ear to hear let him hear; he
that leads into Captivity shall go into Captivity; he that kills with the
Sword must be killed with the Sword; the Purpose of the Lord shall stand who is
now gathering, and bringing back such as have been driven away and deceived by
the Generation of false Prophets, who have deceived the whole World, and all
that dwell therein, and the Lord will take vengeance upon them, upon the Beast,
and upon the false Prophet; and great Babylon shall be thrown down, and shall
be no more at all, but shall be made desolate; and the voice of Harpers, and
Musicians shall no more be heard at all in her; but her Glory shall wither, and
fade away in a moment; for he that has a true Weight and Measure is appeared
to divide, and to give due weight, and measure unto every one; and all the
wicked, who will not come from under the worship of the Beast, shall have their
part in the Lake that burns with Fire, and he that is unjust let him be unjust
still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still; here is the
dividing of all things as they were in the beginning; the Glory of the Lord is
risen, whose name is called the Word of God, and out of his mouth goes a sharp
Sword, and with it be smites the Nations, and he shall rule them with an Iron
Rod; for his Name is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and he is gathering his
Saints together to the Supper of the Great God, to eat the flesh of Kings, the
flesh of Captains, and the flesh of Horses, and them that sat thereon; the
Purpose of the Lord shall not be disannulled, though the Beast, and the Kings
of the Earth gather together their Armies, to make war against him that sits
upon the Horse, who is already gone out to conquer, and the numberless number
of the Saints are gathering together before the Throne of the Lamb, and they
have no guile found in their mouths.

And the day is now dawned, and the night is far spent; Woe unto the World, and
to all the Inhabiters of the Earth, who have worshipped the Beast, the Lord is
coming to plead with you, and ye that have partaken of the sins of the great
Whore shall partake of her Plagues, and she shall be rewarded double, according
to her works; for her sins have reached unto Heaven: The Day of great
tribulation is at hand, of Anguish and Destruction, men shall seek death and
shall not find it, but it shall flee from them, when the Lord arises and the
Lamb stands upon Mount Sion, and his Saints with him, who shall tread down
the Heathen, and cast them out, even as they have trodden down the holy City,
and the Worship thereof; and the Kingdom of the Beast, and his Seat, and his
great Authority, which he has received from the Dragon, shall all be thrown
down; and the Kingdom of the Son of God with his Government, Scepter, and Rule
shall be established in all the Earth, and the utmosts part thereof shall be
given him to possess; this is the Promise, and this shall come to pass; and
through the whole World Laws, and Decrees, Ministry, and Orders shall be
changed and renewed; the Law and Decree of the Most High shall rule over all,
and the holy City shall be beautified, and is adorning and preparing for the
Saints, and their King to inherit; the Lamb is the Light of the City, and the
Temple therein, and all Nations and People that are saved shall walk in the
Light of the Lamb; for he has lighted every man that comes into the World,
with the Light of Salvation, in all that do receive him; and Darkness shall
flee away, the S^^ is risen, and Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and Dominion,
shall be given to the Lamb, who shall reign over Nations, and his Saints shall
see him, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads, and there shall be no
Night, but Light and Glory, and the Kings of the Earth shall bring in their
glory and honor i^ it; and the Gates stand open, and are not shut; every one
that thirsts, let him come, the cry is unto all; and yet nothing that
defiles shall enter: these are the faithful Sayings of the Lord, who is true,
and must not long be sealed; f^r the time is at hand, and all men shall read,
and all that keep the Commandme^ of God, shall have right to the Tree of Life;
and blessed are they, they shall be healed, though now they suffer all manner
of evil, for the Name of Jesus, by the Beast, and under his Power, by them that
worship him, who must fulfill wickedness by persecuting the Innocent, till the
Lord be raised out of his Habitation; and the dominion shall be given to them;
and they shall have power to bind King^ in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of
Iron; this is their Honor, and this i^ their Dignity, and they shall rejoice
for ever and ever, and shall glory in the Lord, and not in this World; and this
shall come to pass, as the Lord has said.

Wherefore all Nations and People, Arise, arise, and be awakened, Prepare,
prepare, and make way for the Lord; be removed, ye Mountains; and throw down,
ye Hills; and hewn down, ye sturdy Oaks; and cut up, ye tall Cedars; Make way,
and prepare, the Path for the Holy One, who is coming to rule w^ his Iron Rod,
and will dash you all to pieces: Be afraid and tremble thou Be^, that have long
reigned over the Earth; and all thy false Prophets and Worshippers be
confounded at this, and bow and tremble at the remembrance hereof; (...) whom
you have hated and crucified, and his Saints, whom you have persecuted, shall
come to reign over you all; and to him, whom you have set at naught, (...) you
be subject to, and ruled by, to all your sorrow; for behold the Lord comes
with his numberless number of Saints.

And this is a warning to all Nations and People upon Earth; Times and Laws
must be changed among you; Governments and Orders must be changed; Unjustice
and Oppression shall be removed, and every Yoke and Burden shall be taken off
from the neck of the Poor; true Judgment, and Justice, Mercy, and Truth, Peace,
and Righteousness shall be exalted; and all the Nations shall have Judges as at
the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; and the Poor shall rejoice when
true Judgment and Justice reigns, and the false Prophet subdued.

And this is a Warning to you all, that you may hear, and consider the Lamb who
has been slain, who is risen to reign, who is the Prince of Peace, of whose
Government there shall be no end; even he has lighted all mankind on the face
of the Earth; the Light is the Eye, which will let you see all this, and will
bring you to the fulfilling of it' a^^ to the good Understanding; and it shall
evidenc^ the truth of this, even the Light of Christ in all men, which is given
to guide (...) the Way of Peace.

THe Kingdom of Christ is setting up, and it is not of this World, neither
shall be exalted, nor advanced by worldly policy, and worldly wisdom, nor by
carnal weapons, nor by the multitude of an host of men, (its true) the Son of
God is gone forth; conquering and and to conquer; and the Spirit of his Mouth,
and the Word of his Power, shall get himself the Victory; his own Arm alone,
without the help of another, shall work the Conquest; and his Kingdom shall be
set up within every particular of his Subjects; for none can know him reign
without them unto their Salvation, till they know him to reign first within;
for that which opposes the Kingdom of Christ, and the setting of it up, is
within every man, and must be subdued within, where it has ruled; and the
Enemy of Christ's Kingdom, which has lodged within, must first be subdued,
before there be dominion over his Enemies without. This is the Word of the Lord
to all People; for he that pursues his Enemy without, and leaves him in his own
house, is foolish; and out of the way, and shall be overcome of his Enemy, and
shall not overcome him; therefore ye that are waiting for the Kingdom of
Christ, be awakened, and seek for it where it is to be found, not without you
first, but first within; strive not to obtain it with your carnal Weapons, but
take the Weapons which are Spiritual, which only will overcome; be not
deceived, for through suffering must the Kingdom of Christ be set up, and not
by rebellion through Crafts, and Plots, and secret Policy, and turbulent
Arisings, nor Strife in the nature of Enmity, (by these means shall the Kingdom
of Christ never be advanced.) And this is the Word of the Lord, and our
Testimony which we give of the Kingdom of Christ, who is indeed arisen to make
war against all his Enemies, and they that follow him are called and faithful;
and chosen, whose Weapons are Spiritual and mighty through God; and reaches to
the killing and subduing of all flesh (and he must war) till all his Enemies be
subdued, and must reign over all his Enemies, till the Kingdom be delivered to
the Father, where he shall be all in all.

The 3d Month, 1657.
All ye Inhabitants of the Earth in all Nations through the World; Hearken and
give ear, the Word of the Lord God that made Heaven and Earth is toward you;
He is coming to set up his Kingdom and his Dominion, which never shall have
end, and the Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and shall become the
Kingdoms of the Son of God.
ALl ye Kings, and Princes, and Rulers through the whole World; the Lord is
coming up with his mighty Host against you all; he, who will fan you, and sift
you, and try you, and search you out; for his Fan is in his Hand, and he will
thoroughly purge you; and you shall all know, that the Kingdom of the Most High
rules in the Kingdoms of men; all your Glory shall fade away, all your Majesty,
and Honor, and Dignities, and Dominions shall come to an end; all your
strength is but as a Straw, all your treasure as a Thing of naught, all your
glory as a fading Leaf in the Presence of the Lord God, that made Heaven and
Earth; all Nations upon Earth are but as the drop of a Bucket before him, and
the hearts of all men are in his Hand, and by him Kings rule, and the Princes
of the Earth are at his disposure; and you are all weighed in the Balance of
Equity, and found too light before the Lord; for all flesh has corrupted its
way before him: Be awakenened ye that have long slept in Darkness, and been at
ease in the flesh; ye that have had peace in this World, and pleasure in the
vanity thereof, the Lord is coming to make war against you, his Trumpet has
sounded, and his Sons and Daughters are gone forth to bear witness of his
Majesty, and Power, and Dominion; and the Lord has spoken, Who can but
prophecy? he has given the Word, and many are they that publish it: Let your
ears be open to Instruction, and kick not against the Lord, neither harden your
hearts against him, but make way for him, and prepare his Path; for he comes
to judge the World in Righteousness, and the People with equity, and the
Testimony of the Light of Jesus in you all shall witness for him; your princely
Powers must become subject to the Power of the Kingdom of the Most High, and
your glory must be veiled and darkened before the Glory, which ^he Lord is
causing to shine forth; and we, the Servants of the Most High, do give you
warning of the day of your Visitation, which is upon you, and all the World;
for the Lord is now risen, who has long winked at the time of great ignorance,
but now ^e warns you all to repent; therefore bow down, ye Stiff-necked; and
tremble, ye Stout-hearted; and be abased, ye Lofty-looks; our King is above you
all, our dominion is over you all, and the line of true Judgment are you all
measured with, and your ways are not found perfect in the Sight of the Lord,
nor your hearts right before him; his Kingdom has not been known in your
dominions, neither has his Laws and his Judgments born rule, but you have
every one been doing that which is right in the sight of your own eyes; and the
counsels of your hearts have been naught but vanity before the Lord; Vainglory
has abounded among you, which the the Lord's Soul has been burdened by; the
honors and pleasures of the flesh have been your delight, and strife and
enmity has been among you, and wars, and quarreling, and fighting one against
another, and you have rejoiced in the overthrow one of another, and in
destroying one another, and you have taken pleasure in gaining one another
dominions; you have striven who should have been the greatest, and greatly
oppressed the Poor; you have exalted your selves one against another, and drawn
up your Armies one in defiance of another, and the blood of Thousands have been
shed to satisfy the humors of your proud hearts; all this has been evil in
the Sight of the Lord, and his Spirit has been grieved, and his Soul vexed by
all this, and he has forborne till he has been weary; for he has been
dishonored by all this, and his Law has not born rule, and his Judgments have
had no place, you have been cruel-hearted one toward another, and merciless,
and without pity, and ouy have not done to others, as you would be done unto,
but you have rendered evil for evil, and sought occasions of evil one against
another, and vexed one another through the pride of your hearts; therefore now
is the Lord risen to make war against you all, and to dash you to pieces; the
Feller comes up amongst you, he that will not spare to slay, and to devour, who
will not be afraid of your lofty looks, he will spoil you of your Treasure, and
lay waste your strength, all ye Kingdoms of the Earth, and your gathering
together against him is but as Briers and thorns; for he will exalt his own
Kingdom over you all, and all ye Kings of the Earth shall know, that the
Kingdom of the most high must rule in your Kingdoms, and your Laws shall be
changed, and the poor shall no more be oppressed; for he is come that proclaims
liberty unto the Captives, who will remove oppression far away, who will change
Times, and Worships, and Ordinances, and there shall be no Law, but the Law of
God; nor no light, but of the Lamb; nor no worship, but the Worship in the
Spirit, and in the Truth; for all your Worships which the Nations are full of,
is naught but vanity, and a lie, immitations, and superstitions, brought forth
in hypocrisy, and not in an upright heart; vanity of vanities have abounded
both in civil and spiritual affairs; The root in which you stand is wholly
corrupted, and no good fruit springs from it, but cursed fruit, which must be
(...) down, and cast into the fire; ye have been evil, and could not bring
forth any good; you are corrupted, and your fruit is of a bitter taste, a day
of sorrow, of lamentation, and misery is coming upon you all; ye that have been
high and lofty, and stouthearted, fearfulness shall surprise you, and the
terror of the Lord of Hosts shall compass you about: I am moved to salute you
all with this, as a warning, and when it comes to pass, remember you have been
told; ye that know not the Kingdom of the most High ruling men, but are saying
in your hearts, this has my hand done, in a moment shall you be smitten, and
know there is one above you which must rule, for it is his right to rule over
all Nations, and there shall be no King but Jesus the A^oin^e^ o^ God, ^o^ ^o
Government, but the Government of the Lamb; there shall be no more war, but war
against the Dragon, who has stood to devour the Man-child, which is now
bringing forth, and he must rule with his Iron Rod, and shall subdue all under
his feet; We whom God has warned cannot but warn you of these things which
(...) come to pass; he is coming to separate between the Just and the unjust;
he will gather from among you, that the wicked may be consumed from off the
face of the Earth.

All you Rulers in the World, I warn you all, take heed how you persecute such
as comes to warn you, who brings this Message to you, lest you add sin to sin,
till there be no place found for repentance; for ye shall all know our God is
the true God that made Heaven and Earth, before whose presence all ^^esh must
come to Judgment.

By one who has measured the Times, who is come to the Day that has made all
Things m^ifest. EDWARD BURROUCH.

A General Epistle and Greeting OF THE Fathers Love t^ all the SAINTS, Called
and chosen to faithfulness in Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, in which
they believing, and their faith standing in his Power, many suffer for his Name
sake. And this is to all such as are found worthy to suffer, and is an
Exhortation to the strengthening of their faith, whereby they may continue
boldly, witnessing to the end. And this is a true Testimony of the Father, and
of the Son, witnessed by us who are called of God, in whom his Power is made
manifest.
TO all the Children of Light every where, who fear and love the Lord, who are
begotten of God, and unto whom he is known in the Spirit and in the Truth; this
is a Testimony of the Fathers love unto you, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from him
that lives for ever, the God of Light and Life be multiplied in you all, that
you may daily be renewed in strength, and girded with Truth, and armed with the
whole Armor of God, and may be kept by his Power until the day of Salvation,
to walk in the Government and subjection to Jesus Christ, witnessing the Power
and Presence of God in you, and amongst you, giving you power to fulfill his
Will in all things, and that in all righteousness, and out of all evil you may
be led, and preserved unto the end, and in the end, to show forth the praises
of God in this Generation, as a people called of him, and redeemed by him for
his great glories sake; even so Amen, and Amen.

Dearly beloved, be not ignorant, but this know, This is the Message which came
unto you, which is true and faithful, and everlasting, That the true God is
Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and this is the Message of Peace and
Reconciliation, and of glad Tidings unto all that have sought the Lord, which
we received of him, and you have heard, and there is not another to be
declared; and all that have received it are gathered up to God, and are in
Covenant with him, and one with another, and are in that which reconcileth and
joyneth unto Christ Jesus (the Husband) and second Adam, who is the Lord from
Heaven, the Prince of Peace, the Savior and the Deliverer, who is made
manifest in power, and condemns the Transgressor, and slays the Enmity, and
raises the Life out of death; and this is he who kills and makes alive, even
the God who is Light, who brings down one, and sets up another; who makes war
against the mighty, and gives peace to the poo^; and besides him there is none:
he searches man's heart, and tries the reins, and ^no^ the thoughts, and every
Creature is manifest in his sight, who gives to every one according to his
doings; and this is he who stands in the Congregation of the Righteous, even
in the midst of us, and sits Judge among the gods, unto him must all the
gods of the Earth bow, and the Inhabitants of the Earth must tremble before
him, and unto him every Tongue shall confess, and the Light in every man shall
answer, when he arises to Judgment, who is a swift Witness, to condemn or
justify all the children of men upon the face of the Earth.

This is the God of Truth whom we worship, and who will be worshipped in
Spirit, and in Truth, who is the God of Abraham, and his Seed for ever; and
with him there is no change, nor shadow of turning; and he has made known his
Name, and his Power, and his wonderful Works in this his Day, and has caused
his Voice to be heard in the Earth, and the Dead has heard, and now lives.

And his Name is exalted on high amongst all that fear him, and obey his Voice;
and he has given his Son a Covenant of Light, who lights every man that
comes into the World with the true Light of Life, or Condemnation, that all
who receive him may come to the knowledge of the Father, whom to know is Life
eternal.

And this is the Christ, the Savior, in whom we have believed, and whom we
preach, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the Foundation of God, which
cannot be moved, the Word of God is his Name, and there is no other Name given
for Salvation. This is he who was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore,
and there is no other to be looked for; if any preach any other, let them be
accursed; and if any bring any other Message, let them not be received.

And all you who have believed in this Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the
World, and who have received the knowledge of this God, who is Light himself,
and that searches your hearts, I exhort you, and warn you all in his Presence,
that lives forever, to wait upon him, and to fear before him, and to walk with
him for ever in uprightness of heart, which is of great price in his Sight; and
forget not his righteous Judgments, which he has made known, least you wax fat
through Mercies, and rebel against him, and become disobedient and gainsaying,
and so be destroyed from being a People; but be stayed upon the Lord, and let
your hearts be established with Grace; and be not tossed, nor shaken with any
wind of Doctrines of men, which is not from the Life of God, nor reaches to
the Life in you, but begets into Idolatry, to worship other gods then he who is
Light; and be not troubled at Temptations, nor at Sufferings, nor at
Reproaches, nor any other thing; but stand in the Counsel of God, and in his
Long-suffering, and wait patiently upon him, in your own measure of the Grace
of God received, which is sufficient for you, to preserve you, that Victory
over Death, and over him that has the power over it, you may receive, to
trample upon all that which is contrary to the Life of God within you, and
without you; neither be you troubled nor offended in Christ; if any among you
deny the Lord, and backslide from his pure Way, through an evil heart of
unbelief, and so become disobedient Children, and vex the righteous Soul; such
shall bear their own burden, and condemnation in the day of the Lord; and
shall know, that Truth changes not, but is the same for ever, though the
Deceitful-hearted through unbelief depart from it, and choose their own ways,
and despise the Counsel of the Lord, to their own destruction; but be ye more
watchful, and faithful, and valiant for the Truth upon Earth, unto the end;
that you may be found faithful Witnesses unto the Name of the Lord, in this
crooked Generation; and may receive the fulfilling of the Promise of God, and
may witness God within you, the Emanuel, the Savior, God with us, and this is
the whole Salvation, and there is no other to be expected, or witnessed, then
this, That God dwells in us, and walks in us, according to his Promise; and all
that know this, need nor go forth to the right hand, or to the left, but
Salvation is come unto us, he that taks away sin, and saves from it, and from
condemnation; and who witnesses this are begotten by the Word of God, and born
of the immortal Seed, and are new creatures; but now there is no condemnation,
but the reward of righteousness and peace to us, who are not in the Flesh, but
in the Spirit; and here we witness the Lord is our God, and we are his People,
and he sees no sin in us who are born of him, nor remembers iniquity; but his
Covenant is with us, and the Kingdom is become the Lords, and his Dominion is
set up, where God is all in all, where the Prince of Darkness is cast out; and
this is the End and Substance of all Ministrations, which we bear witness of:
and I do exhort all you that are called of God every where, patiently to wait
in the way of the Lord, and in his Judgments to receive this, and to possess
it within you, that you may be Worshippers of God, and Doers of his Will, and
may have the Witness, that you are accepted of him, and may know your Calling
and Election sure, where nothing that defiles can enter, but that may be taken
away, and removed; and him you may feel and witness, whom Satan has nothing
in, who is the Second Adam, and cannot be overcome, but is greater then the
first Adam, who was overcome (though innocent) and is lost from the Presence of
God; but he in whom there is no sin, and who cannot transgress, comes to seek
and to save that which was lost in sin, and to bring back that which was driven
away by sin; and he is greater then Innocence, and overcomes the Devil, and is
called the Son of God; and to him that overcomes, who is the Light of the
World, is all Power given of the Father: And know him in you all to be
greatest, who is not of the World, nor cannot bow to the Devil, to give you
dominion and authority over all the World, and the Powers of Hell and Death,
even he who seals up the old Dragon in Perdition, never more to deceive: And
who witnesses this, knows the Election which it is not possible to deceive,
or be deceived; and as every one of you have received him who is the Lord from
Heaven, so let your Faith stand in him, and walk in him; and let all your
Conversations be ordered by him, in all pure and blameless walking i^ the sight
of your Enemies, that it may be manifest that you are Branches in him, and that
you have received power to become the Sons of God, and that you are Heirs of
the Inheritance which shall not fade away.

And all you that witness this, your eye is open to see God, and you are
cleansed from sin by the Word of God, and you have received the peace with God,
and glad tidings from him in your own Souls; and this is Salvation by the
second Ad^; herein be established and settled, and look not for another; for
there is not any besides this Savior, and this Salvation; but if any preach
another, believe hi^ not; and if any cry, Lo here, and lo there is Christ,
without you, go not after them, nor follow them, but know him within you, which
is greater then all; yea, If we our selves, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any
other Jesus, then he that lights every man that comes into the World; or any
other Salvation, the^ God with us, let us be accursed; for this is the Gospel
of our Salvation, Christ Jes^^ within us the hope of Glory, the Power and
Wisdom of God to rule and reign i^ us, by which we are changed from death to
life, and translated from the power of Darkness into the Kingdom of his dear
Son.

And now all Friends and Elect of God, who are called and faithful, you that
have received this Testimony which God has given of the Son, and which the Son
has given of the Father, which in faithfulness has been testified in this
Generation; I exhort you all in the fear and Counsel of the Lord, take heed to
th^^ which you have believed, and heard, and learned of the Father, which is
t^^ Truth, as it is in Jesus, and shall abide for ever; and be not removed from
yo^ hope, nor given to change, but mind the Life of God in you all, which is
immortal, and is but one, and it answers to the Lord in Judgments, and in
Mercies, and one to another in that which is righteous and just, and witnesses
against all the works of the World, which are evil, and not wrought in God.

Ye that know this which is of the Father in you, dwell in it, and walk in it,
and be not shaken out of it, nor removed from it, for it is the Way of Peace
unto everlasting Rest, where there is no sorrow, but Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; and every one in particular, have Salt in your selves to
savor withal, that you may resist the Wicked One in all his Temptations, and
may not join to any thing which is out of union, and contrary to the Life of
God, and to the Truth which you have received, that you may never be betrayed
of your Hope, nor of the Simplicity which is in Christ Jesus, in which the
Father is well pleased; and let the Light of the World guide you in all things,
that your works may be wrought in God, never to be condemned, nor you to suffer
loss, knowing this first, That none are justified by him, but them that are led
and guided by him; and to whom he is a Savior, he is also a Teacher, and he is
given to Teach in all the Ways of Truth.

And now let your fellowship be in the Life and Power of God, and know not one
another in words only, and in shows, and in outward appearance, but witness one
another in the Spirit and in the Truth, and have communion there, in breaking
the Bread of Life, that Christ Jesus may be seen to be the Head in you, and you
Members to serve him, and one another, all receiving Wisdom from the Head, and
Virtue from the Vine (Christ Jesus) that you may abound in Love, Mercy, and
Peace, and all the fruits of Righteousness unto the Father; and dwell in the
Fear and Counsel of God, and be subject to his Will, not despising the Cross,
which is the Power of God, which slays the Birth that is born of the flesh,
which is not Heir of the Promise; but walk in the Cross daily, that your
Understandings may be kept open, to try and discern all spirits, whether they
be of God; and believe not every spirit, for lying spirits may arise among your
selves, and go forth from the Light, who are not in the Truth, but in the
Feignedness and Hypocrisy, with false Visions, and lying Imaginations,
handling the Word of God deceitfully, and corrupting and perverting the pure
Way of God, having the Form, but not the Power, having left the Power, and gone
from the Light, and such utter the Words of Truth without the Life, and are but
as the Chaff to the Wheat, and they are to be denied and resisted, and not
joined to, lest innocence and simplicity be betrayed, and your Faith made void,
and so you destroyed from the Life of God, and Death surprise you, and Darkness
enter into your Dwellings, and so Unbelief, and Doubting, and Murmurring, and
Lustings after evil arise in you, and you be perverted from the Worship of the
true God, and grieve his Righteous Spirit, by bowing to Idols, and following of
other Lovers, and so the true God, who has brought you out of Egypt, and made
manifest his Power in you, be forgotten, and the Faith of his Son made
Ship-rack of, and your latter end be worse then the beginning, and the Name of
the Lord be dishonored by you, and then woe unto you, his Wrath shall suddenly
break out against you: Wherefore hear and fear, and hearken unto the Word of
the Lord; He has caused his Light to shine forth, and his voice to be heard;
he has proclaimed his Name amongst you, and has caused his mavelous Light
to approach, when you sat in Darkness, in the Land of the shadow of death;
when you were lost, he sought you, and when you were driven away and
scatterred, he found you, and brought you home; when you were in your blood,
and no eye pitied you, he had Mercy upon you, and bound you up, and healed
you; when you were dead, he said unto you, Live; and it was so: when you were
led captive by the Devil under the power of death, he broke the Chains, and set
you free; and when there was none to help nor to save, his own Arm brought
deliverance and salvation, and the Way of Life and Peace he set before you.

And now all this has his own Arm accomplished, that you should be a Praise
unto him for evermore; now if you walk in the Way, which he has set before
you, and keep his Covenant which he has made with you, and fulfill his Will,
and walk in Righteousness, in Love, and Unity, in Meekness, Lowliness,
Humbleness, and in Soberness, and Watchfulness, and in Fear of his Name; then
shall his Presence never forsake you, nor his outstretched Arm cease to defend
and preserve you, but he shall go before you, and be your Reward; and he shall
be your God, and you shall be his People, and shall dwell in him; and he shall
be your Hiding Place, and he will be to you a Father, and you shall be his
Children, and his Blessing and Peace shall remain in your Habitations, for ever
and ever; but if any of you turn aside for a thing of naught, after vanity, and
deny the Way of Righteousness, and forget the Lord, and kick against him, and
follow the way and counsel of your own hearts, and worship other gods, and join
your selves to Strangers, and commit Adultery with other Lovers, and make the
Cross of Christ of none effect, and turn from the Light of Christ within you,
and fulfill your own wills, and the desire of your own minds, and go out of the
fear of the Lord into the liberty of the flesh, (which is not the Liberty in
Christ Jesus) and so seek your selves, and strive for mastery to be one above
another, and so surmise evil one against another, and the bond of peace be
broken, and vain contention and strife appear; then shall the Rod of God smite
you, and his Wrath be suddenly kindled against you, and you shall not prosper,
but his Countenance shall be hid, and the terrors of the Lord, and Lamentations
shall possess you, and Peace shall flee far from you; and such shall be cast
out of the Camp of the Lord, and shall have no part in the Inheritance, but the
Blessing shall depart, and the Curse shall enter, till utter destruction; yea,
and if any of you deny the Lord, unto whom his Way is made manifest, he will
deny you, and you shall have no part in him, but Vengeance in Flames of Fire
will he render upon the Disobedient, manifold more then if his Love and Way of
Peace had not been made manifest to you, and the Light of the World is your
condemnation for evermore, if you turn from it.

And in the Presence of the living God, I warn you all, Believe not that
spirit, neither follow it, which brings any other Message then what has been
declared from the beginning; Believe not him which cries, Lo here, or Lo there
is Christ without you, or that draws from the measure of Christ within you,
to hearken to, or to be taught by any other thing; for that sp^^^t is not of
the Father which preaches any other Christ then he that is the Light of the
World, and lighte^^ every man that comes into the World, or bring^^^ any other
Message, then that God is Light in himself, and has given his Son a Light into
the World; and this is the true Testimony of the Father, and of the Son; and he
that testifies any other Message, is to be judged and denied; he is not a
Worshipper of the true God, b^^ out of the Truth, and in the Error, and a
Deceiver, being deceived.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which ministers to others
that which it has not learned o^ the Father, but has the words without the
Power, and lives not in the Power of what it ministers forth in words, nor is
it what it declares, but is in the outward Shows, in the Hypocris^^, and
Feignedness, and reaches not the Life of God, but vaileth and covers it, and
that spirit is not of the Father, but is to be denied, and judged, and not
received nor believed.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is at liberty in the
flesh, and makes the offense of the Cross to cease, which is exalted out of
the Fear of the Lord, in the liberty of the earthly, which crucifieth the Life,
and darkeneth the Eye; and that spirit will boast of Joy, and Peace, and
Experience, and Knowledge, and speak high words in the airy Wind, and that
would lead yo^ out of your conditions, to glory above the Cross, till you be
past feeling of the Life; and that spirit begets into Feignedness and
Hypocrisy, and into the Love of the World, which passes away; and beware of
that spirit, for it is not of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is hasty, and
forward, and rash; for that goes out of God's Counsel, and betrayeth the Just,
and striveth to be greatest, and to be above the Weak, and despises him, and
would be Master, and not a Servant, and would rule, and not be ruled in the
meek and lowly Government of Christ; and that sp^^it will judge, out of
thoughts, rashly and unsavourly, and condemn another in secret in what it self
is guilty of; beware of that spirit, for it is not of God, but to be judged
with the Life of God.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which seeks it self to have
praise of men, and to be accounted, and would beget into divisions, and would
have Parties to it self, and respects persons and glories in gifts, and
knowledge, and parts, more then in the Giver, and admires men more then he that
gives the increase, and feeds of the knowledge in that nature which is to be
famished, and glories in what has been done by it, as though it had not
received power from the Lord, and is exalted, as though it bare the Root, not
knowing that it is born of the Root; and that spirit spends its Treasure (which
it received in the Fathers house) amongst Harlots, and despises the poor, and
seeks occasion to glory over the weak, that it may be renowned; beware of that
spirit, I charge you all, for it is not of the Father, nor to be followed, but
to be condemned, and resisted unto death.

Again, believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which preaches not from
the measure of God received, and to be manifest to it in you, and approved by
it only; but speaks above the measure, and reaches not to the measure of the
Grace of God; that spirit leads after words and outward shows, and cries peace
to the Rich, and judgment to the Poor, and the Word of God is not divided
aright, but heals up falsely, and daubs with untempered mortar, and cries peace
where God speaks war; and cries war where God speaks peace; and that Spirit is
a Deceiver and a Betrayer, and feeds but the Ear, and not the Life, and darkens
the Counsel of God by words without knowledge, and is not of the Father, but of
the World, and to be denied and condemned.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is not subject to
rule and order, and is not meck, and diligent, and long suffering, but heady,
and high, and untoward, seeking occasions against the Just, and Watches for
evil; that spirit will not bear reproof, but is idle, sloathfull, and careless,
and surmising evil, and backbiting, and conforms in appearance, making a fair
show, but is not unto God, as appearing unto man; and that would go, and is not
called; and will not go when it is called; and seeks for the praise of men more
then God, and that is fruitless ground, and brings forth Briars and Thorns in
secret, which choaks the Seed of God; beware of that spirit, it is a Lover of
this World; have no fellowship with it, for it is not of the Father, but a
Deceiver, and is to be a denied.

Again, Believe not that spirit, neither follow it, which is tossed and
unsettled, and is given to change, and is not established with Grace, that is an
Adulterer, and hun^s for the precious Life, and seeks by flattery to beguile
the Innocent; that spirit is zealous for a moment, but is soon overcome, and is
stony ground, and brings not forth fruit to perfection, but withers, and its
latter end is worse then the beginning. That spirit is exalted into presumption
in peace, and cast into desperation in trouble, and the double mind lodges in
it, and it is unstable in all its ways, and is a ground for the Seed of Satan,
and to it there is no peace from God; and beware of that spirit, for it is not
of the Father, but to be condemned.

Again, Believe not that Spirit, neither follow it, which is more zealous then
knowing, whose zeal is without true knowledge, and stands in that which is
corrupted, that flourishes for a moment, but cannot endure for ever; it has
no root in it self, but is furious, and passionate, and not long-suffering;
that spirit knows not its self, but would devour its Adversaries with
bitterness, and not gain by long-suffering; that is not the spirit of the
Father, but must be denied in all.

Again, Believe not that spirit which draws back into the World, into its
lusts, and liberty, and fashions which pass away; that spirit forgets God, and
draws back, for his Soul has no pleasure in it, but is vexed with it, where
the Cross is made of none effect, and the false liberty is walked in, which
murders the Life; that spirit is of the Devil, and is to be condemned.

And now all Friends of God every where, who knows him, and are known of him
whom he has gathered out of this untoward Generation, be diligent in your
Callings, and keep your Meetings in faithfulness, waiting upon the Lord, that
you all may receive of his fullness to be filled with it, and may be nourished
up unto himself, as trees of righteousness, the planting of his own right hand,
to spread forth his Name and Glory, as a people saved by him, and to who^ there
is none like besides. And this know and understand, that spirit is not of the
Father, which confesses not the Son to be come in the Flesh, who destroys the
works of the Devil, and takes away sin; and that Spirit believe and follow
whi^^ condemns sin, and destroys it, and takes it away, and so gives peace with
God i^ your own Consciences, and leads you into all Truth, and keeps you from
all evil: and you that witness this, the Son you know, and the Father you know,
to dwell with you, and in you; and this is the first, and the last; believe in
him and follow him, and look not for any other; and in this the Father of Life
and Glory, whose Dominion is without beginning and end, establish you, and
preserve you, Amen and Amen.

I, a beloved Brother, and a Companion unto all the Saints in suffering, and in
rejoyci^^, who have received this Testimony from the Father, do with it in this
Epistle salute t^^ whole Church in the Love of the Father, as moved of him by
his Eternal Spirit, whi^^ bears witness to me, that we are of God, and the
whole World lies in wickedness, (...) that all that are of God hears us. And
this Testimony I give of the Father, (...) of the Son, and of the Truth, and of
the Salvation of which I am made a Witness, and against all that ever shall
deny it, or turn from it: And this is thus far the (...) of my Testimony by the
Spirit of the Father, not knowing when the time comes it (...) be finished, and
the night may come when no man can work* E. B.

To all that suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, and for his Name sake.
THe glorious God of Truth has appeared, and made known his Way a^^ Truth
perfectly in this our day, and has chosen unto himself faithf^ Witnesses, to
testify of his Name, and of his Truth before Rulers and People, and has
brought forth a Seed which is not of this World, which cannot bo^ to the Devil,
but is Heir of Gods Inheritance, though a Sufferrer in this World under the
Powers thereof; and many in this Generation, who are called, and faithful, and
chosen, bear witness unto the Name of the Lord in Sufferings and Tribulations,
whom he will honor, because they honor him, who is exalting his Truth and his
People through Sufferings.

And now all Friends who are called to suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, and
for the exercise of a pure Conscience, which you hold, be valiant for the Truth
upon Earth* and faint not, but finish your Testimony with joy for the Lord, a^^
against all your Enemies; and look not forth at Afflictions and Sufferings, b^^
look beyond them to the recompense of reward; neither be offended in Christ,
though ye are called to suffer for him, and for his Name sake; but dwell in the
peace with God, which is a sufficient reward; and take heed to your Life which
is immortal, that it you may feel and enjoy, and account that the present
Sufferings are not worthy to be reckoned with the glory that is to be revealed,
and of which you have the earnest, even present peace with God; and look beyond
your Sufferings, and before the rage of man was, and feel the Life of God in
yo^ fresh and lively, which is more then all things, to carry you above all the
World, and all its Envy, which is against the Seed of God.

And take heed of Temptations, for the power of Satan will work, and is ne^^ to
tempt you in Sufferings, to gain dominion over you, and to touch your life, and
to cast you down: Therefore mind the Life of God in you to have dominion, which
Satan has nothing in, which is not given him to touch; and that is more then
all; yea, all that a man has will he give for his Life to enjoy, when he is
tried; (this I witness) and you are tried by sufferings and tribulations, and
your Faith and Patience is proved; therefore approve your selves faithful unto
the Lord, by Long-sufferings and Patience, that Satan overcome you not, though
he may touch you, and have power to cast some of you into Prison, and
otherwise to winnow you, and to try you for your Life; but be faithful unto
death, and you shall receive the Crown of Life Eternal; and keep the Word of
his Patience, that you may be delivered, and Satan may bow under your foot.

And all you who suffer for Well-doing, who hold fast the Testimony which you
have received of God; now when your hearts are searched, blessed from the Lord
you are, your Reward you shall possess, which no man can take away, even the
Life, and Liberty, and Treasure, which Satan cannot touch nor spoil you of.

Ye that suffer because you cannot fulfill wickedness, nor the will of man, but
are of the Seed which cannot please man, nor bow to the Devil; ye suffer for
Christ, and for Righteousness sake, who cannot walk contrary to the Light of
Christ within you, but rather choose to suffer under corrupt men, and Laws,
then to transgress God's righteous Law, written in your hearts; you are chosen
to fulfill the Will of God by sufferings, and are not of the World, and
therefore the World hates you.

And all you that suffer imprisonment of Body, or spoiling of Goods, or
Travels, or any other thing, because you cannot pay Tithes, this is the Word of
the Lord God unto you, You suffer for Righteousness sake, and for the Name of
Christ, and unjustly, by the oppression of men, for Well-doing, and not for
evil; and the Lord will be your exceeding great Reward; Look beyond your
outward Liberty, and know the liberty in Spirit, in the Father, and in the Son,
where is everlasting Peace and Freedom, which none can bring into Bondage; and
look beyond all outward Treasure and Riches, and see God's Treasure, and
possess it, which never waxes old, which none can spoil you of, as Witnesses
for the Lord, and for his Truth, and Covenant you suffer; and it is for a
Testimony against all your Enemies, and against Oppression and Oppressors; for
the Cry of that Oppression the Land groans under, and for Ages has done; but
the Lord is now risen against it; for its cry reaches to Heaven, against the
unrighteous Exactors, whose cruel hands have heavily oppressed the Just, and
the Poor in this particular; and herein your suffering is for a Testimony
against your cruel Adversaries (whether Priests or others) and against the
unjust Judges and Lawyers, and their whole Train of Oppressors; for this end
are you called to suffer, and to you it shall be made easy, if you abide in
the Counsel of God, till Vengeance overcome your Adversaries, therefore lift up
your heads, and fulfill the Will of your Father in Patience, and in
Faithfulness, till the Lord appear for you who hearkeneth to the Cry of the
Poor, and regards him that Suffers unjustly, and will recompense the
Oppressors, into their bosoms; and will break every Yoke, and be a Terror to
all the Cruel-hearted.

And all you that suffer, who are moved by the Power of the Lord, to bear
witness against the false Worships, and against the false Teachers, and
Idol-Temples, of which the Land is full; and who are moved to testify against
sin, in Rulers, Priests, or People; whether your suffering be Imprisonment, or
Beating, and Stoning, or other Abuses or Cruelties whatsoever, which the Devil
has power to lay upon you; you suffer for Righteousness sake, and for the Name
of Christ, and for Well-doing, if in the Wisdom of God you be guided, and the
Lord will be your Reward and Peace forever: Lift up your heads, and rejoice in
him* and abide in his Counsel, ye that suffer herein for him* and for his Names
sake; for your suffering is for a Testimony against all this Generation,
against the Idol Worships and Ways, which God's Soul loathes, and which he
will confound; and against the Idol Teachers, and false Prophets, and Priests,
who preach for Hire, and make Merchandise of souls, against whom Gods Wrath is
kindled, and upon whom his Indignation will be poured; and it is a Testimony
against the sins of Rulers and People, which abound in this Generation, till
the measure of it be fulfilled through persecuting of you, who warn them of the
evil, and bear witness against their evil deeds, that God may be justified when
he condemns them; and he is risen against the Worships, and Ways, and
Teachers, and People, whose abominable iniquities have overgrown the World, and
profaneness has gone forth from them, through Nations; Rulers; and Teachers,
and People are all out of the Way, and given to Vanity, to Covetousness, and
Idolatry; and the Breath of the Lord shall consume you together (all who do
oppress the Just.)

Therefore Friends, be patient and content under all Tribulations and
suffering, and feel Gods living Presence near you, to overshaddow you, and to
be your Hiding Place; and know the Life, which the wickedness and cruelty of
man cannot touch nor reach unto; and dwell in the Power of the Lord, which
moves to bear witness for him, and against all those abominations; and that
will keep you above all the afflictions which can be cast upon you, and you
will be on the top of your Enemies; and the Seed of the Serpent shall hardly
bruise your Heel.

Woe unto the Idol Worships, and Temples, and Teachers, to all the Hirelings,
and Deceivers, who feed themselves and not the Flock, which abound in the
World, and in this Nation, they must down into perdition; the Lord is risen
against them all, to pluck up by the root, that the branches may wither; and
his Arm shall watch over them, to overthrow them all, and to make them
desolate, that the Just may be delivered.

And all you who suffer any where Imprisonment, or Finings, or reproaches, or
any other thing, because ye cannot Swear for Conscience sake; nor respect
Persons, according to the vain Customs of the Heathen, but are redeemed out of
the Customs and Superstitions of men, which are of the World, and are evil, and
not of God, nor justified by him; you suffer for Righteousness sake, and for
Christ's sake, and are Witnesses for God herein, against the Superstitions, and
Wickedness, and Pride, and High-mindedness of men; and the Lord is with you, if
you be ruled in his Wisdom, and are faithful to him; and he will lift up your
heads, till his and your Adversaries be confounded.

And I charge you all in the Presence of the Lord, who suffer for Righteousness
sake, in these things, or in any other, who are moved of the Lord to bear
witness of the Truth, and against the deceits of the World, be not exalted in
the flesh in your sufferings, lest you forget God: Nor be not cast down into
sorrow, lest ye be overcome of the Devil; but dwell in the measure of the Power
and Life of God, which is above all, and more then all; and feel Gods living
Arm to stay your hearts, to watch to his own in you, to refresh you
continually. And resist the Devil on every hand, with the Armor of Light and
Truth, that your Life may be preserved in Dominion over all things, even the
Life which is not of this World in you, may not be veiled nor overcome; for to
enjoy the Life of God with you is enough; if you pass through the Fire, and
through the Water, it keeps you and carries you above all, [this I witness] and
it is more then all outward Freedom, or Liberty, or Riches, or Treasure of this
World; and walk herein in Boldness, and Faithfulness, and Patience, as you have
us for an Example in Christ Jesus, who are in Jepardy every hour, often in
Trials, Sufferings, and Dangers, and love not our lives unto death for the
Testimony of Jesus, which we hold, and that his Name and Truth may be exalted
in the Earth; but as the Lord moves are carried through Nations, among Lions
and Devourers, such as seeks our life for their Prey, and yet the Lord is with
us, our Defense, and Arm, and Preserver above all. Therefore look you at the
Lord in all Affliction and Distress, and know his Reward with you, that your
Burden and Yoke may be easy, and not hard; for his Presence makes all things
joyful: And know, that it is for the Name of the Lord, and for his Honor, and
for his Kingdom, which God will set up through suffering, for this cause are ye
called to suffer; and your Life, nor liberty, nor any other thing is not to be
measured nor compared herewith,

So unto every one of you I am moved to write, and to warn you all in the fear
of God, be content, and long-suffering, and patient, and finish you Testimony
with rejoicing, if ye seal it with your Blood, and dwell with the Lord in his
holy Habitation of Peace, out of respect to time, or places, or things; and
give up your selves, that his will in you may be fulfilled. And think it not
strange though you have fiery trials; neither be moved at any Suffering without
you, or troubled in spirit; neither let it break your peace nor fellowship with
God by any impatiency, or murmurings, or temptations, for then will your
sufferings be grievous to you, and the Enemy within and without will have
ground against you to overthrow you; and know, it is that which ever was in all
Ages, and no new thing for the Seed of God to suffer by the Seed of Evildoers,
for the wicked always strengthened their hands in cruelty against the
Righteous, and laid heavy burdens upon the Just, and caused the Innocent to
groan under them, for a time, till iniquity was fulfilled, that they might be
broken, and the Oppressed delivered, and always the Lord exalted his Name by
the sufferings of his people, as we have a Cloud of Witnesses of our
Forefathers that went before, who did bear witness to the Name of the Lord
through faithful suffering; so it is no strange thing has happened unto you,
but that which is common to all the Saints, who enter the Kingdom through
tribulation; blessed are you, if you be faithful unto the end, that you may
reap the reward of your works, of your sufferings and patience, even the Crown
of Life that never fades away; so the Lord God of Life preserve you.

And all Frieds every where, I am moved to warn you, Dwell in love and unity,
and fellowship one with another in the Light, and in the Spirit of the Father,
and fulfill the Law of Christ, and bear one another burden, and suffer with one
another, that none be oppressed among you in any thing, whilst others are free;
but that the burden of all things, and the care of all things, in relation to
the Truth, be equal among you, according to every ones freedom, and as every
one is moved of the Lord, so to administer to one another necessities, as
Members of one Body, to the honoring of the Head, and spreading of the Truth,
that there be no complaining, but equallity and justness, and the Government of
Christ ruling among you, and his Wisdom in all things: Feed no excess, nor the
lustful devouring mind in any; neither suffer the Distressed to perish for
want; but reach one to another in love, and like mindedness; suffering for one
another, and all caring for the Truth above all things, that God may dwell
among you, and be known that he is in you of a truth; And in this the Wisdom of
God guide you all, Amen.

By a Companion in Tribulation to all the Saints every where, EDWARD BOROUGH

THE Testimony of the Lord CONCERNING LONDON. Witnessed in Truth and
Faithfulness, to the Consciences of all People in it, that they may return to
the Lord, and Repent. Also, the Great Abominations discovered of this People,
who draws near God with their Mouths, and professes Self-Separation, when as
their Hearts be far from the Lord. With a Warning to all sorts of People in
it, what the Lord requires of them.
O LONDON, thou art weighed in an even Balance, and found t^ light; thou are
measured by an equal Line, and found to short, and t^ narrow, and thy People
cannot stand in Judgment; for abundance of iniquity lodges within thee, and
thou aboundst in all unrighteousness thy sins are grown over thy head, and with
transgression thou art covered, as wi^ a Garment; from the Head to the Foot
thou art corrupted, and there is mu^ unsoundness in thee: O how does Pride
abound! Lightness, and Wantonness, and the lust of the Eye, and all the works
of the Flesh are increased to a large su^; abundance of Idolatry and Vanity
springs out of thee; vain Fashions, foolish Customs, and all manner of evil
has its abiding in thee; yea, the very Seat of Satan is established within thy
Wall, and works of unrighteousness do proceed out of thee into other Nations;
abundance of deceitful Merchandise, and of oppressing Merchants, who grind
the face of the Poor, do inhabit thy Borders; thy ways are evil in the sight
of the Lord, and his Spirit is grieved, and his So^^ is vexed from day to day,
every moment of time.

Abundance of Treachery, Flattery, and Hypocrisy, Dissimulation, and
Double-heartedness possesses thine Inhabitants, from Teachers to People, High
and Low, Rich and Poor, you are fulfilling your own wills, and seeking your own
pleasures, and following the counsels of your own hearts, and doing that which
is right in the sight of your own eyes; and your hearts are corrupted before
the Lord, and the very best of your works are evil, and the purest of your
ways are filthy; and all your Observations, your days of Humiliation, and
Thanksgivings, and all your Worships, and Sacrifices, are abomination in the
fight of the Lord; for no good fruit can spring forth, for your root is not the
Vine Christ Jesus, who cannot own the Light, with which you are enlightened,
and that makes all your profession vile, and not accepted, but it is wholly
unfruitful in the Sight of the Lord. Much Profession is in thee of
Righteousness, and Religion, and many Forms, and Gatherings of People, which
are but as so many Images, and liknesses of diverse sorts, which must be
overturned, and overthrown by the roots.

You are all measured with the Line of true Judgment, and your Buildings cannot
stand, when the Lord comes to try you, and search, and try you for your life;
for though you profess much, yet you perform little; your knowledge puffs you
up, and you are not sincere-hearted, but loose, and unsavory are you in your
ways and words: There is much wisdom in thee, and many wise men whose wisdom
is devilish, and it does not lead to God, it must be confounded and trodden
down; for it profits you not in the Sight of the Lord, but in it you are wise
to do evil, but to do good you have no knowledge; and the Lord God is
forgotten, and his Judgments are not known; Vanity, vanity has so stolen away
your hearts, and after Idols are you run, worshipping strange gods, and
following strange lovers: Abundance of subtilty and craft lodges in thee; vain
glory excels above measure; Pride, Idleness and fullness of Bread abounds in
thee, even as in Sodom, unto whom thou art become equal in trangression.
Whoredom, Drunkenness, Wrath, and Envy, Gluttony, and Excess, spending the
Creation upon the lust, and all the Works of the flesh, which are ev^^, have
their full growth in thee; and in evil art thou fully ripe.

O London! Consider, and be awakened ye Inhabitants thereof; for the Lord is
grieved day by day, and his Soul is vexed every moment; the weight of thy
Transgression is upon him; thou even make him to serve with thy sins: Has
there been any evil committed by any Nation, which is not in thee? Has there
been any abomination brought forth, which is not in this day to be found in
thee? Oh what Haughtiness, and stretched-out-Necks! Oh what Pride, and Vain
glory appears in thee! Even thy Infants are nourished up in vanity; and thy old
Men are overgrown with craft, and deceit; thy young Men give their strength to
folly; and thy Maidens are trimed in wantonness; all sorts of People are
profane in their Way; Old and Young, Rich and Poor, are abounding in evil; all
seeking their own things, and few the things of Gods Kingdom; the Way of Truth
is even despised, and they that depart from iniquity are become a Prey to the
mouths of the Ungodly, who are grievously profane, as though the Lord took no
notice, or as though no day of account was to come; so great is the iniquity
committed in thee, words reaches not to manifest it: What Lying, what
Swearing, what Vain-talking, and what Scorning, and what Double-dealing appears
in thee at every corner? What Pride, what Wantonness, and Wickedness is
manifest in all thy Streets; Teachers and People are out of the Way, given to
deceit, and to deceiving, Oppressors, and oppressing one another; such is the
Devils Power amongst you ruling, it cannot easily be overcome; so deep is
wickedness seated in thee, that it cannot easily be plucked up; so strong is
the lust of the flesh grown in thee, that it cannot easily be removed: How is
the glorious Name of the Lord continually dishonored and polluted through thy
Wickedness, which is grown into a numberless sum. But the Lord will be avenged
on all you his Enemies, and will meet you with Judgments, Plagues, and
Vengeance, and the Wicked shall not escape.

And as concerning all thy Profession of God, and the Scriptures in a blind
Zeal, it is but abomination to the Lord; and all thy several Sects, and
Gatherings of People, and separate Congregations, who are not separated by the
Spirit of the Lord, they are but like so many molten and carved Images, which
the Lord will overthrow. All thy Offerings, and Oblations, Preaching, Praying,
and Performances God's Soul has no pleasure in them, but they are a Burden and
Weariness to him; and though thou washest thy self never so clean, and make
thy self never so fair through thy own labor, yet cannot thy iniquities be
washed away, nor thy sin covered; for thy iniquities are marked before the
Lord, and thy sin is written as with a Pen of Iron, and as with the point of a
Diamond. All thy Steeple-House Worship is naught but vanity before the Lord.
All thy public Exercises, all thy Saboath keeping, all thy set days of
Humiliation, and all thy private Duties, and all that ever thou performest unto
God, are not regarded of him, while the hearts of thy People are not aright in
his sight, and upright before him; so the best of thy Sacrifices are but as the
cutting off of a Dogs neck, and the offering of Swines blood; for in thee is
found the great Abomination; open Prophainness abounds, and secret Hypocrisy
super-abounds, and thou art as abominable in the Eyes of the Lord in thy
Hypocritical Profession of Righteousness, as thou art in thy open sins.

In thee is found the Abomination of Israel, Mercy and Truth, Justice and true
Judgment is neglected; Do not thy Heads judge for Reward? And do not thy
Priests preach for Hire? And dot not thy Prophets prophecy falsely? And do not
they divine for money? And do not thy People love to have these things so? Oh
how art thou deceived by thy Teachers, and led blind by the blind Leaders! even
they that lead thee, cause thee to err; and they that should instruct thee,
teach thee vain things: Woe unto them, the Lords Wrath is against them; How do
they make a Prey upon the People? How do they feed themselves, and cloth
themselves, each one of them having a Quarter, from which they seek their Gain,
and through Covetousness make Merchandise of souls; ^he false Prophets of
Israel were their Example, and they follow in the Path of Unrighteousness;
having run and were never sent of God, and therefore the People are not
profited at all, nor turned to God, but from year to year, and time to time,
ever learning, but cannot come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Ignorance abounds in thy old Men, and Rudeness and Wildness in thy Youths, and
thy People are without the knowledge of God, and perish for lack of Knowledge:
Thou art even as a wild untilled Garden, which brings forth no pleasant Fruit;
thy Vines are as the Vines of Sodom, and thy Fruit is loathsome to the Lords
Taste; wild Grapes and sour Grapes are brought forth in thee, which the Lord
has no pleasure in; ye bring forth fruit unto your selves, and not unto the
Lord; ye kindle a Fire and warm your selves with your own sparks; ye sacrifice
to your own Net, and ye think to be heard for your much Babbling, and your many
Performances: Abundance of the first man's wisdom is among you, it leads you,
and guides you, and not the Spirit of God; and through your own wisdom, which
is devilish, you conform to the Saints words, and to their practices in
outward appearance, and make your selves like the Saints, and bow unto your own
Images and Likenesses, which ye make; and are grown wise, and full of
knowledge, but it is not the Wisdom of God, nor the Knowledge that will endure
for ever; for you neglect the one thing, which is only needful to Eternal Life.
Your Buildings are high, but they are not upon the true Foundation; for many of
you stumble at the Corner Stone; your sprinkling Infants is a v^ry Cheat, and
all that believe therein are deceived; and your singing of David's ^^periences,
in rhyme and meeter, is a very Lie unto you; your Worship is but Idolatry, and
it will not cover you in the Day of the Lord; though none be like unto thee O
London, in Profession, nor any City hardly can compare with thee, in respect of
the Multitude of thy gathered Assemblies, and self Separates; yet all this will
not avail thee, when the Lord searches thy heart, which is found not perfect
beforethe Lord, but full of vain glory, and lust, and pleasures of the flesh
and dissimulation, and guile, which the Wrath of God will be revealed against:
A single and an upright Heart is of greater price with the Lord; then all the
Performances of Self-righteousness that is done in thee, while your hearts are
given to vanity, and continue therein.

Wherefore O London, this is a Warning to thee, Let thy Inhabitants repent, the
dreadful Day of the Lord is coming; I have heard the voice of War against thee,
and not of Peace, the cry of Howling and bitter Lamentation, and not of
gladness, nor joy of heart; What will thou do in the day of thy Visitation,
when the Lord stretches forth his Hand to smite thee? To whom will thou flee?
And where will thou be hid, when the Lord shows himself thy Enemy, and appears
to take an account of thee? What will become of all thy Treasures? How will thy
vain glory become a stink,? How will the days of thy mirth be turned into
gr^evous sorrow, instead of thy pleasures and delicacies, and mirth, and
wantonness, shall be Sighing, and Mourning, and woeful Lamentation; all thy gods
shall not be able to deliver thee, nor all thy Profession shall not justify
thee, nor all thy self-separating People shall not be able to stand in the gap,
to stay the hand of the Destroyer, none of thy carved Images shall stay his
fury, nor none of all thy several Sects shall be a mountain to hide thee, when
the Lord strips thee naked, and lays thee bare, and gives thee to know what is
in thy heart, which will come upon thee in a day not looked for.

Wherefore repnet all sorts of People, and turn to the Lord, if there may be
mercy found. Cease your Wickedness, ye Wicked, and learn to live Righteously.
Woe unto you Drunkards. Woe unto you Whormongers. Woe unto you Covetous. Woe unto
you Liars, Swearers, and Scorners. Woe unto you Dissemblers, and deceitful
Dealers. Woe unto you Proud, and Vainglorious. Woe unto you lustful People. The
Lord will plead with you all, and give unto you the fruit of your doings, and
reward you according to your works; his hand shall not spare, nor his Eyes
shall not pity in the day that he comes to Judgment, when he takes vengeance
upon all the seed of Evildoers, and to pluck up the wild branches, and to cast
them into the fire. Sackcloth shall be put on instead of gay Apparel, and all
thy Idols shall vanish away; as for all thy Profession, where is it? All thy
many Sermons, and long Prayers, what is become of them? And all thy public and
private Duties, where are thy? shall it be said. Ye shall all know that there
is a God, that will execute judgment and justice, and that will plead with all
flesh, and in his sight shall no flesh be justified.

And all ye who thirst for the Lord, and desire after the knowledge of his
Ways, unto whom iniquity is a burden, by you desired to be freed from, who
have long sought the Lord, and have not yet found him, who have prayed, and had
no answer, and have been weary and heavy laden, and found no rest: I say unto
you, Save your selves from this untoward Generation, come ye out of these
abominations, that you may be delivered from the Wrath: Fear ye the Lord, and
do not offend him in any thing, stand in awe, and transgress not, love
Righteousness and Truth, touch no unclean thing and the Lord will receive you;
meddle not with their Worships, bow not to their Images, nor sacrifice not to
their Idol gods; have no fellowship with them in their prophanness, nor yet in
their hypocrisy; but hearken ye to the Voice of the Lord, that ye may know his
Judgments in your hearts, and his Law and Covenant established with you; depart
from all iniquity, and cast away all your Idols, and forsake all your Lovers.
Give not your selves to the ways and pleasures of this World, but give your
selves to Chastity, to Soberness, and Meekness, and above all things be upright
in heart toward God, and toward man; speak the truth one to another, and let
no Guile dwell in your Lips, nor a dece^tful Tongue in your Mouth. And cease
from all Vainglory, and vain Customs, and Fashions of the World, which are
evil.

And cease from all Men-teachers, which deceive the People by flattering words,
who cry Peace when the Lord has not spoken peace, and daub with untempored
Mortar, such have not profited you at all, but your souls are starved under
your Ministry, and leanness is upon you; though you ever learn of them, yet you
cannot come to the knowledge of the Truth by them. Cease from them all, and
from all your gathered and self-separate Congregations, and wait upon the Lord
that you may know him to be your Teacher, who is the Teacher of all his People,
and he teaches in the perfect Way of Peace and Truth, and gives Peace unto
all that wait upon him, and causes the heart of the Upright to rejoice; he
takes away sin, and removes it from his People, and he forgiveth all their
iniquities, and heals all their backslidings, and blessed are all they that
put their their trust in him; for he is a God near at hand; for he dwells with
his People, and he is worshipped only in the Spirit and in the Truth. He
dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is he worshipped in outward
Observations; his Soul has no pleasure among any self-separate People, who
cry, I am holyer then another, neither is he well pleased with the Sacrifice of
the Proud; all their Baptisms, and Fellowships, and Meetings, is but a
weariness to the Lords Soul; and he has no pleasure in any of their works, who
follow their own spirit, and are not led with the pure Spirit of God alone, but
unto every one of such will he look, who is poor in spirit, and of a contrite
heart, and of a single and upright mind; he gives regard unto every one that
fears his Name, who thirst and hunger after him in Truth and Righteousness, and
this is of exceeding great price in the Sight of the Lord, yea, more then all
Offerings and Oblations whatsoever, even more then thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand of Rivers of OIL. Therefore hearken diligently to the voice of the
Lord; and seek him with an upright Heart, and thirst for him as for your daily
Food; loose not your precious time, but call upon his Name while he is near,
for he is come near unto many; he stands at the door, if any will open, he will
come in, and will dwell with them for evermore.

All sorts of People, be Awakened, be Awakened, How does the Lord wait to be
gracious unto you? He even tarrieth for you, till you return to him, (...) his
Soul may have pleasure in you, who has long been grieved by you: Therefore
search your own hearts, and see how you stand prepared to meet the Lord by
following of his Counsel, who has so loved you, and all Mankind, that he has
given his Son into the World, to be a Light unto you all, and every on^ of you
is lighted by him, and with the Light you will know your evil deeds, and are
convinced of them, and reproved for them; and with this Light Jes^ Christ
calls you Sinners to Repentance, to turn from your evil, that you may be
restored.

If you love this Light, you love Christ, who will save you from all your
(...)* and from condemnation; If you hate this Light, you hate Christ, and you
^^main in your sins to be everlastingly condemned: And thus is the Way of Life
a^^ the way of Death set before you all; if you follow the Light of Christ
Jesus, it will teach you to deny this World, and all the vanities of it; it
will teach you to deny your own wills, and the counsels of your own hearts, and
whatsoever is contrary to God in thought, word, or action; and in all things it
will teach you to follow Jesus Christ, that you may be justified by him: But if
you follow not t^ Light, then you choose your own ways, to follow your own
wills, and yo^ own lusts, and all temptations, and you deny Christ, and the Way
of Truth, and (...) the Wrath of God abides upon you; for you continue in
unbelief, and in hardness of heart, and are the Servants of sin unto death, if
you follow not the Lig^^ which Christ has enlightened you withal, who lights
every man that comes ^^to the World, that they may believe and be saved.
Therefore take heed to the Light, if you be guided by it, you shall not
transgress against God, but you w^ receive the Power of God to overcome all
evil; all sin and iniquity will be condemned in you, and your hearts will be
made clean for the Lord to dwell in, who^^ dwelling is in his People; and you
must all cease from professing of what you (...) not possess, and from talking
of what you do not enjoy, for that is Hypocrisy, an^ to be judged.

So all ye Professors, be Awakened, Christ without you will not justify you,
ex^ ye know Christ within you, the Profession of him will not take away sin,
not ^^stifie in the Sight of God, except you come to witness the operation of
his Spirit (...) you, to teach you to depart from all evil, and to lead you
into all good.

Therefore come to the feeling of the Spirit of Jesus in you, and the worki^^
of it, which changes, renews, and sanctifies, and brings to witness (...)
same Truth to be manifested in the heart, which the Scriptures speak of
without* and as you receive the same Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, so
you will u^derstand the Scriptures, and by no other means; For all your
preaching, an^ talking of the Scriptures without the Spirit is but vain
babbling, and that mout^ is to be stopped; for God is not known where the
Operation of his Spirit is no^ felt in the heart, nor he cannot be worshipped
in Truth, but where his Spirit lead^ and guides. Much vain Profession there is
in thee O City, in which the Lord has no delight; and this is the Testimony of
the Lord, which I give concerning thee, and do yet once more call unto thee as
often I have done, and do seal the Lords Testimony against thee, even against
all thy righteousness, and against all thy sin, which are both alike unto God,
and both to be condemned. Thou have been warned, and thy People, and the day of
a glorious Visitation has passed over thee; the Lord has reached unto many,
and stricken many, who have not grieved, but carelessly walked, and slighted the
day of their Visitation, and have not hearkened to the Lords Call; Unto
thousands has the word of the Lord been declared, and the Kingdom of God
preached nigh at hand, and the very Way of Life and Death has been set before
you; for the Lord has sent to thee to warn ^hee, and to show unto thee what
the Counsel of the Lord is; and thousands have been reached with the Power of
God, and convinced of the Way of Life and Peace, who yet continue in hardness
of heart, and disobedience, following the ^ounsel of their own hearts, and the
desire of their own minds, which are wholly evil ^ontinually, and the
condemnation of such will be just in the day of the Lord, and greater then
theirs to whom the Way of the Lord has not been known. And yet amongst thy
Thousands who are in the way to destruction, the Lord has a Rem^ant, a Few
among so many, which are precious unto him, and whom his soul de^ighteth in,
who are despised in thee, and set at naught, and cast out of the sa^our of all
men; yet is the Lords Presence amongst them, and his Fear in their ^earts, and
his increase is unto them, and his Power with them, till all their ^nemies be
vanished as a Cloud; for they are of the true Seed, and of the true ^irth,
which the Lord will bless, though they be accounted as thy Slaves and ^ondmen,
yet are they free in the Lord; and this is the very fulfilling of thy
^ickedness, and the height of the Transgression of thy Rulers, Teachers, and
people, in that some of them that fear the Lord, and walk with him are
perse^uted in thee; even they are made a Prey unto the Wicked, to the
Slanderers, to ^he Drunkards, to the Scorners, to Unjust and Cruel men; the
People of the lord are become a very prey in thee, even as meat for the
Devourers. Oh what ^ilt thou do in the day of thy Visitation, when the
righteous Judge numbreth ^p these things against thee? Thy staff shall fail
thee, thy Physicians shall be of no value' and all thy Comforters shall be
miserable at that day. I have truly ^onsidered thy condition, and measured thy
state, and I have often seriously ^eighed thy wickedness, and pondered what
would be the end thereof, and there is no ^ision of Peace unto thee, but even
the day of desperate sorrow, a recompense ^or all thy works from the Hand of
the Lord.

I have often truly lamented thee, and seriously has thy condition entered into
^y heart; thy iniquities have often pressed my soul, and my Spirit has been
^rieved within me, when I have viewed thy great abomination, and how Thou^ands
in thee wholly perish for lack of Knowledge, and even resists and will not be
^nstructed, despitefully using such as do warn them, even loving and delighting
in their Abominations.

These things have often made my Heart sad, who have walked in thee as a
Stranger, and measured thee with the line of true Judgment, and this is thy
Height, and ^ength, and Depth, Iniquity lodges in thee, and Iniquity covers
thee, and In^quity ^^mpasseth thee about.

And this is a Warning to thee from the Lord, in faithfulness declared unto
^hee, whether thou resist, or receive, thus far I am clear of the Blood of all
men in ^hee, who seeks not any thing in thee for my self, but seeks (and
has often) ^o the Lord for thee, that thy People might know him, and worship
him alone, ^ho gives unto them all good things, and has caused the fullness of
all good Crea^ures to abound, and has given plenty of all things, abundance
of which is ^pent vainly upon the lust to the dishonor of God who gives it;
How much ^s vainly spent upon Vanity in Meats, Drinks, and Apparel? Its hard to
be ^eclared what abundance of the good Creatures of God are vainly destroyed
in ^hee upon the lust in the excess, more then what satisfies pure Nature, your
gluttonny and high minds devour in abundance the good Creatures which God
gives, and he is thereby grieved with you, who has taken notice of this your
sin, which is not the least of your Transgressions, and he will plead with you
for it; even in all things great is your wickedness, and the Lord has numbered
it. And above all things that is done in thee, thy deceitful Profession, and
Pretense of worship of God, is the Lord most grieved with who hates all your
Meetings of gathered Assemblies, which are not gathered by his Spirit; he will
confound yo^ wisdom, and overthrow all your buildings: Wherefore repent ye, and
cease from Idols, and all Idolatry, and cease for ever to warm your selves at
your own SPARKS; for this shall you have at the Lords hands, Ye shall lie down
is Sorrow.

A WARNING to you all sorts of People.
YE Merchants, and Traders, and Trafickers, and all ye that Buy and Sell, b^
plain and upright hearted; and Lie not, Swear not, Dissemble not for gai^ unto
your selves, for that is cursed of the Lord, and the gain that is thereby
received; but speak the Truth every man to his Neighbor; flatter not such with
whom you deal by feigned words of guile, whilst secret overreaching lodges i^
your hearts, to make a Prey upon your Neighbor or Brother, for this is evil in
t^ sight of the Lord, but speak the Truth in all things, and let your yea be
yea, a^ your nay nay, in all your common occasions, for whatsoever is more is
evil; a^ what is advantaged unto you through Deceit, or Lying, or multitude of
va^ Words, it shall be a Curse unto you, and not a Blessing unto you, or to yo^
Children; Let the Truth guide you in all your dealings one with an other, a^
let the Fear of God be in your Hearts in all your Enterprises both by Sea (...)
Land.

I Warn you all seek not by any evil means to enrich your selves, neith^
oppress one another in any thing wherein you deal; for you know not how lo^
your time shall be upon Earth, nor how soon the day of account will co^ wherein
every word and every work shall be brought to Judgment, yea for every Idle word
shall ye give an account, and all those words are idle which are not spoken in
the Fear of the Lord; therefore live and act in the Fear of God, that y^ may be
blessed in all that you do.

And all ye whom the Lord has blessed with Riches and Increase, see that y^
abuse not that which God has blessed you withal, but in all things that it be
(...) to the Glory of the Lord, and not wasted in excess upon the lust of your
o^ minds; for the Creation is the Lords, and all things are given by him, and
tak^ away at his Pleasure, and he makes rich, and he makes poor whomsoever he
will. Therefore every man be content with his own, and covet not one another,
nor defraud one another, to enrich your selves, for it is cursed of the Lord.

And all ye Handicrafts People, and Laboring People, fear ye the Lord
continually, and use no deceit, nor craft, nor policy in what you do, in
Labor, seek not to blind men's eyes by fair outsides, neither to cozen and
cheat the Simpl^ by slighty work, but let the Truth Guide you, and that will
teach you to d^ for all men as ye would they should do for you, and this is
acceptable in the Sight of God; Let your Commodities be just and right, and let
all your labo^ be with a single heart, and do all things as in the Sight of the
Lord, and the^ you cannot do evil if the Fear of God be before your eyes, and
the evil in all things will be denied, and the corruption that is entered into
in all Callings an^ Trades, will be judged out; and be Examples one to another
of Truth and Righteousness; and cozen not, nor cheat not one another, nor use
not many words, not vain jestures, but own the Lord to be your Teacher, which
will teach you Truth, to do it, and to speak it in all things.

And all ye young men and Prentises, Learn ye the Fear of the Lord, and take
heed of Temptations, lest ye be destroyed both Soul and Body by them; learn not
to Dissemble, nor to Defr and, nor take not Instructions how to Cozen and
Cheat, but first seek the Kingdom of God and its Righteousness, and then all
outward things shall be added unto you. Give not your selves to any Evil,
beware of WINE and WOMEN, which steals away the Hearts of many; give not your
selves to Vanity, nor fulfill not the desire of your own minds in any thing;
Covet not after Riches, neither study how to be Proud and Vainglorious; Give
not your selves to Craft and human Policies, nor to deceive any People, but
fear God and keep his Commandments, and be subject to your Masters, and obey
them in all things that are good, and be dutiful to them in that which is just
and righteous, but deny them in whatsoever is evil; learn not Craft and Policy
from them, neither Whoredom, nor Vice, nor Drunkenness, nor Cozening, nor any
other thing which is evil, but rather reprove those things, then in the lest to
follow them; and if you do the Truth, and speak the Truth in all things, and
keep your selves from whatsoever is evil, then will the Lord bless you
outwardly, and inwardly, and the Knowledge of God will be your Crown in old
Age; And cease from all Gamings, and vain Sportings, and from all Wontonness,
and vain Pleasures, and from all the works of the flesh; for they that follow
such things shall neither prosper in this World, nor be blessed in the World to
come. Wherefore take heed unto your selves all ye that are young in the World,
be not overcome of evil, nor follow not evil Divices, but stand in awe
continually, and offend not God, who gives you Life, and Health, and all good
things.

And all ye Masters and Heads of Families, this is a Warning to you, Be
Examples of all good in your Families unto your Children and Servants; rule in
Authority in the Fear of God, but not in Tyranny, nor a Rigorous mind; teach
and instruct in fear, and not in cruelty; give no bad example in Pride,
Vainglory, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Dissimulation, nor any other thing, but
stand as a Terror over all evil, and as Encouragers of all good; bind not the
Conscience of any under your power, curb sin only, and reprove not
Righteousness; seek ye to be taught of God, and then may you instruct all under
you in his Way; be pitiful toward your Children, and Servants, and pass by
offenses rather then punish them with cruelty; and make not a prey upon your
Servants, to serve your own ends only, seeking your own good only, and not
theirs; for such things are evil in the sight of God, and it is to be
condemned: Let no Excess, neither let Want be in your Families, but that which
is honest and right, love that in all things, and follow it; let not your anger
and passion exceed when offense is given you, and do not correct in cruelty,
but in a good understanding; and walk in the Truth, and fulfill the will of God,
and not your own, and this is of great prize and acceptable in the sight of the
Lord.

And all ye Tavern-keepers, and Innkeepers, fear the Lord God, and oppress not
your Guests, neither feed the lust of any till they be drunk, for that is
cursed of God both in you and them, and that which he will be avenged of. Oh
great is that abomination among you; much of the good Creatures is vainly and
wickedly spent, and abused in your Dwellings, and your advantage stands in the
abuse of the Creatures by excess, and the Lord is grieved with you because of
that.

And all sorts of People, Rich and Poor, High and Low, Masters and Servants,
Parents and Children, Buyers and Sellers, Tradesmen and Laborers, Hearken to
the Counsel of God, and seek to know his Will to you in all things, that you
may do it, in following all that which is good, and denying all that which is
evil, that your souls may live: Let not the Devil lead you, nor his temptations
overcome you in any thing, but resist him in whatsoever he would lead you into,
which is against God, and contrary to him.

Repent of all evil that ever you have acted, and let the Lord be your Guide,
that you may not utterly perish, and your City be destroyed for your sakes; the
Lords Love is toward you, and he waits to be gracious unto you, and desires
your return, rather then your Destruction, and would heal you if you did wait
upon him, and would bless your City, and make you happy in it, if you do his
Will, and deny your own.

I am a Friend unto all your souls, and a Publisher of Peace, and of
Glad-tidings to all that thirst for the Lord, and he has given me Power to
warn you of all your iniquities and Abominations, to deny them, and that which
is good to warn you to follow; and Oh that ye knew in this your day the things
which belong to your Peace, which now ye may know, before they be totally hid
from your eyes, and there be no place for Repentance, nor time of returning;
and this day will come upon many, and they cannot escape it, who now harden
their hearts against the Way of their own peace, and even scorn to be reproved
for their Transgression, and such my soul pitties, who are going in the way of
destruction, and run hastily into perdition; I have many times been made sad by
reason of such, when I have measured the condion of all People; upon my bed, I
have pondred what abomination was in thee, and what would be the end thereof,
and I have desired nothing so much, as that I might faithfully warn thee, and
free my self, and the Lord from the Blood of all men; deep thoughts have been
upon me, concerning what the counsel of the Lord is unto you all, that I might
manifest the Truth, and discover the Abominations, and I have not spared to cry
Repentance unto Sinners, that Sinners might be converted, and turn unto the
Lord; and thus far I am clear of the Blood of all men, and the Lord is clear,
and if the Wicked perish, it is because of their unbelief, and gainsaying of
the Lord; and this is the Testimony which I give unto thee, and unto all thy
people, O LONDON hearken and consider, this is the only day of your Visitation,
and there is not another Way to Life, nor to escape everlasting death, and
destruction, then that which the Lord has showed you, Blessed is he that can
receive it, and they that deny it do utterly perish without Mercy.

London the 15th. of the 6th month, 1657. I am as a Stranger among you, yet
well known to the Lord, and the Testimony of God concerning you shall stand for
ever, for it is true, and shall'not be confounded, though the wicked reject it
to their own destruction. EDWARD BOROUGH.

A Just and Lawful Trial OF THE Teachers and professed Ministers of this Age
and Generation, by a perfect proceeding against them. And hereby they are
righteously examined, and justly weighed, and truly measured, and condemned
out of their own mouths, and judged by their own professed Rule, viz. The
Scriptures, and thereby are proved to disagree, and be contrary to all the
Ministers of Christ in former Ages; and to agree and concur with all the false
Prophets and Deceivers in their call, in their maintenance, and in their
doctrines, and conversation, and practice. And being brought to the Bar of
Justice, these things are truly charged against them, and legally proved upon
them, and their own professed Rule (the Scriptures) have judged them guilty.
Whereunto is added, A short description of the true Ministry of Christ; and of
its lawful and just maintenance, according to the Apostles Examples, and now
again justified by the People of God, called Quakers, in England.
THe time of Trial is come, wherein the Lord is trying the Hearts of men; and
now it is manifest what lodges in the hearts of all mankind, and by the Fruit
every Tree shall be judged. The Lord has beheld the wickedness of this
Generation, and it is very great, and comes not short, but rather abounds all
other Generations that have gone before: Wickedness is grown high among
Teachers and People, and the measure of iniquity is fulfilling daily. Come, let
us reason together; What think you? was there ever such a Generation of
Teachers as this is? Have they any example, that ever went before, for their
Wickedness? To whom may they be compared? or with whom shall we parallel them?
And because they say the Scripture is their Rule, therefore will we try them by
it, and their own Mouth shall Condemn them; and such they shall be concluded to
be, whose example they do follow, be it Ministers of Christ, or be ^t
Deceivers; unto the Apostles and Ministers of Christ they are compared, but are
found quite contrary in many things, and their Practice fitly suteth and agrees
with all the false Prophets and Deceivers. And thus I shall prove them,
according to Scripture, wherein these men that are Teachers do disagree to the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, which he sent forth in former Generations;
and wherein they do agree with the Deceivers, and Antichrists, and false
Prophets, that have run, and not been sent. Act. 1. 8. 4. 31. Matt. 10. 8. 1
John 1. 1.


1. And first of all, The Apostles and Ministers of Christ were made Ministers
of Christ by the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and by Power from on high only; and
what they ministered unto others, they had freely received from Christ, and had
Handled, Felt, and Tasted of the Word of LIFE. But the Teachers of this
Generation do not agree with them in this; for they are made Ministers by
natural Learning, and Education, and the knowledge of Arts, and by the
Ordination of men, and by the Powers of this World (and not by the Gift of the
Holy Ghost) and they speak that whcih they have heard out of Books, and studied
for by Arts, and which they have received from man, and not that which they
have received only from the Lord.

2. The Ministers of Christ they were approved of God, and called by his Spirit
into Sal. 1. 5.
the work of the Ministry, and were not of man, neither by man. But many of
these are approved of man, and not of God; and called by man, and maintained by
man in their Ministry, and herein do they differ and disagree; for (as I said)
the Ministers of Christ were made Ministers by the Holy Ghost, and not by
natural learning, but these are made Ministers by natural learning, or
otherwise, and not by the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

3. Again, herein do they disagree, The Ministers of Jesus Christ went up (...)
down through the World, declaring the Word of the Lord freely at any time, in
the Marketplaces, Act. 16. 4, 7, 11, 12. Acts 17. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 11.
and in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, and went from Country to Country,
and were Strangers upon Earth, not having any certain Dewlling Place, or any
great PARSONAGES. But these settle themselves in a certain place, for so much
Money by the year, and spend their time in ease and pleasure, and lust of the
flesh, selling to the People for Money what they preach, and herein they
disagree; the Ministers of Christ preached freely as they had received freely:
but the Ministers of this Age sell for money what they preach to the People:
and thus they differ in their call to the Ministry, and in their practice in
the Ministry, and in their maintenance also, as is made manifest to many.

4. Again, the Ministers of Christ preached to bring People into fellowship
with G^ by preaching of the Gospel, through converting Sinners unto the
knowledge of the Truth, an^ (...) John 1. 3.
by no other way did they make Christians, nor counted any so but such as h^
repented, and were changed by the Spirit. But the Teachers of this Age do man
Christians, by sprinkling them while they are Infants, before they preach the
Gosp^ to them, or before they repent of their sins; and they bring them into
fellowship by traditions, and a vain show of Baptism, and not by the Spirit of
God; and her^ also they disagree, the one counted none Christians but such as
were converted by the Spirit of God, and knew the operation of Gods Spirit; and
the other co^ all Christians that are sprinkled when they are Infants, while
they are without t^ Operation of the Spirit of God, and converteth them not
unto God by their preaching, but tell them they are Christians before they
preach to them.

5. Again, they differ in Doctrine; for the Ministers of Christ Preached C^
John 1. 9. Act. 26. 18.
the Light of the World, and said, he lighted every man that comes into the
World. But the Teachers of this Age contend against that, and say, every one is
not enlightened by him, but some have no Light from Christ. And the Ministers
of Christ they tu^ed people to the Light, from the Darkness, and from Satan's
Power to the Power of God. B^ the Teachers of this Age do not turn People to
the Light of Christ within, (...) 2 Cor. 13. 5.
to the Saints words without, or to some other thing, and are divided amo^
themselves, and so in effect ^ry, Lo here, and Lo there is Christ in this form,
(...) that form; but the Ministers of Christ said, he was within People, or
else they were (...) probates.

6. Again, the Ministers of Christ said, Christ was the Word, and the Scripture
was a Declaration of what they believed. But the Teachers of this Age say, the
Letter Rev. 19. 13.
and the Scripture is the Word, and say, It is the Instrument whereby God (...)
souls, and say, it is both the Writings and the thing signified, and say, it
is the Foundation of Foundations; but thus the Ministers of Christ never spoke
of the Letter. An^ thus herein they differ and disagree, the one preach Christ
to be the Word, the other preach the Letter and Scripture to be the Word: The
Ministers of Christ said, Christ was the Foundation, but these say the
Scripture is the Foundation, and herein they are contrary and show by their
doctrine another spirit then was in the Apostles. Ephesians. 2. 20.


7. Again, the Ministers of Christ said, they spoke wisdom among them that were
perfect: and said, As many of us as are perfect be thus minded: and said, that
the end of their Ministry was to present every man perfect in Christ. But the
Teachers of this Age deny Perfection, and say, None must be perfect in this
life; and if any preach 1 Cor. 2. 6. Phil. 3. Col. 1. 28.
up Perfection, that it is to be attained, they say it is Error, and damnable
Doctrine; Nay, they say, none shall ever be free from sin, or ever have victory
over their sin, nor overcome the body of sin while they be upon Earth: But the
Ministers of Christ witnessed they were more then Conquerers, and that they had
put Romans 8. 37. Romans 6. 22.
off the body of Death, and were free from sin, and were the Servants of
Righteousness. And herein also they differ, and are not of one spirit; and we
know that the Ministers of Christ were guided by the Spirit of God, which held
forth these Doctrines; and we know the Teachers of this Age, that their spirit
must needs be of the Devil, because it holds forth and practices what the
Ministers of Christ did not, but the contrary.

8. Again, the Ministers of Christ were persecuted, and suffered cruel and
grievous 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15
things for Righteousness sake, as you may read in the Acts, and did not render
evil for evil to any man, for they suffered patiently. But the Teachers of this
Age are not persecuted, but are Persecutors, and cause Men to be put into
PRISONS, and to be Banished out of Towns; and Sue People at Law, and seeks
occasion against the People of God; and herein they disagree, and are not of
the same spirit as they were, which were Ministers of Christ, but show a spirit
contrary.

9. Again, the Ministers and Apostles of Christ were not chargeable to any, but
made 2 These. 3. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 26. 22.
the Gospel without charge, and free, and labored with their own hands, and
did not live ^dlely, but were often in cold, hunger, and nakedness, and perils,
and trials. But the Teachers of this Age live in Pride, and Covetousness, and
Fullness, and do not work with their own hands, but makes the Gospel of Christ
chargeable, for many Hundred Thousand Pounds in a Year do but maintain them,
which they have ^ut of poor men's labors, and so these differ and disagree from
the Ministers of Christ, and show they are not of that Spirit that they were
guided by, but are guided by a contrary spirit, because they are contrary in
their Call, and in their Doctrine, and Practice, and Maintenance.

10. Again, the Ministers of Christ preached by the Spirit, according as the
Acts 2. 4. and 20. 7.
Spirit gave them Utterance, and sometimes continued preaching till midnight.
But the Teachers of this Age are limited by a Glass, and Preach by a GLASS, and
when their Hour is out, their time of preaching is ended; and that which they
have studied for beforehand, that they preach, and not that which they have
received immediately from the spirit of God. And herein do they disagree, and in
many things more, which after may be declared.

11. Again, the Ministers of Christ said, Ye may all prophecy one by one, that
all ^ight be edified; and as every one had received the gift of Christ, so they
might Minister to 1 Cor. 14. 31. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Acts 21 9.
^hers, and desired that all the Lords People were Prophets, and Sons and
Daughters ^d prophecy, But the Teachers of this Age will not suffer all to
prophecy one by ^ne, neither will allow any to preach as they have received
from Christ, without such Qualifications, and learned Arts, and Ordinations of
men; and ^hey will not allow a Woman to prophecy or speak among them; and all
might speak Ier. 23. 28.
^he Word of the Lord faithfully that had it, and all might Minister as they
had received it; ^his was order in the Apostles days among them, but this is
now counted confusion ^y the Teachers of this Age; and if any speak to them, or
any among them, ma^y such are made to suffer cruelty, or imprisonment, or such
like, by their means; and herein they disagree, and show that they are guided
by another spirit then ^e Ministers of Christ were guided by, and so are not
his Ministers, but De^ivers.

12. Again, the Ministers of Christ declared what they had heard, and seen, and
1 Ioh. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 10. 16. and 4. 2.
^lt, and tasted of the Word of Life; and none of them did boast in another
man's line, but that they all had received of the Lord, that they declared, and
not their own in^entions; and commended themselves to every man's Conscience in
the Sight of God; and they did not provide themselves Studies full of Books to
gather out of in a Weeks time what to preach on the first Days, as the
Teachers of this Age do, who by vai^ study, and humane learning, frame up, and
notes it in a Book, an hour, or two hours discourse to the People. And herein
they disagree, and show that they are guided by a spirit contrary to the
Ministers of Christ.

13. Again, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ were called from their Her^
and from Nets, from their Receipt of Custom, and from their Callings; and by
receiving (...) Holy Ghost were made Ministers of Christ, and did not seek
Peoples Money to themsel^ Mat. 4. 19, 29, 21. Mat. 9. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 14.
but sought the People to God, and went through cruel Sufferings and
Persecutions many ti^ that they might hold forth the Way of Life and Truth to
all People. But the Teachers (...) this Age, they are trained up from their
Childhood in Arts and Sciences, risi^ by degrees from one vanity to an other,
till at last they arive to the Function of (...) Minister of Christ, as they
call it, and few or none of them have been called from their ordinary Calling
to preach the Gospel; for such a one is hardly allowed of to pre^ among People;
and they seek Peoples Money to themselves, and the People to God. And herein
they disagree, and show another spirit then was in the Apostles.

14. Again, the Ministers of Christ were led and guided by the Spirit of
Christ, (...) Romans 8. 14, 1 John 2. 27.
did not fulfill their own wills, nor the wills of men; and they brought People
(...) the feeling of the Spirit of Christ in them, to teach them, and after
they had beg^ People to God, they said they needed no man to teach them, but as
the anointing (...) them taught them. But the Teachers of this Age follows
their own spirits, and (...) subject to the wills of men; if men admit them to
teach, they do; but if m^^ any them, then they do not preach; but the Apostles
did not thus, for when (...) forbad them to teach, they did not cease to
preach, but went on boldly, declaring the NAM^ of the Lord. And these Teachers
do not bring People to know the Spirit of C^ Acts 4. 17, 18, 19.
in them, neither can any through their preaching receive the Anointing to
(...) in them, that so they do not need any man to teach them; but People (...)
ever learning so long as they live, and never able to come to the knowledge of
(...) Truth, and People are not profited at all. And in this thing they
disagree, (...) show another spirit then the Apostles were guided by, even the
spirit of (...) christ.

15. Again, the Ministers of Christ were low, poor, meek, sober, humble men,
(...) as did not exalt themselves, nor maintain themselves in Pride and
Fullness, by (...) ceiving Heb. 11. 37, 38.
of poor Peoples labors. But the Teachers of this Age are Proud, (...) Heady,
High-minded, Self-willed, and Exalted spirits, living in Idleness, P^ and
Fullness, and receive of the Labors of poor People. And herein they (...) gree,
for the Apostles were often in Cold, Hunger, and great Sufferings, and (...)
plexities; but these are as fed Horses, the Proudest of all people, and the
(...) Covetous of any men, and all men must Bow to them, and call them Man
which is quite contrary to Christ's Command. And thus they show another (...)
then what the Ministers of Christ were guided by; and if another spirit, it
(...) needs be the spirit of the Devil; for either the Spirit of Christ leads
men, (...) spirit of the Devil.

And now seeing that the Teachers of this Age bring forth fruits contrary to
(...) Ministers of Christ, it shows that they are not guided by the Spirit of
Christ, cause in their Calling, in their Ministry, in their Maintenance, in
their Life (...) Conversation, and in their Doctrine they are not the same, but
quite contrary the Apostles and Ministers of Christ: What can we conclude of
them? We have (...) cluded already that such are Deceivers, whose works are of
another nature, (...) who are guided by another spirit then the Ministers of
Christ were; for C^ says, Every Tree is known by its Fruits; and this is
sufficient what I have said, (...) if need require, it may further be made to
appear in the sight of the whole Wo^ and sufficiently proved, that they differ
in all these things mentioned, and many more, and are not one with the
Apostles, neither in Call, nor Practice, (...) Maintenance, nor in Doctrine,
nor in Conversation, nor any other thing, (...) do disagree, and are quite
contrary so as it is concluded, these are not the Mi^sters of Christ, though
they profess themselves to be so, because they bring forth fruits quite
contrary to the Spirit of Jesus, which the Spirit of Jesus did, and does
reprove; And seeing they are not guided by the Spirit of Jesus, because their
fruits are contrary to it, then must they needs be guided by the spirit of
Antichrist, and so are the Ministers of Antichrist, and do his works by his
spirit. And further, I shall show wherein they do agree with the false Prophets
and false Apostles, and wherein they are like unto them in their Ministry, and
Practice, and Doctrine, and Conversation; and if the Marks of Deceivers fall
upon them in the sight of all people, why should they not bear it? And if the
same works be proved to be acted by them, which the false Prophets and
Deceivers acted, then why should ^t be thought a thing incredible among men
that these are Deceivers?

1. First, the false Prophets run, and were not sent, and they did not profit
the people at Ier. 23. Chap.
all, for they stood not in the Counsel of God, and so they turned not any from
their iniquity, b^t rather strengthened the Hands of the Evildoers, so that
none could turn from their wicke^ess; and they spoke a Vision of their own
hearts, and not from the Mouth of the Lord; and they said still to the wicked,
The Lord has said, ye shall have Peace; and to every one that walked after the
Imaginations of his own heart, they cried, No Evil shall come upon him; and the
Priests and the Prophets were profane, as you may read, Ier. 23. And this is a
fit parallel for the Teachers of this Generation, they can show no Call from
God, nor by his Spirit, neither are People profited by them, as experience does
show and teach through this Nation; and they do cry Peace to the wicked, and
count all Christians, and followers of Christ, that are but sprinkled when they
are Infants, though they live in wickedness; and from them, as from the
Prophets of Israel, is profaneness gone forth into many Nations, and a wicked
example of evil these give to all Nations; neither do these speak from the
Mouth of the Lord, but a Vision of their own heart, and what old Authors say,
and at the best, but what the Saints of the Lord said before them, and this is
no more, as done by them, then ^^e^ling of the Prophets words, or the word from
their Neighbor. Again, you may read how the false Prophets used their Tongues,
and said, The Lord says it, when t^^ Lord ^^th never spoken to them, but only
what they had stole from others, who were the Prophets of the Lord; and this is
a fit example to the Teachers of this Age, and a tr^e p^rallel between them;
for these dare not own that ever they heard the voice of the lord immediately,
nor that they spoke from the mouth of the Lord immed^ly, but use their Tongues,
and say, The Lord said so by such a Prophet, when (...) themselves have not
received the Word from the Lord; and the Lord was (...) ^ch who prophesied
Lies, as did the false Prophets of Israel, as the Teachers of ^^is Age do, as
it is manifest, and the Lord is against them. And herein do they agree, and
concur with the false Prophets in their Call, and are in concord wi^h the
Deceivers of old.

2. Again, the false Prophets, and blind Watchmen of Israel, they were
ignorant, (...) they were greedy dumb Dogs, that never could have enough, and
they looked to their own (...), and every one sought for his gain from their
Quarter, and they were drinkers of Wine, (...) strong Drink, and boasted that
tomorrow should be as this day, Isa. 56. And this is (...) ^it parallel with
the Teachers of this Age; for they are blind Watchmen, and do not discover to
People the wickedness of their ways, and no less can be said of t^^m, then
that they are greedy dumb Dogs; for they all look to their own way, and every
one of them has a Quarter (a TOWN or a PARISH) from which they seek their
Gain; and some of them are Lovers of Wine and strong Drink, as daily
experiences witness. And herein the Teachers of this Generati^n ^e proved to
succeed the false Prophets in the same works, and show they are (...) by the
same spirit, because they so fitly agree and concur in their works, and (...)
(...) plain to all men that are but reasonable, much more to them that are
spirit.

3. Again, the Deceivers, such as were false Prophets, Preached for Hire, and
Mic. 3. Chap.
(...) for Money, and yet leaned upon the Lord, and said, Is not the Lord among
us? And the Te^chers of this Age they have Hire for preaching, and great sums
of Money, (...) they say they lean upon the Lord; of these things there needs
no proof, they are so plain, in every Town, and Country, where the Priests
preach for Hire, and the Prophets divine for Money. And herein they fitly
agree, and concur with the Deceivers of old, and follow them as an example,
showing that they walk by the very same spirit.

4. Again, the false Shepherds of Israel were like Foxes in the deserts, for
they followed their own spirits, and had seen nothing but lying Divinations,
saying, the Lord said, when the Lord had not sent them; and they seduced the
People, saying, Peace, and there was no peace to them from God; and one builded
a Wall, and another daubed it with untempered Mortar; and with Lies the Heart
of the Righteous they made sad, whom Ezekiel. 13.
the Lord had not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked (that he
should not return from his wicked way) by promising him life. And this is a fit
parallel to the Teachers of this Age, for they follow their own spirits,
because they do things contrary to the spirit of Jesus; and they have seen
nothing but lying vanities, and divinations, whereby they do seduce the People,
by telling them they are Christians, and that they are Baptized into the FAITH
of Christ, and that they have the Seal of the remission of sins, by being
sprinkled with water when they were Infants; and these are lying Divinations by
which they seduce people, and say they shall have peace while they still
continue in sin; and thus they build a Wall, and daub it with untempered
Mortar; and make a Christian of their own, and (...) him with false hopes, and
with such Lies as these, and many other which they declare for doctrine, the
heart of the Righteous is made sad at this day, and the hands of the wicked is
strengthened, that he cannot turn from his wicked way; for life is promised to
him, though he be wicked, and ungodly, living in all unrighteousness; for they
tell him Christ is his righteousness to justify him, and then he thinks he
need not to turn from his sins; and so their hands are strengthened, that they
cannot turn from their sins. And herein the Teachers of this Age, and false
Prophets do fully agree, and are so like one to the other, as Children of one
Father, and their works are so alike, as crafts-men of one Science; and thus
they are one in union, and follows the same spirit.

5. Again the Shepherds of Israel, and idle Pastors, and Deceivers, they eat
the Ezekiel. 34.
fat, and they clothed themselves with the wool, and they killed them that were
fed, but thy feed not the Flock, the diseased they did not strengthen, neither
healed they the SICI, neither bound they up the broken, neither brought they
again that which was driven (...) neither did they seek again that which was
lost; but with Force and Cruelty they ruled (...) Flock, and it was scattered,
and become meat to all the Beasts of the Field, and the (...) wandered
throughout all the Mountains; and the flock was scattered, and none of the
(...) herds, did search or seek after them, and they eat and drank up the good
of the P^, and trod down the residue with their feet, and they thrust with side
and with she and they pushed all the Diseased with their horn, till they
scattered them abroad; N^^ this is a fit comparison with the practice of the
Teachers of this Age; for (...) eat the fat, and lives in pleasures, and
fullness most of any, and they clothe with the Wool; for they claim the tenth
part of every man's Wool; And if any be fed by the true Shepherd, they seek to
kill them, and to devour their Life, (...) causing them to be imprisoned, and
cruelty done unto them; and they feed (...) the Flock, neither do they
strengthen the diseased, nor heal the sick, neither (...) they up the broken;
for if any be wounded, and cries out because of the b^^ den of sin, and be
sick, and broken, and trembles at the WORD of the Lord, such they cry out are
deceived, and mock at them; and the Image of God, which has been driven away
and lost, they have not sought in People, but with cruelty (...) they ruled
among People, by running to Magistrates, and causing such to be put (...)
prison, that would not help to maintain them; and thus with cruelty do (...)
rule among People, as it is witnessed by many Testimonies in England; and the
people are scattered, and wandered into many Sects, and false Judgments, and
(...) Opinions, and they are not sought after by the Teachers of this Age, to
re^ them to the Truth by sound Doctrine, but they persecute them; and the
Sheph^ feed themselves, and not the Flock, and even eat up the good pasture,
and tr^ down the residue; and drink of the deep Waters, and fouls the residue
with t^ feet, so that none that follow them can drink of the pure Waters, nor
eat of the Bread of Life; and they thrust with side, and with shoulder and push
all the diseased which are wounded, because of their sin, who is ready to die
for want of the Bread of life, which denies and are weary of their
abominations; these they push at with their horns, and causes to be
persecuted; and thus they fitly agree with the false Shepherds of Israel, and
is no whit wanting in any thing wherein they were guilty, but rather abounding;
which shows that they follow the same spirit, and are of the same stock, and
seed, and the Lord is against these, as he was against them in old time; and no
more are these Ministers of Christ that acts these things, then they were which
acted the same things by the same spirit; and this is plain to all that shuts
not their eye, and stops not their ear.

6. Again, the false Prophets and Deceivers, they made the people err, and did
bite with their Teeth, and cried peace, but they that put not into their
Mouths, they prepare War against them, as you may read Micah 3. now the
Teachers of this Age brings forth the very same; for they cry peace unto all
that puts into their mouths, though people be never so ungodly; if they will
maintain them, they cry peace to them, but if people put not into their mouths,
they prepare war against them, by suing them at the Law, and casting them into
Prison, if any deny to pay them Tithes, or Money, though they have no due to it
by the Law of Christ, such do prepare open war against them, by distraining
their Goods, and taking treble damages, and casting their bodies into bonds;
and herein the Teachers of this Age agrees with the false Prophets of Israel;
can any man be so blind that does not see it? does any man stop their ear, so
as that they cannot hear this to be true? they show themselves in all things to
be one with the false Prophets of Israel, when justly they are tried by their
own Rule, as they say, and so let them bear this judgment, which their own
professed Rule judges with.

7. Again, the Priests and false Prophets of Israel, this is said of them, That
as Troops of Robbers waits for a man, so the company of Priests murders in the
way, with consent; for they commit lewdness, Hos. 6. 9. And what less may be
spoken of the Teachers of this Age, Spiritual men shall judge; for if any man
does but cease from their abominable worship, their deceitful worship, and
Idolatry, and come to the knowledge of God, they even seek to murder in the
way, and cry out against them for being deluded, and deceived, and such like;
so that like as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so it may be said of the
Teachers of this Age, for they take away the Key of Knowledge, and will not
enter in themselves to the knowledge of the Truth, nor suffer them that would,
and indeed, whatsoever abomination the Teachers and Prophets of Israel were
found guilty of, the Teachers of this Age do not come short, but rather abound,
let search be made through the Scriptures, and see, whether there was any evil
committed by them, I mean the false Prophets of Israel, that is not committed
by the Teachers of this Age; what were they guilty of, that these can free
themselves from? If any man has a word to say, let us hear it, and come out
with your Arguments ye wise men, and let us hear your Plea; and they doing the
same works which the false Prophets of Israel did, must needs ^e concluded to
be Followers of the same spirit, and that they are no less then they were,
whose examples they follow, which are followers or the false Prophets, and ^ot
of the Ministers of Christ.

8. Again Christ in his warning, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, who
gives he description what they were, and what their practices were, and he
says, they meaning the Pharisees) did bind heavy Burdens, grievous to be born,
and they laid them ^n men's Shoulders, but themselves would not move them with
one of their fingers; and their ^^^k they do to be seen of men, and loves the
uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chiefest Seats Matthew. 23.
(...) Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men
Masters. Now the ^eachers of this Generation are like unto these, they do
succeed the Pharisees in ^^inging forth the same fruits; for do not these bind
heavy burdens, grievous to (...) born, and laying them on men's shoulders,
making them suffer grievous ^ings through their cruelty, as imprisonment, and
spoiling their goods, these are grievous burdens which they lay upon men, but
they will not touch them with one of their fingers; and their works are done to
be seen of men, for they think to be heard for their much babbling; and we know
they love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and has it often; and the chief place
in the Synagogue, they love that, and have it; and to be called of men Master,
which Christ forbids his Ministers to be, they love that, and they have it. And
herein do they agree with the Pharisees, and in other things, if we should
duly examine the Scriptures, showing that they are of the same spirit, which
the Pharisees were of, which crucified Christ.

9. Again, the Pharisees and Deceivers were Persecutors, such as complained to
the Magistrates, as you may read through all the New Testament, and the Book of
the Acts, and elsewhere; How the chief Priests caused the Saints to be
persecuted by lying informations, and grievous Complaints to the Elders and
Rulers; they sought to take Christ by Act. 24. 1, 2, 4, 6. Mat. 26. 3, 4.
subtilty, and kill him; and they persecuted the Apostles to prison, and some
to death, and others to bonds, and cruel sufferings. And this was done chiefly
by, or through, (...) complaint of the Priests. It was Amaziah the Kings Priest
that complained to Jeroboam, and informed against the poor Prophet Amos; and it
was Shimshia the Scribe, that complained to the King against the building of
the City of God; and it was the son of the Pri^^^ Amos 7. 10.
that persecuted Jeremiah. And herein also the Teachers of this Generation
(...) agree and concord with the chief Priests, with, and in persecuting the
innocent, Ier. 20. 19.
showing that they are of the same spirit; for now they complain and inform
against the People of God, and through their information evil is done against
them; (...) it is they through their lying, and false accusations to the
Magistrates by whom (...) Saints do suffer; and in all these things they do
fully agree, and concur with t^^ Deceivers of old.

10. Again, the false Apostles, they were such as went for filthy Lucre, and
the covetousness, with feigned words, made merchandise of souls, and denied the
Lord (...) bought them, and brought in damnable Heresies, and they walked after
the flesh, in the (...) Tit. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 2.
and uncleanness, and despised Government, and were presumptuous, and
self-willed, (...) sported themselves with their own deceivings, and they could
not cease from sin, but b^ unstable souls, and an heart they had exercised in
covetous practices, and they went astr^^, ^^ving the way of Balaam, loving the
Wages of unrighteousness; and they were Wells (...) Water, and were Clouds that
are carried with a Tempest; they speak great swelling words of ^nity, and
allured through the lust of the flesh, through much wantonness, those who were
es^ from them, who lived in Error, and they promised others liberty, and
themselves way (...) Servants of corruption. Now the Teachers of this Age are
found guilty of, (...) in all these things they agree, which the false Apostles
were guilty of; for (...) through covetousness, with feigned words, do make
merchandise of the people; any will give them more money at the next Town, they
will sell the People (...) they are and go where there is more MONEY; and
seeing they are out of (...) Doctrine of Christ, it is no less then denying the
Lord that bought them.

And that they hold damnable Errors, this I can pove; For At Reding.
one of (...) said in my hearing, That the Scripture was the Foundation of
Foundation And At Ware.
another said, That the Scripture was both the Writings and the thing
s^^nified. And these are as damnable Errors as ever the false Apostles brought
(...) and these, they walk after the lust of the flesh, in Pride and fullness
thereof, (...) despise the Government of Christ, and are presumptuous,
self-willed, lofty, (...) spirited men; and as the false Apostles did, so do
these speak evil of things (...) know not, of things they understand not; and
no less can be said of these, (...) that they sport themselves with their own
deceivings, and they cannot cease fr^^ sin themselves; for it is a principal
doctrine among them, That none must be (...) from sin while they be upon Earth;
and they deceive unstable souls, who the them to be Ministers of Christ, when
as they were never sent of Christ; and it (...) evident, that their hearts are
exercised with covetous practices, who sue poor P^^ple at Law, some for Twelve
Pence, which they are more able to give to, (...) they whom they sue to receive
from; and they follow the Error of Bal^ and run after him greedily, who went
for Gifts and Rewards, as do these, (...) have unrighteous Wages, cause people
to pay them money, for whom they do not work, and this is unrighteous Wages;
these are Wells without Water, and Clouds without Rain; they make a show of
Godliness and Righteousness, when as they are profane and unrighteous, and
they speak great swelling words of vanity, professing themselves to be
Orthodox, Divines, and such like, which are no more but words of vanity without
Truth; and they seek to allure all people to follow them in their way of Idol
Worships, and so they are deceived and deceiving; and while they promise
liberty to others, by Christ, from sin, when they are dead, themselves are the
Servants of corruption, and live in sin to this day, and in all things which
the false Apostles were guilty of; these come not behind, but these do show by
their works, that they are guided by the same spirit, which was in the
Deceivers of old, and so they agree and concur one with another in
unrighteousness.

Again, the false Prophets and Deceivers, which were come, and coming in the
days of John, they were of the World, and the World heard them: And they were
them which Christ prophesied of, should come into the World, which should
deceive many; and such were they which the Apostle saw coming in, 2 Timothy 3. and
1 John 4. 5. Mat. 24. A and. 20. 29. 1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 8.
he said, after his days grievous Wolves should come in, which should not
spare the Flock, such as were departed from the FAITH, and spoke Lies in
Hypocrisy, having their Consciences s^^^ed with a hot Iron; and such were
they, Covetous, Boasters, proud Blasphemers Unthankful, Unholy, without natural
Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent, fierce, Despisers of
those things which were good; Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasure
more then Lovers of God; they have the form of Godliness, but deny the Power
therereof; and People by them were ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; of this sort the Apostle saw was coming, and would come
more fully, and such are the Teachers of this Age; for they are of the World,
living in Pride, and the Wickedness of it; and the World hears them, such as
themselves, proud and wicked People; for they that fear God, and walk in his
Ways, are departed from many of them; and they show that they have no Faith,
but are departed from it; for FAITH keeps from evil, from the ways of sin and
death, which they live in; and Lies in abundance they speak, in hypocrisy;
and their Consciences are seared, that is plain, else they could not do as many
of them do, who cause inno^ent People to be put in prison, and make havoc of
their Goods, who will not pay them Tithes, or maintain them; and they are the
proudest of men, and as Covetous as any, and Unthankful, and Unholy they show
themselves to be, and they are false Accusers, and Truce Breakers, for they
hardly make any Conscience of belying the People of God in the Pulpits, or to
the Magistrates; and they are Heady, High-minded; and if some of them be not
Treacherous, judge ye, who have turned diverse ways in their judgments,
according to the times; and they have a Form of Godliness, but not the Power;
pray and sing in a form, and preach in a form and method; and people are ever
learning by them, sixty Years, or more, or less, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, but dye in ignorance and blindness, without knowledge,
under them. And herein do they agree also with the false Prophet and
Antichrist, which John saw to be come in, and such as the Apostle saw, which
were then coming in; and they show the very same spirit, by the same works, and
the same fruits which appear from them; men of understanding may compare them
in all these things. They do agree, and appear to be of that very Stock and
Generation which the Apostle prophesied of, for they were grievous Wolves,
which should not spare the Flock, which the Apostle saw; and these do not spare
the FLOCK, but even devour them, and no less then grivous Wolves can they be
said to be; For if a poor Woman has but ten EGGS in all the World, they will
have one, in many parts of this Nation; or but ten Chickens, they will have
one; or but a Fire in their House, they will have a Penny for the Smoke, and
such like wolvish, devouring ways; and if these be not grievous Wolves, let
all the World judge. And here is their Treachery made manifest, while they say
they preach the Gospel in love to souls, yet its manifest they preach for love
of Money, for few, or none of them preach where there is no money; and People
are absolute blind, that do not see them, for in all things they agree with the
Deceivers and false Prophets of old, and show that they be of the very same
spirit; and thus you see their own Rule condemns them; and because they say the
Scripture is their Rule, therefore I have thought good to lay them to it, and
measure them by their own Line; and all People may see wherein they are quite
contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and wherein they wholly agre^ with the
Deceivers; Let them hide themselves from this blow if they can, and let them
bring their Arguments against this sentence, and let all their Friends appear
for them, and see if they can reverse this judgment, which their own line has
judged them by, let them bring in their Plea, and defend themselves from this,
if it be possible; for in those things which I have* named, and many other, it
is manifest, that they fully agree with the Deceivers, and disagree with the
Ministers of Christ, and by their fruits they are perfectly made manifest.

Again, Christ spoke in his days, and the Apostles in their days, that false
Prophets and Deceivers should come into the world, and after them; and they
gave descriptions what such they should be, and what fruits they should bring
forth, as I have before mentioned in that 1 John 2. and it is plain that these
Deceivers and false Prophets did come in, according as was prophesied; for John
said, By this we know it is the last times, for now are they come, which was
many hundred years ago: I say, the Deceivers and false Prophets which Christ
prophesied of to come, Matthew. 24. came into the World many hundred years ago,
as you may read 1 John 2. And with this I shall conclude this particular. The
Teachers of this Age, by their ^ruits, are proved already to be of that stock,
and succeeders in the same works, by the same spirit of them which Christ said
should come, and which the Apostle saw was then come, and so they did deceive
many, as these do deceive many in the same way, as them that went before them;
And so let it not be a thing incredible to the people of these Nations, that
many of these Teachers, which are called Ministers, are Deceivers generally,
b^^ if there be any one that ^ears God among them, or loves Truth and
Sincerity* it will be made manifest, and such I spare, and they shall be spared
in the day (...) the Lord; but yet I say, generally, and the main part of them,
even they (...) bring forth these fruits before mentioned, which the false
Prophets brought forth* are not the Ministers of Christ, but Deceivers, the
Scripture, their own professed Rule, does prove them so; for it must needs be
that they must be the same men that they were, whose spirit they walk by, and
whose fruits they bring forth* and this cannot be avoided, they are the same
trees that brings forth the same fruits; and let no man blame me for saying
such are Deceivers that preach for hire, and divine for money, and goes for
gi^ts and rewards; and that are called o^ men Master, and have the chief place
in the Assemblies, and are covetous, and high-minded, and seeks for their gain
from their Quarter, with those things which I have mentioned, which are the
same things which the false Prophets acted in Ages past; I am not now to be
blamed for saying, These are Deceivers, who are acting such things now in this
Age, as they acted then that were Deceivers; but if you blame any, begin with
Isaiah, and Micah, and Ezekiel, and Christ and his Apostles, and the rest of
the holy men of God, for they are my examples in this, who did declare against
them that brought forth such works, as these do that I have declared against:
and I have done the Teachers of this Age no wrong for judging them by their own
Line, and laying them to their own professed Rule; therefore do not rage at me,
nor do not be offended a^ this; for I have but compared them with the Ministers
of Christ, and with the Ministers of Antichrist, and showed wherein they do
agree to the one, and disagree to the other; and all People may see, and the
Light in all Consciences may judge of what I have said; so that as I said at
the first, I may again say, What think you? Was there ever such a Generation of
Teachers? I now answer, Yea, There was in the days of the true Prophets, and
in the days of the Apostles there were such as these are, which were
Deceivers; and in the times of Christ there were such a Generation as these
are, who acted the same things by the same spirit, as these do at this day? Let
them reply to this that will, my Question is sober, and my Answer is just and
right, and I have dealt faithfully, and you may read the Scriptures, that I
have quoted for your own satisfaction; for, though they falsely say, the
Scripture is their Rule, and accuse us falsely, that we deny the Scripture, yet
the Scripture shall be Judge between us in this matter; and what I have done is
not in envy to any man's person, neither in upbraiding them in their wickedness,
but I do it rather to show them all their iniquities, that they may repent; and
this I have done in perfect love to all people, for the Day is come that has
brought hidden things to Light, and Deceit and Hypocrisy which has lain hid,
is now fully made manifest, as at Noonday.

But again, secondly I answer, In some respects I do believe there was never
such a Generation of Teachers as these are; for we do not read in all the
Scriptures concerning the false Prophets, that they were so extremely covetous
and greedy of gain as these are, or that ever they took such desperate, wicked,
unlawful courses to get their maintenance, and compel people to pay them, as
these Teachers do, a very shame to rehearse it, and to their shame I do
rehearse it, many a poor man in this Nation has been sued by them at the LAW,
and put in PRISON by their means, and had their Goods spoiled in a woeful
manner, for to maintain them, and to uphold them; yea, some hundreds of poor
people, in this Nation, have been dealt cruelly by, and unjustly with, because
for Conscience sake they have denied to maintain them, to pay them Tithes, and
such like; this may be proved, that for five Shillings, unjustly claimed by
them, they have taken Goods by Distraint to the value of five times so much, as
Cumberland and Westmerland can witness; and many at this very day lie in Holes
and Prisons by the means of the Priests, who tear the People as Wolves do the
Sheep; its even woeful to be considered what havoc is made of some men's
persons, and some men's GOODS, and all to maintain the Teachers? The like never
was in any Generation, as it is brought forth in this Generation in this
particular: And again, their exceeding covetousness and greediness of Lucre
does appear, in that they claim Wages of People, and do compel People to pay
them Wages, after this manner, as I have said, for which people they do no
work; neither do these people receive any work done by them, with whom they
thus deal; What thing can be more unjust under Heaven; that they should compel
people by a Law to pay them, and thus punish them if they will not, who set
them not on work, and for whom they do no work? neither do the people like
their work, or love it, but know it to be deceitful, and yet are compelled by a
Law to pay them; they have such a way to get money, that no Tradesman has the
like of it besides themselves, for they cause People, and compel people to buy
their Wares; and they compel people to pay for their Commodity, which have none
of it, nor love it, and this is more unjust then may be spoken: Are they like
Ministers of Christ? Or do they follow their example in these practices? What
do you judge? All people bring in your Verdict; or are they not like Deceivers
herein, even exceeding all that ever went before? It is true, They which preach
the Gospel should live on the Gospel; this Argument we do own; but let these
men be tried, and see if by their preaching their Gospel they have gained so
much love in people, as to maintain them without the Law, and without
compelling of Maintenance and Livelihood from them by a Law; let but the Law
cease to compel Tithes, and other things from people to maintain them, and see
whether their Gospel will maintain them or not; let but the Magistrates hold up
their hands from causing people to pay them Tithes by their orders and writs
and I Will undertake, as I do believe they must either beg, or work, or a worse
thing for a livelihood, or else perish, so little love is there in their own
People toward them, nor have they gained any in the hearts of people toward
them, for many years that they have preached; and herein again I do believe
that they do exceed all the false Prophets, and all the Deceivers that ever
went before them in this respect, none ever had the Magistrates to act for them
as these have, and as it appears the Rulers some of them, are at the wills of
the Teachers, to do for them what they desire, either to take Peoples goods, or
to send them to Prison; showing that these Teac^^^^ have not a spiritual Weapon
to defend themselves; but that the Magistrates wi^^ their Law are their
chiefest ARMOR; for if they can but get favor of (...) Magistrate, they have
allowance to preach at such a place, and if they can get the favor of a
Magistrate they can do well enough to be maintained, by cau^^^^ such to be sent
to prison, or taxing treble damages upon their Goods, if they wi^^ not help to
maintain them; and if they have the favor of the Magistrates, if any do
reprove them for these things, and for others of their wickedness, and if any
do but tell them of it, they can have such sent to Prison, as in revenge, as
for speaking and reproving them for their wickedness, has some hundreds of
innocent People suffered imprisonments, and other cruel things in these
Nations; so that iniquity is upheld, as it were, by Force and Power; so that it
is not their Gospel that maintains them, nor gets them favor with the people,
nor does it defend them, but it is the command and Warrant of a Magistrate
which does all this; so when the Magistrates cease to approve them, to maintai^
them, and ^efend them, they must utterly fall into misery, and can neither be
approved* maintained, or defended any other way; for, because of this their
wickedness, God has left them, and all honest true hearted People have left
them; and therefore, what a condition are the Teachers in, who deserve not the
love of me^ because they are so cruel hearted toward them, and they deserve
not the Love of God, because they are so wicked against him? And I might yet
more fully describe and declare, wherein they do exceed the Deceivers and false
Prophets of old; but of this, according as the Lord moves and leads; and
this may suffice to show what they are by their works, and by the spirit that
leads them, which appears not to be the Spirit of God, but the spirit of
Antichrist.

Furthermore, and besides all this, which I have said, herein they do exceed
the Deceivers that are gone before; for upon account, the sum of their
Maintenance yearly in these Nations, being reckoned, may be about One Million
and five hundred thousandpounds perannum.
Fifteen Hundr^^ Thousand POUNDS a Year: Oh wonderful! Is not this almost
incredible, that the Teachers should put the Nations to such a charge as this,
and yet people receive nothing answerable to it? But all this Money is spent
for that which is (...) Bread, and their labor wasted, and they have no profit
thereby: This money might be made better use of, then to give it for deceiving
the people: And if any doubt of this account, and shall think this is not like
to be true, upon an even r^^koning, it may be proved and made appear,
considering how many Parishes th^^ are, and reckon what belongs to every
Priests Parish, with what is given to (...) Priests in Ireland, which is
abundance: These things are a shame to the Ministry of Christ, though the
impudent Teachers of these Nation are void of sha^^ herein.

A Reply to the Priests Plea, and an Answer to their Objections.
WHereas many of the Priests of ENGLAND, to hide themselves fr^^ the charge of
being Hirelings, they allege these Scriptures, The L^bourer is worthy of his
Hire, and the Workman is worthy of his Meat: but these Scriptures will not
serve to cover their shame in what is charged against them; for (...) Luke 10.
7, 8.
Hire which Christ allows to the Laborers, is but to remain in the same house
into (...) they enter, eating and drinking such things as they give them, with
such who were (...) they were to remain, and to eat that which was set before
them; and they labou^^^ truly, and traveled up and down, and were truly worthy
of meat for their work, and of this Hire for their Labor: But this makes
nothing for the lawfulness of so many pounds a year at a certain place; this is
more then eating (...) (...) house, which is worthy to bargain with people for
so much the year, and compelling people to pay by a Law, that do deny; Christ
never instituted such a practice, neither can it be truly said, that these
called Ministers do labor as the Ministers of Christ did, and so this
Scripture is but wrested by them, when they bring it for proof of their
practice for their hundred pounds a year, compelling some of it from the
people, does exceed eating and drinking to suffice nature, with such who are
worthy; So this Scripture makes not for their turns, nor does it justify
their* Practices.

Again, they Object, against our charge, the words of Paul, who said, He that
preaches the Gospel shall live on the Gospel, and that it was a small matter
to reap carnal things, from them unto whom they sowed Spiritual things; but
this Scripture makes not for them; for as I said, its not the preaching of the
Gospel that maintains them, but the Magistrates with their Law, that compels
Maintenance from the people, and this is not to live on the Gospel; for we
allow, as Paul did, that they which preach the GOSPEL should live on the
Gospel; Therefore let the Magistrates cease, with their Power, to cause people
to pay them, and let all the World see if their Gospel will maintain them; and
let them reap their carnal things from them where they sow spiritual; but they
must reap as a free Gift too, and not by compulsion, for so the Apostle
signifies, it is a small matter for any to reap carnal things where they sow
spiritual things; yet what is this to prove the lawfulness of bargaining with
people for so much by the YEAR, as these Teachers of ENGLAND do, many of them,
and will not preach except they have so much promised them before? For it is
right to reap after sowing, but it is a transgression to bargain to reap before
they sow; and these Scriptures will not hide them, nor defend them in their
practice; for if the Magistrates did not compel from people Maintenance by a
Law, the Priests of this Age would reap but little from any thing that they
sow; for there is little love in the hearts of the people toward them. Also
they Object, He that plants a Vineyard may eat of the fruit thereof; and he
that keeps a Flock, may eat of the Milk of the Flock, this Paul said, though he
would not make use of his power herein, but wrought with his hands, that the
Gospel might not be chargeable; but what Vineyards have the Teachers of England
planted? or what Flocks do they keep? Their Vineyards prove not tender Grapes;
but wild ^ower Grapes; wild Vines, and not Vines to bring forth acceptable
fruits; and their Flocks prove not Flocks of sheep; but wild rude people who
are in the nature of Wolves and Lions; and if the Magistrates Law were not,
their Vineyard no^ the flock would hardly yield them any maintenance; the
Apostles planted first a Vineyard, and gathered the ^^heep, before they reaped
or eat any of the fruit, but the Teachers of England differ from them in this,
for they know what they must have before they plant, or before they feed their
flock, and differ from the Apostles practice, who first planted a Vineyard, and
gathered a flock before they could receive any crop; and they would (...) then
use their power, but kept the Gospel of Christ without charge, so that this
Scripture will not prove the Priests actions lawful, in preaching for sums of
money: and some other Scriptures they bring to prove the lawfulness of their
preaching for ^ire, which may all be answered as these are, and whatsoever they
can object will ^ot justify them, for their reaping carnal things, and their
hire, and their eating ^f the milk of the flock, is quite of another nature, as
is proved, then the Apostle ^ractices were; and were the people wi^e they would
see and understand these things, and not be deluded through perverting of
Scriptures, and through wresting of them, to other ends then wherefore they
were given forth; and this is written ^o answer some of their objections,
whereby they would defend themselves, for that though Paul took of other
Churches to supply his necessities, as sometimes he did, yet ^his will not
prove the lawfulness of their hundreds of pounds by the year, most of which
they spend in pride and idleness; so that still this Judgment is true upon them
which I have given, all objections being answered, and all defenses ^eing made
yoid; and hereof they are guilty, as I have charged them, and pro^ed it out of
the Scripture: They disagree to the Ministers of Christ, and agrees with the
Deceivers, and in some particulars exceeds them, for I believe all the fals^
Prophets in Israel did not destroy any whit near a Million and a half of Money
in a year, considering all things, it must come to little less, their Funeral
Sermons, their great Tithes, and small Tithes, and Marriages, and Sprinkling of
Infants, and Churching of Women, with other such Penuries claimed by the Church
of England, with what is given to them out of the Nations treasure, which is
many hundred pounds a year, also considering how much in a year is spent, and
consumed at two or three Colleges in this Nation, in relation to the Ministry;
as in bringing some up to the attainment of the Ministry; (is they call it) and
upon the Educators of such, with a very great abundance of such like charges,
consumed out of the Nations treasure, which is wasted, as in relation to this
Ministry spoken of: I do not speak against good education and learning, which
is in its place a virtue, (as for Travelers, and many others) neither do I
account such money vainly wasted and spent; but only as to the Ministry of
Christ, natural learning is not there admitted to make Ministers, or to enable
them thereunto; but that money which is thereupon spent, is wasted and
consumed; and how much is spent in this way, and for such an end only, I leave
wise men to judge, which will make up a large sum in the whole; considering all
things I say, their yearly maintenance may amount to fifteen hundred thousand
pounds a year, which is a thousand thousand, and half a thousand thousand
pounds: Men of wea^ understandings can hardly reach, to know how much it is,
and that makes me thus plainly expound it.

Kingston upon Thames, the eighth month, 1657.
A description of the true Ministry of Christ, and its Maintenance.
THe day has appeared that makes all things manifest, and the light is aris^^
that gives to discern between truth and error; between the true and eve^^ false
way, and between the true worship of God, which is spiritual, and every fal^^
worship of the world, which is Idolatry; and the true Ministry of Christ is
kno^^ from the false Ministry, by their several fruits and signs, for hidden
things are broug^^ to light, and secret things are revealed: but now the people
of the world, both t^^ wise and the foolish, thus they object, and say, Seeing
that you do so much co^ our Ministry and Ministers in their call, in their
practices, in their conversation, ^^d (...) their maintenance; what Ministry do
you own, and what Ministers do you allow of, (...) whether would you have any
Ministry at all, seeing you throw down and declare against s^^ as the Law of
the Land sets up, and such as we have looked upon to be able Ministers; (...)
after this manner are the people of this Generation begun to reason among
themselves, s^ what would this people do if they had power; what Ministers
would they approve of; and (...) maintenance would they allow them?

To all this I do answer and say, The true Ministers and Ministry of C^ we do
allow of, and we would have set up and established, and we wait pati^ ly till
it be brought to pass, even such as are ordained by power from on (...) and who
have received the gift of the holy Ghost; who are called of God into the (...)
of the Ministry, such we do approve of to be Ministers of Christ in whom he is
reve^ and who have received him, and are changed by him from death to life and
out (...) darkness into the Kingdom of the Son of God, and who are born of the
Spirit, and (...) led and guided by it into all truth, and are called by it to
follow the lamb whither s^ he goes, and who are taught by it in all their
practices of Religion, and in (...) whole worship of God, and such we own, as
have felt the operation of the spi^ in themselves, and who have tasted,
handled, seen, and felt of the Word of life; whi^^ abids for ever, and such who
goes in the name of the Lord, to Minister and declare freely, what they have
freely received of God by his Spirit, and who preaches Christ freely, as the
only way and means of life and salvation unto all people, even such as
ministereth him the way, the truth, and the life, the only justifier, and
sanctifier, and deliverer of them that believe, and the condemner of them that
believe not, and such as Ministereth Christ, only the teacher and leader of
his people, and nothing else besides him; and such we allow, as only seeks
and labors in the wisdom of God, to bring people out of the ways of sin and
death, unto the knowledge of God, and to the things that belong unto their
peace, such who have no respect to large places, or great benefits, to seek,
after that, who will not have hire for preaching, nor be hired by great sums of
money, from one Country to another, such as makes the Gospel of Christ free,
and without charge, who will not be burdensome to any, but walks in all wisdom,
as examples of righteousness to all people, whose conversations are in heaven,
and holds forth in life and practice, unto all men, what they profess in
words, and by doctrine and conversation holding forth the Light of the glorious
Gospel, which they have received from God, being Partners of all holiness, of
Peace and Long-suffering, of Meekness, and Patience unto their Flocks; even
such who walk in Christ, and show forth good works, and the fruits of his
spirit, causing his Light to shine forth among men, in humility, and soberness,
and in all the fruits of peace, and Truth, and such are approved of God, and of
the Saints, even they that preach Christ freely to all people, and hold forth
the Light of the World, which lights every one in the World, the free gift of
God to all mankind, that all may believe and come to the knowledge of the Truth
and be saved; and such Ministers respect not the person of any man for
advantage, neither respect days, nor places, nor things, but worships God in
Spirit and in Truth, and teach that worship unto all people, and they gather
people into the new Covenant, where Christ is the High Priest, and our Bodies
the Temples of God, and the Circumcision in the Heart and in the Spirit, for
such are Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter, and they divide the
Word of God aright; they feed the Hungry, and the Rich are sent empty away;
they cry not peace to the wicked, neither do justify the Unconvered; neither
do they condemn the Righteous, nor such as are of an upright Heart; but Christ
they preach, to justify all that do believe, and are obedient to him, and do
condemn all that believe not, but are disobedient; and such Ministers have the
Word of Reconciliation, and their Ministry is made effectual, to accomplish the
work of God; Sinners are converted and brought to God thereby, and to be taught
of him alone; and the Saints through that Ministry, may obtain to the Holy
Ghost, and to need no man to teach them, but as the Anointing within them,
which they receive through the Ministry, whose labor is, and the end of it, to
present every man perfect in Christ, and this Ministry, and such Ministers we
approve of, and they are approved of Christ, and we would have them
established; and who are such will not take care for an outward maintenance,
neither what to eat, or what to put on; neither will they petition to
Magistrates for Tithes and Augmentations, but are without care, as for a
Livelihood in this World; they will not remove from one Town to another, for a
better Parsonage ^r Place, for such as do so, are not the lawful called
Ministers of Christ, but have run and were never sent; for Christ's Ministers
take not though, for an outward maintenance, but approve themselves in Patience
in all Conditions, and ^omtimes are in Want, and in Cold, and Hunger, and
Nakedness, and in Persecutions, and Trials, and Afflictions, and suffered all
things for the Name of Christ, and yet we do believe and know, That such have
power to eat and to drink, and may receive car^^l things where they sow
spiritual things, but as a free Gift, and not by compulsion or force; we do
allow that the Ministers of Christ may eat of the Milk of the Flock, which they
keep and feed, and they may eat of the fruit of the Vineyard, which they have
planted, and which they labor in, and they may supply their necessities from
them whom they have begotten of the Faith, and whom they labor among (...)
Life and Doctrine, who are Sheep of the Fold, and Plants of the Vineyard of
Christ Jesus; but I say, as a free gift may they receive the fruits of their
labors, and not as a debt, nor any title claimed thereto by the Law of the
Nation; neither may they receive it by force or compulsion; but who are the
truly called Ministers of Christ are so far from this, of forcing maintenance
from any, that they will not make use of their power, in taking what may be
freely given them, for they will not make the Gospel burdensome by any means,
and this is the maintenance we do allow the Ministers of Christ, they may eat
such things as are set before them, in any house which they enter into, which
is worthy; and they may supply their necessities in food and raiment, as a free
gift from them who are gathered out of the world, who are the Church of Christ,
over whom the Ministers are made Stewards, to watch over them, to exhort them,
to instruct them, and to edify them; but not from the world, who continues in
unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel may they receive any outward
maintenance by compulsion, or by a free gift, neither may they receive great
sums of money by the year, or tithes, or other offerings to maintain themselves
and their families, in pride and idleness, and lust, and excess, and
superfluity in meats and apparel; such a maintenance if by free gift, much less
by force, is not allowed by Christ and his Saints, but is the maintenance of
Antichristian Teachers, which never were sent of Christ, and such cannot be
content with his allowance and wages, but lives in pride and pleasures of this
world, and in vanity; and maintained, they say they must be, and if they be so,
they care not from whence it comes, nor by what means; and that is the reason
wherefore so many hundreds of honest people are so spoiled in their Persons and
Estates, the Bodies of some being cast into prison, and many others having
their Goods taken from them by force and distraint; and all this is to maintain
Antichrists Ministers, who neither care how they have it, or from whom, or to
what evil use they improve it; and this plainly appears in this Nation, by many
evidences; but the Ministers of Christ do deny such a maintenance, and such
practices; and are come to that Life which judges all these things.

And as concerning COMPELLING of Maintenance, and forcing of i^ from people,
this is utterly against the Law of Christ, and condemned by him, and denied by
the Saints; for it is unreasonable and no equallity in it, that people should
be compelled to maintain a Ministry, especially such a one as they know (...)
not the Ministry of Christ, neither is profitable to them, and which they
recei^^ no fruit from; for the Ministers of Christ do not desire maintenance
from the people of the World, neither can receive any from them, neither in
justice and equity should the Ministers of the World receive or compel
Maintenance from the Saints by force and cruelty; but this we would have, and
this is reason and equity let all Ministers be maintained by such as approve of
them, and hear them, and partake of their labor, and so the Saints will
maintain their Ministers, and the World may maintain theirs, and every sort of
people may maintain such Ministers as labor for them, and none to be forced to
maintain such as they do (...) approve of, nor none hindered from maintaining of
such, as they do approve (...) be they true, or false Ministers; and this is
reason and a good Conscience, Th^^ every man be left free in such cases, to
maintain whom he will, and to give as he will, (...) what he will, and this is
reason and equity, that no man be compelled to give, or hi^ from giving to whom
he pleases, and what he pleases; and so let people make choi^^ of their
Ministers, whom they will approve, and whom they will hear, and of who^^
labors they will receive, and then let them maintain them, and if any be
compelled let them be compelled to pay their own Servants, who minister to
them, and not a^^thers, for whom they do no work; and this is just and right
both for Ministers, a^^ people, that every Minister be paid by them to whom he
does Minister, and who receive him as a Minister, and for whom he does work,
and this great injustice and oppression in England will cease, if this Law of
Equity and Righteousness were established, and all people left free to hear,
and approve of whom they will, and then to pay the^ and maintain them, and this
would try the Ministers; and who converted the most (...) God, and gained the
love of most people, and if they wrought well they may recei^^ a Maintenance
accordingly, by the free gift of the People; and the Ministers that are no^
content with this Law, are out of pure Reason and Equity, and show that the
dare not trust the Lord, nor the fruits of their labors, but would be
maintained in ^idleness by unlawful means, by compelling maintenance from them
to whom they do no work; and such show great covetousness, who desire more then
the Milk of their own Flock, and the fruit of their own Vineyard; but in
Equity and Justice ^et every, Minister be maintained, by the fruit of his own
labor, from the people for whom he does labor, and this will content most
part of the People, and till this be established in the Earth, true Justice and
Judgment will be wanting in this particular; and this is according to Truth,
and to a righteous Law; and by this all people may understand what Ministers
and Ministry we do allow and approve of, and how Ministers ought to be
maintained; and if any go forth to a Place, and Country, among a people that
are not converted, then the Church ought to take care to maintain such in their
work, till they may reap of their own labor, and eat of the fruit of their own
Vineyard, but all this ought to be without compelling or forcing by the
Minister; for every Minister of Christ does chiefly take care of the work unto
which he is called; and is without care of his outward Maintenance.

By a Friend unto England's Commonwealth, for whose sake this is written, and
sent abroad. EDWARD BOROUGH.

A Standard lifted up, and an Ensign held forth to all NATIONS: Showing unto
the whole world, and to all people to whom it shall come, by open Proclamation,
what the Testimony of God is, and of his people which they hold, which they
have received from him, through the eternal Spirit, of which they are not
ashamed before men, but are called to witness it forth in the Nations, in the
same Spirit and Power, as they have received it from the Lord. Also showing of
his great work which he is about to do in the Earth, and this Testimony is
true, and no lie, for it is of God, and witnessed by Thousands of his People at
this day, who are in scorn called Quakers.
The CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. A Testimony concerning the true God. Chap. 2. A Testimony concerning
the Son of God. Chap. 3. A Testimony concerning the Spirit of God. Chap. 4. A
Testimony concerning all mankind. Chap. 5. A Testimony concerning the World in
general. Chap. 6. A Testimony concerning man's Restoration, Redemption, and
Salvation, what they are, and by whom they are wrought. Chap. 7. A Testimony
concerning true Religion, and the true Worship of the true God. Chap. 8. A
Testimony concerning Justification and Sanctification. Chap. 9. A Testimony
concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and how it is to be set up. Chap. 10. A
Testimony concerning Governors, and Governments, and subjection to them. Chap.
11. A Testimony concerning the true Ministry of Christ, and the false Ministry,
and the difference betwixt them. Chap. 12. A Testimony concerning the Gospel of
Christ. Chap. 13. A Testimony concerning the Word of God, and concerning the
Scriptures. Chap. 14. A Testimony concerning the Devil, and Damnation. Chap.
15. A Testimony concerning all Creatures that God made. Chap. 16. A Testimony
concerning the new Covenant, and how man comes to the Knowledge of God. Chap.
17. A Testimony concerning Faith. Chap. 18. A Testimony concerning what works
are accepted of God, and what works are (...) accepted, brought forth by the
Creature. Chap. 19. A Testimony concerning man's state in the first Adam, before
the Convers^^^, and his state after Conversion, and what Conversion is. Also a
Testimony of the Seed of God. Also a Testimony that the Way of Life, and the
Way of Death is set before every man. Also a Testimony to all Kings, and
Princes, and P^^^^^, that we are not Enemies against, but Friends unto all
Civil Government, and wholesome* (...) and Customs of any Commonwealth, which is
according to God, etc. Also a Testimony (...) Government we declare our selves
to be Enemies against. Also a Testimony that we (...) (...) disannul and make
void the Covenant or Bond of Relations, etc. Also a Testimony that (...) do
maintain, and hold the very same Truth as all the Generations of the Just did
in all Ages. Also a Testimony of our Government, and a Testimony of Quaking and
Trembling. Also a Declaration of the full purpose of our hearts, etc.
IN the Name and Power of the Eternal God that made Heaven and Earth, and all
things therein; who is the Life of all things, and the Power by which they
stand in his Counsel and Fear. I do hereby declare my self unto the whole
world, and unto all people upon Earth, that ye may all know the very cer^^inty
of those things, which is reported abroad through many Nations, and that ^e may
be informed truly concerning us, from our own mouths of many things which
comes to you by false reports and lying informations, concerning a people
^ppear'd in these late years, and raised up, going under the name of QUAKERS.
^now ye assuredly that we are of God, and are raised up by him, and called by
his Name, and his dreadful presence goes before us, and his righteousness is
our ^eward. We are such as do fear and worship the true God that made Heaven
and Earth in the Spirit, and in the Truth; he has placed his Name amongst us,
and made his everlasting Covenant with us, and established it that it cannot be
^oved, he has given us his Spirit, and poured it upon us, and we are taught of
him according to his promise, and are established in his holy Mountain, where
^one can make us afraid, for he has armed us with his power and strength to
defend us from all our enemies, that we should bear witness of his Name in all
the world, and declare unto all Nations, of his power and Dominion, of his
Salvation and Redemption, that is in Him, and in his Son; of which we are made
^artakers and witnesses, and by him have we received the heirship of the
everlasting inheritance, and we are of God; and he that is of God hears us,
whom the Father has chosen and redeemed out of kindreds tongues and peoples,
to stand before the Throne of God and the Lamb, and we have sought, and do
find, a City whose builder and maker is God, and we are known to the Lord God
Almighty, and approved in his sight: Our light is the light of the Lamb, and
our government the government of Jesus, and our Law the Law of the most high,
and our Way is the way of peace and truth, he that can receive it let him. This
is the Testimony which the Spirit of the everlasting Father witnesses in us
and witnesses of us unto the whole world.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the true God, this Testimony I give to all People upon the Earth.

THe true God he is a Spirit, and is infinite, eternal, and everlasting, the
Creator of all things, and the life and being of all things, and the power by
which all things stand, all Creatures have a being in him, and by him, and
without him no creature is, or does move upon the face of the earth; this is he
whom we worship and fear, and does obey, and he brings to pass by his counsel
whatsoever he will, and nothing can prevent the purpose of his mind, but his
counfel stands for ever, and he is the righteous Judge of all things, and
before him must all mankind come to Judgment, and the living and the dead by
him must be judged, he is a rewarder of every one according to their deeds,
whether they be good or whether they be evil: His Greatness, Power, Majesty and
Dominion is over all and beyond all, ruling above all in the power of his own
will, and who may say what does he? his eye sees all and his presence fills
all, and no creature can be hid from his sight; he is near at hand and afar
off, he searches man's heart and and tries the reins, and shows unto man his
own thoughts, he justifies the righteous and condemns the wicked, he is
light it self, and in him is no darkness at all: This is the true God whom we
worship, and this Testimony I give of him unto all people upon the face of the
whole Earth.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Son of God, this Testimony I give unto all the World.

THE Son of God, who is called Christ the Prince of Peace and Righteousness, he
is one with the Father in power and dominion, and was with him before the world
was, and by him the Father created all things, and without hi^ was not any
thing made that was made, he is Heir of all things, and is the Pri^^^ of the
Kingdom of Righteousness, of Peace and Truth, and he is the Word a^^ Power by
which all things does consist, and is the Salvation of mankind, and the very
life of the World, he inherits life and immortality, and is the Redeemer,
Savior, Deliverer and Restorer of the Children of men, he is the very Wisdom
and Po^er of the Creator, and the Father does nothing without the Son, and by
him, an^ through him the Father brings all things to pass, by him the Father
will judge the whole Earth and all the Children of Adam therein; and this
Christ Jesus the Son of God is the Life and Light of the world and has
enlightened all mankind, every (...) that comes into the world is lighted by
him with the true light of life or cond^^nation, and what the Son does the
Father does also, and he is at his right (...) exalted, and is the very express
Image of the Father, and is the Fathers gift i^^^ the world, and is given to
all mankind that they may have life by him, and all (...) receives: him has
life and salvation, but many receives him not, and they (...) receive him not
perish, even because they do not receive him whom the Father (...) given into
the world, for he is the arm alone of Gods salvation and he is the ^^^der of
his people.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Spirit of God, this Testimony I give unto the whole World.

THe SPIRIT is with the Father, and with the Son, and its present eve^^ where,
and fills all places, and is for ever and ever, and tries all thin^^ and
reveals the things of the Father, and of the Son, unto all that does belie^^
in the Son; and makes manifest, and searches into the deep things of God,
(...) it witnesses the Salvation of the Just, and the condemnation of the
Unjust; it is not absent from any place, nor contained in any one place; the
Father and the Son works all things through it, and brings all things in Heaven
and Earth to pass by it, and it works in the Hearts of the Children of men, and
in every one it witnesses of the Father and of the Son, to the Justness,
Greatness, Righteousness, and to the power of the Eternal Creator, that made
all things by the Son through his Eternal Spirit, which is one with the Father
and with the Son, and is the Worker of their will and mind in all things; it
works in the Wicked to reprove them, and to witness against them, and that
God is angry with them (...) shows; and it works in the Righteous, and
witnesses, the Love, and Mercy, and Peace of the Father unto them; He that can
receive it, let him, this is the Testimony of the Spirit of God, and it leads
into all Truth, and out of all Evil all that are guided by it; and it is given
to be the Guide and Rule of Life to the Children of God.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning Man, and all Mankind, this Testimony I give unto all Nations and
People.

MAN was created and brought forth in the Image of God, and was without sin or
evil brought forth, to do the will of him that created him, and was Lord over
all Creatures, to use them to the glory of the Creator, and all Creatures were
to serve him; but man transgresses against his Maker, and offended him; and
dishonored him, and became degenerate, and grieved his Maker continually, and
was drove out from the Presence of the Lord, and he is now a Child of
Disobedience, and of Wrath, and an Enemy in his mind against the Lord that made
him; and he is doing and fulfilling daily the will of the Devil, and grieveth
the Spirit of God, and vexes his righteous Soul, and is subject unto the Curse
of Woe and Destruction, being ignorant of the Life, and Power, and Wisdom of the
Creator, to lead him, to guide him, and to preserve him, but follows the
counsel of hisown heart, which is evil altogether, though he was made upright,
yet has he sought out many inventions, which are continually abominable unto
the Lord; the ground in which he stands is corrupted, and all his fruit is
unpleasant, even bitter and evil unto the Lords Taste. Man is fallen into the
Pit of Misery and Sorrow, compassed about with desolation, and is left without
a Helper from himself, or from any other Creature, and this in short is the
state of all mankind upon the face of the Earth, who was planted a noble Vine;
wholly aright Seed, to bring forth good fruit unto his Maker; but he is turned
into a degenerate plant, bringing forth cursed fruits which the Creator has
not pleasure in, his best works are not accepted, and his evil deeds are
condemned, because the ground in which he stands is accursed, because of
disobedience.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the World in general, and the state of things as they have been,
and as now they are, this Testimony I give to the whole World.

DArkness has been over the face of the Earth, and thick darkness has covered
the people for many ages, the Beast has reigned upon the face of the whole
Earth, and all Nations have been subject to his power and dominion, even the
Kings and Princes of the Earth have given their power unto him, all the World
has wondered after him, as it is written; and the whole World has worshipped
the Beast and his Image, he has power to kill all that would not worship him,
both small and great, rich and poor, even all have been subject to his
Government; and he has had power to war against the Saints, and to make war
with them, and to overcome them, even all that would not worship him he has
had power to kill. The Rule and Government of the SON of God has not been
witnessed among men for Ages, nor the true God known, nor manifestly worshipped
in Spirit and Truth; but he has been as a Stranger among men, and they have
been ignorant of his Ways and Judgments, and all People have been doing that
which is right in the sight of their own eyes, and God has been forgotten
days without number; the Living Fountain has been forsaken, and many broken
Cestern have been hewn out, which have not holden pure Water: Great Evils and
continual Abominations have been acted in the sight of God, and the measure of
iniquity has been fulfilling through many Generations, and it is grown nigh to
the full: The Law of God h^th been made void, and his Grace has been turned
into wantonness, and all things have been out of good order: Kings, Princes,
Rulers, Governments, Laws, and Decrees have been corrupt, and not right in the
sight of the Lord; Oppressions, Tyranny, and Vainglory has abounded in the
Nations, and Justice and true Judgment have been neglected, and Mercy and Truth
have been Strangers, and the World has been filled with violence, and the
whole Earth stained and polluted with Oppressions Injustice and Cruelties, and
the cry of the poor has not been heard, every one has sought themselves, and
not the Lord, nor the good one of another; the Kings and Princes of the Earth
have not been perfect nor upright before the Lord, but Vainglory has
abounded, and superstitions and Idolatries has reigned over them, and
unrighteousness has abounded, and Self-seeking; and they have risen up one
against another, in quarrelling and destroying one another, and to gain one
another Dominions by Craft, and Policy, and strong hand, and the poor have
been oppressed and trodden down, and thousands of thousands destroyed to fulfill
the wills, and lusts, and pride of their hearts, all this has been evil in the
sight of the Lord, and his soul has been weary with it, by the destruction of
his Creatures, one by another, even Rulers, Teachers, and people have all been
out of the Way, and subverted from that wherein God has pleasure; and the
Prince of Darkness has ruled in his dominion, swaying all under his
Government, and even all things, both of civil and spiritual concernment, has
been out of the Counsel of the Lord. Oh what cruel Injustice and Tyranny in
civil Government! Oh what abominable Superstitions and Idolatries have been in
(supposed) Church-governments! Its a vexation to the spirit of the Lord, to
consider it, and the Righteous soul has long cried out and mourned under it,
and because of this is the Lord of Heaven and Earth now risen to overturn, to
overturn Kings and Princes, Governments and Laws; and he will confound and
break down all Tyranny and Oppression, under which the poor have groaned; and
^e will change Times, and Laws, and Governments; there shall be no King ruling
but Jesus, nor no Government of force, but the Government of the Lamb, no^ no
Law of effect, but the Law of God, all that which is otherwise shall be ground
to powder; the Kingdom of the Most High shall rule amongst men, and the
Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ; and the Lord shall be known in the Earth, to be the
God of Truth, of Righteousness; Justice, and Mercy, and Truth shall be exalted,
and true Judgment shall be set up in the Nations, and the Worship in Spirit and
in Truth shall he established; for the Lord is gathering his numberless number
to stand before his Throne without Guile in their Mouths, and without Fault
before him.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning man's Restoration, Redemption and Salvation, what they are, and by
whom they are wrought, this Testimony I give unto all People.

Man's Restoration is a repairing and giving again that which he had lost by
transgression; and Redemption is a recovering, and a winning again, and setting
free from that wherein man has been held (even all the sons of Adam) because
of disobedience; and Salvation is a saving, keeping, and preserving from sin,
and death, and disobedience, and all the ways thereof, and also a saving from
wrath and misery and condemnation, which are the effects thereof; and by the
Son of God Christ Jesus is all this wrought, manifested and witnessed, and
Restoration, Redemption and Salvation is only in Christ Jesus, the second
Adam, and not in any other, and it is wrought by him, and by no other, and they
are the free gift of the Father unto the sons of men, no way purchased by the
works of the Creature, or desert of him, but are freely given unto the
Creature, through the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, and only by Jesus
Christ the Son of the eternal God, and by the eternal Spirit are they witnessed
in all that believe, and through the word of Life are they handled, tasted,
seen and felt, near at hand, in power, and not in words only. Many professes
them in words, and what others enjoyed of these things, but have not felt in
themselves the working of the eternal Spirit, neither have the witness in
themselves of being restored to God again, and of being redeemed by him from
under the Devils power, neither are saved by Christ from sin and transgression
and so are not, nor cannot be saved from condemnation and wrath, for who abide
in their sins, and in the state unreconciled to God, has not any part or
portion in these things which belongs to their peace; and without the knowledge
of which, by the working of the eternal Spirit, all mankind is everlastingly
miserable.

CHAP. VII.
Concering true Religion and the true Worship of the true God, this Testimony I
give unto the whole World.

THis is true Religion, to be kept pure and clean from all evil, and from all
that which would defile in the sight of the Lord, and to walk in his fear in
all things; this is Religion, to do good and to do no evil, and to speak the
truth, and to do the truth in all things, and to do unto all men as a man would
be done unto, and to love God withal the heart, and the neighbor as self, and
not to love the world, and ways and pleasures of it, nor to use deceit in words
or actions; this is true Religion, and the true Worship of God, to be led with
his Spirit in all things, and to be guided in the truth at all times, on all
occasions; this is acceptable, and well pleasing unto God, above all words, and
outward conformity, and set times, and days, and observances; for the Worship
of God is not in these things, but is without respect of days places, or
things; this Religion and Worship stands in Christ Jesus the second Adam, who
has lighted every man that comes into the World, that all men through him
might believe, and by him have their consciences purely exercised toward God
and toward man in all things whatsoever; and this is our Religion, and Worship
of the True God; he that can receive it, let him.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Justification and Sanctification, this testimony (...) give unto
all People.

JUstification is freely by Jesus Christ in the sight of the Father, and not by
the works of man's own righteousness, and such as are taught by Christ and
guided by him in all the ways of truth and righteousness, are justified by him
and none else, not in any word or work whatsoever, but in what they are led to
fulfill by him, and it is the new man that is justified, and not the old, he
that is born of God; and none that are born of the flesh, such cannot please
God, neither can such be justified by him, for they are not taught of him, nor
saved, nor restored, nor redeemed, and therefore are not justified nor cleared
from condemnation in the sight of the Lord; but who lives in iniquity, and sin,
and the ways and works of the World, which are evil, by Christ Jesus are
condemned, and not justified, though in words they profess him, yet of
justification by him they have no part: and sanctification is by the working of
the eternal Spirit in the heart of the Creature, which purges out and takes
away all unrighteousness, and all the works and fruits of darkness it
witnesses against, and witnesses unto Jesus, who takes away all sin and
destroys the works of the Devil, that man may be holy and pure in the sight of
his Maker; and every one that has the witness of his justification, has the
operation by the eternal Spirit of sanctification, and all that receives Christ
Jesus who has lighted every man that comes into the World, receives
sanctification and justification by him, and he unto us is made so of the
Father; he that can receive it le^ him.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and how it is to be set up, this testimony I
give unto all the World.

THE Kingdom of God, and of his Son, is not of this World, but is from above,
and stands in righteousness and in truth, in mercy and in peace, i^ true
judgment and justice, and this Dominion is from everlasting to everlasting,
and it reaches beyond all the World, and its Government is love and unity and
everlasting peace, and is perfect liberty to the Just, and binds and chaineth
the Unjust; in it there is on oppression, but perfect freedom from all
unrighteousness, and it consists not in word, but in power, to the bringing
down of the Kingdom of the Devil, and to the breaking off the bonds of all
injustice, and all ungodliness, which is the Kingdom of Satan, which has long
ruled i^ the World, that Kingdom whereof Christ is King, which stands in
Righteousness, no unclean thing can have any part therein, and this we believe,
it shall be set up and advanced in the earth, but not by might of man, or arm
of flesh, nor the multitude of an host, neither by policy nor craft, nor by
revenge, but by the arm of the Lord alone, through the suffering and patience
of his people, and by faithful witness bearing unto Jesus Christ by doing and
by suffering, by doing his Will in all things in a pure Life and Conversation,
and upright walkking in the sight of the Lord, and by patient suffering under
the injustice and oppression of men, and of their unjust Government and Laws,
till they be overturned and confounded: and further we give testimony, that
suffering in patience under the cruelty and oppression of the Devils government
and kingdom; more reaches to overthrow them, than the rising to rebel in any
way of outward offense toward them, or defense from them, and the Kingdom of
Christ is near to come, and the Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and
none shall have any part therein, but they that are redeemed out of kindreds,
tongues, and people: this we believe; he that can receive it let him.

CHAP. X.
Concerning Governors, and Governments, and Subjection to them, this testimony
I give to the World.

Governors, Rulers, and Magistrates we own, and do respect in the Lord; (and
yet cannot respect any man's person whatsoever) such as be a terror to all evil
in their Government, and that fears God and hates covetousness, and delights in
Equity, in Justice, and true Judgment, and gives diligent heed to try the
cause of the poor, and will judge justly, without respect of men, who justifies
the good, and gives praise to the Well-doer; such Government and Governors we
reverence, where Sin and Iniquity is kept under, Drunkenness, Swearing,
Murder, Quarrelling, and all the ways and works of the flesh are terrified,
and a Wel-doer praised and justified; this Government of men, reaches to the
witness of God in every man, and that answers to the justice and righteousness
of all such Governors and Government, and these witness that they are of God;
but the witness of God in every man, bears witness against all unjust men,
and Laws, and Rulers, and Governments, which strengthens the hands of the
wicked, and oppresses the just, where the making and execution of Laws are in
the power of proud men, and covetous men, who fears not God, neither hates
covetousness, neither does respect the cause of the poor, but rules by their
Wills and Tyranny, and not by just Laws in Righteousness; but makes unrighteous
decrees to oppress the poor and innocent, letting the wicked go free; such who
upholds unrighteous Worships and Teachers, by oppression, and causes the
Innoccent to suffer, and makes them Offenders, because the exercise of a pure
conscience toward God and men; such Rulers and Government we cannot be subject
to for Conscience sake, but do rather fulfull the Law and Will of God, though
we transgress their wills, and unrighteous laws, and yet does not rebel against
them, nor seek defense from them, but patiently suffers under them, and bears
their injustice and cruelty, without seeking any revenge, but leaves vengeance
to the Lord to whom it belongs; and this is our Judgment in full, the
Government and Laws which we cannot obey nor fulfill for Conscisake, we choose
rather to suffer under them for disobedience to them, than to transgress the
righteous Law of God, written in our hearts, by obeying them; so that what we
cannot obey for Conscience sake, for Conscience sake we resist not, but suffers
under that (the punishment of it) patiently, and herein are we subject to every
ordinance of man, for conscience sake: in fulfilling of the good, the just, and
righteous, and in patience suffering under the cruelty and oppression of the
unjust, and unrighteous, and this we do and teach every where, subjection to
every Ordinance of man, and are not destroyers of true Government, or
rebellious against just Governors, but are exalters of true Justice and
Judgment in the Earth.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the true Ministry of Christ and the false Ministry, and the
difference betwixt them, this testimony I give unto all the World.

THE true Ministry is sent of God, and is the gift of the holy Ghost, and it
stands in the Power of the Spirit of God, and not in the words of man's wisdom,
of that wisdom which is from below, and it brings people to the knowledge of
God, which is life eternal, and it turns people from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to the Power of God, it is freely received of God, and
freely given forth of us, it proclaims Peace on Earth, unto such as are of a
broken and upright heart, and it proclaims war against all the wicked upon
Earth; it is a good savor unto God in setting the way of life, and the way of
death, before all people; the Ministry of Christ is free, and cannot be bought
nor sold for money, it is without hire, and gifts, and rewards from any man,
which is given freely into the World, and it ever was and is persecuted by the
Generation of the unjust, and by the powers of the Earth; he that comes in the
Fathers Name cannot be received of the World, but the World is at enmity
against it, in this Generation, as ever was; it converts people unto the
Knowledge of God, and many did, and many do receive the Knowledge of God
thereby, though some thereby be hardened against God unto destruction, and the
Word of the Lord, and the Ministry returns not in vain unto God, but all by it
ar^ left without excuse, the Witness of Christ in every Creature being reached
to, which gives Testimony to the Power, and to the Truth of the Ministry of
Christ; but the false Ministers and Ministry are not such, for their Ministry
is received by natural Learning and Arts, and is not the Gift of the holy
Ghost, but stands in the wisdom of man's words, and not in the Power and Life of
God, it profits not the people at all, neither do any come to the Knowledge of
God thereby, neither is turned from Darkness to Light; but Teachers and people
continues in the power of Satan, and in the unconverted estate, the Witness of
God not reached to, to bring to the understanding of things which are eternal,
but people are ever learning by it, and never coming to the Knowledge of the
Truth; but the Blind leads the Blind, and like Teachers like People, all out of
the Way, given to Iniquity and unrighteousness, and such are they who preaches
for Hire, and divines for Money, and seeks for their gai^ from their Quarter,
and through covetousness, by feigned words, make merchandise of Souls, going
for Gifts and Rewards, and teaching for filthy Lucre having settled places and
so much a year, these are not the true Ministers of Christ, but false Ministers
of Autichrist and Deceivers, and were never sent of God, and do never bring any
to the Knowledge of Gods, and such we be^^ witness against to be of the Devil,
and that for many Generations the World has been deceived by them, who has
had the form of godliness, but not the Power, and Christ's words, and the
Apostles, words without the Life; and they have served themselves, and not the
Lord Jesus; but now they are made manifest with the true Light, which approves
the Ministry of God, and disapproveth such who are Ministers of Antichrist; and
all that are in the Light, and walk in the light can receive this testimony
which is given by the Spirit of God, to that Ministry which is sent of him,
which does fulfill his will, and against the false Ministry which is not of
God, which runs and was never sent of him.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the Gospel of Christ, this is my testimony unto all the World.

THE Gospel is the Power of God, and it is sent of him into the World to
reconcile people unto him, that have been in the enmity agai^^^ him, (...) is
Peace to the Poor in spirit, and judgment to the Fat, and to the high min^^^;
and it is to be preached to every creature (male and female) under Heaven
without respect of Peoples, Nations, or Generations, it is the manifestation of
the Love of God to the whole World, to gather people out of all
unrighteous^^^^, into the living Way of Life, Peace and Truth, to walk with God
in Purity and Holiness, and to deny the World and all its ways, and works, and
worships which are evil, and by it some are brought to God, and to salvation,
and life eternal, and some through it are hardened against God, that they may
be destroyed and condemned, who are Reprobates, and believes not in him from
whom the Gospel comes, and it cannot be received by any other way or means than
by the revelation of Jesus Christ in the hearts of his people, and many have
the letter which knows not the Gospel, nor has received it, and this Gospel
which is everlasting, have we received from God, and this is the sound of it
which we give in the World unto the World: Fear God, and give Glory to him, for
the hour of his Judgments is come, and this is the everlasting Gospel of
Salvation, he that can receive it let him.

CHAP. XIII.
Concerning the Word of God, and concerning the Scriptures, this testimony I
give unto all the World.

THE Word of God was in the beginning before any Creatures were made, and by it
all things stand and remain unto this day, and the Word endures, for ever, and
by it all things in Heaven and in Earth are brought to pass which God does, and
it is from everlasting to everlasting, without beginning and without end, and
the Word is powerful, dividing and discerning all things, even the secret
thoughts of every man's heart, it is as a two edged sword, and as a fire, and
like a hammer to cut up, to burn, and to beat down; the Word of the Lord
reconciles man again to him, and this Word is in the mouth and in the heart,
and the Servants of the Lord handled, tasted, saw and felt the Word of Life,
and from it spoke forth the Scriptures, as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
through the eternal Spirit, and it is an Declaration of the Word of Life, which
was in the beginning and endures for ever, and it declares what the Saints
received, believed, and enjoyed, and none can understand it without the same
Spirit that gave it forth, and to such who have the same Spirit the Scripture
is profitable; the Word of God, which was in the beginning, and which endures
for ever, is not the Scripture which was not in the beginning, neither can it
endure for ever, but the Scripture testifies of that Word, and that Word
witnesses to the Scripture, and they are not contrary one to the other, but
gives witness each of other, but many has the Scripture that has not the
Word, neither knows it; but they that have the Word cannot but own the
Scriptures, and this is the Truth as it is in Jesus, Testified to all the World
by us, who does deny them that hereof gives any other testimony.

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the Devil and Damnation, this Testimony I give to all People.

THere is a Devil which is out of the Truth, who abode not in the Truth, but is
a Liar from the beginning, and the father of all evil doing, and the author of
all unrighteousness, and whatsoever is contrary to God in thought, word, and
action; he is the enmity against God, and against all good, and by his power
subverts creatures and things to another end, than wherefore they were created,
even to the dishonor of the Creator; he is the god of this World, the prince
of darkness, and he rules King in all the childern of the first Ad^^, who are
in evil; he was the cause of the first transgression, and is the cause of
disobedience to God to this day in all people, who are led by him, moving a^^
them to Envy, Wrath, Pride, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Theft, and Murder, and all
the works of darkness, sin, and death; he is the Fountain and Root of (...)
these, and the Leader and Ruler in the exercise of them, and of every evil wo^^
and work whatsoever which are contrary to God; he abode not in the Tr^^^, and
he has led all mankind out of Truth, into all deceit and unrighteousness, and
into every evil way, and he dwells in darkness, and inhabits in thick darkness,
and is out of the Light, and is separate from the Presence of God for ever,
bo^^^ in chains of darkness and ignorance, and unbelief, and he has power in
the earthly part of man, and a law in the members, and he possesses him that is
born of the flesh, and his covenant is with him who is not born of the Seed of
God, who cannot sin, such are in covenant with God and renewed into his Image;
but such as are not, has the Divil power in, to captivate and lead their minds
into vanity, and their affections and desires into all that which is evil, by
which the Spirit of God, the Creator of all things is grieved, and his soul
vexed, and all murder, and deceitful works of the World, and all whatsoever is
contrary to God i^ words, thoughts, or actions is of the Devil, that wicked
one, and from him, and all that follow his movings, and works evil thereby,
they serve him, a^^ obey him; he is their god, and their King, and they are his
people, and hi^ subjects; he is their father, and they are his children; he is
their root, and they are his offspring, and brings forth fruit unto him, and
serves (...) worships him, and not the true God that made all things; and all
such (...) be cast into utter darkness with him, and shall have their portion
with him in (...) bottomless pit of darkness for ever and ever, where there is
no end of woe, an^ sorrow, and misery; for in the anger of God, there the worm
di^^ not, (...) the fire is not quenched, and out of that there is on
redemption for the ^^clean; and all such who are led of him who is out of the
Truth, and in evil, are judged, and condemned, and damned by him, who is the
Truth, who judges righteously; and as he has not ceased to work evil, and to
draw the children of men into evil, for he continually tempts to lead from
God into Rebellion against him. And they that are led by him are destroyed, and
he shall not cease sorrow, woe, and misery for ever, as he has not ceased to
work evil, he lives and moves in the anger of God, his beginning was in it,
and all his works are in it, and it shall be the reward of him, and all that
obey him in the separation from Gods everlasting Presence, for ever and ever.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning all creatures that God made, this Testimony I give unto all the
World.

ALL creatures that God made in their creation and beginning was very good in
his sight that made them, and unto man that was to use them, and no Creature
was evil or defiled in its Creation, but mankind transgressing against his
Maker, he become evil, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and he being
possessed with evil, and corrupted, he makes all Creatures evil in his exercise
of them, corrups them, and perverts them to another end than wherefore they
were created, and by the Creatures, dishonours the Creator, ^o should have
honored him by them, and they are become a curse unto man, and not a blessing,
though in themselves are neither cursed, nor evil, nor defiled, but is become
so unto man, because of his transgression and disobedience; for he being in the
curse and defiled, all things are so unto him, and in his exercise of them he
is wicked, abusing them upon the lust to satisfy his devilish mind, and
ruling over them in oppression and cruelty, and hard heartedness, and not in
the Wisdom of God, as he ought, and he subverts them out from their pure
virtue, feeding his lust in pride and voluptuousness, with that which should
keep him from hunger and nakedness, and so pleasing the lust in all things more
than satisfying pure nature, and this ought not to be, for it is out of the
Covenant of God, in which all Creatures were made, and in which they stand,
except the Creature man, who is degenerated out of Gods Covenant, and subverts
all things to his own end, and not unto the glory of God, while he continues in
that state unreconciled to God, but man being restored, and redeemed, and
renewed again into covenant with God, through the condemning of the evil, then
all Creatures to him are restored, and made blessed, the curse being removed
out of his own heart, the Creatures are no longer cursed to him, but good and
decent, and enjoyed, and received in the Covenant, of God in the life and
virtue by which they were created, and by the wisdom which they were made, man
comes to order them, and exercise himself in them, and no more are they spent
upon the lust, nor on the vain mind, nor ruled over in oppression, but all
that is condemned, and all Creatures are seen to be the Lords, and the Whole
Earth is his, and the fullness thereof, and the abuse of all Creatures is
ceased, and they are enjoyed in their pure virtue to feed and to cloth the
Creature, and not to be destroyed upon the lust, but for the healths-sake are
they used to the glory of of the Creator, and unto the end wherefore he Created
them, and are pure as they were in the beginning, and the blessing is felt
which is more than all creatures.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the new Covenant, and how man comes to the Knowledge of God, this
Testimony I give.

THE Covenant of God is Unity betwixt God and man, and a binding each to other,
to serve each other, the one is bound to obey, and submit, and worship; and the
other to bless, and keep, and lead, and perserve; this Covenant is established
with his own Seed for ever, and there is no Teacher but God, all is taught of
him, from the least to the greatest who are in this Covenant, his just Law is
written in their heart to condemn all transgression, and his pure Spirit is put
into the inward parts, to be the rule and guide of life in all things, and none
need to say, know the Lord, but all knows him in the Spirit, and worships him,
and obeys him: and follows him in Spirit, and in Truth, and such are come into
Peace and Reconciliation with God, and the Covenant with Hell and Death is
broken; and in this Covenant, there is no Priest, nor Offering, but Christ
Jesus the high ^iest of God, the one Offering for sin, he takes away sin and
makes intercession, and in it is no Temple, but our bodies are the Temple of
God, and he dwells in us, and walks in us, and there is no circumcision, but
the circumcision of the heart, which is the putting away of all the uncleanness
of the flesh, nor in it there is no means of salvation, but Christ the only
way the Truth and Life, and none comes to the Father but by him; he Declares of
the Father, and there is no Light but the Light of the Lamb; all that are Saved
shall walk in the Light of the Lamb, and there shall be no need of any other
light, no need of the Light of the Sun, nor of the Moon nor of Candle, but the
Lord is unto them an everlasting Light, and God alone is their Glory, and this
Covenant is for ever, and cannot alter nor change, but is sure unto the Seed of
his own Inheritance; but he that is born of the Flesh has no part in it, who
is shut out from the Knowledge of God, who is not known to the wisdom of this
World, which is Foolishness with God; and the Knowledge of God is received no
other way but only by the revelation of Jesus Christ, and by the Working of
the Spirit of the Father in the heart, he opens the blind Eye, and unstops the
deaf Ear, and changes the heart, and causes it to understand, and he removes
that which has stood in the way betwixt God and the Creature, which has
caused ignorance in the Creature, that the Lord could not be seen nor
perceived. Christ Jesus the second Adam Lights every man, and at Mankind that
comes into the World, with the true Light, but some hates the Light, and they
will not come to the Light, least their Deeds should be reproved, and their
Deeds are evil, and they are in a condemned State, and such cannot receive
Christ, nor the Knowledge of God, but such who love the Light with which Christ
has enlightened them, they bring all their Deeds to the Light, and walk in the
Light, and their Deeds are wrought in God, never to be condemned. And such as
loves the Light receives Christ, and the Knowledge of God, which is eternal
Life, and none comes to the Knowledge of God, and of Christ, any other way, but
through the Light of Christ, and by the Operation of the Spirit of God, and
evil is condemned out of the Heart, and the Heart is made clean by the Word of
God, and the Knowledge of God is received into the clean Heart, and not into
the impure; for without Holiness none shall see God, nor ever come to the
Knowledge of him, neither can the Knowledge of God be received by the
Traditions of men, or any outward Observance in the will of man, but only by
the Teachings of the eternal Spirit, is the living God known in the Creature.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning Faith, this Testimony I give unto the World.

FAith is the Gift of God, and by it Christ is received and enjoyed; it is the
Substance of things hoped for, and the very Evidence of things not seen, gives
the Creature to believe God in all what he has promised; all that which is
acted and spoken in it, is well pleasing unto God, and that which is done
without is sin; it is the strengh of the Creature to act for God, in all
things; It is that whereby the World is overcome, and all the Powers of Hell
and death; it is the Armor against the Devil, and the defense of all the
Children of God, by it they overcome all their Enemies, and through it they
reign over all the World, it carries through all Sufferings and Tribulations
with Joy and Patience: Faith is an Act of God in the Creature, through it Peace
and Righteousness, and the Crown of Life is received from God, by Faith all
things are received, that are received of God by any of his Children: He that
has Faith sees and feels the Lords Presence at all times, and through Faith we
do and suffer gladly for the name of Christ in all things; and this is thus far
our Testimony given by the Spirit of the Father, of those things of which we
have received the knowledge from God, who has given us his Treasure, and we
have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, even the knowledge of those things which
are Eternal, which is not our own, but the Lords, to give forth according to
his movings, and of those things have we Handled, Tasted and Felt.

CHAP. XVIII.
Concerning what Works are accepted of God, and what Works are not accepted,
brought forth by the Creature

WHatsoever work man is moved and led unto by the Spirit of God, and guided and
ruled in the practice of, to speak or act whatsoever, by the same Spirit (which
moves and leads into all the works of righteousness, and not into any evil)
this is acceptable in the sight of the Lord, and these works are well pleasing
to him: where the Lord goes before, and is the leader in all things; and this
man, and his works who is led with the Spirit of the Father, is justified and
accepted of God, and not for the Creatures sake, who respects not the person of
any, but for his own Name sake, because they are wrought in him through faith,
and is moved unto, and guided in by his own Spirit, and they arise from Gods
Righteousness revealed in the Creature, and not from the righteousness of the
Creature; for man being changed and replanted into the Living Vine, and the
Root being good, every work which springs forth from it, is good also, and
accepted of God, because the Root is so: But whatsoever works are brought forth
by any Creature, though the same, in appearance, which are accepted of God from
another, yet not being moved unto, nor guided in by the Spirit of the Father,
but brought forth in the will and wisdom of the Creature, which is from below,
and acted in imitation from the Saints words; these works are not accepted and
well pleasing unto God, but is offense unto him, and sin against him, even the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto him, and if a man come before
the Lord with thousands of Rams, and ten thousand of Rivers of Oil, and if he
give the fruit of his Body for the sin of the Soul, and cover the Alter with
tears, and is not led with a measure of Gods Spirit, none of all these works
are accepted; nor his Preaching, Praying, Baptism, nor Breaking of Bread, nor
any other Observances toward God whatsoever, are not good in his sight, but
evil, and to be contemned, and the Root from whence they spring; because man is
in the Enmity against him, and not changed out of the old Root, nor in that
state is not led with the holy Spirit of the Father; and the Root being Bad,
the Branches are evil; and none are accepted of God in any thing which they
perform toward him, but such as are in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, and such
are new Creatures: so that it is not for the Creatures sake that any work is
accepted of, or offense against God, but only for his Name sake, and because of
being guided, or not of being guided with the Measure of Gods Pure Spirit:
Therefore is man, and his works good, and accepted; or evil, and not regarded,
but condemned of God.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning man's state in the first Adam, before Conversion, and his state
after Conversion; and what Conversion is.

Man's state in the first Adam, in transgression, is a state of perfect enmity
against God, and Death rigns in every man, and he is possessed with Blindness
and Ignorance, and unbelief, and is wholly imperfect to receive the things of
Gods Kingdom, or to act any thing for God, acceptable to him; man in that state
is wholly Dead to God, and insensible of the Presence, and Power, and Life of
his Creator, for he is drove from God, and is not led by him; he has no power
to perform any good in the sight of God, but is possessed with evil, and led
into all evil continually; he is free from righteousness, and free to all evil,
being the servant of the Devil, and subject to him, and overcome of him every
moment, and is led by him to transgress against the Lord; his heart is unclean,
and out of it proceeds continually uncleanness, in all manner of words,
thoughts, and actions, which flow out of the corrupt Fountain, which grieve and
vex the Lord, and his Spirit, who is dishonored daily by man, through his
abuse of Gods Creatures, who is a Devourer and Destroyer of them, and not a
Preserver as he ought to be, who abuses them upon his Lust, and not to the
Glory of the Lord; he loves the Creature, and worships the Creature, and is
gone a whoring after the Creature, and has forgotten God, that made him, and
all things, and has lost his own dominion wherein he was set in his Creation;
and his state in his Transgression is cursed of God, and without the Peace of
God, it being in the enmity against him; and in all things he is wholly
unprofitable to his Maker, and only profitable to himself, and to the Devil;
and this in short is the state of every man in Transgression before Conversion;
but his state after Conversion is a State, more blessed; for man is changed,
and renewed, and translated by the Power of the Lord, through the working of
the eternal Spirit: Through Conversion, his Mind is changed and his heart is
renewed, the old is done away, and a new Heart is given, and all things are
become new, even every Word and Works, and every Intent and Purpose of his Mind
is converted into another end, and guided by another Spirit, than before his
Conversion; and man is again returned to God, into the Sense and Feeling of his
Maker, and into Covenant with him, where he is blessed, and all things to him;
for the Reconciliation is made with God, and the evil is judged and condemened,
and Sin is taken away, and blotted out, and not remembered: For man is become
Servant unto God, and only serves him in all things, and not himself or any
other Creature in any thing, for he has received Power to become Son to God,
and has received Power over the Devil and his Temptations, and Death is
destroyed, and the effects of it are ceased, and the Sting of it is taken away,
and Life and Immortallity is brought to Light, and man is made capable to act
in all things, for the Glory of his Maker; and God has made Christ Wisdom to
him, to rule him and guide him in all things, and Righteousness, to cover him;
and Justification to him, to clear him in his Sight; and the new Man is brought
forth, and the creating in Christ Jesus unto good Works is known, and the Birth
which is Heir of Gods Kingdom is witnessed; and unto this man is the Lord
become an everlasting Light, and a sure hiding Place; for he is not the Servant
of Sin, but of Righteousness, nor an offense to God in any of his Works, but
for his Names sake is well pleased, with him; he is his Teacher in all the ways
of Peace, he is his Helmet, and his Shield, and his hope of Salvation, and his
Shepherd to feed him and perserve him at all times; though he may be tempted,
yet he is not overcome, for God is his strength; though he may be tried, yet he
is not forsaken of the Lord; though he may be cast into the Fire, it is not to
consume him, for the Lord is with him; all things he receives as from the Hand
of God, and all Creatures he enjoyes in the Covenant with God, and Peace is in
all his ways, for it is the Lord that works in him both to will and to do of
his own Good Pleasure; and this is the state of the new man brought forth in
Conversion, which is a turning of the Creature from the power of Satan (which
rules in every man, before Conversion) to the Power of God which is the Ruler
of every man that is truly converted; and this is the Truth as it is in Jesus,
which I have received from God, he that can receive it let him, and if any have
an Ear let him Hear what the Spirit says; this Conversion of the Creature is
wrought by the Spirit of God through the Ministry sent of him, and even for
this cause have we received the Ministry of God through the Holy Ghost, that we
might publish these things abroad, that all people may come to the knowledge of
them, and may taste, and handle, and feel of the same Word of Life in
themselves, which will reveal the Knowledge of these things to them, that they
may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and
with the Son.

And now be it known to all the World, and to all people in it, that the Lord
has raised up a People, and brought forth a Seed, to bear witness of his Name,
and of his Dominion, and Power in all the Earth, and of these Truths, with many
more, which are but one in Christ Jesus, has God given us the perfect
Knowledge of, even wrought them in us, and revealed them to us by the eternal
Spirit, and as that same Spirit does, and shall move in us, do we, and shall we
bear witness of these Truths unto all People upon Earth whatsoever, both by
Doctrine and Conversation, holding forth the Testimony unto others which we
have received of God, that Christ may be exalted, and his Kingdom set up in the
World: And in comparison of this, that we may serve God in our Generation, by
bearing witness of these things, which we have heard and seen, nothing of this
World, (our Liberty, our Life, not any other thing whatsoever) is dear unto us;
yea, even for this cause that the Name of the Lord may be testified of, do we
give up our selves continually to suffer all manner of evil in words or works;
and we love not our lives unto death, that Truth and Righteousness may be
exalted, and this is the cause wherefore we pass through many Dangers on every
hand, and are in perils often; and we are not, nor cannot be afraid of the face
of any man, even that the Lord alone may be exalted, whose name, and Honor,
and Truth is more dear unto us than any other thing; and for it have we
forsaken all, and counted it as nothing, in comparison of the Knowledge of
Christ and his Truth, herein declared and witnessed to the whole World, to whom
it shall come, and the Light of Christ in every one shall give testimony to it,
unto which I do only commend my self and these truths to be witnessed.

And know ye assuredly that God who is just and righteous in all his Ways, it
is he that sets the Way of Life and the way of Death before every man, and
he has appeared in this Generation, and he has caused his voice to be heard
in the Earth, and he has set the way of Death and the Way of Life before you,
and all that perish it is through unbelief; and because they do despise the Way
which God has prepared, who has prepared a Way for life and Salvation unto
(...) People, that all may come to Life and Salvation, and may not perish; and
he has not shut out any Creature before he was brought forth into the World,
but gives to every one that comes into the World, a Day of Visitation and a
time (...) Repentance, and Returning, that healing may be received from the
Lord, w^^ is the Restorer of lost man, and there is not another; so that if man
perish (...) is of himself, and not of God, who has so loved Mankind, that he
has give^ his Son, his own Wisdom and his Power, into the World, that all that
does receive him (Christ Jesus) may have everlasting Life, and they that
receive him not, they perish because of unbelief, whereby they are hardened for
destruction; and unto such our Gospel, the Gospel of God, is hid, whose Eye i^
blinded by the God of this World, that they cannot see the things which be
eternal, nor believe in him from whence Life comes, and such are stumbling at
Christ the Foundation, and therefore shall be broken, and must not inherit the
Kingdom of God; and unto such though they be wise in the Kingdom (...) this
World, are we become Fools for Christ's sake, and our Testimony cannot be
received by them, nor approved of them, even them that seek after a Sig^ and
them that seek after Wisdom, to such we are not known, nor can our Testimony be
acceptable to them, which is not with enticing words of man's wisdom, (...) in
the demonstration of Gods Spirit, and in simplicity of Truth, which is of gr^^^
Price with the Lord, even above knowledge, and all wisdom which is of this Wor^^
which comes to nothing; but the Lord will confound that, and bring it to
nothing; for the World by its wisdom does not know God, neither can it recei^^
the things of God, but is Foolishness in the Sight of God, and the wisdom of
t^^ World Must be offended in him, and in the Testimony which is given of him,
(...) the Princes of this World, and the Wise men must stumble and fall, the
power of the Earth must be offended at him, that they may be confounded and
broug^^ to naught; all the Heathen shall rage, and the People shall imagine a
vain thing But what of all this? the Testimony of the Lord is true which he
has given us (...) bear of his Name, and of it we are not ashamed before the
face of the whole World and we are armed to suffer for it, and not only to
subscribe to the truth of (...) with our hand, or to declare of it with our
Tongue and Pen; but also, if we (...) called to it, may seal it with our blood:
Wherefore this is sent among you all Rulers, Teachers, and People, in all the
World, this is sent among you, as to gi^^ you the certain knowledge of what we
hold, and bear witness to, which is received of us from God, and born witness
of, to you, by his Spirit, even those things with many others, which we have
not received from man, but from God, are (...) purposed in the Lord to declare
abroad, and he has put it into our hearts to (...) his Will herein; for he
has spoken, who can but prophecy; and he has given (...) word, and many are
they that publish it in faithfulness against the kingdom (...) the Man of Sin,
which has long been exalted in the Earth over the Seed of (...), which the
Lord is now a gathering, and establishing his Covenant with, and Jerusalem that
has long lain waste, shall be made the praise of the whole Earth, (...) the
Gentiles, which has polluted her, shall be cast out, and the Saints shall
Rejoy^^ over all their Enemies.

And know you assuredly from us, who know the Lord, that God is doing gre^^^
things in the Earth; he is begun to work, and his arm shall bring it to pass;
he will overturn, and overturn, till he come to reign whose right it is, who
will change times and things, even that which cannot be believed, though a man
declare it unto you, is the Lord bringing to pass; the Eye shall bless that
sees it, and the Heart shall praise that can understand, and behold the Lord
comes quickly, and they are blessed that wait for him, whose Reward is with
him, and his glorious Work is before him to be wrought by his own hand without
the help of any other; who needs not the help of man; and he that does oppose
him, shall be overthrown, confounded, and destroyed.

And again, All ye Kings, Princes, Rulers, and People whatsoever, know ye
assuredly that we are not Enemies against, but Friends unto all Civil
Government, and to all just and righteous Orders and Decrees, and wholesome Laws
and Customs of any Commonwealth, and no way are we destructive to, or
Destroyers of the Peace, and Welfare, and wholesome Laws (which is according to
God) of any Nation whatsoever. But are Preservers of the Peace of all people,
and wait in patience for the establishment of Justice and true Judgment; and
that Righteousness may spring forth, and the Government of all Nations may be
according to the Law of God. Neither are we such who makes void the just
Government of any Nation or City: Neither are we such who through evil
purposes, plot, or conspire, or contrive Evil in our Hearts against any
Governors or Government whatsoever; but wish Peace and Truth, and the Fear of
the Lord unto all men and Nations, and desire not the overthrow or evil to any
people, or their Government: but are subject to just Government everywhere by
obedience to it; and subject to evil Government by suffering in patience under
it; so that righteousness alone we wait to see set up through the World, and
for that cause suffer patiently under our Enemies, not seeking revenge against
them, nor envying the persons of any; but pity our enemies, and desire their
Repentance rather than their Destruction: Yet this we give all to know, that
the Lord will be avenged on all them who hate the Way of Righteousness, and all
that oppose the Lord and his Way, and despise his Truth which he has revealed;
they shall be confounded and broken to pieces, and shall confess to the Lord,
and his Way, and his Truth in the day of their Destruction.

Again, let all the Earth know, that against all unrighteousness, injustice,
oppression, whoredom, murder and drunkenness, and all sin whatsoever; we do
declare and acknowledge our selves to be Enemies against all sin, and they that
commit it, and we cannot hide Sin and Iniquity in any, but give our testimony
against it, and against all, that live in it, whatsoever, without Respect to
men or places, and cannot flatter any man in his Transgressions, but say, that
Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Covetousness, Jniustice, Dissimulation,
Hypocrisy, Murder, and Envy, Lust of the Flesh, Pride and Wantonness, and all
the works of the Flesh whatsoever, are contrary to God, and of the Devil, and
they that lives in them, and brings them forth, are the Servants of the Devil,
and must not inherit the Kingdom of God, who brings forth those works, which
grieves the Spirit of God, and vexes his righteous Soul; and this is that
Government only, which is the Government of Sin and Death, which we declare
our selves Enemies to, which is of the Devil, and not of God; and this is that
Government which we testify against, and war against, by the Sword of the
Spirit of God, and by his Power, and not by the carnal weapons, or subtle
conspiracies, or violent Insurrections, for this way, and by this means, shall
not the Government of Satan be overthrown, or the Kingdom of Christ ever
exalted.

Again, let all the World know, that we are not such as disanul, or makes void
the Covenant, and bond of Relations, or teach any so to do, or give any
example, by our practice, to any subjects to be rebellious to their Governors;
or children, to be disobedient to their Parents; or that servants be undutiful
to their Masters. But on the contrary, do say, and affirm it, that it is the
duty of Subjects, to be obedient, and subject in the Lord to their Rulers and
Governors, whether Kings, Dukes, or others, who have rule over them; and also,
that Children should be obedient to their Parents; and Servants to be dutiful,
and subject to their Master in the Lord, in all things; and that Husbands and
Wives live in all unity and peace in the Lord: Provided only, where Rulers
Parents, or Masters, or Husbands require of their Subjects, Children, or
Servants, or any other whatsoever, requiring of their Relations, that which is
unjust, and contrary to God, and his righteous Law; in such a case we say, that
Subjects, Children, Servants, and all other whatsoever are free, and we say,
where man requires any thing contrary to God, and God requires another thing
contrary to man, the obedience to God is rather to be chosen, and the obedience
to all m^ is to be denied; and this is our judgment, which is acording to
truth, and i^ the mind of God concerning subjection and obedience, and the duty
of Relations one to another.

And lastly, Know ye assuredly, that we do not hold and maintain any thing, by
conversation or doctrine, but the very same Truth in word and practice, (...)
all our Forefathers did, but bears witness of the same Salvation, by the same
Christ, as they did, and are not setters forth of strange gods; for no other
God is worshipped by us than he, which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the
rest of the servants of the Lord in every generation worshipped, served and
obeyed; neither are we such as do maintain Heresy, Error, or Idolatry, or the
worship of any strange god, though hereof we are accused falsely, yet against
us cannot it be proved truly; and this we give the whole world to know, that no
other end, or purpose, or design is in our hearts, but only to fulfill the will
of God in all things, as it is to us made manifest. Even this is the resolution
of our hearts, and the full purpose of our minds, to give testimony through the
World, as we are moved, both by writing and declaring of these Truths which to
us is known from the Lord, that truth and righteousness may come to reign; and
this may we do (...) the Lord provideth way for us, not fearing the face of any
man, nor being afraid of the threatening of high looks; and that we may finish
the testimony given (...) of God, our life, nor any other thing is dear unto
us; and all ye people every where, for your sake is this written, to come
abroad amongst you, to give yo^ warning, and true information of the work of
the Lord, and what he is about to do, that you may hear, and understand, and
may receive the knowledge (...) those things which belong to your peace, and
may be saved with an eternal Salvation; or otherwise, through this are you
wholly left without excuse, if yo^ perish: And unto this was I pressed in
spirit for many days, that all the World may be satisfied, what we are, and
what we hold, and what the purpose of the Lord is; and I whom God has warned,
do warn all people upon the face of the Earth, that you prepare, prepare to
meet the Lord, for his coming, and his day is nigh at hand, and his judgments
shall be revealed in the Earth, and all flesh shall tremble before him, and all
the Inhabitants of the World shall be confounded at his presence; The Proud
shall be abased, and the Poor shall be exalted; the High and Lofty shall be
brought down, and the Meek and Upright shall be set up; Truth shall reign as
King, and Deceit shall utterly be confounded; they that now suffer all manner
of evil, for the Name of Jesus, shall possess everlasting Freedom, and the
Dominion shall be in their hands, and they that now cause the Just to suffer,
shall go into endless captivity; the Seed of God shall spring forth and
flourish, but the seed of Evildoers shall never be renowned: And betwixt these
two Seeds is an e^mity put, and they can never be reconciled, each seed has
his fruit, the one i^ cursed and the other is blessed, and each Seed is known
by its fruit, and must receive from the Lord accordingly.

And this is the Testimony of the Servants of the Lord, and the Witness which
they give unto all the World, of those things which we have handled, tasted,
heard, seen and felt; blessed are all they that can receive it.

We are known to God in the Spirit, and one to another in his Life, and are
known in the World by the name of Quakers, cast upon us through the derisio^ of
the Heathen.

But Quaking and Trembling at the Word of the Lord, by the Servants of the
Lord, we do own, when the power of God reaches to the Witness of God in the
Creature, which brings condemnation upon all high looks, and upon the lofty
nature, which causes the earthly part to tremble; we do own, and many of us do
witness, the Quaking and Trembling which is by the operation of the Spirit of
God, and the several operations by the one Spirit we own: which brings down
proud flesh, whose honor God will lay in the dust, and bring it to everlasting
contempt, and when this comes to pass Quaking shall not be a strange thing, nor
the Name reproached, as it is at this day by the proud spirits of men, who
knows not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his Spirit.

Moreover, and beside all this, let all the World know, that our Conversion,
Life and Practice is one and the same with what we hold forth in words, and
that we give as large a Testimony of God amongst us, by pure Conversation, as
Doctrine, and do deny them who gives Testimony in Words only, and answers not
in their Conversation, for that is Hypocrisy, and our souls loath it; and it
is abomination in the sight of the Lord, where he is professed in words, and not
walked to in purity and righteousness of life; for Righteousness being brought
forth in the heart, works of righteousness will spring forth in the World, and
where Righteousness springs not forth in the World, and the fruits of the
Knowledge of God, it shows that righteousness is not in the heart, and that God
is not known.

Also concerning our Government, it is according to Christ, whom we own to be
Head amongst us, and no other head we have, or do bow unto, and we are but
Members of his Body, joined to him, through the Spirit, as Head over us all,
and the greatest of us, is but a Member of Christ, who is the Head alone; and
we have not another, neither can we be subject to any other Government, but
his, or to obey any Government, but what is justly according to his, whose
Government must be set up in the earth, and for it we wait, and labor, and
travel, and counts nothing hard, but all things are easy to us, for this prise
which is before us, even the Government of Christ to be set up, and all
Governments of men established according to it; and this is our Testimony which
we give forth in Words and Practice, and if it be required can Seal it with our
Blood.

And this is written for no other end, but that you may be certainly informed,
what we are, and what we hold, and what the Lord has done, and what he is
about to do in all the Earth, who is risen and has said, Ah! I will ease me of
my Adversaries.

Given forth by a Servant of the Lord, EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE Woeful Cry OF Unjust Persecutions, and grievous Oppressions of the People
of God in England, through the Injustice of some of her Rulers, and the
Wickedness of Teachers and People, who hasten to fulfill the Measure of their
Forefathers Cruelty. With a Lamentation over them all who reward the Lord evil
for good, and is a Warning to them all for Repentance; showing that the coming
of the Lord is nigh. And this may serve for an Answer in full, to all such who
have Persecuted by violence, by Word or Writing the innocent people in scorn
called Quakers. With a Short Addition, which shows unto all, the ground of
Persecution, in its first cause, and the enmity which is betwixt the two Seeds
is clearly discovered.
Reader,
THis is sent abroad into the World, that all People may see what is brought
forth is this Generation against the Innocent; who suffer cruel things for well
doing, and not for evil; and the words of Christ are fullfilled, who said, As
they have done unto me, so will they do unto you: And the time comes, that
whosoever kills you he will think that he does God good service. And this is
now come to pass, according as he has said, to our rejoicing, and to the
sorrow of all our Enemies. And as any is moved herein, this is to be given to
the hands of the Persecuters, and of them who have done evil against the Lords
People, as a gift unto them from a Friend.


OF a truth the Lord is arisen, and he has caused the Light of his countenance
to shine forth upon his people, his day is dawned, and the brightness of his
glory is shining forth as the Sun at noon day, h^ everlasting Arm is stretched
forth to lead out of Captivity his o^ chosen, the days of perfect freedom is
approaching, he that brings Health, Peace and Liberty to all Nations is come
and coming, who will restore the breaches, and subdue all things under himself,
that he may reign for ever and ever, who alone is worthy (for he has all Power
in his hand, and he bring^ to pass whatsoever he will, that all Men and Nations
may fear before him, and tremble at his dreadful Presence, who has power in
his hand) to change Tim^ and Laws, Orders, Decrees and Governments, the hearts
of all men he c^ turn what way he lists, and he pulls down one, and sets
up another, and whatsoever is in his heart to do, his power can bring it to
pass: who would not fear before him and reverence his Name? Who would not be
afraid to offend him? who gives unto man Breath and takes it away in a moment;
all Nations are as the drop of a bucket before his eternal Eye, he dwells in
the high and holy place, and his habitation is high above the World; be
inhabits eternity forevermore, and yet abides, and walks, and dwells with
the children of men, that fear his Name and tremble at his Word; he has been
as a stranger, as one not known, for men have been separated from him by
transgression, and have been ignorant of his ways; he has been as one hidden
for many ages, and has been worshipped ignorantly, and has winked in the time
of ignorance, but now he calls all to repentance every where: Blessed are
they that wait upon him, that they may know him, and their souls may live, and
now the purpose of his heart, is to bring in his scattered people into the fold
of peace, where Christ Jesus is the shepherd, and his people shall dwell in
safety, and shall be a free people, to worship him, in the Spirit and in the
Truth, and every yoke of bondage shall be broken, and the oppressed shall be
set free, and Christ shall feign, and his Government, above shall be
established over all the World, man's honor shall be laid in the dust, and the
pride of all flesh shall be stained, and the Glory thereof shall wither as a
flower, the loftiness of all flesh shall be laid low, and the Lord alone shall
be exalted, and his people, which now are oppressed, shall replenish and fill
the Earth: All corrupt men and Rulers their strength and might shall utterly
fail them, and men that fear God and love righteousness shall take their place,
and all things shall be changed, and the World shall be turned up-side down.

But because of this is all the World troubled, and the Heathen is on a rage,
and the people do imagine vain things, and men of high degree, and low degree,
and of all sorts, have set themselves against the Lord, that they might stop
the purpose of the most high, and their hearts within them burn because of
envy, and the Devil has stirred up all sorts of people to work for him, and to
uphold his kingdom and his power, he is come down in great rage, knowing that
his time is but short, and has filled the hearts of all his servants with
despite and ravening envy against the Seed of God.

The heads of the people, they have conspired together against the Lord, and
against his Truth; and have decreed unrighteous decrees, that they might
pervent the purpose of the most High. Many of the Rulers and Judges, as members
of the beastly power, rather than of Jesus Christ, have unjustly judged and
falsely imprisoned and trodden under foot the meek and upright, who fear the
Lord, and walk in his way; even such who have come from under the subjection of
the worship and power of the Beast, (which all the World had wondered after)
^ath the Beast raised his force against. How many hundreds in this Nation have
been imprisoned falsely, and suffered grievous abuses unjustly for righteousness
sake, and not for evil doing, as a testimony against this Generation of Judges
and people, and for a testimony that they are of God, who have in pa^ience born
the sufferings, and the cruelties of the wicked; many have suffered ^he loss of
Liberty and riches, and some the loss of life, for the exercise of a ^ure
conscience toward God, and for the Kingdom of Jesus; many have ^uffered under
the power of wicked men, for declaring against sin and iniquity, (...) Towns,
Steeple Houses, or high ways, and for crying against pride, and ^anity, and
idolatry, and coveteousness, and the wickedness of Rulers, Priests, and People,
whose deceits and transgressions has abounded in this Generation; and others
have deeply suffered grievous cruelties, because they could not swear and
respect persons with hat or knee, and so were witnesses for the Lord and his
Kingdom, which stands in righteousness; and against the power and kingdom ^f
the Beast, which stands in iniquity, in fainedness and flattering titles, and
^isobedience to the Son of God, and many hundreds are woeful unjust and
op^ressed sufferers at this day, by false imprisonment and spoiling of goods,
because they cannot pay Tithes, that abominable and crying oppression, by which
the Beast chiefly maintains his false Prophets, and because the unchangable
Priesthood is witnessed, and the changable denied, and Christ the Light of the
World followed, therefore is this suffering laid upon the just, and many are
sufferers under hard tasks, because they cannot maintain the Idol temples, and
Idol worships, and Idol Priests, which the power of Antichrist upholds against
the Power of the Son of God, and against the new Covenant of life, where God in
Spirit and in Truth is worshipped without respect of places, days, or men, or
things; and the True Worshippers, they Worship God in the Spirit and in the
Truth, and cannot be subject to days, places, or things, appointed and ordained
by the power of men and false prophets; and how many unjust fines and false
indictments have been most illegally charged upon the Innocent, in many Courts
and Judicatories through this Nation, and all in the defense of the kingdom of
the man of sin; lest his authority should be abated, and the Authority of
Christ Jesus exalted; many cruelties have been done, and injustice acted both
by Rulers and People, against such which no evil could justly be charged
against, nor yet the transgression of any just law, by any one of them; O!
horrid grievances and cruel oppressions has been brought forth in this Nation,
by such who should have eased the oppressed, and set at liberty the captives,
such who should have judged justly the cause of the Poor, and heard the call o^
the oppressed, have turned judgment backward from the Poor, and equity ha^
found no place to enter, but Truth has fallen in the streets, and justice a^
mercy have perished from among men, and the Poor has been oppressed, a^ they
that have departed from iniquity have been made a prey to the mouths (...)
devouring Lions, for some of the Judges have been as ravening Wolves, and (...)
greedy devouring Foxes, the Lambs of Christ have been chased by the wicked, and
his power, for their lives; O how have the oppressed groaned in this Nation
under false judgment? to Ages and Generations for ever, may it be record^ for a
witness against this Generation of cruel hearted men, whom the Beast a^ false
prophet has raised in his defense, and against the Kingdom of Christ Je^ and
them that follow him, how full have the most part of the prisons in all the
Land been with guiltless Sufferers under cruel bondage, with unjust dealings;
a^ false judgments, have gone forth from some of your mouths, you that h^ been
set to judge over the people, who should have been a terror to the wicked, but
have rather strengthened the hands of Evildoers, and been a terror to
righteousness, so much as is possible, the great Whore which sits upon the
Beast, (...) made your Rulers drunk and stagger with envy, and hatred, and
persecution, a^ works of wickedness against the upright; Woe is me for you, what
have yo^ brought sorth? even iniquity by Decrees, and Injustice by Ordinances,
a^ false Judgment by Laws; alas, alas, your Destruction comes as an arm^ man
upon you, Was ever the like heard, or any persident in any Generati^ before
you, for imprisoning Just men, for declaring against sin and the abominations
of the times, as you have done many; and for imprisoning men because they
cannot put off their Hats to you, and Respect your Persons, and (...)
transgress the Law of God, and because they cannot Swear, and so break Chr^
Command? For this you have imprisoned many, and caused them to su^ because of
this; may not you fear and tremble before the Lord God, a^ your faces gather
blackness at this, when you consider it? Did ever any t^ were set to judge in
the Earth among men so abuse their power, and subvert (...) so quite to another
End than wherefore it was committed to them? May (...) Shame cover you all, to
commit men to Prison for the exercise of pure Conscience toward God, because
they cannot Swear, or respect men's Persons, or maintain Idol-Shepherds, and
Idol-temples and Worships, which are Abominatio^ to the Lord; and for taking
peaceable men out of peaceable Meetings, and out of their Travel on the
Highways, and first Whipping them, and sending them to Prison, the example of
this which you have done, never went before in any Age, and therefore have you
exceeded in Oppression, in Injustice, in Cruelty and false Judgment; all your
Forefathers the Pope nor Bishops, hardly ever brought forth such things; but
the Lord will reckon with you, and plead the Cause of the Oppressed against all
you Oppressors; yea, and will give unto you a Recompense of Reward according to
your works; ye that have exalted your selves against the innocent, shall be
brought down to the dust of misery, and the Saints shall reign and rejoice over
you, when the Kingdom of Christ Jesus the Lamb shall be set up over you all,
and your Beastly power dashed to pieces as a Potters Vessel, when he whom you
have persecuted, and his Followers, shall rule with a Rod of Iron, and break
you asunder; and this shall surely come to pass, therefore consider it, ye that
thus deal in your anger against the Lord and his chosen, for the Lamb shall get
the victory over the Beast, and over you all that seek to defend him, and that
strive under his power; for they that are with the Lamb are Called, and
Faithful, and Chosen: O! therefore be awakened, be awakened, ye Heads; and
Judges, and Rulers of the People, remember and repent, the Lords Hand is
stretched forth against all Oppressors, and his Wrath is kindled against the
wicked One and his power, to overthrow his dominon which long has reigned in
the Nations, and now though he seeks to defend himself against the Lamb and his
Followers by injust dealing, yet the outstretched Arm of the Lord shall bring
deliverance to his Chosen, who have been made Havoc upon, in their Liberties,
and in their estates, some cruelly suffering in Prison, and others by spoiling
of their Goods, and none of these for Evil-doing, but upon false Suspicions,
and envious Jealousies, and secret Surmisings, without any ground of occosion
given; but by Wickedness have many of you sought occasion to make Offenders, by
laying Snares for the Feet of the Harmless and Innocent; you have made men
Offenders for a word, and perverted innocent words and actions, that you might
make to your self a ground to persecute, and have sought a Cloak to cover your
Cruelty in the sight of men, but naked and bare are your hearts made manifest
in the Sight of the Lord, who has looked down from Heaven, and considered
these things, and has regarded the unjust sufferings of his people whose
Liberties, and estates, and good names have been spoiled through injustice, by
grievous burdens laid upon some, because they could not pay Tithes (that
heinous oppression) to satisfy the unmercifullness of cruel men; and many
suffers at this day, unjustly in the sight of God, and illegally also in the
sight of men; and some suffer the spoiling of their goods, rather by way of
robbery and theft, than by just execution of judgment in proceeding of just
Law; this can largely be witnessed, and this is brought forth by subservant
Officers to you that are set to judge, and you to them are evil examples, and
strengtheners of their malicious hands, some of them are not ashamed to take
six times the value of what is unjustly claimed for the use of a false Teacher
and deceitful Hireling who rides upon the Beast, and make you their servants to
oppress the Poor, to uphold them and maintain them in their pride and vanities,
but the Lord has considered these things, and he has numbered the oppressions
against you, wherewith the just have been grieved and oppressed under you, he
has counted this cruelty and recorded all your unjust dealing, which you have
(or suffered to be) brought forth, yea the day of account hastens and the term
draws near upon you, wherein the just and righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth
will call you to account who will plead the cause of the Poor, and of the
unjust sufferer, and oppressed, against all you Oppressors; for the cry of the
Innocent against you, and the begging of the Poor is heard, which calls for
vengeance upon you. In the Record of justice, what account will you give to the
Highest-power, who rules over Heaven and Earth, for imprisoning just men for
crying against sin, and declaring against the wickedness of this Age; this
shall be proved against you in the day of the Lord; Is your answer ready, or
will not your mouths be stoped and you speechless, when righteousness it self
pleads against you? And what can you plead for fining men, and imprisoning
them, for not respecting your persons, and bowing with hat and knee, and
because they could not swear; this has some of you done; will you have any
thing to say in the cause of these things, when Christ Jesus comes to reign and
his Saints with him, unto whom the government and the authority, and rule shall
be given: though now they are persecuted, and as the refuse of men accounted by
you, unto whom they are become a prey, to act your oppression and cruelty upon;
and because they render nor evil for evil, therefore is the impudency of some
men the more increased, and their hardness of heart enlarged; and because
judgment is not speedily executed, therefore are the hearts of some men set in
them to do evil. O! what a sad reckoning in that day, and what large
indictments and verdicts for your oppression, will be read against you, and
proved to be just in the sight of God and men; a sad thing will it be upon you,
when laid to your charge by the Lord, for causing men to suffer because they
could not swear, nor respect persons, nor uphold the deceits of false Worships
and Teachers, nor cease to cry against sin, in your Towns and Steeple Houses.
O! be stirred up out of your security; you Heads, and Rulers, and Judges, and
Officers, even all you be awakened who have turned your sword against the
peaceable, and been a terror to righteousness as much as you could, which you
ought not to have been, and so your power you have abused, and subverted it to
another end than wherefore it was committed to you: instead of defending the
upright you have offended him; and instead of being a terror to the wicked, his
hand, has been strengthened through your wicked presidents; this is the truth,
as the Light in all your consciences shall witness in the day of the Lord; O!
how has justice and true judgment been neglected, and oppression and cruelty
abounded, the like in Generations past has not been known, but the Lord is now
arisen, and has said, I will ease m^ of my Enemies, and take vengeance upon my
Adversaries, who have done wickedly against him and his people, till the
patience of the Lord is near an end, and his long suffering finished, and his
judgments will he make known upon his Enemies in this Generation, that Ages to
come forever may be warned not to oppress the Innocent, as these have done by
false accusations, and unjust judgments, and wicked proceedings; and because of
it, the wrath of the Lord is kindled, and his viols of indignation shall be
poured upon the Beast, and upon the false Prophet; and all their power shall be
smitten in one day.

And O what wickedness has abounded in the people also, to help up the measure
of the Rulers sins, that they may receive their recompense together; how have
the people of all sorts abused the innocent lambs of Christ, whom he has
called? What beatings, and stonings, and bruisings, and other abuses, in Towns,
and Highways, and Steeple Houses; its hard to be expressed, and large to be
declared: some have been wounded nigh unto death, others bruised till blood
have gushed out, and others cast down in the dirt, and punched with feet, and
trodden upon, and many have been in danger of their lives; some have been
knocked down with staves, and their cloaths-rent, and their hair torn off their
heads; and some have been pursued after, with throwing stones and dirt at them;
and many haled, and tumbled, and lugged, and hurried up and down in cruel
manner, to the danger of life, and oppression of the creature; and others have
been whipped, and lashed, and put into cruel torment of their Bodies, by Engines
framed of purpose to torment the Bodies of the harmless, as Chester and Carlisle
may witness; and others have been haled before Rulers, and falsely slandered to
the taking away of life, if the Lord had not prevented more than the mercy of
men, and having been unmercifully and unjustly sent to prison, there have they
suffered cruelties from the Goalers or their servants, by beatings, or
punishings, or threatenings, or cruel words, and casting into Dungeons, and
great abuses shamefully acted upon them; and other Prisoners have made a prey
upon them, by taking away their clothes and meat, and beating of them, and
abusing them diverse ways, and Murderers have had more privilege of freedom in
prisons, and in trials, than these who are Innocent; and those things thus
acted contrary to their own Law, have passed without reproof from many in
Authority, though it has been brought to their Door, and in this manner have
the Children of God, the Lamb and his Followers been persecuted without cause,
or any evil works brought forth by them, and legally proved against them; but
for well-doing, and not for evil, have the wicked vented their malice against
them, that the more the Beast and his power has fulfilled wickedness, the
sooner may be his destruction.

And O what scorning, and reviling, and lying, and slandering, and evil
speeches with mockings, and cruel words of envy, and terms of cruelty against
the Innocent, has this Generation brought forth in this day, wherein the
Dragon with his Angels has joined battle against the Prince of Righteousness,
and they that follow him; and whole Gog and Magog is gathered together, to
compass the Camp of the Saints about, and to fight against the beloved City,
the Judges and Rulers, with their train of subservant officers, as Bailiffs,
Clarks, Goalers, Constables, with all that to those belonged, have with a high
hand persecuted, and laid oppressions by hard-heartedness, upon the backs of
the poor and distressed, and the Scorners, and ^iers, and profane wretches
have bent their tongue against the Just, in uttering lies, slanders,
reproaches, backbiting, nick-naming, and false-accusing, and all manner of
evil speeches, and false reproaches, and the just have been burdened by all
this; and thus they that have been departed from iniquity have been a prey to
Rulers to act their injustice upon, and to the people to utter their slanders,
and to do cruelty against; and the teeth of evildoers have been set on edge,
to bite and devour, and to satisfy their maliciousness upon the sufferings of
the upright people; and from the Judge upon his throne, to the beggar upon the
highway, all have had their hand dipped in this cause of cruel and unjust
persecution, and the Lord has considered and harkened from his holy
Habitation, and numbered up the sum of all your iniquities that he may repay
and recompense upon your heads; woe unto you unjust Judges, and corrupt men, who
have abused your power. And woe unto all that do oppress by hard dealing, who
have offended the just, and defended the unjust: Woe unto all you scorners,
liars, back-biters, and repoachful tougues; the Lord is coming to take an
account. Your sins cry for vengeance against you, and though your hands and
tongues have been strengthened to speak and act ungodliness, by the evil
example of your Rulers, yet your own iniquity shall you bear in the day of the
Lord, and though your Rulers and Judges have been strengthened in their
unjustness and mercilesness, by the false lying Teachers and Diviners of false
visions, which have seen vanity, yet their own iniquity shall they bear, and
every man shall die for his own sin; Woe unto your Teachers, they have eaten up
the sin of Rulers and people, and covered iniquity and transgression, by
flattering and lying words; they have daubed with untempered mortar, and healed
up the wound deceitfully, and cried peace, peace, to the wicked, that have
walked in the imaginations of their own hearts, when unto such the Lord never
spoke peace.

And now whereas the Rulers and people have stretched forth their hands to vex
the Lords people, and have through unjust judgment, and grievous oppressions,
and unmercifull dealings, trodden the Innocent under foot, and made them a prey
to their mouth, and diverse ways have persecuted in cruel manner the Followers
of the Lamb; yet also have the wise men of this World, even the Priests and
Teachers, who have led the people, and have caused them to err, and have set
themselves as in battle array against the Lord and his way and people; How have
you hardened your hearts, and made your forehead as brass, against the Word of
the Lord, and you have been as the fountain of all this wickedness acted
against the Just, and strengtheners of the hands of ungodly men; the Heads and
Rulers you have strengthened in their cruelty, of false judgments by your
arguments of strife; in subtilty you have been as nursers of all this
Persecution and Wickedness, and have interceded for oppression, to cause the
Just to groan, whom the Lord has raised to testify against you; the Judges
they have given regard unto you, and the people they have taken you for
examples, who have been cursed presidents to the Rulers and people, who have
followed your cruel steps of malice and envy; and from the head to the tail,
they have drunk in your, poisonous Doctrines; and made themselves drunk
therewith, and out of reason, in their furious zeal of madness, and all have
taken council together to slay the harmless from off the face of the Earth;
some by false judgment and oppression, and others by cruel abusings, as
beatings, and stonings, unheard of, or unequalized in Generations of late. O ye
Priests, and Teachers, and Wisemen, and Scribes! how many of you in this
Nation joined hand in hand to betray the Innocent, by your false Doctrines and
lying Divinations, and have filled, (and sought to do so) the mind of the
people with slanders and false reproaches, and lying imaginations, and many
conceptions, and jealousies against the people of God; many of you have made it
your study-work, to bring forth evil by cunning Arguments, to suggest into the
hearts of people, that they might not enter the Kingdom, and even so have you
been shutters of the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and would not enter your
selves, nor suffer others that would.

Woe unto you, you have taken away the Key of Knowledge, and lost it, and
multitudes of false Aspersions, and lying Assertions have you brought forth
without fear, by wicked consequence and lying productions, that you might take
away the key of knowledge thereby, and hide it from men, and lay
stumbling blocks of Iniquity before the people, to stop the way of the Upright,
and you have traveled to seek occasions of evil against the Just, and watched
for the halting of the Innocent, that you might glory and rejoice in their
fall, and without any occasion, by words or actious, you have taken offense,
and made offenses by evil surmisings, to blind the eyes of people, that your
Idolatry might not be discovered, nor the Way of Righteousness shine forth. O
be ashamed and repent, for to account must you Come, and the sin of Rulers and
people, whom you have blindy led, will be charged against you, who have given
them wicked examples, of cruelty in your Pulpits; you have spent time in
Railing, and Slandering, and Lying, to infuse evil into the minds of men,
against the Truth, and many books have you given forth, and sent abroad from
your lying Pens, outof your vain studies, of false prophecy, and men's hearts
have been filled with your damnable Doctrines of Devils, wherewith the Simple
have been poisoned, and the Innocent betrayed; even great numbers of Books, and
lying Scroules have gone through the Nation from some of you, filled with false
Divination, and intents of evil, against the Way of the Lord and his people,
and worse than Balaam, and far exceeding him have you been: you have sought
e^chantments to curse the people whom God has blessed altogether, and some of
you have done it to your evil reward of your evil work: and you have not known
that there is no divination against the holy Seed. O^ what will become of you
when the Lord is arisen to plead with you (...) these things, the cruelty and
oppression of the Rulers shall be added (...) your account, and the sin of the
people which you have swallowed down, it shall be laid to your charge; for you
have strengthened the hands of Evildoers, so that none could turn from his
evil way, but have by y^ been hardened therein, and from you profaneness have
gone forth to the ends of the Earth. Woe, woe, is approaching, what account
will yo^ render in the day of the Lord? you will all be speechless in that day,
wh^ the swift Witness does arise; therefore to all you I am moved to write, who
have set your selves to gainsay the Truth, and to write against the people of
the Lord, whom you call Quakers, who walk in the Truth, and have received the
Truth from the Lord, whom you have reproached and slandered in secret, and also
in open print, in the face of the World, and have laid many cruel and false
Charges and Accusations against them, and to all that has, or ever shall
hereafter bend your tongues and pens, to utter wickedness and falsehood by
writing or otherwise. Repent, and cease your wickedness, for the wrath of the
Lord is kindled against you, and take this for an answer in full to all your
Books, and false reproaches; we are of God, and he that is of God hears us,
and the whole World lies in wickedness, and we have the Testimony that we
please God; and he is our God, and we are his People, and he has Chosen us,
and we have Chosen him, and the Name of the Lord is our strength, and his
Covenant of Life is with us, and among us has he fullfilled his promise, and
his Spirit is poured forth, and sons and daughters do Prophecy, and one King
reigns upon mount Sion, and the night to us is far spent, and the day is
dawned, and the darkness of the night, which long has overshadowed the World,
in which no man could work is from us fled, and the mavelous Light is risen,
and we are them whom God has gathered according to his promise, Ezik. 34. from
the mouths of Idol-shepherds which once made a prey upon us, and the Glory of
the Lord is revealed, and the time is come of Restoration, and of bringing back
out of the captivity of darkness, where all have lain, with a vail of darkness
spread over all their faces, and we are eyewitnesses of his glory, and it is
given us to taste, and feel, and handle the Word of Life, which lives for ever;
therefore I say unto you all, it is a little thing to us, and not respected, to
be reproached by you; our life you cannot reach, nor our glory deface, and you
we know to be them who God never sent, but must fulfill your measure of
wickedness, till the time of your overthrow, which draws near upon you all, and
despisable shall you be to all that fear the Lord, and love his ways, for your
nakedness and shame shall be uncovered, and them that have loved you shall be
filled with the indignation of the Lord against you, all your writings, and
Books, and lies, and slanders, and false reproaches uttered in public and
private, shall go into the pit from which they came, and shall return upon your
own heads, and when your vail of slanders and false aspersions is taken off,
then shall we (as we are) appear, and till then all your evil brought forth
against us we bear in patience, and love your revilings rather than your
praise; wherefore with shame put off your armor, and lay down your crowns,
and stop your mouths in the dust, and bow and Tremble before the Just God, and
before the Lamb, who is risen to make war against the Beast, and against you
his false Prophets, whose Generation must grow feeble, and become weakness in
this the day of the Lord; your time is at an end, wherein it was given you to
reign, and to seduce and deceive the Nations; and now shall the Son of God be
exalted, and the kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of Christ:
hear and consider this, all ye that exalt your selves against the Lord and his
way, and are established in the throne of unrighteousnes, under the beastly
power; if any man has an ear to hear let him hear; the light is risen, and
these things are made manifest, and with the light of the World, in all men
shall they be witnessed to be truth, and the state of things as they are at
this day; and if you can discern the times, and the signs of times, and the
changing of times, here you may read and understand; blessed are all that have
an ear to hear.

TO all ye Heads and Rulers, Judges and Magistrates, Mayors, Bailiffs, Goalers
and Constables, and all others whatsoever, Governors, Priests and People, who
have, and do persecute the Children, and Servants of the Lord, the Saints of
the most high God, who fears the Name of the Lord, and walks in his way,
who are not of this World, but redeemed out of it, and are despised among men,
as all the Generation of the just every where; to all you Persecuters and
violent Doers, this is a Word from the Lord God: Repent, repent, for evil have
you done in his sight, and vexed his Soul, and grieved his Spirit, and heaped up
wrath against the day of wrath, and multiplied your transgressions, and the
measure of your Iniquities are well nigh filled up; ye have set your selves
against the Lord, and your hands you have strengthened against his people, you
have rejected the day of your visitation, and you have not regarded the day of
your Salvation, you have plainly made it manifest that you are of that
Generation which killed the just, and that you are of the seed of evildoers,
the works you have brought forth do plainly declare that you will not have
Christ to reign amongst you, nor his Government to rule over you, who have thus
persecuted the Innocent without cause, by false imprisonments, and false
judgments, and hard dealings, and reproachings, and revilings; consider your
ways, and what you have done, search your hearts, and let it take place in you
all, how have you persecuted the just, how have you stretched forth your hands
and dealt cruelly and violently with the meek of the Earth? how have you trodden
under-foot the poor and needy, and greatly oppressed the upright hearted, who
have not rendered evil for evil, but forgiven you, and prayed for you, and
wished well unto you, and born in patience (without complaining) ^ll your
injustice and cruelty, and have not sought vengeance against you, even such
has God chosen more than many, and them you have despised and persecuted more
than any, and laid heavy bonds of oppression upon them, and doubled their task
through your hard-heartedness, least the Seed of God should grow; grieveous
yoaks have you laid upon it by false imprisonments, and unjust fines, and
illegal proceedings, by beatings, halings, abusings, reproaches, and revilings,
all manner of evil have been acted and spoken against the Generation of the
just by you, and under you in your Judicatories and Jurisdictions, in your
Corporations, highways, Towns, and Goals, and other places.

O! consider what you have done? and suffered to be done under you; lay it to
heart what havoc of the people of the Lord in their persons and estates, and
what cruelty exercised upon them through your rebellious hearts, without any
evil justly charged upon them, or breach of any Law justly proved against them,
for well-doing, and not for evil have you caused them to suffer: (...) crying
against iniquity, and reproving sin in the Gate, and for bearing witness (...)
the Truth, and against all unrighteousness which abounds in this Generation;
such have you falsely judged to be offenders, and cried a confederacy again
them, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, and caused the Innocent^ groan.
O! what will you do in the day of your visitation, when the Lord aris^ to plead
with you; to whom will you fly for refuge, and to whom will you cry (...)
deliverance? Shall not the Lords soul be avenged upon you, yea from the least
of you to the greatest? You shall feel his hand of judgment, even all you who
ha^ had your fingers dipped in the unjust sufferings of the dear Servants of
the Lord* whom he has called to place his Name with for ever, who are his
faithf^ Witnesses in this perverse Generation, and by your persecuting of them
ha^ you proved them to be the people of God, in the sight of all Nations; and
it (...) for a testimony unto them, that they are of God; and against you, that
you (...) of the Devil; and Christ's words are fullfilled upon them, to their
rejoyci^ and to your sorrow, who said, The time comes, that they shall speak
all (...) evil falsely, and persecute you, and think they do God service that
kills you, (...) casts you from among them; and the Devil shall cast some of
you into prison. And the things you have done, and fullfilled Christ's words
against your selves, for (...) witness against you, and to show that you are
Enemies to Christ, and to his Kingdom, and that you will not have him to reign
(as I have said): Therefore wh^ he reigns, he shall say, Bring hither those
mine Enemies, and slay them before me.

O! what will the just Judge of true Judgment, the God of Heaven and Earth
render unto you, when he arises to plead the cause of the poor and needy, and
to deliver his Inheritance from under your oppression into perfect freedom?
What account will you give in that day, when he brings swift destruction upon
you? And wherewith will you answer him when the secrets of your hearts are made
manifest, and when the true witness in you all is awakened, which will bring to
your remembrance all your cruel and unjust dealing, and all your bitter and
hard speeches which in your envy you have brought forth against the Lord and
against his people? What will be done to you his Enemies, when Christ Jesus,
whom you have persecuted, comes to reign in his Kingdom, and subdues the
kingdoms of this World, and changes them into the Kingdoms of the Lord, and
his Christ, and the Saints which you have oppressed, receives the Authority and
Dominion? It shall be said, All that would not that Christ should reign, slay
them before him; when it shall be given to the Saints to bind Kings in chains
and Nobles in fetters of iron, and to execute upon the Heathen all the
judgments written; for behold all ye stout hearted, the Lord comes in ten
thousand of his Saints to judge the World in righteousness, and you shall be
convinced of all your ungodly deeds; for the Scriptures must be fullfilled; and
as you have done, even so will it be done unto you, when the suffering of the
righteous is finished, and your wickedness come to an end; when the Lord shall
reign, you shall lick the dust off his feet, and all the Persecuters of Christ
shall be trodden down as mire, and the righteous shall rejoice over them, and
the Lord shall mock when your fear and calamnity comes, which come suddenly, in
a day when you expect not; how shall the Lord pardon you for this? you have
sinned against knowledge, and gone on after warning, and hardened your hearts
after reproof, and the day of your visitation you have greatly slighted; ye
Rulers have abused your power, and ye subjects have abused your subjection; and
now consider what God did in Generations past unto the rebellious children,
what he did to Pharaoh and all his Hosts, when his long suffering was finished;
how did Pharaoh harden his heart, and his cruel Taskmasters oppress the
righteous, even as you have done, and they would not let Israel go free to
serve the Lord, but they kept them in bondage; and this way you walk, who
exercise cruelty as they did, and laid heavy burdens upon the Innocent
grievous to be born; cruel taskmasters have you been over the Heritage of the
Lord, and in Pharaohs example of wickedness have you walked, fulfilling his
measure of cruelty, and Pharaohs example shall you follow in a cursed end;
remember how the loftiness of his heart was bowed down, and how his proud heart
was abased in the day that God pleaded with him in his righteous judgments, he
and all his task-makers were confounded in a day, and the bondage of the
righteous was broken in a moment, how was his whole strength of Tyranny
overturned and turned into weakness, the righteous were delivered, and he and
all his train overwhelmed in one day, and thus shall it come to pass upon you:
Therefore consider this, all ye that fulfill the measure of iniquity, suddenly
will the righteous God be awakened to take vengeance upon you, and the just
shall not always groan under your bondage, for he that looks from the Heaven
has pity upon the distressed, for whom now his arm is stretched out to bring
deliverance unto them, and all their enemies will be confounded, who have this
long time ploughed long furrows upon the back of the righteous, the oppression;
and cruelty, and injustice, brought forth in this Nation, it calls for
vengeance from Heaven.

Alas, alas, woe is me for you, you Heads, and Rulers, and Judges of England,
what have you done and suffered to be done (under you) against the innocent
people of God, who is as dear to him as the apple of his eye? for they be
written on the palms of his hands, and because of the cry of the poor and the
needy will the Lord arise and plead their cause. Oh consider, and let it enter
into your hearts, the cruelty and injustice that has been brought forth in
this Land, and remember what God did unto all the Persecuters of old, how was
their strength consumed, and they overturned and destroyed, what did he to
Pharaoh and all his host, who persecuted the Seed of God? how was he destroyed
and the righteous set free; and what was done to Haman? How was he justly
rewarded, who persecuted the Innocent Seed of God? What did God to Herod and
all his people who persecuted the Innocent? and remember what he did unto them
that persecuted the Three Children, and them that persecuted Daniel, how did
they fall into the pit which they had dug for another, and how were they
destroyed, and the Innocent delivered, considered and remember these things, ye
that suffer the Just to groan by you.

Search through the Records of old, and search what God has done unto all them
that lifted up their hand against Him and his People, and is he not the same at
this day, his Hand is not shortened that it cannot save his people, and destroy
his Enemies, his Ear is not dull of hearing that he should not understand this
unjust suffering of his people, though you live carelessely in pleasure upon
Earth, while the Innocent mourns, yet does the Lord regard, though you spend
your time in pleasure, and delight your selves in vanities all the day long,
yet the Lord has taken it to heart, and his Spirit is grieved that his
Innocent Servants should lie in Holes and Dungeons to be trodden upon, and be
accounted as the offscouring of all things, hardly thought worthy to have a
place on the Earth. Oh remember these things, ye that are high minded, and
consider what God did to the Bishops and their crew of persecutors in this
Nation, your selves are witnesses how the Lord overthrew them, and delivered
his people in a few years time; and as little as you, did they think, that they
whom they persecuted should so soon come to have reigned over them, the Lords
Hand was then against Oppressors as it is at this day, do you think the Lord
has forgotten or that he takes no notice of what is come to pass, how should
he forget his People to save them, or his Enemies, that he should not
recompense them; but know ye assuredly that the Lord is the same, and all those
things are written in a Book, and remembered by him, and he will judge justly
and righteously in his dreadful day; Ah, let it enter into your hearts, serve
not your selves altogether in the pleasures of this World, but serve the Lord,
and this he requires of you, let the oppressed go free, and break every bond,
whereby the Innocent do suffer, and this the Lord requires at your hands; Oh
but I feel great hardness of heart, and rather a strengthening of cruel bonds,
than a breaking of them, and you appear rather to be given up to work
wickedness, and to fulfill the largest measure of them that went before you,
than otherwise, unrighteous Decrees are rather established than disannulled.

Oh, what will be the end of these things! and what will be your judgment when
the Lord awakens himself, as out of sleep, who has left you to follow your own
spirits, to try you, that it might be known unto all what is in your hearts;
and behold perverseness lodges in them; and while the Lord has looked for
justice amongst you, even the cry of oppression has been heard, even a
grieveous cry of unjust persecution and violence against the Seed of God, and
once you would have been ashamed of those things which now you act without
shame; so that which is in your hearts is poured forth in the sight of the
World.

Oh ye Rulers of England, the Rulers of the Heathen shall rise up is judgment
against you, even they that never professed so much as you have done; they
shall be rather justified than you, whose ways have been more equal than
yours, and less cruelty brought forth by them than by you, unto their subjects;
and this makes your sin more great, in that many of yo^ were raised from low
estate, and you have exalted your selves more than is meet, and have caused
your very equals to groan under you, by the heavy yoke which you have prepared
for them; well, but the Lord has listened and heard, and a Book of remembrance
is written, and he will repay into your bosoms; the time is not long when the
Lord may scatter you, and give you unto the will of your Enemies; therefore be
awakened, and warned, the day of your visitation is upon you all.

OH England that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to
thy peace.

Oh that thy Rulers and people had known how that the Lord has called unto
them.

Oh that they had considered-how that his hand has been stretched forth all
the day long, and he would have gathered them, as a Shepherd does his flock,
but they have n^ known, neither have they considered, and therefore that which
belongs to their peace will the Lord hide from their eyes, the day of their
visitation is spending apace, and the night will come, and no man shall be able
to work; and because the Lord has called and you have not heard, therefore
shall you cry and the Lord will give no answer.

Oh Nation, thou art filled with oppression, and griveous iniquities; and from
the Head to the Foot thou bear marks of great abominations; in thee is found
lamentable oppression of the Poor; and great and grieveous Idolatries; and Gods
Rightous Soul is vexed in thee day by day, the Just groans and mourns under the
heavy hand of oppressors, many of thy Goales do witness it, where many Innocent
and Upright People have suffered unjustly the loss of their Freedom, without
any ground, or charge of evil laid upon them.

Oh what have thy Rulers done, Judgment and Justice have they turned backward,
the cry of the Poor has not been regarded, and equity has not found a place
to enter.

Who would have thought that you, who have been so high in Profession of the
Scriptures, should thus have dealt with them who are in the Life of the
Scriptures, this agravates your sin, in that none has been like you in
profession of Religion, and in pretenses of Righteousness; and yet you have
exceeded others in persecuting (and suffering of it) the servants of the Lord,
but it is now made Manifest what lodges in your hearts; under your fair covers
of promises, words and shows, what deep Hypocrisy is this that you should
profess Liberty of Conscience, and yet have persecuted hundreds for the
exercise of their pure Consciences.

Is not this to be taken notice of, that you should profess that which you do
not perform? and will not the Lord plead with you because of it, in his
dreadful day? which is hastening upon you, as a thief in the night, and the
wicked shall not escape; do you not think that he whom you persecute in his
Members, and his Members, shall surely reign over you? do not you know that he
is sufficient to avenge himself of all his Enemies? and do not you believe that
he could command thousands of thousands to fight for him, and to revenge his
Cause? Has the consideration of these things no room in your hearts; or are
your hearts wholly shut up from all compassion toward the Lords people? Surely
to Vengeance will the Lord be awakened, and he will tread you down as mire in
the streets; and as you have done, and suffered to be done to the Lords people,
even so shall it be done unto you.

THere are only two Seeds in the World, and there are but two and no more; to
wit, the Seed of God, and the Seed of the Serpent; and these two are contrary
one to the other, in their bringing forth, in their time, and in their ends;
they differ in their Nature, in their fruits and works, and in their reward;
and these two are at continual enmity one against another, and never was, is,
or shall be reconciled, the life of one is the death of the other; and where
the one does live, the other does dye; and where the one rejoices, the other
is made sorrowful; and where the one is in Freedom, the other is in Bondage;
and where the one is Ruler, the other is a Slave and in Captivity; and thus are
they contrary: where the one brings forth fruit, the other is barren; and the
one is rewarded with the overthrow of the other, and the one of these is ruling
in every creature man and woman, and growing and bringing forth fruit from it
self, through the Creature; and the fruits of the one is blessed for ever and
the fruits of the other are cursed for ever; and betwixt these two there is no
concurrence or agreement in any thing whatsoever, but they differ in likeness,
and their fruits differ in appearance; the fruit of the one is love, and peace,
and unity; the fruit of the other is hatred, and envy, and trouble, and enmity;
the fruit of the Seed of God in the creature, is truth, and righteousness, and
faith, and patience, long-suffering, and temperance, and joy, and peace in the
Lord, with all other things which are good, and just, and pure; but the fruits
of the seed of the Serpent are of another nature, as Lying, Theft, Murder,
Dissimulation, Drunkenness, and Whordoms, Hypocrisy and all Unrighteousness,
which is not according to God, but contrary to him; and by these several Fruits
proceeding through the Creature, do we know every Creature, and so judge of him
to be the Child of God, or the Child of the Devil in the election, or in the
reprobation; for through whom the Fruits of the Seed of God does spring forth,
we know such are not of the Devil; and through whom the Fruits of the seed of
the Serpent do spring forth, we know such are not of God. And these two Seeds
are now striving in the Earth, the one against the other, and they in whom the
Seed of God rules are persecuted by them in whom the seed of the Serpent rules;
for they in whom the Seed of God rules are born of God, and of his Spirit; and
they in whom the seed of the Serpent rules are born of flesh, and minds the
things of the flesh, which shall not endure for ever; and so every one that is
born of the flesh, is of the seed of the Serpent, or the seed of the Serpent
rules in him; and every one that is born of the Seed of God, the Seed of God
rules in him; such are persecuted for righteousness sake, by the seed of the
Serpent, which is at enmity against the Seed of God, which cannot fulfill the
will of the Serpents seed, nor be subject to his laws; for the Seed of God
cannot be subject to the Serpents seed in any thing, but is subject to God, and
not to any thing that is contrary to him; but rather suffers imprisonment, and
cruelties, and bonds, under the Serpents seed, than in the least to bow to it.

So this is the ground of all persecution and enmity, which is betwixt the two
seeds, which seeks the overthrow each of other, but who are of the Seed of God,
knows that they are of God, and that the whole World lies in wickedness; under
the government of the seed of the Serpent; and such where he Seed of God is
brought forth, has the testimony in themselves that they are of God, and have
believed in the Son of God who is the Light of the World, and knows him to be
the Foundation and the Rock of Ages, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail
against him, nor the enmity of the Serpents seed overcome him, nor they that
are Builded on him; and this is a Testimony for the Seed of God, and against
the seed of the Serpent in all the World, that it is persecuted of the seed of
the Serpent, and spoken all manner of evil of by the World, according to the
words of Christ, which are fullfilled upon us to our rejoicing, who are of the
Seed of God, and to the trouble of all our Enemies, who are of the seed of the
Serpent. And otherwise it cannot be, but that they who are born of the flesh
must persecute them who are born of the Spirit; for because of the enmity that
is placed between the two feeds, the one cannot love the other, nor have
fellowship the one with the other, and which of our Forefathers the Prophets
and Disciples of Christ, which were of the Seed of God, were not persecuted,
hated, and reviled, and reproached by your forefathers, who were of the seed
of the Serpent; and they, no more then you, could receive the Knowledge of God
and his ways, but ever despised the path thereof, and counted the Wisdom of
God foolishness, and stood in the enmity against God and his people, and all
their ways; and they that were of the seed of the Serpent ever called truth
error, and the way thereof heresy and blalphemie.

Jeremiah, Amos, and the rest, were called deceivers and madmen, and seducers
of the people, and evil was done unto them; Jeremiah was put in the stocks, and
in the dungeons, by the Rulers of that Generation, who were of the seed of the
Serpent; even the Prophets of God who were sent of God, and were witnesses of
his Name in truth and righteousness, were accounted and called deceivers, and
were persecuted by imprisonments, and some unto death, as you may read in the
Scripture, Jeremiah 20. Amos 7.

These with others, who were sent of the Lord, to bear testimony of God, and
against the Rulers; who executed not true Justice and Judgment, but were
oppressors of the poor, who judged for gifts and rewards, and against the false
Prophets and Priests that ran and had not been sent, who used their tongue, and
said the Lord said, and the Lord had not spoken to them, who prophesied falsely,
and preached for hire, and bare rule by their means, and made a prey upon the
people; these were of the seed of the Serpent, and did persecute them that bore
witness against them, that were of the Seed of God.

The Word of the Lord was even a reproach unto Jeremiah daily, and they smote
him with the tongue, and the chief Governor of the Lords house smote him, and
put him in the Dungeon: And Amos, who had been no Prophet, nor the son of a
Prophet, but a herdsman, he was persecuted by the Priest of Bethel, and was
commanded not to Prophecy in the Kings Chapel; And Amaziah the Priest
complained to Jeroboam the King against Amos the Prophet: And Ezekiel the
Prophet could not be received of the people; for says the Lord, they will not
hear thee, for they will not hear me; and they were a rebelious house, and
impudent, and hard-hearted, and would not receive the Prophets words: And thus
it was in the time of the Apostles and Christ Jesus, they were persecuted, and
some of them put to death for bearing testimony unto the Father, whom they were
witnesses of, and against the World; what Reproaches, Slanders, Beatings,
Buffetings Scornings, Tumults, Uproars, and all manner of evil did they suffer
in their Generation by the seed of the Serpent, from the hands of the Rulers,
and Priests, and People; Christ was accounted a Deceiver, and called a Devil,
and a Blasphemer; and the Apostles were called Here^icks, Deceivers, and
pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, destroyers of ^he Law, and turners of
the World upside down, and such like: All ^hese were of the Seed of God that
were persecuted, and the Persecu^ors were of the seed of the Serpent, which
brought forth violence, and ^ickedness, and false judgment against the
Innocent; and some were ^ost cruely put to death upon the false account of
being Deceivers and Blas^hemers.

If you search through the whole Scripture, you may read how the Just ^ere
persecuted, even from Abel, who was of the Seed of God, and all ^at ever were
persecuted for righteousness. sake, were persecuted upon the account of being
Evildoers, and the Persecutors judged themselves to be Righteous.

He was the chief Governor of the House of the Lord, that persecuted Jeremiah,
and the people that smote him with the tongue, said, They knew the Law should
not perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the Honorable: And it was Amaziah
the Kings Priests that persecuted Amos; and it was they that seemed to be
religious that persecuted the Prophets; and it was the wise Scribes and
Pharisees, and the chief Priests, that handled the Law, and that offered
Sacrifice, that persecuted Christ and the Apostles.

How zealous were the Jews in their Traditions and Observations, in their
Sabboth-keeping, and in the Days of their Humiliation, in their
Temple-worship, and in all the Commandments of God? They were zealous according
to their own thoughts: yet were they of the seed of the Serpent, and persecuted
the Seed of God in Blind-zeal, upon false Judgment; and the Persecutors had a
Name to be Righteous, and the Persecuted were accounted Unrighteous; and so
Darkness was put for Light, and Light for Darkness; and them that were
Well-doers were accounted for Evildoers, and them that were Evildoers, were
accounted for Righteous.

And such was the blindness of Rulers and people, such as prophesied falsely,
and came in their own names were received, for the people loved to have it so
when the great abomination was committed; but they that came in the Fathers
Name could not be received, but were Persecuted; the Prophets, Christ, nor his
Apostles could not be received of the World, but were persecuted in it, and
Laws and Decrees were made against them, whereby they suffered unjustly, upon
false grounds suspicions and jealousies, for that Way was called Heresy, in
which the true God was worshipped.

Christ was called a Deceiver; and the wisdom of the World could not receive
the knowledge of the things of God; and as it was then, so i^ it now in every
particular, if any man has an ear to hear he may hear, and a heart to
understand, and he may perceive; for now is the Seed of God and the seed of the
Serpent at enmity, striving one against the other, and the one persecutes the
other in his Generation, as ever it was: we are persecuted upon the false
account, and false judgment of being Evildoers, and Deceivers, and our
Persecuters accounts themselves Righteous, and zealous for Gods Ways; and such
as are false Prophets and Deceivers are accounted true Ministers of Christ,
even them that preach for hire, and seek for their gain from their Quarter, and
through covetousness, by feigned words makes merchandise of souls; such were,
and such are Deceivers, and were never sent of God; and yet such in this
Generation are accounted Ministers of Christ, and such as are Ministers of
Christ, who walk in the Doctrine of Christ, as they have received freely, so do
they freely give, and seek not advantage to themselves, but are pre^ cuted and
reviled for righteousness sake, such are accounted and fal^ judged Deceivers,
and so true Judgment is turned backward; Good (...) called Evil, and Evil Good;
Deceivers are called Ministers of Christ, and Ministers of Christ are called
Deceivers; and thus people in this Generation errs in judgment, and persecutes
the Righteous, who are of the Seed (...) God.

And it was ever the Ministers of Christ that were presecuted, and never any
(...) them persecuted any, nor ever any of the Deceivers were persecuted for
righteousness sake; but they ever persecuted the Just and sought to the Rulers,
and to the Elders of the people for violence to be done unto them that feared
the Lord, and witnessed against their wickedness; it was the Chief Priests and
them that handled the Law, which caused Christ and the Apostles to be
persecuted.

Amaziah sought to Jeroboam to have Amos persecuted, and as it was then, so it
is now. How does the Teachers of this Nation seek to the Magistrates to have
the Innocent persecuted? and yet these man are zealous for their Performances
and Duties in the set-Days of Humiliation and Lectures, and even they think
they do God good service in imprisoning the Innocent, they have great zeal
without knowledge, as the Jews had, and they are strict in their
Sabboth-keeping, in their Singing and Praying, etc. But yet is Violence done to
the Just, and true Judgment and Justice neglected; and therefore all that which
they perform to God is abomination in his sight.

Oh, what complaining is there, from the Teachers of this Nation to the
Magistrates? What crying out for defense, showing that they want the spiritual
Armor, and dare not trust the Lord? What plotting and contriving is there
against the Seed of God, by the Seed of the Serpent, who ever was a Persecutor,
and never was persecuted? What Laws and Decrees are there brought forth
against the Lords people, as Traps to ensnare their Feet, like as it was in the
days of old, even like unto Artaxerxes the King, who made a Decree, and gave
commandment, that the City of God should not be builded; and this was from the
information and complaining of Rhehum the Chancellor and Shimshai the Scribe,
who brought certain Accusations to the King against the people of God; and
called the holy City, a rebellious and bad City, and that it was hurtful unto
Kings, and in danger to endamage the Revenue of Kings.

Here was a Conspiracy by the Scribes and such as handled the Law, with the
King against the people of God; and thus is it also now: he that has but an
eye to see may see; How many Petitions have they put to the Rulers against the
people of God? What grieveous and false Accusations have they laid to the
charge of the Innocent, saying they be Popishly affected, and disobedient to
Government: so that the seed of the Serpent ever does hatch evil against the
Seed of God, to destroy it from off the face of the Earth; and it was the Wise,
and the Learned, and the Rulers, whom the Devil made use of to persecute the
Righteous: it was such as Rhehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, and
Pashur the chief Governor in the House of the Lord, and it was such as the
chief Priests and Elders of the people, and the Wisemen of this World; such as
these it was that persecuted the Righteous; and so it is now, Orthodox men (so
called) and Justices of Peace, etc. whom the Devil makes use of, to persecute
the Innocent, against whom no occasion can be found but concerning the Law of
their God, as it was with Daniel, as you may read, in the sixth Chapter of
Daniel, and the fifth and sixth Verses, against him they could find no occasion
that they might presecute him, but concerning the Law of his God; and it was
the President and Princes, and Counselors, and the Governors which consulted
together against Daniel, who was the Servant of God.

And as it was then, so it is also now in this our Generation, they can find no
occasion against us (the people of God) either by our Doctrine or Conversation,
but only concerning the Law and Worship of our God; for there is a Law made
against the Law of Christ, and all that will not swear contrary to the Law of
Christ, must be counted Evildoers and Popish Recusants; and punished, and this
is not for any Evil in us, but because we cannot transgress the righteous Law
of our God; and also another Decree, which takes hold upon them that travel to
worship God on the first day of the week, whereby the Innocent does suffer, and
are like to suffer; and not for Evil-doing is any occasion against us, but
because we will not stay from the Worship of our God, but are made to travel,
that we may meet together to Worship him; with such other Decrees, which
shows unto all men that they seek occasion against us concerning the Law of
God, not having occasion by doctrine, or conversation, or any other thing; so
for righteousness sake are we persecuted, and not for evil-doing; some are
persecuted, because for Conscience Sake they cannot stay at their own houses,
but are moved by the Lord to declare the Name of the Lord abroad in the Nation;
many by a decree are taken and punished, as for vagabonds, and this is an
occasion concerning the Law of our God; and Christ was persecuted, and put to
death by an unrighteous Decree; for they had an (unrighteous) Law, as they
said, and by it he ought to dye; and unrighteous laws and decrees were made
against the Apostles, whereby they were commanded to depart out of their Towns,
and to preach no more in the Name of Jesus, and by such decrees were the
Apostles persecuted. So that this may show unto all, that our forefathers who
were of the Seed of God, some were persecuted unto death by unrighteous decrees
and statutes, and as it was then, so it is now, he that has an eye to see may
see: the same as ever was is come to pass in the Earth, the seed of the Serpent
striving against the Seed of God and persecuting it where it is brought forth,
by unrighteous decrees: how did the late Bishops of England persecute the
harmless? What Laws and Ordinances were then brought forth, whereby violence
was done against such as feared the Lord, and then was the seed of the Serpent
striving against the Seed of God.

And this is given forth to show unto all the World the cause of persecution in
its first ground, (to wit) the irrecoverable enmity which is betwixt the two
Seeds, the one continually hating and persecuting the other, and seeking the
overthrow each of other, and the enmity betwixt the two Seeds, is the cause of
strife, the one being Innocent, and the other unrighteous; so it is not for the
persons sake, or any other thing that the Just are persecuted; but it is
because of the Seed of God, which cannot bow, nor worship the seed of the
Serpent, that is the first cause of persecution.

Again, all may see what unrighteous Laws and Decrees were and are brought
forth to persecute the Innocent, whereby they have suffered in all Generations
for Righteousness sake, and not for Evil-doing; also it may be seen, that it
was the Wise, the Learned, the Presidents and Chancellors, and chief Priests,
and Scribes, who were and are the very active persons, by whom the Seed of God
is persecuted, and even such as were and are zealous in their Observances, and
Sabboth-keeping, and such like; it was not the Poor, nor the Foolish only which
the Devil made use of to do his work; but it was the Wise, and the Learned, and
the Chief in Authority, and such like; it was such in whom the seed of the
Serpent ruled, who were the active men against the Servants of God.

Also it was through the evil Counsel of such as were Teachers, and Scribes,
and Handlers of the Law; and it was through the false Accusations of the chief
Priests unto the Governors and Elders of the People, and so it is now at this
day, as I have proved; and also the Righteous were persecuted upon the false
Judgment of others, and they were falsely adjudged to be Deceivers, and
Blasphemers, and Evildoers; and upon this account were they persecuted, and as
being falsely reputed to be destructive to Government, and Revenue of Kings, and
upon such like; and that they made void the Law of God, and were Movers of
Sedition; and upon such accounts as these, was the Seed of God persecuted, as
it it at this day; and all men that read this with moderation may come to the
good Undestanding, upon what account, and by what Instruments, and by what
means the seed of the Serpent has persecuted the Seed of God, even from Cain
unto this day.

And this is to go abroad into this Nation, and into the World; and it is given
forth from the Suffering-Seed of God, to clear it self in the sight of all men,
that not for Evil, but for Good are these Sufferings laid upon it. But behold
the Lord heearth and regards the Cry of the Poor, and of the unjust Sufferer,
and he will remember his Mercy, and his Covenant with his own Seed; and when it
passes through the Fire, he is with it, and thought it be afflicted, it cannot
be forsaken; though the Lord hide his Face from his people, and suffers most
grievous things to be done against them, by the wicked; yet it is but to try
them, and to prove them, that they may be found faithful to him, and the Seed
of God shall reign in the Earth; and the seed of the Serpent, and his head
shall be bruised, and is bruised already; and it bruiseth its heel by following
after with persecution and cruelty; but the Seed of God shall arise, and is
arisen, and praises the Living God for evermore.

It plainly appears that the Suffering of the people of God in this Age, is a
greater Suffering and more Unjust, than in the days of Christ, or of the
Apostles, or in any time since: Queen Mary's days brought not forth a
Suffering more cruel, and in many respects, as does appear; First, What was
done to Christ and the Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law; and in a great part
by the due execution of a Law; and also the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, had
more just Examination, and a more Just Prosecution in Law, than the people of
God have now; for now it is a matter of Conscience among some of the
Magistrates in England to cast men into Prison, and confine them, and to cause
their Goods to be spoiled, without any Law, or the due execution of a Law;
which is utterly contrary to the Charters of England, and hereby it appearts
the Suffering to be more Unjust, because what the Persecutors of old did to the
People of God, they did by a Law, and by the due execution of a Law; but now
many are caused to suffer deeply; whom the transgression of no Law, good or
bad, can be charged against; and others suffer without the due execution of a
Law.

Again, herein it does appear to exceed the Suffering of the Saints in former
Age, in that many suffer now cruel things about trivial foolish matters; as for
not putting off a Hat, or for Theeing men; and for denying the foolish
circumstance of Swearing; and we do not read that the worst of Tyrants in the
Apostles days, or before or since, ever caused any to suffer for such things
as these, or ever questioned any upon any such small accounts; for hundreds
have suffered upon suspicion, when nothing at all can be charged against them;
and this is contrary to Magna-Carta: And in many other respects which might be
named, this suffering is greater than has been in any Age; for many have
suffered in this Commonwealth, which have been faithful, and hazarded all in
time of war, for the good of the Commonwealth; and many of them suffer by
them, who have been Enemies, and in Arms against the Commonwealth; and herein
the suffering appears more intolerable. But does the Magistrate think to come
to account for these things? Yea, the Lord is Just, and his Way is Righteous;
What flesh could but be provoked hereby? But the Saints are changed in nature,
and are to fulfill the Will of the Lord by Suffering: the Cruelty of men is
become exceeding great against the Lord, and his people.

Again, hereby the Persecution in this Age appears more to exceed former Ages,
because Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Religion, was never so much
promised and professed, as in this Nation at this day; and yet for the exercise
of a pure Conscience many are woeful Sufferers, even by such who in words
profess Liberty of Conscience themselves; and yet persecutes the exercise of it
in others, even for not putting off a Hat, or the like, to them; these with
many other things, may aggravate the hainousness of the sin of persecution to
be great, and more unjust than in-former Ages.

Alas, how is the Sword of Justice turned backward, and the Innocent smitten
and persecuted, and that for Righteousness sake, and not for Evil-doing. By a
Friend to the Suffering Seed of God, EDWARD BOROUGH.

Truth (the Strongest of all) Witnessed forth in the Spirit of Truth, against
all Deceit. And pleading in Righteousness its own Cause, to the understanding
of the Simple, against a very great number of Lies, Slanders, Perverting of the
Scriptures, Contradictions, and false Damnable Doctrines, held forth by the
INDEPENDANTS. And is a Reply to John Bunion's second Book, called, A
Vindication, etc. Wherein what was wanting in his former of fulfilling
wickedness is now appeared; by his adding sin unto sin, against God and against
his own soul.
Reader,
THOU have here a very great number of About a 100 or more as may be proved
inparticular need requie.
Lies and Slanders, and Unjust-dealings and False-doctrines, etc. Laid open and
reproved in plainness, and not in hypocrisy; and of contention there is not
suddenly an end, being begun; therefore seeing the unbelieving heart of John
Bunion cannot believe me, when I speak the truth in justness, nor may I believe
his Lies and Slanders, uttered in hypocrisy; what is laid down is left to
thee, soberly to judge of betwixt us, while we are both silent: And this know,
the one is a Deceiver; and the other is as a Deceiver, yet true; and thus may
thou weight things equally.

First, considering of many Lies and Slanders truly charged upon him in my
first, of which he is guilty from his first, and he has not at all cleared
himself of them in his second, which an honest man ought to have done, before
he had gone further; for I soberly desired witness of what he said: But be has
added to the number of his wickedness, and not proved justly what he has said
against us: And it is not for his sake, for little thoughts I have of his
conversion, but the ^ther that he will be hardened; nor for may own sake, as if
I were unsatisfied concerni^m, that this is written; but to undeceive the
simple of what his wickedness may falsely suggest into the mind, as if all were
truth that he spoke, if his wickedness were not reproved.

Again, Consider that I have cleared the Truth of my words which he has
wrested, and thereby taken occasion against the Truth, by answering his own
conceptions, and not my plain words; so my words (which are words of Truth)
being defended, all his Reply is made void: So I have not so much desired to
answer every particular of his words, as to vindicate my own words, and the
Truth from his false Slanders and Accusations.


O HOW has Satan filled the hearts of men, in this Generation (as well as in
former Ages) with Envy against the Truth, and with Wrath against the Way
thereof; and how has he filled them with Craft, and deceitful Subtilty, to
offend the Way of the Lord, in all manner of Persecuting, and Evil-speaking
against it openly, and also in secret Gainsaying, in Hypocrisy; and how are
men armed to defend themselves in their naughtiness, lying hid under the Vail
of fair Speeches, and fine Arguments, using the Scripture in the words of man's
wisdom, to oppose the Power and Life of Righteousness; even as the Scribes and
Pharisees of old, how zealous were they in their Observances, and in
fullfilling the Commands and Traditions of their Fathers, having set themselves
in Moses Seat, professing Moses, and the Prophets words, and yet persecuted
Christ the Life and Substance of Moses, and the Prophets? And as it was then,
so is it now; how are Christ's words, and the Apostles professed and preached by
such who are Enemies to the Life of Christ made manifest in mortal flesh, and
secretly opposing the doctrine of the Apostles? who said, Know ye not, that
Christ is within you, except you be Reprobates. But the mighty Day of the Lord
is come, and coming, wherein all hearts are made manifest, and the secrets
thereof discovered; and the light is springing out of darkness, and the Sun is
breaking through the Clouds to give light to all men and Nations, and the great
Whore which has decked her self in diverse colors to deceive, shall be made
naked and bare; and the day of great striving is come, and now every man stands
up for his Interest, to defend his Possession, for the just Judge stands at
the Door, to enquire by what Law every man holds his Inheritance; and he
finds many holding their Religion; and Profession, by the Traditions of men
only, and not by the Revelation of Christ Jesus in them; and such he will
dispossess, though they strive against him, yet all is in vain, and though they
plead Antiquity, yet that will not prevail; and in that the day of great
striving is come, betwixt the Lamb and his Followers, the Draggon and his
Followers; every one of that Party appearing with such weapons as the Devil
has armed them withal; and with such Armor as the wicked has, they come,
appearing under diverse colors to fight against Zio^, yet under one Head, and
Prince of Darkness, and unto one Purpose, ev^ that the Seed of Jacob may be
rooted out, and that the Way of Truth may (...) prosper, that then the Wicked
may go on in their wickedness, without reproof, and ungodliness may be hid
under hypocrisy; and above all other means, that is used at this day, to keep
up the Kingdom of the Devil, and to offend the Kingdom of Christ; this is
Chief, striving against the Light of the World, opposing it, and denying it,
and by crafty Arguments, and cunning Speeches, seeking suitable Scriptures, (as
they suppose) to ground their false Argument^ upon, against this very thing,
that the Light of Christ is given to every man that comes into the World, or
that the Light which convinces and reproves every man of sin within him, is
not the Light of Christ, nor worthy to be taken notice of, but natural and such
like, and no way sufficient to Life and Salvation; if the Unjust men persecute,
it is such as walk in the Light of Christ Jesus, that cannot fulfill the wills
and customs of m^n, and so are not of the World, but contrary to it in all its
ways and work^ ^ich are evil; and if t^ wise men of the World make any
Arguments, it is against the Light, wi^ which Christ lightneth every man that
comes into the World; so that all (...) envy of the Devil, whether under this
or that color and appearance, is again^ the Light of Christ Jesus, and them
that walk therein; and if the light be (...) denied, and not believed in, nor
regarded, then may the Devil have wh^ Possession of the heart of man; and if
the Light of Christ Jesus within, (...) owned and loved, and walked in, then
Christ is received, and there the D^ is dispossessed; and therefore it stands
him upon, above all other things, (...) possess people against the Light
within, which Christ has given, that then (...) may not be discovered in the
heart; but may keep all his goods in peace, a^ have quiet possession in his
Habitation? Well, be it so, though all men of the Kingdom does gainsay the
Light of Christ, by this or that way of wickedness, yet it is precious unto us,
and I cannot but earnestly contend for it, against (...) Gainsayers, and yet
strives not for mastery to our selves, nor to exalt any thing of our selves,
but only the Lord and his truth, which he has made more dear to us, then
either life, or name, or liberty; and though so it be, that this Way be spoken
evil against everywhere, yet the Lord owneth it, and us who are faithful
therein in the presence of our Enemies; to the confounding of the wisdom of
this World. And whereas John Bunion has formerly set himself diverse ways to
oppose the Truth under the account of his great zeal against Error; but
especially in a Book sometime since put forth by him, thinking thereby to
offend the Way of Righteousness; and now a second time has appeared, with a
defense upon his former, called A Vindication, etc.

Of the former and his Defense, is more to the laying open his folly, and to
the uncovering of his blindness and wickedness, then his first offense given by
him, which caused me to write in short four sheets of paper, to clear the Truth
from what he had spoken against it.

And now having again a second time appeared in many word, without knowledge,
yet in great zeal, has brought forth many things reprovable, even Lies and
Slanders, and evil Speeches in abundance, yet with great pretense of holiness,
and soberness; and he has not only belyed me, but the Truth which is my chief,
and moving cause, (that the Truth may be clear) of this my second Reply unto
him; and not for my own sake in any thing; for I more prize to be accounted a
fool, and dispraised in the World, then to be honored thereby; and when
iniquity shall come to an end, and transgression shall be finished, his shall
be the Kingdom and the Inheritance of Rest Eternal, that has kept himself
clean and pure, from a lying and slanderous tongue, and who has done
righteously and fullfilled the Will of God, For it is not every one that says
Lord, Lord, that enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of the
Father which is in Heaven; and in that day when the Book of all Consciences
shall be opened, and every thing brought to Judgment, then shall the Light in
every ones Conscience answer the Lord in the justness of his dealings; and even
then (if not before) shall this John Bunion know the Light in all men's
Consciences is of force, when he shall be judged and then shall he see, he has
wronged the Lord, and dealt evil against his own soul, in speaking evil of what
he has not known, and in giving false judgment of what he has not
understood; and till that day I leave him (without praying for fire to devour
him) only may reprove his Lies Errors, Contradictions and False-dealing, and
clear the Truth from his false Charges, and only to the most chiefest things
whereof he accuses us, in short I may Reply.

And whereas thou say, There is one that has ventured to stand up against
the Truth, and has published a Book in which there is a great number of
Heresies cunningly vented by him, and also many things there falsely Reported of
thee, To which I answer, that same Book published, called, The true faith of
the Gospel contended for, etc. Shall clear it self from this reproach, that I
have not stood against any one truth, or uttered any Heresy or lie against
thee; Several Lies and Slanders were proved against him in that Book, which he
cannot clear himself of; mark that.
but in that Book did witness forth the Truth against many things falsely laid
down by thee against the Quakers, and that same Book with soberness read
(without partiality and prejudice) does clear it self from these false
Aspersions, and prove thee a Liar herein, and I leave it to the honest hearted
to judge, who reads that Book, while I with patience, and not seeking any
revenge, do^ bear thy reproaches, counting them greater riches then thy praise.

And Farther thou say, Only by the way thou think good to mind me of my
clothing my self with the words of the Prophets and Apostles, etc.

Answ. True enough, by the Way, out of the Truth, and out of Christ, who is the
Way, have thou spoken this, and so have uttered in falsehood, and by, or out of
the Way; neither have I clothed my self, and yet am I clothed with the Life of
the Prophets and Apostles, and not only with their words; nor do I fight
against them (though thou falsely say it) but bears witness unto them, in
Doctrine and Conversation, and before all the seed of Evildoers; and take back
thy own words to thy self, who art in that Generation, which has the words,
but are without the Lying perverting Scripture is an evil life;
Life, in the evil life.

Farther thou say, I have broken out with a false Testimony of John Burton,
and thee, at which thou seem to be much offended, that I should say thou art
joined with the broken Army of Magog, and has showed your selves in the
defense of the Dragon, against the Lamb, etc.

Reply, what need thou be troubied at this, have I not spoken the truth, and
have I not said well herein? for you are joined with all the wicked in the
Nation, and as Liars and Swearers and Drunkards, persecutes with violence; and
as the proud and wanton are filled with scorning and singing wicked rimes in
the streets, even so also are you come in Print, and all of you against them
called Quakers; the Drunkards and Swearers they beat them, and abuse them, and
cast them as for dead into Ditches, with stoning in the high ways, and in the
streets beating down with Staves; and the wanton they sing there rimes in scorn
in Alehouses, and Taverns against them; and thou and thy Fellows and
Generation appears in open Print, slandering and reviling them (yet in pretense
of zeal for God) and all this you do against us, who have the witness that we
are of God, and that the whole World Lies in wickedness, and now are not you
all joined as an Army, and do you not show your selves in the defense of the
Draggon; Liars and Slanderers is of the Dragons party;
what wrong I have done you, let the upright in heart judge, whether I have
given false testimony against you or no; and though you have noted it for a Lie
in the Margent, yet the Lie is thy own, who has gainsaid the Truth herein,
and called it a Lie; and I have dealt justly with thee, in the sight of God,
and all that know him, and when the Book of thy Conscience is opened, thou
shall also confess to this thing, when thou stand condemned with them, with
whom thou art now joined against us; who have the testimony that we are of God,
and worshippers of the Father in the Spirit and Truth, and my words were spoken
by the Spirit of the Lord, and that in thy Conscience shall witness them, in
the day of the Lord, though now thou opprobriously say, I said that desolate
Zion is compassed about with enemies to make her a destruction, etc. These are
some of the words which he says flung into the wind.
they are flung into the wind. And whereas thou seem to be greatly offended,
that I should say part of the first Book is a Corrupted grain of Babylons
treasure, etc.

But have not I spoken the Truth herein also, when I say, I have numbered (...)
part of your work, and this is the sum thereof, that part which I have
numbered, viz. your Lies and false Reproaches against the Quakers, is a
corrupted grain; yea, and of Babylons treasure too. I am not ashamed of my
words, though thou would defend your work by saying, Your discourse was of
the Birth, Righteousness, Death, Blood, etc. And of the second coming of the
Son of Mary, etc.

To which I say, these things, and the knowledge of them, by the Spirit of God,
is not counted by me Corrupted, nor of Babylon, though now I answer, as in my
last; the words I own, but thy voice I deny, and knows it to be the voice of
the stranger; and for this saying, have I not, nor never shall have any burden
upon my Conscience, (though thou would say it) but it is cleared in the sight
of God, even though I say all that thou speak I deny, or thy speaking of any
thing of the Kingdom of God, with thy lying spirit.

And whereas thou art offended, that I should say you are described to be the
Flock of Ishmael, and of the seed of Cain, whose line reaches to the murdering
Priests, etc.

And thou say, I am very sensorious, and utterest many word without
knowledge, etc.

Reply, Yea, your words does describe your nature, for by your voice I know
you, to be none of Christ's sheep, and accordingly I judge, in just judgment,
and in true knowledge, and does not falsely sensure, nor utter words voi^ of
knowledge, and my words shall be witnessed by you in the day of the Lord: Envy
is of Cains nature and seed, and in that you are; and Liars are of Ishmaels
stock, and you are guilty of that, let the sober Reader try; and you are among
the murdering Priests party, and close joined to them, in Doctrine and
practice, especially in writing against us.

Now no wrong have I done you, that thou need to be troubled, and seek to
cover your selves by thy fair words in thy answer, as if you were righteous;
but all will not hide you, your works make you manifest to be no less then what
I have said of you.

Then farther thou art hot against me, in that I say, you are found Enemies to
Christ, revealed in his Saints, and this thou have noted it in the Margent for
false, but thou do not well to be angry; it is true, what I have spoken, thy
own words do prove it, in saying there was nothing in thee, to be taken notice
of; this was a denying of Christ within, and such as deny him are found Enemies
to him within; So the Lie is thy own, who have denied Truth, let the wise
Reader judge, and thy many words in a pretending Answer will not cover you from
the guilt of what I have charged upon you, and not falsely; and what I have said
hitherto is true, and not false, though thou feigningly say, Thou marvels I
should be so overseen, as to utter so many false things in so little a space;
nay, my understanding was open, when I wrote forth that Book, at which thou art
so tormented, that it has caused thee some Months travel in anguish to clear
thy self, and yet cannot be at rest; and thou art over-seen who resists the
reproof of thy Wickedness.

Then thou go about to justify thy Brother Burtons words, who wickedly laid
it down, as thou impudently go to justify it, who joined in his Accusation,
and slanders Quakers with Ranters; and this would thou justify we are one,
against my just Answer, which denied them in the fourth page of my first; where
I said, Between Quakers and Ranters there is no more union, etc. then betwixt
Light and Darkness, Good and Evil; and that Answer stands untouched by thee,
and is true; and in justifying John Burtons wicked Slander, thou art more
wicked in comparing the Principles, and say, it will appear they agree in
one, etc.

Viz. That the Quakers deny Christ to be a real Man: Secondly, that they fancy
him to be God, manifest in their flesh: Thirdly, that they make his humane
nature with the fullness of the Godhead, to be but a type of God: these thing
were charged upon us.

But what a wicked course have thou taken to clear him, by adding thy own
wickedness; let all consider that reads: for do not I desire in plainness in
my first, in these words; if thou dare lay the Charge only upon the Quakers,
write in plainness, and bring testimony of thy Accusation, and thou may
receive a farther answer, but not a word in plain answer to this is returned,
though soberly desired, neither time, nor place, nor witnesses evidenced to
clear your selves of your first Slanders, which had been more honest, then to
have slandered afresh, passing over your first; but it seems you cannot clear
your selves in honesty, and so fulfill your wickedness by adding to your Lies
and Slanders, as thou impudently do in thy comparing the principles of the
Ranters with the Quakers.

And to save thy brother from shame and guilt, thou art fallen thy self into
the Snare, and justly may be judged, to exceed him in Wickedness; and thou
say, (with shame to thy self, I repeat it) that the This is a lie;
Quakers will not own Christ without them, but thou brings not testimony of
this Assertion; till then art thou reckoned, and shall be plauged for a Liar,
which will be forever, for we own him as he is ascended far above all Heavens,
who fills all things; yea, and without us too: So that instead of proving the
first false Accusation, thou adds another Slander, and the That the Ranters and
Quakers deny all teaching but the teaching within; and yet condemns principle
by practice.
second thing wherein thou comparest them, is unsound; for though we witness,
(yea thousands) that we need no man to teach us, as the Saints did 1 John, yet
we cry not down the Ministry of God, but owns, it, and cries down such by whom
people cannot come to the Knowledge of the Truth, though they be ever learning;
who Preach for Hire, and goes for Gifts, and Rewards and loves the Wages of
Unrightousness; and this was the Apostles Doctrine as it was ours, and is no
Heresy (though thou may so judge it) for we say by the same Spirit as the
Apostles did, they that are of God hears us who are in the Truth, which is
but one, and there is not another; and the Apostles which witnessed, Saints
needed no man to teach them, did exhort them; and yet did not condemn
principles by practice.

Then thou go on, and say, The Ranters are not for Baptism, and Breaking
if Bread; and are not the Quakers the same? But what does this prove; and thou
say, the Ranters are they that would profess themselves without sin; and how
far short of (...) Opinion are the Quakers? and the Ranters would not own the
Resurrection, etc.

And how say you, Do you believe the very Bodies shall rise, etc.

Reply, Friend, this is far short of proving these things upon us, by querying
them to us, let the Reader consider: But it may be impudency has not so wholly
eaten out honesty in thee, as that thou dare charge us wholly with these
things, but would intrude into us be thy Questions, as though the thing were so
indeed, but thou may by ashamed of thy work: Is this sufficient proof of evil
against us, to ask us whether it be so? what have thou proved in all this
against us (if we were guilty) think thou we will accuse our selves? this is
absurdity, and wickedness in thee, falsely to charge us, and to bring no better
evidence, but thy bare words; and as we deny the Ranters, so do we thee, and
sees you both to be Enemies to the Life of God: But thy last and chie^ proof
(as thou think) that we are one, is, that the Ranters are Sinners, and the
Quakers are Liars; the first I will not vindicate, but this last) is
disputable, and thy proof of it is first, tho^ say, from what thou have said
already, to some pages of my first Book, to which I (...) Replied, and leaves
it to the Reader; only does say, thou have not yet proved one Lie against me in
the sight of God nor men; thou art the Liar if thou say the have, and honest
men shall be judge betwixt us: And thy second proof is mo^ to the discovering
thy ignorance then yet has been: And to clear thy self from my In my first
Book.
charge against thee (viz) to be a wrester of the Scripture, which yet I stand
to, thou art fain into grievous error: my first charge is true upon thee, (...)
thou perverted or wrested that Scripture; Rev. 13. 18. in saying the Lamb was
(...) before the Foundation of the World; for that Scripture says since, or
from (...) Foundation of the World; have thou no more sense? art thou and all
thy compa^ so ignorant that you know not betwixt before and since a time? how
are you blinded? and yet persists in your wickedness, and will not be reproved;
therefore this is a double iniquity in thee, to thy shame remember it; for I
have said true, though thou understand it not, in my first Book I said,
there is as much difference, betwixt before, and since, in that thing, as
betwixt a Lie and Truth; for to say the blood was shed before the Foundation of
the World, as thou did, is a very Lie; but to say i^ was shed since, or from,
is truth, and that Scripture is truth, Rev. 13.

And thou art the Liar, and Wrester of it, and I have not wronged thee in my
first, though thou impudently and ignorantly would clear thy self, and lay
iniquity upon me: But further to clear thy self, thou say, thou said, in Gods
account it was shed, before the World was: and this is little less then
Blasphemy, what, is God a Hypocrite, like thy self? to account that for Truth,
which is a Lie, as I have proved; O horrid error and perfect blindness! but
this will not cover thee, nor thy shame, from the eye of men; where is thy
Proof for such a Doctrine, that God accounts that which is a Lie, for Truth?
largely is manifest thy Read the Scriptutes and mark the sense; betxist before,
and from.
folly; Repent, if thy heart be not void of shame, for what thou have spoken
he^ in; and let the Reader understand this difference; thou say the Blood of
Christ, was shed before the Foundation of the World, according to that
Scripture, Rev. 13. I say thou perverts the Scripture, and lie grossly in the
main thing it self; and says it is* since, or from the Foundation of the
World; let the honest judge; and now it is seen the Lie rests upon thy own
Head, who wrests the Scripture; and belyes the Lord, and me, and goes on in thy
wickedness after reproof, and take thou the Ranters, they are thy Companinons,
in lying, and sinning, and not ours.

And further thou art offended that I should say, and would fain reckon it for
a Lie, that all thy work is a secret smiteing, and an obscure shooting against
the manifestation of Christ within, which words I own to be truth concerning
thee, and am not ashamed of them, though thou say, I say falsely, and when the
Book of thy Conscience is opened, thou shall confess it; only I leave viz. that
which you said; there was nothing in any men to be taken notice of; this is a
denying of him within.
this to be considered seriously, and judged by them who are spiritual, and
they shall be my Witnesses; and the Lie is of thee and thy Father, whose
wickedness is sufficiently seen by what is said, if I should say no more: Again
thou say it is an untruth of thee, to say thou art one of those that do
preach for Hire, through Covetousness making merchandise of Souls; my words are
not so laid down, thou have wrested them for thy purpose, though it availes
nothing: but I said, thou art in their steps, that through covetousness, with
fained words, makes merchandise of Souls, and thou art found among them that
preaches for Hire; and I have spoken the truth herein, let the Light in all
Consciences judge, who are not feared in many things; I might instance that
thou art in their steps, and among them that act such things, as further may be
proved, and the wisdom of God so foresaw, to keep me clear, and my words to be
defended; though I expected no less from thee, as to this thing, then is come
to pass, but the Lie is of thy self, who would deny the the truth is he is in
their steps, and among them.
Truth: The next thing that thou will charge upon to be a Lie, I pass here, the
Reader may expect it in its place; and though thou say, the Rantors and I,
and my Fellows are of the same mind in many things, etc.

To which I Reply, Their practices I deny, and the ground in which they stand,
and their false doctrines; yet dare we not deny any truth as it is in Christ;
though they, as thou may, profess it in words, which is seldom they do, for
we have respect unto the Truth, for the truths sake only; but how uncharitable
art thou in thy measure and judgment, consider, as if he should say, John
Bunion is of the same mind with the Pope in many things; the Pope holds Christ
was born of Mary, and was crucified, and raised again, and ascended, etc. And
this holds I. Bunion, and is of the same mind with the Pope in many things;
and therefore must partake of the same plagues with the Pope, as thou said of
us; though thou have by unequal measure thus judged us, yet I render not evil
for evil, but in love to thy soul, shows thee thy folly and weakness.

Then thou go on having viz. that the Quakers undervalues the Lord Jesus,
and does not lay him for their foundation.
passed by the two slanders cast upon us, by I. Burton, in your first Book,
which I charged you withal in mine, to which not one word as to evidence your
slanders, but has slippen it over, as a foul guilty man, which charge stands
upon you both; that you are Slanderers herein, and my first answer I am not
ashamed of, though you snarle much about it, and would taint it, or undermine
it: but thy subtilty is to weak, Truth confounds thee and thy simple policy,
which is, that we prize the Lord Jesus Christ, God man, to be precious unto us,
and has owned him alone to be the Foundation whom God has laid, and in his
Light we are saved, etc.

As I said in Page 7. against which words thou can not justly except, nor yet
prove the contrary; and yet as a man that loves to hear thy own tongue, thou
lays down many things impertinent as to the cause in hand.

But it had been more honest to have helped thy brother Burton, from under my
true Charge, and cleared the Truth, if thou had been able; but thou have left
^im in the dirt under the Charge of a Slanderer; and are unfaithful to him,
and goes about to inquire what it is (as thou say) to lay Christ for a
Foundation; thou confesses what I have said is fairly spoken, and yet thy
envious mind, and unbelieving heart seems to be offended at my words; and to
them that can believe I speak plainly, and does not beg thy belief, nor any
man's, but commends my self to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, and
knows no other Jesus the Savior, nor Foundation, then he that John was sent to
prepare the Way before, who was, and is, and is to come; who said, I am the
light of the World, and now my words are defended to be truth in the sight of
them that are spiritual; and thou, and such may hear, but must not understand,
who have hardened your hearts, least you should believe, and therefore is given
up to Gainsayings, till the Wrath of God break out against you; and let John
Burton remember my words, where I said he is fallen into the pit which he
dug for another, and he undervalues the Lord Jesus, whose Doctrine is to
speak Truth, but he has lied and slandered, and so is out of Christ the
Foundation, and undervalues him, who keeps not his sayings, but is a Worker in
Darkness, and not in the Light: And as to that where I say, thus much is the
mind of the Penmans spirit, (of the first Epistle, of the first Book) secretly
smiting at the Doctrine of true Faith and Salvation (to wit) Christ within, I
have said the truth in righteousness, and do own my words, though thou say I
have done him a great deal of wrong, etc.

But I leave it to be judged by them that are spiritual, and not unto thee, to
give false meaning of my words; and does not he say in that Epistle of some
that have been depending too much upon some thing they call Christ, and the
Righteousness of Christ within them, etc.

Let the wise in heart judge, whether this be not as I said, even a secret
smiting against Christ within, without which as I have said, there can be no
Salvation, for he that has not Christ in him, is a Reprobate; and this I
speak, not in opposition, but as a testimony of Christ Jesus, that dyed, and
rose again, and ascended, who is within, and without also; and if any preach
another Jesus, let him be accursed; and repent thou, who art in the wrong doing
thy self, falsely charging me; noting in the Margent, with speaking falsely, when
I spa^ the truth; and the false speaking rests at thy door, and is driven
thither with the power of truth.

Then whereas thou would justify thy former wickedness, in charging the
Quakers to be Deceivers, against my just Answer The children of God were ever
counted De cenvers by this Generation, but the way which he called delusion do
we worship, the true God, etc.
in page 8. of mine; which stands free from any of thy vain Argument, and
uncontroled; though resisted; but it appears my words sticks close unto thee,
and torments thee; and thou said, with much confidence, it will easily be
proved that we are Deceivers; but thy Arguments we shall try.

And (say thou) First, the Quakers deny the man Christ Jesus without them,
and own Christ no otherways but as he is within, etc.

Reply, How impudent art thou in forging Lie after Lie, and building them up in
thy Work one upon another, and a wicked course thou takes to clear thy former
Slanders, truly charged upon thee in my first, even by laying another upon it.

Friend, By this thy deceitful Slander, while thou have thought to prove us
Deceivers has proved thy self one, even a false Accuser; may thou not blush
to say we own Christ no otherwise, then as he is within? we own him which was,
is, and is to come, who is within us, and without us, as I have said in my
first, we own him as the Scripture speaks of him; and it is known (...) the
Lord, and in his sight we are approved, whether thou believe it or not; f^ I
beg not belief of thee, but leaves thy double Slanders to be read, and judged
of, by all honest people, and in the interim, know it is a bad way to prove us
Deceivers by thy Lies, this the rather is a Witness to us that we are of God,
and against thee, and thou to be of the Devil, who was a Liar from the
beginning, and (...) his Child succeeds him; in lying.

Thy second proof is, That we are Deceivers, because (say thou) (...) do
persuade souls that Christ is crucified in them, dead within them, kept (...)
with something within them, which was never taught by them that spoke the
Scriptures, etc.

Reply, These words are falsely laid down, but what think thou of such who
might crucify to themselves Or in themselves.
afresh the Son of God, and put him to open shame, as it is written; this they
could not do, above Stars, they being men upon the Earth; and Christ was sent
to preach to the Spirits in Prison, he that can read let him understand, this
Doctrine was preached by them that spoke forth the Scriptures, who had the
Spirit of God; but in blindness I find thee, and I think so I must leave thee:
and though I do not feed the Serpent, yet my words are plain to him that has
an understanding, and an ear open; and Deceiver belongs to thee, and at thy
door it lies, and thou can not remove it.

Farther (thou say) We persuade souls that that man, that was born of the
Virgin Mary, is not above the Clouds, and the Stars, when as the Scripture
says a Cloud received him out of their fight.

Reply, This is another Lie, uttered without fear or knowledge, or honesty, we
do not persuade souls to believe any such thing; but bears witness to the truth
of that Scripture, that a Cloud received him out of their sight, and we say he
is out of their sight and must appear again in sight; and this is a wicked way
of thee, to prove us Deceivers, by slandering us, adding more to thy own sin,
and the more will be thy burden, in the day of the Lord, when Plagues and
Torment are thy portion, from which thou shall not fly, though now thou be
above shame.

Farther, (say thou) We persuade souls not to believe that that man that was
crucified, and rose again, etc. Shall so come again to Judgment, as he went
away; and shall raise up men and women out of their Graves, and cause them to
come into the Valley of Jehoshaphat; thou say we strive to beat souls off
from believing this, etc.

Reply, O how swiftly thy lying Tongue runs without fear, as though neither God
nor man took notice of thee, or that ever thou should be called to question
for them; many Lies together thou have here foulded up in one; thy Lies I deny,
and this to be one; have thou set thy self to tell Lies! O abominable
wickedness, may thou not tremble? when thou considers what thou falsely say
of us, contrary to my words, who said in the truth of my heart, we own him to
be what the Scripture speaks of him, and not otherwise? it seems thou cannot
believe when I speak truth; I number up thy Lies, and returns them back to thee
to read; and by all this is it not true, that thou art of the same spirit with
thy fellow, and abound more in Lies? as I said in my first; his was but about
three, thine manifold more; but thy Lies are no testimony against us, that we
are Deceivers, but they shall lie heavy upon thee at one day, when we shall be
clear: For in the affirmive.

I further say, that, that Christ Jesus that was crucified, and rose again,
shall come (as he went away) to Judgment, and the dead shall be raised, and
every man shall receive according to their deeds; and he shall set to judge the
Heathen round about, according to Joel 3. and thy portion in that day shall be
Howling and Gnashing of Teeth; for the Liars Portion is the Lake.

Thou say again, the Quakers make no difference between that Light, wherewith
Christ, as he is God has enlightened all, and the Spirit of Christ he gives not
to all.

Reply, I put thee to prove that they are contrary or divided one against the
other; for thus Christ says, I will send you the Comforter even the Spirit of
Truth, which must needs be the Spirit of Christ, and he shall reprove or
convince the World of sin, and of righteousness; now mark that same Spirit of
the Father, and of the Son, who is the Comforter of the Saints is the same, and
not another, that does reprove the World; he that can read, let him understand,
the World cannot receive the Comforter, yet have they given to them, that which
does reprove them; which is with the Light of Christ Jesus, of the same, and
not contrary, nor divided; if thou have an ear, thou may hear; the Error is
in thy self, who art without understanding.

Further, thou say, That every one has that which is like the Spirit of
Christ, even as God, as the Spirit of Christ; which thou say is desperate
blassphemy, and cries out with an outcry, O wonderful deceit! etc.

Reply, I would have all to take notice, that thou have wronged my words, in
wresting of them for thy wicked purpose, to have a ground of slander; there is
no such words in the tenth Page of my Book, which thou quotest, but in one
place; I say, till thou prove the Light of Christ, John 1. 9. (which thou
confesses every man has) to be contrary to the Spirit of Christ, (Mark) I
shall say every man has that which is one in union, and like the Spirit of
Christ, even as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to its measure; these
words I must own.

But let the sober Reader take notice, how foully thou have wronged my words,
Till he could prove the light, John 1. 9. to be contrary to the Spirit of
Christ, when he proves this, I may shut my mouth.
leaving out the strength of them, to take occasion of slander; when thou had
proved the Light of Christ (which in John 1. 9. is spoken of) to be contrary to
the Spirit of Christ, then had been a better season, for this charge against me.

O thou impudent and shameless man! so uniustly to deal against the upright,
who envies thee not, but pitties thee; therefore when thou, or any man can
prove the Light of Christ spoken of John 1. 9. and John 8. 12. to be contrary
to the Spirit of Christ, then I may own the Judgment and charge upon me; but
till then thou art proved a Liar; for the Light of Christ spoken of John 1. 9.
that Light is one in union, and not contrary, and is of the likeness of the
Spirit of Christ, and as The Witness is as good as the Judge; in measure.
good in its measure; and these words I stand to, to vindicate against all thy
Lies, and wresting of words, and outcries, who is an unfit fellow to judge
what Blasphemy is, who art so blind, that thou know not the difference of
words, betwixt before, and from, as I have showed:

Repent, If so be thou may find mercy.

Then further thou say, to cover my self, and deceit, I do apply, that which
should be to the children of God, etc. And yet cannot reprehend my answer,
which is just and faithful, that the Children of God were always counted
Deceivers, and this is true, as thy self confesses, but wickedly says in thy
answer, and most lyingly too, and blasphemy is falen out of thy mouth; The
Devil knows how to take Childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs.

Reply, Now let all consider what thou have said, Christ Jesus is the Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven, the Childrens Bread, and they have no other;
Now the Devil cannot take Christ Jesus, who only is the Childrens Bread, and
give him to Dogs; O horrid! can thou behold this, and not be smitten to the
heart, what wickedness and ignorance lodges in that heart that can utter these
things; Though thou think, thou have done bravely i^ thus saying, yet the
Wisdom of God turns thy words upon thy own head into confusion and grievous
error, I deny it though thou affirm it; that the Devil can take, or knows how
to take Christ Jesus, and give him to Dogs.

Further thou say, I am grieved, that thou should say none but a Company
of Notionist and Ranters, etc. are carried with the Quakers, etc. and say
thou, this appears in (...) men's sight, etc.

Reply, Thou art a Liar, I am not greived at thy Slanders and wicked
Reproaches; but rather rejoices therein, that I am one worthy to bear them; and
all men that can see, sees thee a false Accuser herein: For such who have
feared the Lord, and served him, and are, and have been honest and upright to
God and man, have owned us, and have been neither Ranters, nor such like; and
we rejoice, if any that has been so, be turned from it unto God, to live in
Righteousness, though thou note it for a false thing in the margent. (But to
make it appear false thou have corrupted my words) which are, Though some of
all sorts of people be brought to God, yet thou The words seems to be are left
out, by him, which cause the strength of my words.
seems to be offended herewith; and these my words are true upon thy head, for
I ask, notwithstanding some were such, are they such who are in wickedness
since they owned us? then why do thou wickedly (as though thou were offended
at it) upbraid us, that such, or such are carried away with us, as though none
else; which is thy Lie uttered in thy hastiness.

And whereas thou art offended, (thou say) that I should say, thou are like
the Pharisees; whether I spoke so or no, however, I own that thou art like them
(at least) even one among them.

As further I shall manifest; then thou have over-leapt (with a false excuse of
passing by many railings as thou say) which it seems troubles thee that I
should truly In my first Book.
charge thee to bring sorth Lies without fear; and that the Ranters and light
Notionists, and thee we deny, till you turn to the Lord by repentance; and if
you turn from your iniquity we dare not deny you.

And further I truly charge thee, that thou art puffed up in thy Lies and
Slanders, and advances thy self above the Innocent, who exceeds thee in Faith
toward God, and in good works toward man, and whose conversation is in
heaven, but thine is among the Hirelings, etc. And this thou have skipped over,
as a deceitful Child, with a poor excuse, which thou may be ashamed to call
these railings; but that thy heart is void of shame, let the sober Reader judge
else; then thou say I stumble at that, wherein in thy first thou say, The
Devil persuades these men to believe.

First, That salvation was not completely wrought out for Sinners by the man
Christ Jesus, etc.

Reply, Here thou art a Liar again; I stumble not, for I walk in the Light, and
does not stumble; but I reproved thy Lie, and Slander, and said, this
Accusation is clearly false, wickedly cast upon us; for there is no Salvation
in any other, neither is it wrought by any other, but by Jesus Christ, etc. As
page the ninth of my first may be read; but thou have not at all removed, the
true charge against thee, that I charged upon thee, upon these words (viz) a
Believer of Lies, a Slanderer, a false Accuser, which stands true upon thee
still, and will for ever, till thou remove it by repentance; for thou can
never clear thy self any otherways; and thou say, I have left some words out,
but this is but a poor catch; for do I not make an Et caettera at the end of
thy words? and if thou were not too ignorant, thou might understand that
which follows is included and conjoined.

Then thou go on, and say, I am offended that thou should say the Devil
deceives souls, by bidding them follow the Light that they brought into the
World with them, telling them, that will lead into the Kingdom etc.

Now my answer to this is sober, and just, Page 10. of my first.
as will appear, though thou say vainly, I seem to be gravelled, because I
informed thy mistake; who said, pervertingly, either in subtilty, or for want
of wit, the light which they brought into the World with them; when as the
Scripture says, Christ is the Light which lights every man that comes into
the World, Ioh. 1. 9. which Light, as I did, I do affirm, will lead into the
Kingdom of peace and rest; and deny it if thou can; for the Light of Christ,
does reveal Christ, and the Light lights every man that comes into the
World; then thou heaps up many words, though thou falsely say, I corrupt that
Scripture Ioh. 8. yet I lay it down in its own words, and say, that is, or was
the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World, and that Light
(which has so done) will lead all that believes into the Kingdom, for Christ
said I am the Light of the World; and though thou ignorantly would seem to
say this is error; yet I affirm it, that the same which says, I am the Light
of the World, is he, and no other, which lights every man that comes into the
World, and this I suppose thou will call a filthy error; but the filthiness is
in thy own heart, and error too, through ignorance of the knowledge of the
things of God, who would fain (if thou could) make it appear, that that
Christ which lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. is not
the same that says I am the Light of the World, John 8. 12. Thy confused words
seems to carry this meaning; let the Reader judge, whether that be not the same
Christ Jesus, which John speaks of; John 1. 9. as it is written of John 8. 12.
and though thou ignorantly say I would have room to broach my folly, yet thou
lets out of thy vessel in sides of leaves, of Lies and Slanders and Folly; and
thou say, when he said, I am the Light of the World, he was without, he did
not mean any light within, and thou presumptuously bids me deny this if I can;
to which I say, the same Christ, which said, I am the Light of the World, was
he which was before Abraham, who was Light to the Gentiles, and lights every
man in the World; yea, he was and is given to be a Light, where his person
(which was supposed the son of Joseph) never came, and do thou deny this if
thou can, that all men may see thy Folly; for there is not many Christ's, but
one Christ, which is not only within, but without, not only without, but
within, but is all and in all; let him that read^ understand.

Then thou say, the Light wherewith Christ, as he is God, lighted every one,
is the Soul of man, which is the Life of the Body, and is a Creature, and has
one faculty of its own Nature called Conscience.

Reply, Now lets try this Doctrine, and consider what thou have said, it amoun^
to thus much, that Conscience is of the nature of the Soul of man, and the soul
is the Light of Christ, as God.

Therefore thou have said the Conscience is the Light of God which must needs
be without sin; this is more then I have or dare say, I might here fitly ask
thee, if thou know what the word Conscience signifies in true understanding;
and yet though thou have uttered this, that Conscience is a Faculty of the
soul, which thou say is the Light of Christ, as God, which Light of God must
needs be of the nature of God pure, and not impure; yet in the next page thou
say, Conscience is a poor Dunghill Creature in comparis^ of the Spirit, etc.
and in another page calls Conscience poor, so empty beggarly things, etc.

What now John Bunion; is that which thou have concluded to be the Light of
God, but a dunghill-Creature, and low, and empty, and beggarly in comparison
etc. For shame cease such Divinity, lest all thy Fellows reprove thee; O how
does thy ignorant zeal lead thee into Snares, and trape thy own feet. And to
confound thy self, thou say, Conscience, which is the Light of God, is Nature
it self; then it must needs be that every man's nature (which is sinful say I)
it the Light of God; O what horrible Doctrine this proves in its explanation!

Blush, and be ashamed when thou considers; then thou cries out in reproof* O
wonderful, say thou, That men should make a God, and Christ of their
Consciences! I know none that does it, nor that ever spoke so highly of
Conscience, (...) thou have here done; yet we say our Conscience bears us
witness in the holy Ghost; and this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Consciences; (...) if our Consciences condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God; and yet makes not God and Christ of our Conscience, as thou
secretly would charge us withal: Then thou go on, and would seem to
prove, but can not, that something besides the Light of Christ convinces of
sin; but thy reach is too short, tho^ thou wind abroad, and lets thy thoughts
into the pit of thy own reason, to bring up a thing to confound Truth, but
cannot; for this is thy proof, where they were all convinced by their own
Consciences John 8. Now all these I say we^ men come into the World, and
therefore according to John 1. 9. were lighted with the Light of Christ, and
thou have confessed that Conscience is the Light of Christ, as God; which is no
less then I have affirmed, then wherefore have thou waded so far, when at the
end thou art forced to confess my position, thy words being explained, that it
is the Light of Christ that does convince of sin, and can find no other thing
besides that; then thou say, here is something besides the Spirit of Christ
that does convince of sin etc.

But yet I say, nothing besides the Light of Christ, as thou have confessed,
and that was that only which I affirmed in the tenth page of mine, about which
thou have made all this stir, and to no purpose, (as to prove any thing
convinces of sin but the Light of Christ) and in that I said, he that
convinces of sin against the Law, leads up into the fulfiling of the Law,
which still I own, though thou would contradict it, but can not; and I
clearly see thou have not reached the understanding of my words, but answered
thy own conceiving, and not my words; for I do not say, or think that
righteousness comes by the Law, yet that is righteousness, which condemns
that which breaks the Law; if thou have an ear thou may hear; and as I said
it is the Word of Truth, the Righteousness of the Law must needs be fulfilled
in Judgment, upon you all, and by Christ Jesus in you, if ever you receive the
Salvation to your Souls; and thou have not yet learned what I mean, and though
thou say, that for justification, thou lookst beyond the Law, to the Son of
Mary; but I say thou must not look beyond it for condemnation, who art in
transgression, and not reconciled to God, through condemnation in the flesh,
for it will reach you to condemnation; and thou say Thou understandst that I
do, in all my discourse disown Christ without, by pretending to a Christ
within; To which I say, thy understanding deceives thee, who, it may be feared,
blinds thy own eyes; that thy Conscience may not condemn thee for slandering,
but while I am approved in the sight of God, of those things whereof thou
accusest me falsely, and wickedly; I matter nothing what a Liars Judgments is
of me, my Answer to thy Query shall prove me clear, and thee a Liar herein,
that we own Gods Christ as the Scripture declares of him, as I have said, and
the darkness of my words is to blind the eye of subtilty, and not to deceive
the hearts of the simple (though thou would say it) see if thou now can
tell what I say.

And whereas thou art offended, that I say, many more things in thy Book I pass
by, as being not pertinent to the thing in hand; my words are true, for the
thing in hand was proving us Deceivers, and that was the most of which I meddled
withal, or purposed to oppose; and to other things that thou speak of in
short, my answer was, and is the words (or of some of them) I own, and thy
voice I deny, without any blaspheming or error, in the view of all the World
(though thou would say it) for whatsoever a lying spirit speaks, I deny it to
be the voice of Christ, though it may be some of his words; and thy spirit is a
lying spirit: And though thou art offended that I should say Fools loves to be
meddling, yet its true enough, is not he a Fool who is a Liar and a Slanderer,
that understands not betwixt before a time, and since a time, judge in thy own
Conscience; and thy fair words, as that it must needs be (say thou) That the
Saints of God must be called Fool; I say, never presume the name of Saint, but
clear thy self of thy Lies and Slanders, and perverting Scriptures, and learn
the First principle of Religion; Even that which Condemns thee.

And as to that which I say (...) true, that the Pope can speak as much of
Christ without as thou, I own it, and may add; I believe he can speak more then
thou of Christ without, and with as good, or better understanding; though both
a like far from the Kingdom of God; yet in thy Answer, thou ask me, if I put
(...) difference betwixt the speaking of; and believing in Christ without; Yea,
I do a great deal, for he that believes in him, has the Witness in himself of
him, and his heart is purifyed, and he is a new Creature, which thou art not,
but thou I suppose would be reckoned a Believer; nay, for I think the Pope
has both more words, and more good works, and makes as much Conscience of
lying and false accusing as thou, for ought as may be understood, of a tree by
the fruits, which is our way to judge, as Christ has given us example; then is
that I said thou have answered thy self a question deceitful, thou art
offended, and boasts thy self against me, Charging me to be an Enemy to the
truth, and the li^^, in that I did not manifest thy deceit; but now I shall
therefore, to stop thy pro^ boasts in that answer, thou calls it a sad doctrine
which says, follow the Light which Christ has enlightened every man withal,
and other such like things following that question, which are deceitful, and
wicked, and thou thereby art proved the Enemy to truth thy self, and thou and
thy words are both deceitful; and therefore boast not thy self: Then thou
answers my Question, which was, does not the Scripture witness that all who
have not Christ are Reprobates? the Question is sound, and of worth to be
noted, and in thy answer thou say, yet it is true, to which I soberly Reply,
then what a condition are all in, that has (...) Christ within, nor no
knowledge of him, but what they have of him as he is without, by the letter
without, do thou consider this; and whether it be not of the chiefest prize to
Life and Salvation, to wait for him, and seek for him within, seeing all that
have not him within are Reprobates.

But farther thou would seem to manifest a great deal of folly in me, when as
the folly lies in thy own bosom, and by thy confused words, I understand the
groundst thy Answer upon alye, and false understanding, and therefrom bring^
the false reproof, as if I should hold forth that every man has received Chri^
or the Spirit of Christ in him.

This I have never said, but that every man has the Light of Christ gi^ him
which I say is one in union, with the Spirit of Christ; and I say Christ (...)
given to all, but all receives him not; and I see thou understands not my for^
words that I write in answer to one of thy Queries, thou can not disting^
betwixt a thing being given of God, and a thing being received by man, so (...)
the folly is fallen back on thee, take it, who understands not my words, (...)
opposes thy own conceivings, and false understanding; and though I might (...)
truly apply this word folly in that extent, then thou applied the like word
(...) thy self in this same page, yet I leave it to the judgment of the
serious Reader, and say, thy folly is want of wit in the World, and not for Ch^
sake: Then thou would defend thy first wickedness, in that thou said the
Devil deceives Souls, by persuading them to follow the Light within, which all
men have; but my answer to it thou have not reached, in that I said, (...) that
comes to Life eternal must follow the Light within which Christ ha^ given,
which stands over thy head for ever to be truth; but yet how bli^ art thou in
confessing the Light within, even Conscience to be the Light (...) Christ as
God, and yet say, the Devil deceives souls by bidding follow the Light within.

O abominable doctrine! what does the Devil deceive souls by bidding for the
Light of Christ as God? so John Bunion's doctrine is; let it be noted: (...)
see thou thy folly how it is manifest, and thy pitiful evasions are weighed,
(...) stead of contradicting my former sufficient answer, which thou could no
(...) reach to wrest, or otherwise to answer it, asks a question, which I may
ans^ as soon as thou have sufficiently replied to my former answer, and this is
in (...) an answer to it; it is heresy to say, that the Light of God (or any
Light of (...) or Christ) can or does deceive the Soul; and though thou stumble
at it, I said (...) in saying, that thy whole purpose is a secret smiting
against the Light within, (...) the Reader judge.

And now to manifest thy ignorance fully; thou have confessed the Light wit^
even Conscience is the Light of God; have not thou cause to repent of (...)
absurdities and blindness, who holds forth, that the Devil deceives Souls by
the Light of God, seeing thou can find no Light within man, but that which
thou confessest is the Light of God.

Then thou says, Thy whole design was first to show Souls where Salvation is
to be bad, namely in Christ without, and yet has confessed, all that has him
not within are Reprobates, and such have not salvation, by him without;
Consider therefore, without Christ within no Salvation, as I have said, and
thou have confessed it, (Mark it) then to clear thy self from contradiction,
which I charged thee with, thou would cast a confusion upon me, in that thou
says, I would make a defiled Conscience, the Law and Spirit of Christ to be all
one; This is falsely spoken, I have never said, nor thought, that a defiled
Conscience is the Law and Spirit of Christ, a Liar thou art to be noted, and
this Lie adds to the number; and yet consider thou have said (several time)
that Consciences is the Light of Christ, as God; and now calls Conscience
defiled; Is the Light of God defiled? John Bunnion, says so; O horrid! read
thou thy confusion, and grievous Error, which is brought to thy Door, and there
I leave it; thou may Blush, and all thy Witnesses at this; and in that thou
callst my Answer Scoulding, against thy Epistle, and persumptuously say, The
truth of which thou could be willing to seal with thy Blood.

Reply, Scoulding I deny, but I have reproved thy Lies in the Authority of the
Lord, and be not so proudly pust up in boasting: what say thou? shall thy
Blood go for this, that the Quakers are Deceivers, and that the Devil deceives
Souls, by bidding them follow the Light within, which thou say is Conscience,
which thou confesses is the Light of God, and that the Blood of Christ was shed
before the World was, and that the Scripture say so, and that we deny that
Salvation was completely wrought by the man Christ Jesus, with several other
things noted for Lies; what say thou John Bunnion? art thou so desparte as
that thou will hazard thy Blood upon this account? if it be so, sure the Devil
has great power over thee; cease thy boasting lest the Lord make thee an
Example, and though thou would exhort me, thy spirit I deny, and so thy words
I judge, and cannot receive good from an evil Spirit: Then thou comes on,
falling on thy own foul ignorance again, and would fain clear thy self, but
by thy stirring thy own wickedness herein, thou makes it cast an odious sight
to all that pass by, (we may follow thee a little, seeing thou art not yet
weary) and fain would thou make it appear that the Blood of Christ was shed
before the World was, and say it was, in Gods account; but to this I have
spoken, and largely showed thy blindness to all men, and adds this upon thy
head; thou art a Liar and Perverter of Scripture to say, That the Blood of
Christ was shed before the World was.

And further thou art a Liar, to say, That God accounts a thing for Truth which
is a Lie; a sad error, and wicked.

And further thou art a Liar, to say, that I corrupt thy woods: for I had not
laid open thy nakedness so fully, if thou had not persisted in thy blindness,
as now I am forced to do, but enough of this, and more then ever thou can
clear thy self of honestly; and yet to cover thy own shame charges me falsely
with folly, to speak evil of things I know not, or else with madness, etc.

Reply, Friend, be not so confident, I know the difference betwixt, before, and
since, or from, and know that God accounts not a Lie for Truth (as thou holds
out) thy own folly and madness; behold, who commits iniquity in lying on the
Scripture, and on God, and on me, and yet persists after a sober reproof, and
resists the Reprover, with opprobrious words, let confusion of face cover thy
impudent forehead, while I forgive thee, and seeks not vengeance against thee;
then through thy mistake of my words, thou have falsely gathered a subject to
oppose, and fights with thy own understanding mightily, and think thou
confoundst me, and its thy self; for however thou understands my words, either
for want of wit, or otherwise, it never entered into my thoughts, with charging
thee to believe that Christ is a tipe; only I charge thee that thou said so
of others; So that I think this is a mistake in thee for want of knowledge to
understand my rehearsal of thy words, being transcribed as the shortest, not to
fill volumes, and through thy own misunderstanding of my laying down the words,
thou heavily, yet vainly charges me with corrupting thy words, which God is my
witness I have not done, though thou be guilty herein.

But further, I deal plainly, and slanders not in secret, as thou do, we do
not look on Christ to be but a shadow and tipe, if thou affirm I shall answer
further, and as to that (thou say) I say Jesus is the substance; to that
answer I stand, though thou say, Thou doubts I do not sp^ plainly, etc.

Reply, As I have said I seek not a proof of my faith of thee, nor any man, not
do I beg thy belief while I am approved in the sight of God, herein I matter
not what a lying spirit doubts of me, so that what vain Arguments, or Queries
thou raises from thy own false doubt I pass by, being by the present thing,
branching out in things on the by, if I should examine every particular, I
might fill a vollume.

And whereas thou have answered my question, which is; did Christ put an end to
the Law for them, who yet live in the transgression of the Law? or does he
justify that which the Law condemns, before the work of the Law be finished?
In thy Answer thou say, Christ did put an end to the Law for Righteousness,
for all that the Father has given him, This is little to the Question:

I say that Transgressors of the Law, are not Christ's, but Children of
Disobedience, and Children of Wrath, and such God has not given to Christ, who
are his Enemies, nor Christ to them is not given, but to condemn them is that
estate, and thou say there are many given to Christ, who yet lives is their
sins; the Apostle John says, he that sins is of the Devil, and has (...)
known God, and such as are of the Devil are not Christ's; and in that I sa^,
does Christ justify that which the Law condemns before the work of the Law
(...) finished, and not one tittle of the Law shall fail, till all be
fulfilled? thou have (...) reached the understanding of my words, for while
disobedience stands and the Transgressor lives, the work of the Law is not
finished, nor fulfilled, but to that is Condemnation, and not Justification; if
thou have an ear thou may hear, for he that transgresses the Law is an Enemy
to Christ, and Christ fulfills not the Law for his Enemies, they must bear
their own burden; and though this thou cannot understand now, yet in the day
of Judgment shall thou feel it, and when the burden of thy own Inquity is
upon thee, then shall thou confess to what I have said, and read me in what now
thou can not understand; and in the mean time, I deny that Christ has put an
end to the Law for thee, who art a Liar, and breaks one, and so is guilty of
all.

Many of thy words might be weighed and searched, but I am no pic^ of quarrels;
but to my last Query, thou say little to the purpose, which is; what
assurance have any, that the Law is fulfilled for them, who (...) yet
Transgressors of it, in themselves? but say, Assurance comes the believing
and obedience to the Law is a fruit of believing, etc. Saying (...) one that
has the hope of the Son of God purifies himself as he (Christ) (...) pure.

Reply, Then he that has not the fruit, (viz.) obedience to the Law, (...) may
judge by the fruit, or for want of fruit is no Believer; and he that is (...)
purifyed as he is pure (Christ) has not the hope of being the Son of God but
is without hope, now see where thou art, who yet breaks the Law, and (...)
without (thy own noted) fruit of believing, neither is purifyed as he is pure,
and so is without hope, this is according to thy own affirmation; if the can
not bear it, blame thy self for laying down such a position, as has pro^ thy
self to be^an Unbeliever, and without hope; and so without God in the World;
one that is for condemnation, and to be judged in the state where now thou
standst.

And whereas thou say, I would lay assurance on obedience to the Law; thou
lie in this also, my words are, the Law must be fulfilled in you by Christ,
in Judgment and in Righteousness, if ever you receive Salvation, and these
words are true against all thy opposition, neither do I affirm that by the
deeds of the Law any flesh living shall be justified (but the contrary) though
thou would falsely (yet secretly) cast it upon me, and wickedly callst this my
forthy argument, where I said the Law convinces, and is a Schoolmaster to
bring to Christ, etc.

But the froth proceeds out of thy mouth, for this Argument comprehends thee,
and stands out of thy reach, for all thy detestable speeches against me, and
the truth; and the rest of my following words thou have passed by, where I say,
who owns not that which convinces of sin, how can they own him that takes it
away by his Blood? and this is truth; and tell me in ^ust^ess according to my
first Query in that page, how is sin taken away ^^om thee, more then from the
Pope? seeing neither of you has the fruit of ceasing to commit sin: And art
not thou in the froth, who opposes me, as though (I should say yet never did
nor thought) that justification must be sought by the deeds of the Law, and so
gathers a false conception, and fights with it, and keeps thy self doing in
nine sheets against four, and yet have passed over many special things, almost
the chiefest; and though no flesh shall be justified by the deeds of the Law,
yet must all flesh living be condemned for the transgression of the Law by
Christ, who freely gives Life to all that believes; if thou have an ear thou
may hear; in the next thou seemst (or would at least) to defend thy self
from my charge which shall (if it does not) lie heavy upon thee, which is that
I call thee Slanderer, and truly too, from thy words, where thou falsely accused
the Qunkers with boasting, and Hypocrisy, and in thy answer thou say, I need
not be offended, for thou do not know our fellow, for boasting, in that (thou
say) we ^ry^p our selves, and condemn all others, etc.

But this is no proof of the former Accusation, but an addition to thy former
wickedness, let honest men consider I asked thee when thou did* hear any of
them boast, or see them live in Hypocrisy; but not a word to this sober
desire, but adds sin to sin, a bad way to clear thy self, and thy God, Be
ashamed; for crying up self, we deny, but yet must say, or else say falsely,
That we are of God, and the whole World lies in wickedness, and he that is of
God hears us, and is one with us; and this is as the Saints testified, and is
neither boasting nor Hypocrifie; then to my question, which was; Will that
Faith which is without works justify? and thou say no, etc.

Then I Reply, what is thy condition and theirs, who are not only without works
of faith; but in thy very work of darkness, as Lying and false Accusing, etc.
And seeing thou say no, Consider, whether thou have faith, and whether thy
works which are like good works proceed not from the unbeleiving ground, and
this I add to my next I asked which thou have passed by; must not every one
receive according to their deeds, in the day of Judgment; and then thou runs
out in high words against me, in that I said, if to talk of him (Christ) his
Birth, Blood, etc. Were Faith in him, and living by faith, then few would want
it; and further I add the Pope himself would have it, and my words are just and
honest, without exception or contradiction, but only that something thou must
needs say; though thou say many can talk of Christ, that will fall short of
Heaven, etc. And asks me a question, and fayst, Is there not enough in them,
((...)) Birth Blood, etc. to justify, etc.

I answer the knowledge of all things whatsoever without, will not justify,
except Christ be within, and if he be within, the power of his Life, Blood,
Birth, etc. is known and received and felt, and in this I preach, not any other
Gospel then the Apostles, who said, Say not who shall ascend or descend to
fetch him, (Mark) but what says it; the Word of Faith (or of the Gospel) which
are not divided, is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart. Romans 10.


And thou falsely again charges the Quakers with corrupting, (and beguiling may)
by those Scriptures.

Reply. Beguiling is thy own, and corrupting of Scriptures too, as is proved,
and whilst thou accuses us falsely in these things, thy self art proved truly
guilty, in the sight of all that are spiritual; and as to thy charging me, That
the man Christ Jesus is not very pleasant to me, And with Scoulding, etc.

Thy slanders I bear with patience, and thy reproaches which is not for evil,
but for Christ's sake, who dyed at Jerusalem, and is revaeled in me; and for she
cease to say, Thou art ruled by Scripture a Liar, and Slanderer, and Preverter
of Scriptures, is not led with the Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, but is
ruled by the Devil, and is out of Scripture rule: then thou goes on, and
would justify thy ignorant saying, How are they deceived who own Christ; no
otherwise then as he was before the World began, etc.

And my Page the 14 of my first.
answer to it thou have not touched, nor truly contradicted, which stands over
thee, and is sufficient to all honest people, and Christ we own the same
yesterday to day and for ever; and does believe the Father granted that
request, and he is glorified with the same glory that he had before the World
was, and though thou tell me of a double meaning, yet in plainness I speak
without doubleness, the fault is in thy weakness, and sottishness, and
blindness of heart, who kno^ not that which is infinite and immortal, and
eternal, the flesh of Christ's body is so.

Then thou falsely charges me again (in that I said) if every spirit be of God
which does in words confess thus (viz.) that Christ was with the Father before
the World was (was born and suffered in the flesh and was buried and raised,
etc. then is not the Pope himself Antichrist, etc. As (in my fourteenth page)
whi^ putting on a vail and ventering upon thy words.

But I have spoken the truth herein, let that in thy Conscience answer in
nakedness without a vail, the vail is on thy heart, and thou can not
understand me; and so this is thy simple policy to say the vail is on me; and
what of that, if (...) ventred on it, it is but in the fear of God, though I
should say I deny all the thou say, or the speaking of any thing, for I do
not own thy voice, though some of thy words be true, and though thou speak
words of truth, yet therefore I reprove thee, and sometimes may not let it pass
for truth; for Christ is my example herein, who reproved the Devils, though
they confessed him, (Mark that) but the chief part of my words are passed over,
and read over again, and see if it is not truth it self, where I said, It is
not much better, nor more accepted, to confess Christ in words to be come, and
yet in works to deny him, the^ it is both in words and works to deny him, the
one is wicked in prophane^ the other in Hypocrisy, the one is a Liar, and the
other a false Witness, and let the honest Judge; then whereas I said Christ is
a mystery; and unto hi^ he is Light, and shall be Salvation, where his person,
supposed son of Joseph, never came; which words are true, not gain-sayed by
thee, though thou ask, Did he obtain salvation for any without that body which
he took of (...) Virgin?

Answ. That body which was begotten by the holy Ghost is not so carnal (...)
thou supposest, and that spiritual Rock which followed them, saved them, a^ the
same Son of God the Savior, who was born a Child to them, was the Pri^ of
peace, yea, the everlasting Father, but thy eye sees not this, and therefore
the say. Here Is the place where he is not, and the place where he has not
been, (Now the say) Thou passes by many things which thou might justly
examine, and also many unseemly expressions.

O thou deceitful heart and tongue! is this thy excuse when my words are

Consider of this, when thou have a better understanding for its yet hidden
from thee; then when thou have thus cried out against my just Answer, thou
tells me what I should have said; Alas, poor man! thou reaches not what the
knowledge of things eternal is, by that wisdom in which thou art, I need no man
to teach me, but the Lord.

Then thou say, Jesus Christ has obeyed the Law, and justified thee, etc.

Reply, Nay hold, repent first, and be turned from thy iniquities, and believe
in him, and boast not thy self so proudly; thou art in the transgressions of
the Law in disobedience to it, a Liar, Slanderer, and Scorner, one that the
Prince of the power of the Air rules in, a Child of Wrath, and every one shall
dye for his own iniquity, and the soul that sins shall dye, and wrath to every
one that does evil, and the revelation of the Judgments of God; Learn what
this means, or ask them that are of a better understanding then thy self.

Then thou seemst to mind me of some weakness, and cries out, Wonderful
foolishness, etc.

Because I said, the Light of Christ, given to every man, Ioh. 1. 9. as thou
confessest, is not contrary to the Spirit of Christ, and to the Grace of God,
but is one in their nature (Mark) and a man cannot possibly love one of them,
and hate another; therefore one they are, in the union, leading in the same
way, unto the same End; and where does the Spirit of Christ give light, or the
Grace of God work or lead, if not in the Conscience? etc.

These are my words, Now let honest men consider, and John Bunnion be silent,
what foolishness or wonderful weakness, is in these words, but only to the
wisdom which is devilish, which despises truth? or what cause was there to
blush, when I wrote them? as he impudently says, who cannot contradict them,
nor reprove them, and yet railes upon them: no marvel that thou would pass
them, as thou say with such a poor shift to evade with a Lie, that thou have
spoken to it already, when as thou have not meddled of these things.

O let not thy impudency so sottishly carry thee, (for thy shame is seen and
laid open, its good (in thy light) to pass that which confounds thee, which is
past answering) so to save thy credit among thy fellows; the cause to blush is
in thy self, and its brought to thy own door.

Then thou pleads for the Scripture to be the Rule in opposition to my
Question, which is not answered; which was, can there be any surer thing for
the Creature to look to, to walk to Life, or to come to God by, then the Light
of Christ which every man has given him, etc.

But thou may for shame cease pleading for Scripture rule, being thy self art
so far contrary to it; for he that walks in the Life of the Scripture, I have
union with him, and the Light of Christ is a more surer Testimony, either to
witness Justification or Condemnation, then any man's words without, whatsoever;
then my other Question was, whether the Turks, Jews, and thee, and others, do
serve sin and lust, because Christ has not given you Light to discover your
sins, or because you hate that Light, that is given? and much to this thou
speak not pertinent, nor answerest in plainness; I leave it to the Reader to
judge, and to read my answer Page 17. of my first, which clears truth from all
what thou have said against it in this particular.

Now I come to the next thing, where thou Foolishly chargest me, That my
Doctrine is not according to Truth, but a Lie, Charging me to affirm that which
the Apostle does deny; Because I said the Spirit is given to every man, though
every man receives it not; and it strives with the wicked, though he follow it
not, etc.

My words herein are Truth, and no Lie, neither contrary to the Scripture, and
let the Reader be judge betwixt us; the Apostle says the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; and some of these to whom he
writes thus, were wicked, given to incest and idolatry, and other sins; here I
prove, it was given to the wicked, and thou confesses the Righteous had it, and
there is but these two on the face of the Earth; Now if thou can find a man
that is neither wicked, nor righteous, then thou have advantage, then some has
not the manifestation of the Spirit; the Saints had the Comforter, the Spirit
of Truth, and he (the Spirit of Truth) convinced or reproved the World of sin;
they that were not Saints, but wicked had it, reproving them; Mark these
things, and let honest men judge, while both thou and I am silent, whether thy
Doctrine, which denies that which the Scripture affirms, or mi^ which bears
witness to the same thing which the Scriptures speaks, be to be disowned, let
an equal Line measure; the shame, and false Doctrine is fallen upon thee, and
thou art offended (that I should say thou bringst other vain Arguments) with a
vapor, saying, Neither I, nor my fellows are able to answer, etc.

But I say true, the Arguments are vain, one is, The Devils are convinced, but
have not the Spirit, or such like, Now what is this to the purpose, that thou
contendst in that wherein no body strives with thee, nor none affirms against
thee; and it is a vain Argument to parallel the Devil in such a case, as having
the Spirit; but thou art so blind, its hardly possible to let thee see thy
ignorance herein; I may not much strive with thee, only I Will tell thee of those
things and the sober Reader shall judge; to instance a thing impossible, to
pro^ things possible, are vain Arguments, so that I have herein done thee no
wro^ Then thou cries out of my weakness, and that I Blaspheme, and of a great
(...) of ignorance discovered in me, and bidst me be silent, and falsely charges
me with Presumption, and such like, etc. Because I said, thus much I leave with
thee, (...) thou prove the Light of Christ, (which thou confesses every man
has) to (...) contrary to the Spirit of Christ; I shall say every man has
that which is one (...) union, and like the Spirit of Christ, even as good as
the Spirit of Christ, according to its measure; these are my words, Page 18.
and I own them, and thy answer to them is no contradiction, nor just
confutation of them; but lie, (...) saying, I call Conscience, and Nature it
self the Spirit of Christ; this is fals^ never spoken by me, so that thou have
uttered a pack of railing words, with any knowledge or fear of God, instead of
a sober Answer; the blasphemy a^ great deal of ignorance and presumption
appears not in my words, they a^ truth, and thou have not proved that the Light
of Christ is contrary to the Spirit of Christ; Nay, thy simple policy is too
short, when thou had done so, then had been a time to have cast these
opprobrious speeches at me, like venom from a Viper; but the weakness (or
strength of error) and blasphemy, and the great deal of ignorance and
presumption etc. is fallen at thy door, and there I lea^ it, clear thy self
from it as thou art able, who without any confutation of the words, falls
impudently to charge me thus highly and falsely from the words, (...) thou
silent, while the Reader judges: Then thou goes about to defend thy first
wickedness, in that thou said, the Devil does deceive poor Souls, by bidding
them listen wi^ and turn the mind within, and see if there be not that which
does convince^ sin, etc.

And my Answer to this is sound, and stands over thee, and unreproved by the
though many words thou speak; yet from the Scripture does not prove, or
(...) honest Arguments, that the Devil does deceive any, by bidding them to
tur^ the Light within, which convinces of sin; if thou would have cleared
thy (...) thou should have proved thy assertion, according to my desire, I
asked the was ever such a thing spoken, that the Devil can deceive any by the
Light (...) Christ? but to this not a word in proof, but says, Every man has
not the Spirit (...) Christ, etc.

But further then I Query, Does the Devil deceive any by bidding the^ (...)
turn in, and listen to that Light spoken of John 1. 9. for that Light am I
contending for, and not any other contrary to it; then thou say, thou denyst.

beyond thy reach either to understand or contradict? thou wants that Spirit
which can examine of truth, be it known unto thee; and what are those unseemly
expressions? will thou slander always in secret, without evidence? and if these
be they, in that I said, our innocence will appear when thy black veil of Lies
is taken away; and this is truth, and is no way but seemly to be spoken to
thee, who art an Enemy of God; then thou would justify thy former slander,
who said, we wrest that Scripture, John 1. 9.

And my answer is, we take it without adding or diminishing, which is true, and
no Lie, nor wresting of it; neither in thy Reply can I find that thou provest
it, though many words uttered, little to the purpose, with adding to thy former
slanders, in saying, We would hold that that Light is the Spirit of Christ;
this is not spoken in all my Book, but that it is one in union I say, and not
contrary to the Spirit of Christ, but witnesses of it, and to it.

And thou further says, We say many things, which thou know to be
Blasphemy; This is another Lie, prove one Blasphemy.

And further thou say, Christ, as he is Mediator, does not enlighten every
one that comes into the World, etc.

Reply, Well, thy ignorance and wickedness vents it self forth apace, let any
man read that first Chapter of John, and see whether he does not speak of
Christ as Mediator; he says, He was in the beginning with the Father, and was
made flesh and dwelt with the Disciples; and his Life was the Light of men, and
the Light shined in Darkness; and that was he which lights every man that
comes into the World; and he came to his own, but they received him not, but as
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, etc.

What say thou? Was not this spoken of Christ as Mediator? Consider, and be
instructed, rather then let thy Blood go for it; however I leave thy Doctrine
and Errors herein to be judged by them that are spiritual, and for shame cease
such Doctrine, the more I rake among the filth, the more vilely and odious it
appears; and for thy proof of this Doctrine, thou bringst Mat. 11. 25. and
say, here the Father and the Son are speaking one to another; but what does
this prove, though it be so? does it any way follow that John did not speak of
Christ as Mediator? John 1. what vain productions thou bringst from thy
impertinent proofs, let them be weighed, and taken notice of honestly; and thou
bidst me understand thus much, That nature which is Conscience, is the Light of
God.

I understand thy blindness; if this be so as thou say, then man's nature is
pure without sin, as the Light of God is; and this is error abominable,
contrary to the Scripture, which says, All by nature are the Children of
Wrath; are all by the Light of God (as thou say nature is) Children of Wrath?
see thy Divinity, and take it as it is truly interpreted, I desire not to wrong
thy words; thou give me to understand the greatest ignorance from those
things that lately I have heard, no not the like in England; and it is very
true, as I said thy folly appears by thy much meddling.

Then thou askst me, What I will have the Light called, wherewith every man in
the World is lightened, and because I do not call it the Spirit of Christ, thou
(as it were) murmurs; because I have cut of thy occasion, and thou can not
bend thy tongue with any seeming advantage against the Truth; but in that I say
the Light of Christ convinces of sin, which is true, thou on a sudden produces
thy bad consequences, and asks, if I call nature the Light of Christ, and such
like. etc.

But they all do not prove the contrary, so that which convinces of sin, is
worth minding and taking notice of, by all that ever are saved; and as to that
where I say, that which may be known of God was manifest in them, even in them
that were given up to work unrighteousness, etc.

I said the truth, which thou are not able to contradict in equity, though thou
very ignorantly bendst thy answer (as if I had said) the Knowledge of God was
made manifest in them, when I say plainly in my Book; that they (...) turned
from the Knowledge of God, and yet that which might be k^ of him was manifest
in them; and this thou can not deny: And though (...) words, as laid down,
are not in the Scripture words, in terms, yet I have (...) said falsely herein,
and do not thou be a reprover of that which thou cannnot (...) self deny; then
thou say, How feeble an argument is this to prove, that every one (...)
Spirit, etc.

Reply, Thou blind man, did I go about to prove any such thing or (...) any
Argument thereupon; we are about the Light which Christ has gi^ or lighted
every man in the World withal, which Light convinces of (...) and is not
contrary to the Spirit of Christ; unto this was I speaking, (...) this I stand
by, and thou conceives another thing from my words, and (...) against thy own
consequences, like a man too irrational to understand co^ English, etc.

Then thou say, Thou passed by other lame Arguments, which I tumble ev^ (...)
blind man in a thicket of bushes.

O be ashamed for ever! thus to evade and shuffle, with such scornful (...) I
said, that which reproves of sin is the gift of the Spirit of God, John 1^.
(...) that which makes manifest sin, is Light, and whatsoever is reproved is
made (...) fest by the Light, Ephesians. 5. how dare thou call these lame
Arguments, tumb^ over? what impudence is in thy heart, so to say? when thou art
put to (...) fusion, then such excuses thou bringst; Well, some may see thy
folly: (...) to my Question which was, whether that Light which every man is
li^ withal, is sufficient in it self for Life and Salvation to every one (...)
believes? if thou say, not; wherein is the blame, in God, in his Li^ (...) in
the Creature; thou say, No it is not sufficient; I take it. for an (...) and
leaves it to be weighed by the sober Reader, and though there be ve^ honor,
and of dishonor made of the same lump, as thou say, yet I (...) Query; is
not every man's blood that perishes of his own head? (...) not the Lord clear
from the blood of all men, even though they go to d^ ction? and if the Reader
try thy Book over, he may judge whose Arguments (...) lame.

Then whereas thou say, Christ, as God, has lighted every man that com^^
(...) the World, To which I said, then, why do thou say we wrest that Scri^
John 1. 9. seeing thou thy self have confessed no less then what thou call
w^elling in us; and this is truth, let all men consider else; that when tho^
c^nfesses Christ as God has lighted every man in the World, it is no less then
w^ we say, and that Scripture says, which is, That Christ is the true Light,
(...) that is he which lights every man that comes into the World; and may^^
(...) thou be ashamed to call this so scornfully a glavering Answer, not being
(...) clear thy self from my just charge, in that herein I charged thee with
co^ to oppose us, in that which thy self confesses to be true; consider well
o^ and let not thy blood go for the truth of all what thou say, for I de^ not.

Further thou cries out, Is this all the wit I have, and wonderful ig^ (...)
Because I said it is not good to neglect following the Light, but that (...)
one mind the Light of Christ Jesus in them; in answer to thy words, (...)
having said, the Light which convinces of sin is the Light of Christ as (...)
which the neglect of, will be sure to damn, as thou say; and now let wise^
judge of my answer; but thou falls heavily on it, proving that obed^ to the Law
will not justify, and the like, which I do not at all affirm; (...) to that I
say, the Law having its opperation upon the disobedient, the (...) comes to be
seen, which is he that is the end of the Law, and the Law m^ him be obeyed or
fulfilled in thee, if ever thou be saved from being damned (...) it.

(...) ^ul bid listen ^ithin, telling me of making she^^^r for my err^^, etc.
T^ ^o (...) say, that Paul bids listen within, let the Reader judge from that
Sc^ture (...). 10. 6. The righteousness of faith s^ks on th^s ^se, ^^rs. (...).
(which is the (...) of the Gospel) and verse. 9. what says it, the Word i^ nigh
t^, (...) (...) M^, and in thy Heart; was not that the end of these words, to
lis^ (...) the Word is in the Heart; what says it there? now the error i^
thine, (...) ^e truth; and the Lie is returned to the Founder, who denies that
P^l ^en within; when its plain he says, The W^^d (...) i^ (...) H^t; what
(...) it ^ere?

O that a man professing knowledge and enterprzing such things, should ^e so
(...) and so unable to finish what he has ^in; then thou cryest o^t ^sly, and
notes it in the margent, for wresting of thy words, in that I ^d, ^ou say,
They are ignorant of the Gospel who clos^ in with these ^s of the (...) ^in (or
Conscience) which does command to abstain from the ^^ll, and (...) (...) (...);
and thy own words are; How the poor souls through ignorance of the Gospel (...)
(...) these motions of its own Conscience (viz.) the motions which convinces
of sin ^in, which does comm^ abstain from this evil, and practice th^^ g^dd; so
^et w^^e men consider whether I have wronged that intent of thy words; and ^e
not so soon angry; ^or thou can not vindicate, that they that closes ^n with
these motions of the ^^science, or the Light of Christ within, which o^ceth of
sin within, which does command to abstain from-this evil, and ^o practice thi^
(...), is ig^nce of the Gospel; and do not evade it by words without kn^dge, in
picking of quarrels, and seeking offenses (by different terms of wor^ ^e ^o
occasion justly is given thee. Then my Question thou see ^est to answer, which
was, what, and how does the Light of the Gospel work, of not in the ^ce, and to
command from evil, and to practice good^ this (...) ^nds over thy head, not
confuted, nor fully answered; for the true (...) ^ang of it thou have not
comprehended, but to thy own conception, thou (...) (...) ^ed as if I should
say, that every man has the Light of the Gospel ^g ^n them to Salvation, which
I never said nor thought; so thy answer (...) (...) the purpose.

Then thou have passed by full slig^ (as disable to clear thy God^ and his
Spir^^ that guides thee, which is the Godd of this World) of that great (...)
of (...) justly charged upon thee, Page 19. of my last, which a ^ing to ^e
collection is; by turning the mind within to the Light which does (...) of sin,
and listening thereunto and clasping in with the motions of (...) Conscience,
which does command to abstain from evil, and to (...) (...) and closing with
something within, which thou confessess (...) the (...) ^f (...); these things
preceding, then thou, say, Hereby, (...) th^s (...) (...) (...) ^ried
headlong, and at the end of its life does fall into the ^lly (...) (...); (...)
(...) a sum of wickedness set forth by thee, which when thou ^el (...) ^t in
(...) shall receive the interest upon it, of indignation and vengeance; (...)
(...) thou have slipped it now, it shall their be reckoned on John (...) ^e.
Remember thou owe to prove this before tho^ be ^ru any. (...).

(...) again thou criest out, That I have ^ghtily belyed thee, and the like,
(...) of misplacing a word, and saying, The Light of the World, instead (...)
Light brought into the World; thou art an unjust Judge, who (...) (...) ^ers
for a word misplaceing; but it is plain, thou meanst by (...) (...) into the
World, that Light ^^bu 1. 9. which every man in the (...) ^ed withal; and if
thou do then thou art a Liar, in saying (...) (...) (...) ^ook, and in this,
The Devil (...) or s^ the (...) ^irth by (...) (...) at (...) (...) that Light,
and if thou mean not that Light, I^^n 1. 9. (...) that (...) ^rit, John 16.
(which I say is ^ot divided) then tho^ are a ^yar (...) ^d now while thou
charge me to be g^ded by S^, and ^o be a Liar, in the very time have snared thy
self in a Lie, and cannot get o^^, (...) it.

Then thou say Thou passes by many rageing expressions, which thou might
(...) with unrighteousness etc.

Reply, I asked thee, by what is the new birth wrought? and how, if (...)
following the Light of Christ in the Conscience? is there any other way to
(...) but Christ Jesus, who has lighted every man that comes into the Worl^
i^, part of that thou (...) passed by, with thy lying excuse of (...)
expressions, of which tho^ may be ashamed to equivocate thus po^ save thy own
credit; the charge of unrighteousness justly falls upon the head.

Thou further say, And eats up thy own wickedness, who said then, a^ it now
but most ignorantly, That Satan makes the Soul believe, if it will b^^ (...) by
what shall be made known to it, from the Light (or Conscience) within, it (...)
^^ll, etc.

My last Answer to this, is sufficient, only I ask thee a proof ou^ (...)
Scripture for this Doctrine, that the Devil do deceive any by the Light of C^
the Conscience within; and till then, mind my words in my last A^ ever thou
know God, it must be by following, and by being led with (...) within, which
God has made known unto thee, else that Light is thy co^ tion eternally.

Then again thou chargest me with corruping thy words, for writi^ for their;
Now a scorner I charged thee to be, from thy words, and (...) yet say of th^^,
taking thy words in thy own since, as Page 77. of the does manifest thee, unto
the single eye; and thou secretly chargest (...) following our own spirit, and
speaking by our own spirit; but our own Spirit (...) denied, and have received
the Spirit of the Father, through the Light of (...) whereby every man in the
World is lighted to Life, or to Condemnation (...) thou seemst to be highly
offended, that I should say, thou do not pro^ ple at all, noting it for false
in the margent; but thou needst not be (...) gry, though thou say, The people
in the Country where thou dwellst will (...) contrary etc.

To which I say, thou have no cause to boast of the fruit of thy Minis^ they of
much profit received by thee, witness a meeting in Bedford, (...) Company of
thy chiefest Members, I suppose, uttered much wickedness (...) and Slanders, as
many can witness; and witness three of thy Brethren tors of this Book, who say
they know that to be truth, which thou has^ ed, and thou ^rt proved a Liar in
many things; let them read themsel^ Witnesses and Liars, like thy self; and
these things being considered, (...) with other things at the end of this, thou
have no cause to boast of thy (...) nor they of their profit, by it in that
Country, who art unconver^ from lying and false accusing, and so art not turned
from Satan's power power of God: And as for a carnal Ministry, of which thou
speaks^ are very bad that exceeds thy self in carnality, in thy understanding
(...) things that are spiritual: Then further thou go on seeming to bring
(...) of thy former Slanders, having in thy last, falsely accused us with sad B^
mies and horrible Doctrines, and thou say, My speech bewrays (...) (...)
^ns of them, because say thou, I say that every man has the Sp^ Christ.

O thou lying tongue, when will thou cease thy wickedness! I never sa^ thought
so.

And further thou say, I say, there is that in every man which is as (...)
the Spirit of Christ, my words are, The Light of Christ, lights or is (...)
every man that ome^ into the World, which Light is not contrary to the of
Christ, but one in the union, and a^ good in its nature, according to (...)
(...) and till thou prove that that Light John (...). 9. is contrary to the
Spirit, (...) (...) have not done, stop thy mouth, and take shame to thy self,
for be^ (...) ^lty thy self of corrupting my words, which thou falsely (...)

(...) things thou say, that our society s^^uld (...), b^t I may (...) (...)
^ge thou art, so slanderous a tongue (...) me, that ^he (...) ^ou (...) (...)
of (...)

(...) whereas I said, thou art confounded i^ (...), I said (...), (...); thou
say, That Conscience my be se^, (...), and another (...), (...) is the Light
of God; can the Light of (...) ^ed; or i^ (...) (...) it forth.

(...), i^ not this confusion; other things (...) might collect, but ^is (...)
^ficient to prove thee in confusion; and thou^ the (...) (...) with the
Ranters, and sometimes with ^he (...), (...) (...) (...) of bitterness and
envy, yet we bear thy reproaches, and when they (...) taken off, then shall we
appear, and thou appear, and be j^d, a^ we (...), by ^im that is above all.
Then thou falsely chargest me with ^ing ^at Scr^, in John 3. 19. Whereas, I
neither added (...) (...), ^ut sp^ i^ (...) be seen in my Book. Further chargi^
^e, that I do not under^ (...) d^rence between the Light of the La^, and the
Light of the Gosp^ (...)

(...), (...) rejoice in that I am hidden from thee, and that my (...) (...)
(...) (...) to thee; for in that state thou stand the ^trance ^to the (...)
o^ God, thou shall not know, whose wisdom is (...) (...) (...), (...) ^gh thou
say the Light of Christ is a saving co^ing Li^ (...) will it (...) (...) a
condemning Light, and of all Liars and Slandere^^, and ^^is (...) (...), though
thou art busied up and down, in thy ^nde, (...) (...) (...) me, from my words,
not clearing thy felt from wha^ I (...) (...) ^on thee, but accusing me falsely,
and this is come to p^, (...) (...) ^ight openly appear, as to that difference
of the Law, and Gospel, thy (...) ^th my knowledge of it, I shall not feed, yet
I leave the (...) to (...) Deuteronomy. 30. from verse. 11. to 16. And Romans 10. 7, 8.
And (...) (...) ^id (...) upon thee undone to prove by the Scripture, something
(...) con^ce (...), and besides, or contrary to the Spirit of God, wh^ ^ou
(...) (...) (...) do; for though thou say (as none aff^) the Light in every
(...) ^ience is not the Spirit of God, yet ho^ do^ thou proye; (...) (...)
(...) ^ontrary to the Spirit of God, which in my last a put (...), (...) leave
it with thee; and then thou would ex^se t^y (...) ^ds (...) ^on called the
Quakers fond Hypocrites, but have ^ot yet pro^ed (...) live in Hypocrisy, and
so art a Liar still, and ^y (...) (...) (...) (...) a perverter of the right
Way of God thou a^^, and in (...) (...) ^f (...) it shall be proved by thy
recompense. Then tho^ ^est (...) (...) (...) That a natural man may have power
over sin, and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) in the Law; and for thy proof thou
inst^ in p^^l, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), Phil. 3. Now this was before the
Commandment ca^^ (...) God (...) which let him see the Law was spiritual; and
this does (...) p^^ve that (...) power over sin; for he was an Envy, and so a
(...), and had (...) over sin, according as I asked thee, if thou ^yst he had
power over (...).

(...) ^st to do before he was convicted, while he was a ^al (...) (...) no si^
to persecute Jesus; and this would ^e blasphemy, the p^ (...); ^t this thou
have c^^^ingly slipped, ^e I ^ed the get (...) sin, and to abstain from those
things ^idden in the Law, (...) not (...) thou ever came? and because thou will
not answer, I do, and say (...) concludes, that John (...) sta^ i^ not so good
(...) P^^le, while he was ^er according to his own Doctrine; and thou say the
Gentiles did by nature the things containted in the Law; true, but that state
was not co^ (...) ^stined, before the Circumcision; and I ask thee, Is any
condem^ (...) who are ex^sed in his light? or is any justified who is accused?
(...) (...) (...) ^d, which thou ignorantly comments upon, where I (...) (...)
chose to be of that profession which abstains from those things (...) in the
Law, and to have power over sin, then to live in the transg^ the (...) and
under the power over sin, yet talking of belief in the Son o^ (...). Let the
Reader (...) whether of these Religions is more accep^ s^^hn of God, thy
Religion is proved to be talking of belief, in the (...) and (...) in the
tra^sg ^ession of the Law, a Liar, a false Witnese, (...) (...), and
Backbiting, and such like; thy false belief will not save thee in (...) (...)
the Lord.

Then further thou still confessest, that as he is God, Christ lights ever^
(...) come into the Wo^ then, wherefore do thou make all this ado, in (...)
us, in this particular? yet let us try thy Doctrine, whether it be sound (...)
say, This Light, wherewith Christ, as God, has lighted every man, is C^ and
yet sometimes says, This Conscience is seared, and hardened, and evil (...) is
the Light of Christ as God, seared, heardened, and evil? John B^ it forth; this
is thy great Ignorance and Blasphemy; and sometimes (...) This Light is Nature*
and Nature is corrupted, and sinful, and in it, (...) (...) dren of ^th. What
is the Light of Christ as God corrupted, and sinful^ (...) are a^^ by i^
Children of Wrath? John Bunions Doctrine holds it forth, (...) blindness
possessed thee, when thou writst this, yet may thou blush at the (...) hereof.

Then thou go to give a meaning upon my words: in that I said, t^ is Light,
and Light is the Law, which is truth; but I spoke them not (...) to Interpret,
with thy lying spirit, but let spiritual men judge of them, (...) much ado
thou makes in answering my question to thee, but hits not my (...) at all; I
asked thee, and bid thee show, (if thou can) any sin which (...) against the
Law,; but this thou can not do, though thou would pro^ thou could, that
imbelief is not a sin against the Law of God; then thou (...) of the obedience
of the Son, of Mary, imputed to us, etc. But I say, (...) obedience of him
without, does not justify any, who are in the Na^ c^ty against him, who is not
a new creature, nor condemned in t^ (...) and whereas thou secretly chargest
us, with mingling Law and Gospel to (...) I tell thee we know the operation of
each, and does witnes^ the Minist^ each, and they are not divided nor oppsite
one against the other; but (...) the ^ing of the other; and though thou said,
you leap over the (...) Justification, yet it is too high for thee to leap over
for Condemnation (...) member this, and all thy feigned says, while in that
Nature thou st^ condemned, is but as the stubble for the fire: Then whereas I
charged t^ preaching another Gospel, then the Apostle preached, and my charge^
upon thy head, and my proof is found against thee; he directed to the (...)
withing in the heart, Romans 10. what says it, the Word is in the heart (...) he
turned to the Light from Darkness; but thou say; who shall ascend (...) hi^^,
^en ^st follow him to the Cross without, and to Heaven without, etc. (...) art
one that faith, ^o here, and lo there; but these things thou have pa^ with thy
lying excuse of quarreling, a many p^ shirts thou art ^ain to (...) and in that
I said, thou wast a Liar, in saying, the Light (vit) of Chr^ God, does not show
the soul a Savior, or Deliv^; my charge (...) is true, and stands unremoved;
and I asked thee, if the Light of Ch^ not show Christ, to (...) will in the
Light, then what c^^ but thi^ have passed also most ^fully, which stands upon
thee to answer, or (...) thy mouth, then thou would excuse thy contradictions
charged upon (...) that thou saydst they are wickedly del^^ed, who own Christ
no otherwise (...) as he was before the World; and yet saying God only is the
Savior, and (...) is none besides him; and all thou say clears not thy self,
from contradiction herein let honest men be judge betwixt us both, for thou
judge falsely me to be ^aught, and I am sure thou art naught; and thou will
not take my judgment. I may not take thine, (let impartiallity judge betwixt
us) then thou would excuse thy slanders charged justly upon thee, in saying,
that Quakers make light of the Resurrection; and to prove thy wickedness, thou
ask us, whether so it be? (...) ^e enough for us to answer; when thou have
brought evidence of the first a^sation; what poor proof is this for to cover
thy self, though to add to thy wickedness. Thou say, thou know we deny it;
I ask thee, when it was? or where it was? O thou Enemy of Righteousness, yea,
thou shall arise in the day of Judgment to shame and contempt, and this I
affirm, except thou repent of this thy wickedness.

Then whereas thou urgest me, that I should have answered, the Query raised
from Ephesians. 4. 10. better, or confuted thine, etc. Do not boast, but hear what I
say, thou say in that answer, that Christ ascended to the right hand of the
Father in your Nature. Mark now, thy Nature, and your Nature, who are one with
thee, is sinful and wicked, and of the Devil, for so all Liars are; and it is
Blasphemy to say sinful wicked divillish Nature, such as John Bunions is, and
his Fellows, is at the right hand of God in Heaven; O horrible! consider of
this, and see what thy begging an answer has brought upon thee; I deny, though
thou affirm it, that thy, and your Nature, which is wicked, or a man in that
Nature is ascended into Heaven; and therefore boast not thy self another time.
This nakedness of thine might have been covered, but for thy own boasting; and
thou say, Asts 1. proves it; let the Reader search, If he can find that
Christ ascended in sinful wicked Nature, such as theirs is, who are one with
John Bunion; and this is another Lie of the Scripture; and though thou with
much impudent confidence affirm the Quakers to be Deluders etc. I say from that
we rather love dispraise, then praise, and are, as our Forefathers were,
counted Deceivers, and yet are true; and thou art deceived in thy own heart, in
that thou understandst my words, that I should say, as though there were no
false Prophets now, because I said they were in the Apostles days, which is
true, and yet are they now too; even its witnessed by thee, and thy Fellows,
who are in their steps, who through coveteousness making merchandise of Souls,
and your people are ever learning, and not able to come to the knowledge of the
truth, and goes for gifts and rewards, and are false Accusers, and such like.
Nay, but understand me better, for I say thou art a false Prophet, and thou art
now, though thy root sprang forth in the time of the Apostles of which thou are
a Beanch, and thy Fellows; And though I said that Antichrist was in the days
of John, and this was before a Quakers was heard of; my words I own, p^rs that,
that the Christians were called Quakers at that day, if thou can, (...). I
allow not thee to be my Interperter, except I found thee more honest, (...)
does condemn thy meaning upon my words; and though thou say, instead of
moving our selves no false Prophets, we prove our selves no Christians, because
I said (that word) Quaker was not heard of in those days. Now consider, are
they no Christians now, whose title or name without, was not gives or heard of,
in the Apostles days, then Protestants are no Christians, nor Independants are
no Christians, nor Anabaptists are no Christians, because they were not called
so in the Apostles days; and whilst thou have thought to prove us no
Christians, have cast out thy self also; then thou art no better then we, and
what poor Arguments and vain consequence these are, (...) the wise consider; I
did not say, there were no Quakers then, but not a Quakers heard of (viz.) by
that name; for there were thousands of Quakers, who trembled and quaked at the
Word of the Lord, Moses, and David, Iere^, Isaac Paul with many more Quakers,
and Tremblers, though not then (...) called; but as I said, such as thou have,
such thou bringst, and thy Master will accept thee.

Then thou say I fling dirt in thy face, because I said, if we should
diligently search thee, we should find thee in their steps, through feigned
words, through coveteousness, making merchandise of Souls, loving the wages of
unrighteousness. And further I said, among them thou art found, who art
preaching (...) hire, and loves the error of Balaam, who went after Gifts and
Rewards, o^. Now thou seem to be grieved, and calls this a false Accusation,
But lets try the cause admits dispute, Art not thou in their steps, and among
them that do (...) things? ask John Burion, with whom thou art joined close, to
vindicate (...), and call him Brother; has he not so much yearly, 150. l. or
more (except t^ have some of it.) which is unrighteous Wages, and Hire, and
Gifts, and Rewards. What say thou, Art thou not in his steps, and among, and
with him and then that do these things? if he be thy Brother, and thou so own
him, what is (...) in him whom thou vindicates, I lay upon thee; but tell me,
who have (...) thee deny him, and the rest of the Independants, in these
things, which (...) know he does act? and in thy answer I cannot find thee
fully clearing thy (...) by denial, but say, That spirit that lead me out of
this Way is a lying spirit; (...) or what Way; I say, out of the way of
preaching for Hire do thou mean? ^y its a lying spirit in thee, that goes in
their steps, and among them that goes in (...) way; and though thou bid me,
have a care of receiving by hear say, what I b^ (said) and received in this, is
truth, though thou evade it never so much.

As to that, of some bidding thee throw away the Scriptures, etc, Indeed upon
such terms, it might be spoken so as to be owned; a Liar and a Slandere^ is an
unfit Fellow to meddle with the Scriptures, or to take the Name of the Lord, or
of the man Christ Jesus, in his mouth; and I may say truly, what have (...)
(unrighteous person) to do, to take his Name, and truth in thy mouth, hate^ to
be reformed?

And in that I say of thy crying against Christ within, this is true; who said,
there was nothing in thee, nor any man (without exception) to be taken not in
of, as we may prove by witness, though thou deny it; then, was not Chr^ within?
and what less is this, then to cry against him, when as thou deayd him within,
or else concludes he is not worth taking notice of. And tho^ thou say I falsely
speak of thee in saying, thou callst the Doctrine of Christ wa^ in, false
opinions, and take in hand to discover it; but the falseness is in the who has
uttered that which is untruth, and contrary to the Gospel, and (...) denies it,
or would hide thy wickedness; for thou having framed an objecti^ and speaks of
some that are for a Christ within, etc. and then thou say, the wilt discover
the falsity of such opinions, Now thou do here reckon the Doctrine of Christ
within a false opinion, (or among them at lest) let the Rea^ judge, and be thou
silent for shame; but all thou say clears thee not, from what I said of thee,
God shall judge thee, thou lying tongue, and dece^ heart.

Then thou chargest me with folly, and to eat my first words, and to be (...)
ble in judgment, and to fight against the Truth, etc. From my question a^e
does not the Scripture say, Christ is within, except you be Reprobates? a^ not
this thus much, all are Reprobates, but they in whom Christ is within; a yet
because I said the measure or manifestation of the Spirit, is given, to eve^
man, this thou have catched at, and would prove it unsound; but truth is o^
thee, and both these are true; and further, I say that Christ is given unto
(...) World, yea to all, but all receives him not, and they that do not receive
him (...) Reprobates, though he be given, but not received; and the folly and
fig^ against truth is in thy self, who says it is contrary to the Scriptures to
say (...) Spirit is given to every one, thou here lie of the Scripture as its
proved, (...) I do not befool my self in saying the words (or some of them) I
own in (...) Book, though I have written against the Book; for though thou
speak Ch^ words and the Apostles words, yet thy voice is the strangers, and thy
(...) I deny, what ever words thou speakst, and is not bafooling my self, and
(...) I could justly end my discourse, and what is said is sufficient, to
manifest thee and me to the honest Reader. And thus far thy weapons of Slanders
are broken, and thy refuge of Lies are laid waste, and this also is cast by, as
our spoiled prey of Babyl^^s treasure, and trampled upon, and know that we are
of God, and be that is of God hears us; and to our God, shall all bow; and
before him tremble.

And whereas thou seem to be greatly offended, and stumbling very much at my
answers to thy Queries, because thy carnal conceptions is not satisfied, nor
thy vain mind gratified, having as thou think great occasion against me
thereby, which causes thy mouth to be opened in vapouring words aloft, against
the simplicity of the Gospel, not understanding my words; for the things of the
Kingdom of God is a parable to thee, and sealed from thee, never to be known in
the reason in which thou judge.

But in short thus I Reply, I did not purpose to answer fully to them, to feed
any man's wisdom with my knowledge of the things of Gods Kingdom; for the
Queries were not fully directed to the Quakers; so that quench thy anger, and
according to my answer, go seek a further answer (or else be thou still
unsatisfied) from them who are led with a spirit of delusion, for such a
direction requires, no full answer from me, nor any of us, who are in the
truth, and not in the delusion, neither did I purpose, nor do I at any time, to
answer fully to such things as are directed in a great part to others; I am not
a servant especially to them that are led with a spirit of delusion, to fufil
thy will: But yet the short answers that I gave, (which was not in the behalf
of delusion) but for the truths sake, I still own though thou cannot understand
them, but products many bad lying wicked consequences from them, and my purpose
was not to feed thy foolish wisdom in answering; nor to satisfy thy reason to
receive praise from thee, or any man; for so I know it must be in hearing and
seeing, thou must not perceive nor understand, who art of the Generation
hardened, and in parable is the Kingdom of Heaven unto thee, and I rejoice the
rather in being a stumbling to thee, in that state wherein thou standed, then
that I should have gratified thee; for I seek not, nor receives honor from
man, in what I do; but is covered from the Worlds knowledge and know this, if
thou cannot receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little leaven, thou shall never
know it; But yet how wicked art thou in this also, though not understanding me,
in what I said, yet so foully wronging me with above 30. false charges and
slanders from my words, which thou reaches not the knowledge of, so it will be
enough.

Reply, to sum up thy Lies, and send them back to thee to seek them out, and an
evidence for them, and the Querys, and my Answers shall stand, as they are to
be judged of by honest men, while we are both silent in our own cause, they are
to be seen at large in my first Book, The true faith of the Gospel contended
for, etc. in the 26, 27, 28, pages.

And whereas further I speak at the end of my Answers of Christ within the hope
of glory and said it is that mystery which long has been hid from Ages, but
now is made manifest and declared, and though the wise of this World cannot
receive it, but speaks evil against it, yet it is dear unto us, and so much
more precious because despised by such as him, and such things are a testimony
to us, and against you, (viz.) our Enemies, etc. As in my 29. Page of my first
may be s^en; and most wickedly this, or part of it, he calls babbling, and says
he passes by it.

O horrible impudency! What marvel that he should so belie me, when as he has
called the very Scripture truth, spoken forth in righteousness, bablings? and
these things I leave the Reader to Judge of, and all his Lies thrown upon (...)
^^pudently; and consider, what ground this man has from my answers to be seen
in my first Book to broach out and belch out such a number of Lies and
Slanders, in five sides of paper, not any one of them (charged against me
falsely) were spoken by me, or ever in my thoughts to speak, or ground given by
any of my words for such productions, as it is seen what lodges in the heart of
such a Fellow, even desperate wickedness, who is without any (...) or honesty,
who dare utter such things against the upright, who hates not his Enemies; but
while I am clear in the sight of God, from all his false Slanders, I matter not
what John Bunion says of me, who is as a man given up to wickedness who in less
then a sheet of paper has uttered thirty Lies, or more, which I may
particularly manifest before he can find evidence; a great wickedness? (...)
this man's Converts be good, while himself is unconverted? is he a Minister of
Christ? for shame let it not be told so; well, I beg not vengeance against him,
he leaves my answers to be read, who will clear me from his lying consequences,
(...) wickedly conceived, and as wickedly uttered (By one of Gogs Army) against
a Member of Jesus.

Now I come to reckon up his damnable Doctrines, and errors, which are contrary
to the truth; as will manifestly appear to him that is spiritual; some of th^^
damnable without comparison.

John Bunion said, That Christ's second coming, is not his coming in Spirit, for
(...) coming in Spirit, is no coming. He says, this (or part of it) is a lie
made of hi^ To this is two witnesses.
by me; when as several Witnesses, does testify in righteousness, that those
very words were spoken by him, in Paul's steeple-house in Bedford Town, M^ 23.
1656. as is witnessed; and yet this man is so impudent, that he de^^^ what he
spoke, (or is ashamed of his words) and so would cast the Lie upon me, who is
clear, and the wickedness lies at his door; and whereas he would prove that the
second coming of Christ, is not his coming in Spirit, I say I will not beg him
to believe it, but as he believes, so be it unto him; and all that he says
does not prove, but that Christ promised, and fullfilled to his Disciples, that
he would come again to them, (mark) again is a second time; If any man John 14.
has an ear let him hear. And then he says, he will not trouble himself to
lay this to my charge, in that it was said of him, Christ's coming in Spirit is
no coming, it may be he repents of what he has said, being better considered,
since he has already falsely charged me with it, as some in the County of
Bedford knows very (...), that he has falsely charged me, and denied his own
words, spoken by his own mouth.

Also he said, Take notice, that I affirm, that there is nothing in me, nor is
any man to be taken notice of, These are his own words spoken by him April 12,
1656. at Patnam, witnessed by three men, who heard it from his mouth, and this
charge he does not fully deny, but in a great measure he assents to it, yet
would cover his shame a little with a Lie, in saying, Directly in this f^^^ of
words he did not lay them down; but this will not serve to hide his Reprobate
state, for to his face it may be testified he spoke the words, as I have laid
them down; and therefore consider against whom I am yoaked, against one that is
a Reprobate, and without Christ in him, one that has denied Christ in him, or
else thinks Christ not worth taking notice of. O abominable ignorance, why
should such a fellow take the things of God in his mouth, who has denied
Christ in him, and the Spirit of Christ? indeed it appears that he does take
notice of nothing in him, else he would have been wounded with the Light in his
own Conscience, before he had brought forth thus many Lies; it seems he takes
notice of nothing in him, but is past feeling; damnable doctrine indeed,
without comparison, that ever one professing to be Minister of Christ, should
be so stark blind and wicked; yea, we have taken notice of what thou have said,
and it shall be recorded for ignorance of the greatest sort; but he would evade
the thing and give a sense upon his words, and in such a s^^^^ he owns, and in
such a sense he denies it, but what is this to the purpose, except he confess
it, (at it is) that he is unregenerate, and if so, he confess^^ the Light of
God is in him, and then to be taken notice of, if it be but to condemn him.

O blindness to be marked! well, this man's folly has appeared sufficiently,
who confesses this Light in every man is the Light of Christ, as God, and yet
says, he affirms there is nothing in him, nor any man, (regenerate or
unregenerate) without exception are his words here spoken) worth the taking
notice of.

The rest of the particulars charged upon his Fellows is passed by with the
excuse of wanting the names expressed, may be he is glad to be ignorant in this
thing, but let^ search; John Burton said, That Christ had two bodies, one out
of the fight of the Saints; in Bedford, May 23. 1656. And to this Job. Bunion
confesses, but would excuse it if he could, and would manifest that Christ has
two bodies, clean contrary to the Scripture, which affirms, Ephesians. 4. 4. Now no
marvel that he gain-sayes me, when as he has gainsaid the Apostle, who said
expressly, There is one body, but they say two bodies; let them be ashamed for
ever, thus to contradict Scripture.

John Spencly (one of the Testators of this lying Scrole, a Member of the same
supposed Church) said, that Christ, and the Word of Life were two things, and
so would divide Christ contrary to Ioh. 6. 48. where Christ says, he is the
bread of Life; and contrary to 1 Ioh. 1. 2. The 23d. of the 8th. Month, 1656.
John Bunion and one Fer, and Ioh. Child laid down;

1. That God dyed, And that very God, and the everlasting Father dyed, contrary
to many Scriptures, as Dan. 4. 34. and 12. 7.

2. They affirmed, That the Word that was in the beginning was crucified upon
the Cross, contrary to 1 Peter 1. 23.

3. They affirmed, That Justification is without obedience, yet say I, None is
Justified in disobedience, but all condemned in it, let them mark that; and
there is but either in obedience, or in disobedience, and he that is a Believer
and justified, is not without obedience.

4. That There is a light which convinces of sin, besides the Light of Christ,
and John Bunion in all his Book cannot prove any is convinced of sin, that has
not the Light of Christ, or that any thing besides the Light of Christ does
convince of sin; so that his confusion does appear.

5. That There is no saving knowledge, but what comes without from Heaven,
contrary to 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. where it is said the light shone in their hearts
out of darkness, I. Child denied that the man Christ Jesus had given a Light to
every man that comes into the World, contrary to John 1. 9.

Also he denied. That every man was lighted, that they might believe, contrary
to Ioh. 12. 36. 35. Ioh. Burton said, That a man might be upon the foundation,
and yet ^y Christ, Now the Scripture says, Matthew. 10. 33. He that denis
Christ, shall be denied of the Father, and the Father denis not any that are on
the foundation, as they affirm.

Another of them said, That the Word that was hid in David's heart was the
outward Scriptures.

Another of them affirmed, That he was justified from all his sins, past,
present and to (...); and said, there was Scripture in the Acts to prove it.

John Burton said, That a man is not justified by the Spirit; John Bunion said
the 30. of the 11. month, That the Spirit of Christ does nothing (Mark) within
(...), as to justification; he affirmed, That the Flesh of Christ is not within
any man; then there is no man that has life in him, if Christ's words be true,
Ioh. 6. 53. and Christ's words is true, and therefore John Bunions doctrine is
damnable. He said, That by the Kingdom of Heaven, within the Pharisees, Luke
17. Christ speaks of himself there, as a personal man to be that Kingdom of
Heaven; Mark here what the substance of this is; does he mean that the person
of Christ was in the Pharisees?

O horrid blindness! not to be parrelelled.

He said, The best thing in a natural man is Impure, and yet in this Book
confesses that the Light of God is in all men, so that must be impure, else
Ioh. Bunions doctrine is a Lie; but the Light of God is pure, and therefore
Ioh. Bunions doctrine is a Lie.

He said, that the Scripture, In every place does not mean as it speaks, and
instanced that in Peter, not to mean as it speaks, where it is said, yea, a
lively stones are built up a spiritual house; and where it is said, (...) Salt
in your selves; He asked if a man's belly must be filled with salt, Mark this
Expositor, and his blindness and ignorance, and the cause why (...) is silent,
And forbears to aggravate sin is, least hard thoughts should be entertained
against him; Let men judge, whether this be not an unfaithful man to His own
Book holds this forth.
the Lord, who rather then harsh thoughts should be against him in the wicked,
he will be silent, and hide and cover sin in sinners. O wickedness indeed!

He says, that Christ Ascended into Heaven in our nature, (viz) in his nature,
and they that are one with him; and he and they are proved to be in corrupt
nature, as they will confess it. O what wickedness to hold forth that Christ is
at the right hand of God in sinful nature, as his words holds forth from his
own mouth.

John Burton said, That men may depend too much upon something called Christ,
and (...) righteousness of Christ within.

He says, that the Devil Knows how to take the Childrens bread (viz.) Christ
Jesus who only is the Childrens bread, and give him to dogs. O s^d error and
damnable.

He said, That the Devil deceives souls by bidding them follow the Light which
they brought into the World with them.

And he confesses that Light is the Light of Christ (as God) O unutterible
ignorance! can a sober man read this, and not be ashamed, to hold forth, that
the Devil deceives souls by bidding them follow the Light of Christ (as God)?

He says, they that follow Christ aright, must follow him without, to the
cross, wi^ for Justification, or monut Calvery without; they must seek for
Justification without, (...) the Spirit of Christ it leads to Christ without.

Reader, see if this be not near unto Popery, or enquire else what he means, as
if he would have people to go a Pilgrimage, and this is contratry to Romans 10.
6, 7, 8.

He said, That the soul of man is the Light wherewith every man is lighted by
Christ as God, and this is the Light that every man brought into the World with
him, and the Devil deceives souls by this Light (viz.) by the soul, this is
true from his own words, let it be marked by sober men, what damnable doctrines
these are, hardly fit to be raked in.

He says further, That the Devil deceives souls by persuading them to follow
the Light within, which he confesses is the Light of Christ, and that all man
has it.

He says Conscience is the Light of God, and yet in another place says,
Conscie^ defiled, what concurrence is here, let the Reader judge, to hold forth
that the Light of God is defiled, his words plainly shows, to say, that the Law
is the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ.

He says, This is a frothy Argument.

And to make up his wickedness he said, He is ruled by Scripture; con^ whether
those doctrines and lies be not quite contrary to Scripture; what is pudency is
in this man's heart, to say he is ruled by Scripture; he says, Thy that look
upon Compare this dostrine with Heb. 13. 8. and his doctrine is proved to be
damnable.
Christ no otherwise then as he was before the World was, be dare (...) bold
to say they, are no Christians, but Antichristians, he said. That Contrary to
John 1. 9.
Christ as he is ^diator, so he hoth not lighten every man that comes into the
World, though as he is God, (...) does, Mark here, he would divide Christ, not
to be the same, the Son, as he is the Father; yet he confesses in his Book,
What the Father does, the Son does also; see what contradiction here is, not
worth the raking in? O blindness that may be felt in the grossest darkness he
inhabits. He says, That the Devil has more experience of the knowledge of the
eternal power, and Godhead, then unregenerate men; Mark, the word more
signifies something. He says, The Light of Christ, (...) God, is Conscience,
and Nature it self; Mark, nature is sinful, and wicked, and all are children of
Wrath, in it so are all by the Light of Christ as God wicked and children of
wrath if Ioh. Bunions doctrine be true, let him make it good as he can: O
wonderful trash, and muddy stuff, unheard of before. He says, The Devil
deceives souls, by bidding them listen within, and see if there be not that
which does convince of sin, Mark his doctrine well. He denies, That Paul's bids
listen within, contrary to that Scripture, Romans 10. 8, 9. He said, Conscience
may be hardened and seared, and is naturally evil; and yet says, Conscience is
the Light of Christ, as God; see what an agreement is here, the Light of
Christ, as God, is hardened, and seared, and evil, else John Bunion must revoke
his doctrine, or else prove this; Consider what stuff this is, which is held
forth by him.

He says, he preaches not for hire; indeed, he had no need to receive money
for such doctrines as these.

He says, Christ is some four or five foot long, This is more then he can,
tell.

He reckons the doctrine of Christ within a false, (or among false opinions.

He says, It is contrary to Scripture to say the measure ^or manifestation) of
the Spirit is given to every man, though Paul says so plainly to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Mark, here he has spoken quite contrary to Scripture, denied that which Paul
affirmed, or else counted Paul's words no Scripture.

He says, They that are born of God do daily sin, absolute contrary to 1 Ioh.
3. 9. And therefore he would give the Apostle the lie.

Now Reader consider, whether thou will believe John Bunion, or the Apostle
John, for they are at odds, and speaks quite contrary one to the other.

He says, That the Light that shows thee there is a God, and that this God is
eternal, would lead to life, then might Devils be delivered from damnation, and
the Devils knows God as a Creator, etc.

He says, That the Light spoken of John 3. is the man Christ Jesus, and yet
says, that the man Christ Jesus is not a condemning Light.

Mark, that Scripture says, that Light was condemnation to them that did evil;
he says, not; who must you believe?

He says, That the Liar and Slanderer is an Unbeliver, and his condition is
sad.

Consider here, how out of his own mouth he is condemned, who is at large
proved a Liar and Slander; out of his own mouth will the Lord condemn him.

He says, That a man cannot give a more right description of a false Prophet,
then the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles did give, Reply, In this thou have
truly said. Now lets consider, how thou have; confessed to thy own shame, and
laid open thy own nakedness, the Prophets said such were false Prophets as
Preached for Hire, and divined for Money, and fed themselves, and clothed
themselves with the wool, and that used their Tongues, and said the Lord says
it, when God had not spoken to them, and that cried peace to the wicked; and
Christ said, such were Deceivers, who had the chiefest place in the Assembly,
and stood praying in the Synagogues, and loved the uppermost rooms at Feasts,
and that were called of men Master, and such like; and the Apostle said such
were Deceivers, to take gifts and rewards, and lucre, and that loved
unrighteous wages, and that were Back-biters, and false Accusers, and Covetous,
and having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power, who ever taught, and the
people were not able to come to the knowledge of the truth, with many other
such like. Now this is my appeal to all men's Consciences, in the sight of God,
whether thou art not found under some of these Charracters (at least) or
whether thou art not one in union and fellowship, with such who act, these
things, yea, thou are among them, and not crying against them, and so art
guilty of their sin, though not as fully in the act as are some, may be; so
that I doubt not, but they who have not hardened their hearts, and blinded
their eyes will see, how thou have condemned thy self in confessing the truth;
and the time is coming, that further it will be made manifest concerning thee,
only at present thou art sufficiently discovered, to be out of the truth in the
way of perdition; and however, though thou have covered thy self, as much as is
possible, from the stroke of thy own hand, and from the guilt of thy own
confession; yet Ioh. Burton, thou have condemned an hundred, I think of
Independent Ministers, (so called) thy brethren, who are known to be found
guilty of those things, all or most of them, which thou confessest are marks of
a false Prophet, and while thou bidst us examine our selves, thou art the man
(or among them) that are proved truly guilty.

He says, He is not come to one of the days of the thousand years, of Satan's
being chained; and this is truly confessed, and so he is in the Reign and
Government of the Devil, and Satan is not bound, but at liberty in him, (as it
well appears) and Christ's reign is not known; and so it must needs be true,
that he is of the Army of the Dragon against the Lamb.

Some of the same Members with him said, in Bedford, That they scorned that
Light which convinces of sin, (which the Quakers speak of.)

Further, most falsely I am charged by him with railing against the Lord Jesus,
which is absolute false; my words are spoken in fear and reverence of the Lord
Jesus. Reader, these things I leave to thee, to be judged of, his false
Slander; and his Damnable Doctrines, and wicked lying Accusations, and
Contradictions which his nine sheets of paper is filled with, as if he had set
himself to lie, and slanders, and speak wickedly against the truth, which is
over him, and is a testimony against him, and though opposed by him, yet not
confounded; but him it confounds, and by it he shall be judged and condemned;
and the time comes when further he may be made manifest if this be not
sufficient; out of the abundance of his heart, has his wicked Tongue uttered
these things, which are but a little of what lodges in him, but let him prove
these things first, and then utter more.

AND now John Bunion, thou and thy false Witnesses, and all thy Company, and
brethren in iniquity, Remember and repent for the day of your visitation is
upon you, blessed were you, if you could receive it, before it be spent, not to
be recalled, and before the long suffering of God come to an end, and you be
shut up in utter darkness: And indeed friends the day hastens wherein every man
shall receive according to his deeds; he that has done evil shall not be
cloaked, and he that has done good shall not be uncovered, in that day when
the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open, and searched with the eternal
Eye; the end of my work is to clear the Truth, and the Way thereof, (God is
witness) from thy slanderous and lying and perverting Tongue; and only I
reprove thee, by the Spirit of the Lord, and so leaves thee to receive thy
reward from the Just God of righteous Judgment; who upon thy head will render
vengeance in flames of Fire, in his dreadful day, which upon thee comes
suddenly, even when thou and you cries peace, peace, then shall destruction
come as an armed man, from which thou shall not fly to escape, though now you
all be hardened against the Lord, and his Way and Truth, and has even bent thy
Tongue for Lies, and has reproached the Innocent, to the pi^^cing of thy own
soul, and one day shall thou know it; therefore bow and tremble before the Lord
God, thou and all thy Companions; a Liar and Slanderer thou art, a Perverter
and Wrester of the right Way of God, and of the Scriptures, a Hypocrite and
Dissembler, a holder forth of damnable Doctrines, an envious man, and false
Accuser, condemning another falsely in what thy self is fully guilty of; these
things I lay to thy charge justly in the presence of the Lord God, and upon thy
account are they reckoned by him, and proved by testimony in the sight of man
(and may be more fully hereafter, if any thing be wanting) and one day shall
thou feel the burden of them, though now thou be above shame; and all thy
Lies, Slanders, Deceits, Confusions, Hypocrisies, Contradictions, and damnable
Doctrines of Devils, with impudency held forth by thee, shall be consumed in
the Pit of Vengeance, and then shall the Witness in thy Conscience justify the
Lord (in condemning thee,) and me, to be true in reproving thee; and this I say
to thee, and you all, the Living God you know not, nor his Son Jesus Christ;
but are Enemies to God, and * persecuters of the Lord of Life, and shall perish
among the Uncircumcised: Ye false Witnesses, and wicked Helpers, you may be
ashamed of your testimony subscribed at the beginning of his lying scribble;
will you yet say through Grace, those things are true; the rather stop your
mouths in the dust, who has offended the Lord, more then defended him, or
your selves; and be ashamed in the presence of God and man; much more may be
said hereafter, to lay you further open, if you yet harden your hearts in your
wickedness, but I do rather reprove you, then strive with you, and rather
desires your return to God, then your Condemnation by him, and with this I
shall end; and by what is said in short is sufficient to manifest you, and John
Bunion to all honest people, what Generation you are of, and that you are
guided by, a lying and unclean spirit, and that you are doing the Devils works
in gainsaying the Way of Truth and Righteousness, by your multitude of Lies
and Slanders, and damnable Doctrines; and what ever you account, or falsely
judge of me, yet am I true, (though as a Deceiver) and the Lords Servants, and
a Witness for him, and against all your Lies and Slanders, and Wickedness
hatched amongst you, and brought forth by a lying Orator, whom you have made
your mouth, into the view of the World, even a cursed Birth, and the Father of
it, and the Womb that conceived it, and it shall rot, and perish as the dung,
and not accomplish any part of the end, of your desire; for so loathsome it is,
being truly searched, and laid open, that it has not obtained neither the
praise of God nor man, but is defamed by men, and condemned of God: Alas, alas,
for thee John Bunion thy several months travel in grief and pain, is a
fruitless Birth, and perishes as an untimely Fig, and its praise is blotted out
among men, and its passed away as smoke; Truth, is atop of thee, and
out-reaches thee, and thy formed weapons cannot prosper, and it shall stand for
ever to confound thee, and all its Enemies: and though thou will not subject
thy mind to serve it willingly, yet a Slave to it must thou be, and what thou
do in thy wickedness against it, the end thereof brings forth the glory of
it, and thy own confounding and shame; and now be wise and learned, and put off
thy Armor, for thou may understand the more thou strives, the more thou art
entangled, and the higher thou arises in Envy, the deeper is thy fall into
Confusion, and the more thy Arguments are, the more increased is thy folly, let
experience teach thee, and thy own wickedness correct thee, and thus I leave
thee; and if thou will not own the Light of Christ in thy own Conscience, now
to reprove thee, and convince thee, yet in the day of Judgment thou shall own
it, and it shall witness the justness of the Judgments of the Lord, when for
thy Iniquities he pleads with thee; and behold as a Thief in the night, when
thou art not aware, he will come; and then, woe unto thee that art poluted.

By a Friend to Truth, EDWARD BOROUGH.

Many Strong Reasons CONFOUNDED, Which would hinder any reasonable man from
being a Quaker; And Offenses taken out of the way. But particularly, Four and
twenty Arguments Overturned and Confuted; put forth, and sent into the World by
Richard Baxter, a professed Minister; but a frequent Contender against the
Ways of God. And this is an Answer to a Sheet of his, cried up and down the
Streets in London, as some excellent piece; but is proved to be full of Lies,
Slanders, and false Reproaches against an Innocent People. And this is sent
forth in the pursuit thereof, that people may not be deceived with every lying
Monster which is brought forth to public view; but first let all things be
tried, and only that which is good held fast.
HOW long shall it be, ere the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, and the
measure of this Generations iniquity be fulfilled, who rush into iniquity as a
Horse into the battle, and who hastens to fill up the largest measure of
iniquity of any Generation that ever went before? Is it not plain and manifest
to all people that have but an eye to see? How does the wicked run on greedily,
drinking up iniquity as an Ox drinks water? How does the Archers of Babylon
shoot at the Innocent, and makes the harmless their prey? But this is but for a
moment, the end thereof is nigh; and because the Devils time is but short,
therefore he is come down in rage, and has filled the hearts of many people
with raving envy and despite against the Lord and his people, whom the Lord is
a gathering out of the mouths of all their Enemies; and the Serpents seed, it
bruiseth the heel, but its head is deadly wounded by the Seed of God.

And whereas many has set themselves in oppsition against the Lord, and their
work is become a stink, and a proverb to be laughed at in Generations to come,
yet must not the wicked cease their wickedness, till their measure be perfectly
accomplished. And whereas Richard Baxter, a professed Minister in
Worcestershire, known to many by his fruits to be a corrupt Tree which brings
not forth good fruit, who sends out of his study Lies and false Reports, and
vain Arguments to blind the Eyes of People, that they may not see the Truth,
and has written once and again against the people of God, which he in scorn
calls Quakers, some of which writings have been sufficiently answered, and his
shame and folly seen openly by all people; yet he (as a man not weary of
wickedness) has sent forth a Paper, which he calls, A Sheet against the
Quakers; wherein what was wanting of wickedness in his former, is now fully
brought forth out of his Vessel, (a malicious heart) which cannot contain
within it self its rage, and fury, and madness against the Innocent; but need
must his folly break forth openly, that all men may see it: And in thi^ his
foolish Paper he has twenty four reasons, which he says, Moves him to
conceive that no Christian or reasonable man should be a Quaker, or approve of,
or excuse their way; now his Reasons we shall try. But first of all I say, It
had been more honest for him to have made a sufficient Reply to have defended
his former works, and cleared himself of his former Lies and Slanders truly
charged against him, then to have past that slightly, and begin anew to revile;
for that Book which he often mentions, and boasts of, called, The Quakers
Catechism, was sufficiently answered, and his folly laid open, by a Friend to
the Truth, in a Book called, An Answer to the Quakers Catechism, to which Book
he never equally replied to this day, which had been more honest to have
cleared himself from what is truly charged against him in that answer, then to
have begun afresh to reproach and speak wickedness; and this all people may
consider of.

1. His first Reason which he brings forth against the Quakers, is, That they
deny, and revile the Churches and Ministers of Christ; and yet said he cannot
tell indeed of any Church or Ministry which is to be preferred before those
that they do despise.

Answ. To this I answer, This is utterly false; for we do not deny the Church
and Ministers of Christ, nor do revile them, or any others whatsoever, but
speaks the truth in nakedness to all people: The Church of Christ we own, and
are of it, which are gathered out of the World through the preaching of the
Gospel, and separated from the World, and all its works and ways, which are
evil, and are joined to Christ the Head, in the Spirit, and one to another, as
Members of Christ; and these are born again, and are Redeemed out of the World,
and are of the Kingdom of Christ, and of his Church, and Members of his body;
and this we own to be a Church, and are of it, who has no fellowship with
darkness, nor no part with the practice of the works of darkness. And the
Ministers of Christ we own, who have received the Gift of the Ministry by the
Holy Ghost, and exercises that Gifs by the Holy Ghost, whose call is from God,
and their work of God, and their end alone his glory; such we own to be
Ministers of Christ, and does not revile or deny (as he falsely says) such a
Church, and such Ministers of Christ; but this we do, and without offense to
God too, we do deny and bear our witness against such a people who professes
themselves to a Church, and yet are in the pride, in the wickedness, and in the
evil of this World, and not redeemed, cleansed, and separated from the works and
iniquities thereof, such we do reprove for their Hypocrisy, even ^ll them that
owns a title to a Church, because they were sprinkled when they were Infants,
and has not another ground; and such who professes themselves Ministers of
Christ, who has not received their Ministry by the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
neither are led by the Spirit of Christ, but are such as Christ and the
Apostles declared against, such we cannot own to be Ministers of Jesus Christ,
but does reprove them, and deny them; even such who Preaches for Hire, and
has Gifts and Rewards for Preaching, and set-places for so much a ^ear, these
we disown, and yet does not offend God herein: And this in honesty (...) do
show to all people, what that professed Church and professed Ministry is which
we do deny, and what that Church and Ministry is which we do set up to ^e
preferred, which is a right Ministry, and a right Church: And thus his
reasonless reason is overturned, and confounded, and is found to be no
sufficient reason wherefore a man should not be a Quaker.

2. His second reason is, No wise man can be a Quaker (says he) because their
Religion is an uncertain thing, and so is not the Religion that must save us,
etc.

I answer, This again is utterly false, and no man that has Gods wisdom would
speak it; for our Religion which we profess is a certain thing, and we have
openly declared it once and again, and this is it, To believe in Christ, and to
receive Christ, and to be lead by the Spirit of Christ, and taught in all
things to love God with all the Heart, and a man's neighbor as himself; and
through the Power of Christ dwelling in man, to do all good, and to be kept
from all evil: This in very short is our Religion, and it is a very certain and
established Religion, and this Religion we all agree in: And this in short is
the substance, of our faith, Even Christ in us, believed on, and received by
us, This is the Truth, and his lies is judged; and if he say this is an
uncertain Religion, let him give it under his hand, and subscribe to it, and he
shall have a further Reply.

3. His third Reason is, No man of Reason should be a Quaker, considering that
amongst those scraps of their Religion which is made known, there is so much
notorious fals^^d and ungodliness, says he.

Ans. Let all Christian people mark this his Reason, they are even lies heaped
one upon another: What secret Slanders are these behind our Backs, who never
would clear himself of what is truly charged against him in answer to his
Catechism? his words are turned by as utter lies: for that which we profess and
practice for Religion, which we have made known by word and writing, is,
uprightness, godliness, sincerity and truth, and neither notorious falsehood,
not ungodliness, as he wickedly says: And why did not he make it appear what
this notorious falsehood and ungodliness had been? that had been more honest,
then to cast his charges, and prove nothing. And whereas he says, The very
pers^^ of Christ Jesus many of them do blaspheme, etc. this is utterly false,
for Jesus Christ have we owned and believed in only, and for his sake we do,
and suffer ha^^ things.

4. His fourth Reason is, says he, Because their false pernicious Doctrines,
t^ practical Religion does much consist in most notorious wicked injustice and
uncharitableness, etc.

Ans. Here is lie upon lie uttered, and wickedness joined to wickedness, and
drunk up as an Ox drinks up water, and no conscience made thereof by Richard
Baxter; it had been just to have mentioned these pernicious Doctrines, their
practical Religion, injustice, and uncharitableness, and not to have slandered
in the dark: but we are delivered by the Lord from all pernicious Doctrines and
notorious wickedness whatsoever, and we find this false Reproacher guilty
himself and his people, of what he accuses the Innocent: And so his words are
true unto himself, and upon his own head I turn them.

5. His fifth Reason is, The worst of all, says he, is, That they behave
themselves like malignant Enemies to the very Church, and Gospel, and Servants
of Jesus Christ, etc.

Ans. This man speaks as if he had sold himself wholly to lie: but my answer to
his first Reason is sufficient to answer this also, and does say, That the C^se
and the Church, and the Gospel and Servants of Jesus Christ we do fully and
freely (...), and are daily exercised therein as the very Servants of Jesus,
and are Friends thereof i^ our hearts, and does not behave our selves in any
way as Enemies thereunto: God will judge every lying tongue, and shall condemn
our false Accusers guilty of that which they charge the guiltless, to reprove
and bear witness against the will, wicked, and rude conversations, and against
such as have gotten the Saints words, and by art frame an hours discourse
thereupon for so much a Sermon, or so much a year, to deny such to be a Church
of Christ, and Ministers of Christ, this we do, and does not behave our selves
like Enemies to the Church, or Gospel, or Ministers and Servants of Christ, as
our Adversary wickedly says.

6. His sixth Reason, says he, That part of the Quakers peculiar Religion
which consists not in error and malignant impudency, is made up very much of it
of childish and unreasonable foppery, etc.

Ans. As I have said, No part of our Religion consists in error and malignant
impudency, and as for that which he calls childish and unreasonable foppery, we
stand not to man's judgment, for it is a small thing with us for to be judged
of any man; for we do acknowledge that we are become fools for Christ's sake,
and herein we have cause to glory, though he upbraid us with it; and it was
such as he who called Paul a Babbler, and that his Doctrine was madness, as he
says ours is foppery; and let him know, that which is foolishness with man, is
wisdom with God; and we know God will confound the wisest of men by that which
they may judge to be foolish, and unreasonable, and foppery; for to such who
are lost our Gospel is hid, where the god of this World has blinded their Eye,
as it is plain he has done this our Adversaries, and that is the reason
wherefore he has sent forth such lying Scribbles from his study of wicked
inventions; and let him make the best use of his wisdom he can, he can but
serve the Devil with it, while his wisdom is sensual and divillish: And let him
leave us to our childishness and folly, and let the issue prove whether is the
safer guide.

7. His seventh Reason is, says he, Their malignancy does blind them to make
that the principal cause of their rage, and reviling the Ministry, which is
plainly agreeable to the will of God, and necessary to the Churches good.

Ans. This is false also; we are not blinded, but does see Richard Baxter and
all such, to be out of the Way of Truth and Peace: And as for rage, and
reviling against the Ministers, that is false also, though indeed we do openly
reprove deceivers; and we know it is not agreeable to the will of God, and
necessary to the Churches good, though he says it is, for Ministers of Christ
to take tithes, or to have a set-maintenance; for never none of the Ministers
of Christ that we read of in Scripture, either took tithes to maintain them, or
had a set-maintenance; but all that Christ allows to his Ministers, is to eat
such things as were set before them. And in that he says, We liken them to
covetous Priests among the Jews, that is true; to whom should we liken them but
to them that practiced the same things as they do? And I am sure there never
was Priests in any Generation that were more covetous then these of England
are, as in many particulars might be showed; for as the false prophets in
Israel did, so do these in many things; and what the Ministers of Christ did,
these do not: And whereas he pleads for Tithes, never Minister of Christ did in
the Gospel-administration claim the tenth of peoples labors, nor none of the
Ministers of Christ were Maintained by Tithes, but lived of the Gospel which
they preached, which livelihood was not great sums of money, and compelling
some of it too from the people by a Law; but the Churches ministered to the
Apostles necessities, whom the Apostles had begotten to the faith, and planted
them as a Vinyard, and kept them as a Flock: But the manintenance of the
Priests of England is another case, they must have so much a year, and people
is bound to pay them, and sometimes so much a Sermon; and they maintain
themselves in idleness, and fullness, and pride, and spend the Creation more
then upon their necessities: but he says Concerning Tithes, That Tithes are
the Churches, and not the peoples, and by the Law of the Land too. What the Law
of the Land requires, which is just, we do own, and do not resist it; but what
the Law of the Land commands, which is contrary to the Law of God, as the Law
is which commands to pay Tithes; we cannot be obedient to it; for we read in
the Hebrews, that Law which commanded to pay Tithes, and take Tithes in the old
Covenant, is put to an end, and Christ the second Priesthood established, and
the Priesthood being changed, there was a necessity of the change of the Law
also which upheld the priesthood: Then whence is that Law of the Land which
commands ^ythes of God or otherwise? judge ye, seeing the Scripture says, The
Commandment going before (viz. that gave Tithes, is disannulled.

8. His eighth Reason, The Quakers way is too cruel and uncharitable to be the
way of God; they damn (says he) the most humble, holy, faithful Servants of
God, to whom God has promised life, etc.

Answ. This is not the least of his Lies, our Way is Christ, and is neither
cruel nor uncharitable, but pure, and holy, and zealous against all sin, and
cannot bear and suffer iniquity, but reproves it; neither do we damn any, but
warns all to repent, to be humble and lowly, that they may have the promise of
life; and we sharply reprove sin, and Deceivers, and Deceit, and this makes the
men of this Generation mad, and calls it cruel and uncharitable, when as we do
but warn them of their sins, showing them if they live in sin they perish, and
if they repent and turn to God, they shall be saved; and God has given us the
spirit of discerning, and by their fruits we do know a child of God from a
child of the Devil, and herein do establish the Gospel, and not repeal it,
though he falsely says so; neither do we condemn any who fear the Lord, in any
thing they do or speak in his fear, but with such we have unity, who walks in
uprightness in the midst of a malicious World, and perverse Generation, as this
is.

9. His nineth Reason, says he, After all their sins they most impudently
pretend to (...) sinless perfection, etc.

Ans. What such as are in darkness does conceive of us, and so utters, i^
matters not; but many of us do witness that Christ has done away our sins and
in him we are complete through says, in which we are perfect without sin, and
it is not of our selves; and that perfection we exhort all to press after, that
they may be perfect in Christ Jesus without sin: And he says, They themselves
desire a sinless perfection, and confesses it is their command and duty, and
yet says it is an impudent pret^^^^e in us to profess that which himself
confesses they desire, and is their comman: and duty; and this is great
confusion, and comes out of Babylons store; And though he would falsely suppose
that the Quakers suppose to have no need of Christ, and says he, They dare (it
seems) say they will not (...) beholding to God, or to the Blood of Christ for
the pardon of sin; but these are his foolis^^ imaginations, for we are
beholding to Christ, and to his Blood only, which has cleansed us from all
sin, and by it our sins and trespasses are blotted out, and forgiven: And we do
not think highly of our selves, though he impudently charge it upon us, and
has bent his tongue for Lies, and made them his refuge and strong Reasons.

10. His tenth Reason, That we do in many Doctrines so openly comply with the
Papis^, that people may see plainly that the Jesuits and Friars are our
Leaders; and he says, this has been proved by many Confessions, etc.

Ans. The Papist we utterly deny, their Doctrines, their ways, and whatsoever
favors of Popery, and are not lead by any other, but by Jesus Christ, a our
lives and Doctrines does make appear to all that have an eye to see; i^ true we
may be falsely slandered and accused by Richard Baxter, and by t^^ Priests and
the wicked people of the World, for it is enough for us to be as o^^ Master
Christ, who was called a Devil; and as was he, so are we slandered an^ accused
in this and many other things: But that ever it was proved that we a^ led by
Jesuits and Friars, this is one of our Adversaries slanders he has on^ and
again accused us; but he never proved it, though now he says, the Papi^ make
the Scriptures a dead Letter, and no Rule of faith, and so do we: The Papist
cry^ down our Church and Ministers, (says he) The Jesuits cries up free will
and sufficie^^ Grace to all, and a common sufficient Light to all, and so do we
(says he:) The Papi^^ extenuate imputed righteousness in setting up inherent
righteousness: and the Papist pl^e most in external abstenances and
observances, and so do we, says he, etc. To all this I answer, what is truth
we hold and maintain in the power of God, and may not deny it, though the
Papists may hold the same in words, which seldom they do; for we hold the
truth, for the truths sake, and dare not deny the truth, though the Devil
confess it in words; but he has falsely compared us with the Papists and
Jesuits; for we do not hold free will in the creature, neither do we extenuate
imputed righteousness, neither do we place most in external ^bstenances and
observances, herein Richard Baxter has belyed us: But wh^ I should measure him
by his own rule, and should say that the Jesuits and ^yars are his Leaders?
Why, because the Papists say Christ was born of Mary; and did many Miracles,
and dyed, being Crucified of the Jew, and was buried, and rose again, and so
does Richard Baxter say, and all the Pres^t ^ians in England, and therefore may
we conjecture, they do bu^sts, or open Infidels, as he says concerning us. But
fur^ sprinkling Infants is baptizing into the faith of Ch^ be free from sin
while they are upon Earth, and (...) (...) aga^ error, and thus does Richard
Baxter and his any, and therefore by his own Arguments he may be judged that
the Jesuit^s and ^yars are (...) Leaders, and that he prepares people to be
Papists; but I will not (...) (...) unchar^ (...) judge him so by this rule, as
he has falsely done us, though (...) do know in the Light of God there is a
greater concurrence in Doctrine, and ^ctice^sation, between many of our
Accusers and the Papists, then there is between Papists and us, and the Light
of Christ in all Consciences shall answer me in the day of Gods righteous
Judgments, and the Papists and him we do deny, and see them to be of one
spirit, though differing in appearances; and what we are it is by Grace, and
not of our selves; and what we do it is through Christ, and not by our selves,
and to God we appeal for judgment, and tramples upon all men's vain conceiving,
false judgments, Lies and Slanders, and turns them back to them again where
they were hatched.

11. His eleventh Reason: He says, Our Doctrine are self-contradictory, and
therefore they cannot be of God, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, This is false, our Doctrines do agree in one, and are
not self-contradictory, though falsely he may judge of this, as he may judge of
other things; if he had been in Christ's time, likely he would have judged his
words self-contradictory, who said, Except you eat my Flesh, and drink my
Blood, you have no Life in you; and yet at the same instant of time said, The
Flesh profits nothing; with many other such instances as might be brought.
Why, but Ric. Baxter tells you, We say all men have a sufficient light within
them, and goes up and down, preaching it with great zeal. This is no more then
the Apostle John did, who told the Saints they needed no man to teach them, but
as the Anointing in them, and yet preached unto them, and wrote Epistles to
them, but bid John contradict himself? let wise men judge. And John said,
Christ lights every man that comes into the World with the true Light; and no
more then he did, do we contradict our seves herein, for we follow the same
example, and we say the Saints have the Anointing in them, and needs no man to
teach them, and yet do we exhort them as the Apostle John did. And he asks,
what do we peach, If darkness, who would have such Teachers? if light, what
needless labor is this, when all men have sufficient light already, etc. To
all this I answer, We preach light that all should believe in it, and thereby
should be lead out of darkness, and the light is sufficient, being believed in
by the Creature, but all are not lead by it sufficiently. neither does receive
Christ: And we may ask him now, and say, If he preach darkness (as it is likely
he does, rather then the light, because he smites at preaching the light that
has lighted every man that comes into the World, and so in effect denies the
Lord that brought him) then who would have such a Preacher; but if he preach
the light, and not that Light which does enlighten every one that comes into
the World, which is Christ, and is sufficient, (as it seems by his own words he
does not, because he condemns us for it) then is he a Minister of Antichrist,
according to his own confession. But whatever he judges, we are sent to turn
people from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to the power of God,
and herein we do as the Ministers of Christ did; but that we revile the
Ministers of Christ as blind Guides, as says he, this false is again; but such
we bear witness against who preaches for Hire, and oppresses the
Commonwealth, and are in the steps of the proud Pharisees, and all people that
follows them are in darkness as the Pharisees were, and in the way of
Damnation, because they are not in the truth who follows not Christ, and yet
such people are lightened with the light of Christ, and that is their
Condemnation, because they believe not in it, and it is sufficient to the
Condmnation of all such.

12. His twelfth Reason: Says he, Consider also how suitable their Doctrine is
(...) the interest and pleasure both of the Papist and the Devil, why, says
he, they damn all the Ministers and Churches of CHRIST, etc.

To this I answer, A lying Tongue is but for a moment; though he makes Lies his
refuge, yet they shall be sweept away. Of the Ministers and Churches of Christ
are we, and such as are so, they we own, and are one with them, though this man
says otherwise; and it does little appear that our Doctrine is suitable to the
interest and pleasure of the Papists, for we find them our Enemies, and Gods
Enemies, and bears our witness against them, as against the Devil, and do say
that they are his offspring, and that the Priests of England are their
offspring, such as are open Liars especially: But if we should reckon, we
should find their Doctrine more agreeable to the Papists in many things, then
ours are, as I have instanced concerning sprinkling of Infants, and other
things; but does it follow that the Papists and we agree, because the Papists
declare against them out of cruelty and wickedness, and out of a murderous
mind to divert people into Idolatry and wicked superstition; and we declare
against them out of love to peoples souls, that they should not always be
deceived, and always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth; and has no other end to our selves, God is our witness, but that
people may be converted to the knowledge of God; and as I said before, though
the Papists may hold some truth in words, and cry against some sort of people
out of a wicked end, yet may not we therefore deny the truth as it is in Jesus,
neither must be silent is declaring against sin and wickedness; and let him
say what he will concerting any advantage the Devil reaps by us, it will but be
the overthrow of his very kingdom: Why, but says he, If we do but unchurch all
the reformed Churches, the Papists will give us a fee: I say it is a hard thing
to unchurch them that never were truly churched; and that we seek to unchurch
such as are the Churches of Christ, this is utterly false, and the Papists fee,
and his reproach, we trample upon them both together; and let him take the
Papists fee, as he pleads for it, for it was they first that took tithes for a
fee, and it is he now that strongly pleads for them, to be maintained in his
Ministry by them.

13. His thirteenth Reason: Says he, the Doctrine and practice of the Quakers
is contrary to the experience and holy nature of the Saints; why, says he,
they have sound a renewed light and life by the Scriptures and Ministry which
the Quakers make so light of, etc.

To this I answer, this is as false as the rest, for with all the Saints that
ever were upon earth, both in Doctrine and Practice we agree with them; and as
(...) the peoples sakes of England, I wish his words were true, and that they
ha^ indeed found a renewing light and life by this Ministry; but though he may
boast of it now, in the day of Gods righteous judgments it shall be found
otherwise, when it shall be tried, that the renewing has been but in form and
appearance, from one likeness to another, and not a renewing from death to
life; and though there has been sometimes appearing, a zeal and a desire after
him in the Ministry of England in times past, yet from this day has the Lord
forsaken them, and such as were sober and sincere in what was made manifest,
are now become Revilers and Reproachers, Slanderers and Persecutors of the
People of God, and from henceforth shall they not boast of many being
Converted by them from sin unto the way of Righteousness. But further he says,
We tell the people that their Ministry does the people no good, and none are
the better for it: If we do, we tell them true: And though he says, The
experiences of many thousands does confute this, yet say I, the experiences of
ten thousand times so many more shall confirm it: It is true, there may be
thousands like himself which will not stumble to belie their own souls, as he
has done of us; yet betwixt him and I in this matter God shall be our Judge,
who has not sent this Ministry, and yet it has run, therefore it does not,
nor shall not profit the people at all: He says, It is quite contrary to the
nature of Saints to damn and reproach the Saints, and call them the children of
the Devil: This is true; but it is not contrary to the nature of the Saints to
reprove Hypocrites, such as profess that which they do not enjoy, and speak
that which they have not received from the Lord, but steal from other men's
words, such are many of the Teachers of England; and it was the way of Christ
and his Apostles soundly to reprove such: And this is our way, and we do not
reproach the Saints, nor damn them, and yet to the wicked, which are not
Saints, we dare not cry peace, but do say, The wicked, and such who forget God,
shall be turned into Hell: And for this, David is our example.

14. His fourteenth Reason: He says, The Quakers are unlikely to be better
then other men seeing they are so notoriously proud; and thus this pride does
appear: Says he, It is the supposed Spirit of God, and the extraordinary
holiness, and inspiration, and abilities, that they are proud of, and says he,
They proclaim themselves perfect without sin. And this is the pride he charge
us with, etc.

To which I answer, We say that in Christ we are complete, as the Apostles said
to the Churches, and do not boast of it, neither are proud of it more then the
Churches were, but in the Lord we will glory, and in him rejoice again and
again; and it is that which we press after, and exhort all to press after, to
be perfect in him who takes away our sins, and gives power over the temptations
of the Devil. And he says, We pretend to know men's hearts: Yea, we do know
that the heart of man is desperately wicked and deceitful above all things; and
by men's words and works, we do know their hearts to be evil that acts and
speaks wickedness; For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks:
And if we should say we do not know men's hearts that acts and speaks
wickedness, we should be Liars: but as I said, What we are it is by grace in
Christ, and we boast not of it in the flesh, but our glorying is only in the
Lord in Spirit, that our names are written in the Book of life. And as for our
crying against Deceivers, which he so much stumbles at, it is but the practice
of Christ and his Apostles, as may be read through the Scriptures, and yet we
do it not, no more then they did in self-exaltation, though he would charge us
with it.

15. His fifteenth Reason: Says he, They plainly discover a persecuting
spirit: Why (says he) what man can in reason think but that they run up and
down the World to bring Ministry into hatred, etc.

To this I answer, Little of this does appear that our spirits are persecuting
spirits, for we pray for our Enemies, and do forgive them that do evil entreat
us, and renders to no man evil for evil; for if we had sought vengeance, or
prosecuted the good Laws of England against those that had wronged and robbed
us, and unjustly caused us to be put in Prison, many might have deeply suffered
by true Justice before this day, if we had not forgiven our Enemies, and
blessed them that hated us: Such has been the cruelty acted upon us, that many
might have been arraigned for felony, if we had sought the prosecution of the
good Laws, and not forgiven our Enemies.

Why, but the main thing is, because we are moved to go up and down the World
and declare against the false Ministers, and holding forth that Ministry, and
truly applying it to many of the Teachers of England: But let all the World
know, this is not from a persecuting spirit, not more then Isaiah did it, and
Micah, and the rest of the Prophets and Apostles, who did zealously give their
testimony against such as went for gifts and rewards, as the Teachers of
England do; but this is that which he is offended at, and calls it a
persecuting spirit, which is not so, but in love to peoples souls, that they
may deny the evil, and follow the good: And that our Ancesters have persecuted
to death, as he says, This is also a lie, and of the Devil, for our Ancestors
were the Saints, who were called of God, and were not of the World, even as we
are not of the World, and we are persecuted, but seeks not to persecute any,
and gives our witness faithfully against this Generation, and against the sins
both of Teachers and people; and this I suppose is it, even our zeal for the
Name of the Lord against unrighteousness, which he falsely calls a persecuting
spirit.

16. His sixteenth Reason is, Some Interrogatories, (says he) What reasonable
man should turn Quaker that sees the common fruit of their Doctrine? wh^^ good
do they do wherever they come, but (says he) hate both godly Teacher and
people, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, The fruit of our Doctrine is begetting people to the
Knowledge of God, and a converting them from sin and death, and from the ways
and works of unrighteousness, to be the Servants of the Lord; and every
spiritual man does see this to be the fruit of our doctrine: It does condemn
unrighteousness, and bring war and a sword upon Earth, as Christ's Doctrine did.
And this is the good, where we come, many are changed from wickedness,
rudeness, and ungodliness, to live soberly, righteously, and purely in this
present World, without offense toward God and men. For to say, We make people
both to hate godly Teachers and people, this is utterly false, for we endeavor
to bring people to the true Teacher, Christ Jesus, and to have fellowship with
the Saints: It Is true, in the World our Doctrine does make division, and does
set a man at variance, and does set Father against Son, and Son against Father,
even as Christ did, and his Doctrine, so he says we do. But again he belyes
us, in saying, We bring people into confusion and abominable error, or that we
cast people into a malicious mood, or tincture of bitterness, this is also
false, and this is my Answer, He that does the will of our Father, knows of our
Doctrine, whether we we^^ of God, or of our selves, and to all the World
besides we are unknown, and desires to be manifest to every man's conscience in
the Sight of God, and not to that wisdom which is of this World: And though he
scorn at such who are made to cast off their Points and Lace, yet is not this
more then any fruit that his Doctrine has brought forth? for as (...) do, so
did the Apostle exhort against all superflui^^ of naughtiness, as Points and L^
are; and it seems that such as depart from iniquity become a prey to such
wicked men^ slandering and scornful Tongues, and a matter to makes Books of, to
send into the World.

17. His seventeenth Reason: Says he, It is no great encouragement to us to
turn Quakers, when we consider who are their followers, very few experienced
sober Christians turn to them, (says he) but such who are ignorant, and
ungrounded, and raw professors, etc.

Answ. To this I answer, Let no man take encourgement from without, to turn
Quakers, or to own the Way of Gods Salvation, But let every one feel a Measure
of God in his own heart, converting him from sin unto righteousness, and
drawing his mind from the vanity and hypocrisy of this World, to the truth and
singleness of heart: And he appears to be of the spirit of the Pharisees, who
said, None but a company of poor people which were accursed, followed Christ;
and so says he, in effect, None but such as are ignorant, and such like: But
what if there were not any other, but such who owned the Way of the Lord? this
is a confirmation of it, rather then a cause of objecting against it, when such
who are ignorant are brought to the Knowledge of God: But yet his words are
false, for it is known, that very many honest, humble, sober (...) and people,
who have all their days been sincere toward God in what they have known of
him, have and do own us; and indeed, all that ever ow^^ God and Salvation,
shall own us, for we are of God, and he that is of God hea^ us, and the whole
World Lies in wickedness: And such as are self-conceited and in pride, and wise
in their own eyes, and in the wickedness of the World, such are his followers,
and not ours, though be falsely say it; for such as follow Christ have we
fellowship with, and not with such as walk in darkness.

18. His eighteenth Reason: Says he, It is an evident Judgment of God upon
these people that turn Quakers, and a punishment for their former sins, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, The Lord God, his Angels, and all his Saints and
Servants I call to record against thee, and they all shall witness that it is
Mercy, and not Judgment, upon them that owns the way of the Lord: And them
that owned the Quakers in truth and sincerity, have and do witness a remission
of their former sins and forgiveness of them by Jesus Christ, and not a
punishment for them: And Rich. Baxter may please himself and some others with
his reasonless Reasons, as these are; yet they are not worthy of the name of
Reason, they be so senceless and utterly false. And though he rails against the
Anabaptists as well as against us, yet any man whose eye is open, sees his
folly, and turns it upon his own head: and he may conceit himself in these
things for a moment. but the day of the Lord will declare it otherwise, and
that upon us Mercy and Peace shall be, and not Judgment nor Wrath.

19. His ninteenth Reason: Says he, They are already in division among
themselves, as the contention between, Nayler, and Fox, and their followers do
show.

To this I answer, Though an occasion may come and be taken against the truth,
yet woe unto him by whom it comes, and to them who do receive it, for the
Testimony of Truth abids for ever. But as about that division he speaks of, it
has been answered by writings several times, and now I say, It happened but as
a Trial to the Lords People, and not to destroy them; though the Enemy boasts
himself because of it, yet the Lord knows how to preserve his in the midst of
Temptation: But these things are now at an end, though a Temptation presented
it self yet it overcame not, and truth is the same, and the Testimony thereof
does never change: and all these Refuges which the Wicked flies unto shall not
cover them when the Lord appears.

20. His twentieth Reason: And says he, To make all their delusions more
odious wickedness, they father it upon the Holy Ghost.

Ans. His words are utterly false: yet we say we have received the Holy Ghost
which teaches us, and leads us into all truth, and by it are we lead out of
all Wickedness and Delusion, and all wicked speeches, which he brands us
withal, and these things are his own, for he is seen to be in delusion, and
odious wickedness, and wicked speeches. And says he, They speak against the
DOCTRINE of the SPIRIT, and cries down the love of the Saints, and against the
Ordinances of the Ministers of Christ. To this I have answered, In the love and
union with all the Saints we are, and Ministers of Christ, but against
Hypocrisy we declare, such who profess what they are not, and use their
tougues, and says the Lord says, when the Lord has not spoken to them; and
sprinkle Infants, and says it is an Ordinance of Christ; and singing David's
experiences in Rhyme and Meeter, with many other things which the Priests has
in their practice; such things we deny to be Ordinances of Christ, and them to
be Ministers of Christ, which do practice them; and this we do say by the
Spirit of Truth: But that we pronounce damnation against Gods Church and holy
Servants, this is false again, and is but the fulfilling the number of his
lies; and though he charge us secretly with preaching another Gospel, then that
which Paul preached, is false, and if we duly examine, it will be he that will
be found preaching another Gospel, whose practice is found in many things
contrary to them who were Ministers of the true Gospel, and so the curse
pronounced by the Apostle will fall upon him, and not upon us in the day of
Judgment.

21. His one and twentieth Reason: Says he, The Quakers themselves renounce
(...) words the Ranters and Papists, as a deluded sort.

Answer. To which I answer and say, Yea, not only in words, but in lives lives
also we utterly abhor the Ranters and Papists both in profession and practice,
and do know that Rich. Baxter is of the same spirit, though differing in words.
But says he, The Ranters and Drunkards cries out against the same Ministers,
same exercise, and godly people, as the Quakers do. To which I answer, What the
Ranters and Drunkards may do in their wickedness and unclean spirits, is one
thing, and what we do in the fear of God, and tender love to peoples Souls, is
another thing; but how uncharitable is this man in his judgment? Let us try
him, as if I should say, The Ranters, and Drunkards, and Profane, and all
ungodly People, they are our Enemies, and do oppose and gainsay the Way of God,
and the people called Quakers, and they Beat them, and Reproach them, and
Slander them, and does much cruelty unto them; and thus does Richard Baxter of
Kidderminster, he reviles them, and reproaches them, and belyes them, and
therefore he is one with the Ranters, and Drunkards, and profane people, and
he holds part of the Papists Ranters, and Drunkards doctrine and practice: And
thus he is judged with his own Rule, according as (...) has judged us, by the
same Rule, and now say I, as well as he of us, Let any man judge that has not
forsworn all wit and reasons whether it is likely the Holy Ghost will inspire
Richard Baxter and a company of Priests of Engl^, to acquaint them with the
same Points, Doctrines, and Practices, which the Papists, Ranters Drunkards,
and all profane people exercise themselves in; for as all they are Enemies to
the Quakers, so is he and his company. A^ farther I ask him, Whether the same
things be heavenly in Rich. Ba^ and his company, which be hellish in the
Ranters and Drunkards? And whether Richard Baxter has not condemned himself
and the Priests of England, in condemning the Papists, and Ranters, and
Drunkards, and profane people, in acting the very same things, to wit,
speaking against, reproaching, reviling, and slandering, and backbiting an
innocent people of God, called Quakers?

22. His two and twentieth Reason: And says he, If I have any Reason to (...)
weary of the Christian Catholic Reformed Religion, what reason have I to turn
Qua^ more then to any other Sect? Why (says he) how do they prove they are
more in the ri^ then any other, etc.

Ans. To all this I answer, this is according to his knowledge, who sees (...)
difference between good and evil, between such as serves God, and such as
serves him not; and how can this man be a Teacher of others that is so blind
himself; The true Christian Religion he is out of, and in a Sect, whose frui^
are as bad as the Papists or Familists, or any others; for I believe not the
wor^^ of Sects could have brought forth more lies and slanders, and scoffing
wor^^ in one sheet of paper, then he has done in this which now I deal withal.
And as for our proof that we are in the right way, to every man that has an
eye to see, and an ear to hear, and an heart to conceive, it is easy to be
proved, and such are satisfied; but as for Unbelievers and Persecutors, such as
himself, they must hear and see, and not perceive and understand.

23. His three and twentieth Reason: Says he, The way by which they pr^ is not
producing any evidence, for they renounce that, and offers all from the Aut^ of
the spirit within them, etc.

Ans. The way by which we prevail is by the the Spirit of the Lord which (...)
within us, and that was the way whereby all the Ministers of Christ ev^
prevailed, by the authority of that. But yet this is false, we do not deny
(...) produce Evidence, but is sufficiently able, and has done it, to produce
Evi^ out of the Scriptures, to prove all things which we profess or practice
for Religion. But says he, They must prove their Commission by Divine miracles
before (...) reasonable man can believe it, etc. many that fear God, and are in
the (...) Reason, has Believed us already, and do see the Mighty Wonders of
Go^ brought to pass, and it cannot be believed by Richard Baxter, no more
(...) Christ was believed of the Pharisees, in whom the mighty Power of God
(...) made manifest, for though he did miracles, yet this Generation could not
believe them. And he tells of some that said he was (...); so might they well
do, and not lie, his blindness is made manifest at larg^ And says he, But can
I see the Witness in them that says they have the Witness in themselves. Nay,
because thou art an Unbeliever thou can not; but it thou were a Believer in
Christ, thou would feel the same Testimony in the Brethren; but by thee we
are not known, and therefore by thee are falsely Judged; for no other Testimony
do we give or hold forth, but the same which the Apostles did, which we have
received from Christ as the Apostles did, and not by any authority of our own,
though he falsely says it, but by the Authority of the Power of God; and we
shall not much seek or beg our Adversaries belief, for to God are we known, and
one to another in the Spirit, and not to the wisdom of the World, which is
devilish, and knows not, nor receives not the things which be eternal.

His last Reason: They teach but such like Dostrine, and takes the like course
as many of the Heretics did, and says he, Shall we run our selves into the
fire which has consumed such Heresy through former Ages, etc.

Answer. To this I answer, The Doctrines of the Gospel we hold forth and teach
to all people, and in that way that is called Heresy, worship we indeed the
God of our fathers; but it is but such as this man with whom I deal, who is a
false witness-bearer, and a reproacher, and the Company of Hireling-Teachers,
and such like, that does call the Way of God Heresy. And though he say,
presently after the Apostles days, such Heretics arose and troubled the
Church. To which I answer, Nay it is just such like as himself, who appeared in
the Apostles days, who taught for filthy lucre, and for gain made merchandise
of souls; and it was such lying Prophets which John saw the whole world run
after in his days, and they were them that troubled the Church, even such as
were heady, and high minded, and covetous men, and such as are false Accusers,
and fierce men; and his shame and folly is made manifest, and so his lies and
slanders are turned upon his own head. And in his conclusion he does beseech
Professors to consider impartially of these 24. Reasons; to which I say, The
most of them are so reasonlesse, that they will rather turn to his own
confusion, then to his praise, to any man of understanding: And he bids all
bethink themselves, first, What a doleful thing it is that Professors should be
so loose and unstable, etc.

Answ. Doleful it is indeed that after so much preaching of Priests of England,
people should be so ignorant, loose, and unstable as indeed they are, and this
is, a very shame to Teachers, and shows that they were not sent of God, because
that the people are not profited at all, but continues ignorant, loose, and
unstable and wicked, according to their own confession, and indeed, people are
to be pitied that are under their Ministry, who by it can never come to the
Knowledge of God, but must be ever learning fifty or sixty years, and ignorant
loose, and unstable at their very end, and yet these are members of this Church
of England, so called, which the very Pastors thereof confesses to be loose,
and unstable, andwicked, and brands us to be denyers of this Church, as indeed
we have good reason, to see the Members thereof so wicked, loose, and unstable,
as is confessed by their own Teachers, therefore we cannot be condemned for
denying such a Church. Secondly, He bids consider what a heavy judgment it is
to Professors themselves, to be self-condemned, and self-divided from the
Church, etc.

To which I answer, A heavy judgment indeed, that such as are of the Church
should be self-condemned, and self-divided from it; but yet it is a blessed
thing that any that have been deceived with false likeness, now should come to
see the error thereof, and be turned to the true Church which is in God, and to
be drawn away from all windy Doctrines of Englands Teachers, and this many does
witness. Then he exhorts Christians to be serious, and be true to the Light
which they have received: To which I say, All that are true to the light which
they have received from Christ Jesus, will deny this man I now deal withal,
and all his Lies and Slanders. Then he bid-stick close to the Word of God; and
I say, All that do so will find it as a Fire and a Hammer, and will be gathered
from under the dead Doctrines of men in this Age. And he exhorts them to stick
close to a faithful Ministry: To which I say, Then must they deny all
Hirelings, and such as preaches for hire, for such are not of the faithful
Ministry, but Deceivers of people.

And thus in few words return is sent in the pursuit of a Sheet of Lies and
Slanders put forth into the World, and all sober-minded people by this may come
to a good understanding between Truth and error. And though he has taken a
course to spread his Books (...) Ballads and Fables, by having them cried up
and down the streets, which is not for his advantage altogether, but does show
his Work ridiculous to all wise men. And so hereby it may be seen that all his
Strong Reasons are confounded and overturned, that would hinder a man from
being a QUAKER.

THe main and chief things I have spoken of, and by what is written in short
men of understanding may understand what his whole matter can be: But in the
beginning of his Book he falls a complaining of the lamentable ignorance and
ungodliness of common People; and of the pride, and se^conceitedness of
Professors of godliness, and of the weakness, and giddiness, and unstableness
of others: To this I Answer; It is true, abundance are ignorant, and abundance
are proud and self-conceited, and abundance unstable and giddy in their minds;
and substract these from the whole Company of the Hearers of the Teachers of
England, and there is but a few left (if any at all) that are truly righteous
in the Sight of God; and so to the shame of all the Teachers of England, has
he confessed the truth in this particular; and shows that indeed the People
is not profited by them: and this is a strong Argument that they were never
sent of God, but has ran and were never sent: But presently after that he
cries out of Heretics and Deceivers, even like as the Pope does; but What is
he afraid of, That they that are ignorant, and ungodly, and proud, and
self-conceited, unstable, and giddy, should be deceived, they that are in those
iniquities are deceived already, and cannot possibly fall into greater deceit,
or delusion. But it appears, That many of the Priests of England cares not how
little their Hearers profits by them, so if they can get their wages, their
Hire, their great sums of money; for one of them said, I mean a supposed
Minister of England) in Cambridge-shire, That he mattered not if all his
Hearers went to the Devil, so they would but give him his dues; to wit, Tithes
and Maintenance. So that by this instance, you may judge what stock they are
of, and what their endeavors are; and we desire that people may be undeceived
of that wherein they are deceived, and that they may turn from such a
Generation of covetous Teachers, who care so little for their souls. And
whereas he says, The Quakers are but of a few years standing, and that they
arose from among the Papists but a few year ago, etc.

To this I Answer, the people of God received that name but a few years ago,
but the Saints were Quakers, I am able to prove, long before; for Abrah^ and
Isaac, and Moses, and Habakkuk, Daniel, and Paul, and all the rest were
Quakers, though they were not called so; and though our name is new, yet our
Religion is old; for it is the good old way, even the way the Apostles walked
in, though it has been over-clouded for many years in the dark night of
Apostasy, which has been over the whole World; and the Beast has Reigned and
made War against the Saints and killed them, and this has been for many ages
as you may read: Yet there was a Seed which God preserved for himself in the
midst of darkness, but now is the Way of the Lord made manifest again, and the
same Power and Life of God which was in the Apostles days, and Truth shall
spring forth, and Idolatry shall be rooted out by little and little, and
Antichrist and his kingdom shall fall, and even Christ the Son of God the same
as ever was, for no other do we own, but him who was and is, and is to come; he
shall rule, and his People shall follow him. And though he says, The Quakers
be an upstart Sect: using such scornful words, not beseeming a Minister of
Jesus Christ; but we are willing to bear all his reproaches for Christ's sake.
And he speaks most foolishly, and says as if we knew not the contents of our
Religion; yea, we know the contents and foundation of it, which is Christ that
good old foundation, and him we are zealous for, and him we Preach, and no
other. And though he says, The Christians Faith has been known for sixteen
hundred years ago: I say it was so, but the night has been over all, wherein
no man can work, since it has been first revealed; and Traditions, and
Superstitions has the World been exercised in, and led into; and the true
Faith of the Gospel has been departed from, and many knows it not at this day.
And he says, He abhors any Gospel, or Religion, that was not made sixteen
hundred years ago, etc. To this I Answer, Then must he abhor his own practice;
for sprinkling of Infants, telling people it is a Baptizing into the Faith of
Christ, was not so long since nor singing David's experiences in Rhyme and Meeter
for a part of Gods Worship; and many other things which the Priests of England
practice for Religion and Gospel Ordinances, but are not so; but an invention
came in many years since the Faith was revealed to the Apostles; and thus he
has abhored his own practice, and is condemned out of his own mouth. And
whereas he speaks of one that lately spoke to another in these words, He denied
the God that he Worshipped. That might be true: for thousands in England
Worships the god of this World; and that god the Saints deny: And he counts it
a thing very abominable to trust to that Which is within the Saints; though it
be according to the Scriptures, for Christ is in the Saints, and God dwells in
the Saints; and God and Christ is only to to be trusted to. There is also
another piece put forth by him, called, A Sheet for the Ministry: in which also
(according to his usual manner) he Rails and Lies against the Quakers in many
things; also I might instance in many more things wherein he has belyed us, as
a man without fear or honesty: and much ado he maks about Tithes: And he
commends his Reader to the Quakers Catechism, for better satifaction. And I do
commend all sober people to the Answer of the same, wherein his folly and
weakness is laid open, as in them particulars. But he says, The Tenths are
theirs as fully as the rest are ours, but this is denied; for the Tithes are
not paid out of the Lands, but out of men's labors and industrious exercises
upon the Land: for if any man let his Land lie untilled, there is no Tithes
claimed; so that it is manifest it is paid out of men's labors, and not out of
the Land: and many other things we have against Tithes, and against the
unjustness of them, and the oppression growing thereby. And we do know, That
never any Minister of Christ was maintained in such a way: nay, they were so
far off being maintained by a Law, that they would not make use of their power
which they had in Christ in those things as of outward maintenance. But much
need not be said, for thousands begins to see the grievous burden and
unlawfulness of Tithes, and that in the Gospel administration, these things are
no way commanded by the Law of God, but as they came in by tradition, and were
established by the Pope, and are now the chief maintenance of Englands
Teachers. Indeed grievous and sad to be considered it is, how many hundreds in
England of honest men are made havoc on in their Persons and Estates in
relation to Tithes, because for Conscience sake they cannot pay to the
upholding of an Antichristian Ministry, which denies Christ come in the flesh,
by upholding Tithes, which only belonged to the first Priesthood under the Law,
and was never practiced (either paid or received by any) of them that were
Witnesses of Christ come, or after his death, who did thereby fulfill that part
of the old Covenant, and put an end to that Covenant, and the Priesthood was
changed that took Tithes, and a necessity there was also of the change of the
Law as it is written. So this is an Answer in part to Richard Baxters many Lies
and Reproaches, and his whole Work is turned by as our spoiled prey of Babylons
treasure; and no more to be recokned in the Records of Truth, but shall stand
upon an account, among the corrupted and poluted commodity, of the growth of
Egypt and Babylon.

And this is for the satisfaction of honest people by a Friend, EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE TRUE Christian Religion Again DISCOVERED, After the long and dark Night of
Apostasy, which has overshaddow'd the whole World for many Ages; and the
profession and practice thereof witnessed unto by the Scriptures. And here all
may see, who it is of all these Sects, and diverse Forms of Religion in these
Nations, that are agreeable to the Scriptures, in what they profess and
Practice, and who it is that are not according thereunto; for the Line of true
Judgment it stretched upon all Profession, and a true search into, and trial
thereof is made, and hereby it is manifest who it is, and what sort of people,
that may justly claim the benefit of the Protectors Oath, to be protected
thereby in their Practices of Religion, who has bound himself to maintain and
uphold that Christian Religion which is according to the Scriptures, etc.
FOrasmuch as Oliver Cromwell, called Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, (chief Ruler according to man) has bound himself by an Oath, and
Sworn, that he will uphold and maintain the true reformed Protestant Christian
Religion in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Old and New Testament
of the Scriptures; which Oath he is bound to perform before the Lord, and unto
all men.

Now it remains to be tried and proved, what the Christian Religion is; and who
they are in these Nations that are of the true reformed Protestant Christian
Religion in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Scriptures, seeing
there are abundance of Sects and diversity of Judgments, and many Assemblies
and Gatherings of people, who are diverse in their Ways, in their Practices,
and in their Form of Religion in these Nations, which do all profess the
Scriptures, and that their Form of Religion is according to the Scriptures; but
this cannot be, but it will be manifest otherwise; for the Scriptures, which
were given forth by the one Spirit of God, bears not witness of many true Ways,
or unto many true Religions, but unto one Truth, and unto one true Religion,
and is the Declaration of one way of Life, and Salvation, by one Jesus Christ;
and there is no other Name under Heaven given for Salvation: And they that
believe in him, and receive him, those are they only that are of the true
Religion, who are guided by the Spirit, and changed thereby from Death to Life;
and such have unity with the Father, and with the Son, and one with another,
and are not of this World, but Heirs of the Kingdom of God; and these may own
and claim a Title to be defended and preserved in their exercise and Practice
of Religion.

Therefore come all sorts of People, and let us try and prove who it is that is
of the true Religion, and who it is that he is bound to maintain and uphold by
his Oath: Come I say, all Sects and sorts of people, and appear to Trial: Dare
you join issue with me in this matter, to try your Profession and Practice o^
Religion, whether it be according to the Scriptures in the purity thereof, yea
or nay? for the Lord has put it into my Heart, to lay you all to the Line of
true Judgment, and to prove you whether you must be upholden and maintained in
your Religion, yea, or nay: Come claim your Privilege; if your Profession and
Practice in Religion be according to the Scriptures, then you may own your
right, and the benefit of the Protectors Oath; but if your Profession and
Practice in Religion be otherwise, and not according to the Scriptures, then
you must stand back, and defend your selves if you can, for the Protector is
not bound to maintain and uphold you in your Practice of Religion. And with
this Argument I shall try you all, Whatsoever is professed and practiced for
Religion, for which there is neither command nor president in Scripture, is not
aecording to the Scripture; let this fall where it may, this is Truth; and
therefore all people come to trial, and receive your judgment by this rule.

And first, the true Religion is a walking with God in purity and holiness, a
performing of good to him, and not doing any evil; a belief in Christ, and
receiving of him, and a living in him, and through the operation of his Spirit
to be changed into his Image, and the Body of Sin and Death put off, and a
living to God in all things, and not a living to this vain World in any thing,
but in all things to be guided by the Spirit of Christ: This, in short, is a
description of the true Religion, and they that are of this Religion shall be
saved in the Day of the Lord, and in Equity and Righteousness should be
protected according to the Oath beforementioned, or else the Oath is not
performed in justice, but rather broken through transgression. And first of
all, as concerning that profession and practice in Religion, which is most
general in these Nations, I mean such as sprinkle Infants, and are sprinkled
being Infants; professing it to be the Baptism into the Faith of Christ; and
that it is a seal of the new Covenant, and of remission of sins, and that
thereby people are made capable of union with Christ, and that it is a sign of
regeneration, etc. This is practiced and professed by many for Religion; but
this Practice and Doctrine is not according to the Scripture; therefore all ye
through all these Nations that are made Christians, and own your Title in
Christianity, and a right to fellowship with Christ; and that ye are joined to
the Church, and become Members of Christ, because you were sprinkled when you
were Infants (and all ye that preach this for Doctrine, and practice it for
Religion) you are not of the true Christian Religion, in the Purity thereof, as
it is contained in the Scriptures: this I do affirm. Therefore stand you by;
for what you practice and profess, there is neither Command nor President in
Scripture; if you could show any, you are now called, and a Necessity is put
upon you, to make use of your Knowledge, if you would be protected in this
Commonwealth, in your Practice of Religion.

Likewise you sing, and give to sing, David's Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter,
professing it is to the Glory and Honor of God; ye practice this as an
Ordinance of God, as a part of his Worship, and as a part of your Religion; but
this Practice and Profession also is manifest not to be according to
Scriptures; because it was never commanded; neither is there any President for
this Practice in the Scriptures, in Gospel Times: therefore in this part of
your Religion you cannot justly own to be pro tected and maintained; because
the Protector's Oath reaches not to uphold and maintain any such Practices in
Religion, which are not according to the Scriptures.

Likewise, all ye that meet together, to exercise your Religion, and to worship
God in Temples made with hands, set a part by you for that Practice, professing
them to be Churches of Christ; this is not according, but contrary to the
Scriptures, which say, God dwells not in Temples made with hands; neither did
the Saints of old constantly practice any such thing: But they were the
Persecutors that met in Temples made with hands, who cast out, and haled* the
Apostles out of such Temples: so that in this Practice you cannot justly own to
be protected, as not being a Practice in Religion according to Scriptures.

Likewise, All ye, whose Ministers preach for Hire, and have Hire for
preaching, so much a Year, and so much a Sermon at a Town or a Parish in a
settled Place; and who take Tithes, and compel People to pay Tithes by a Law;
such are not the Ministers of Christ; and ye that uphold such for Ministers of
Christ, are false in Judgment, and blind in Understanding; and are not of that
Christian Religion, which is according to Scriptures in the Purity thereof,
neither Ministers, nor People; for the Ministers of Christ never acted any such
thing: they were the false Prophets, and false Apostles, that preached for
Hire, and for Gifts, and Rewards: neither did the Saints and Churches of Christ
look upon them that acted those things to be Ministers of Christ; but on the
contrary, declared against them to be Deceivers: So that all you People, and
you professed Ministers, that act those things that the false Prophets acted;
and all you People that love to have it so, and give Hire to your Ministers for
Preaching, and consent unto it; none of you are of the Christian Religion, as
it is held forth in the Scriptures; because this part of your Practice in
Religion is not according, but contrary to Scriptures.

Now substracting all these in these Nations from the whole, which practices
and professes these things mentioned for Ordinances of God, and for his
Worship, none of you are of the true Christian Religion, as it is held forth in
the Scriptures; because these things which you Practice for Religion, is not
held forth in all the Scriptures by any example or command, likewise you are of
the greatest number of people in all these Nations; and that Practice and
Profession of Religion, which the greatest number follow, and exercise
themselves in, cannot be the true Christian Religion, because the Scripture
says, Few are in the straight way that leads to Life, to wit, in the pure and
true Religion; but many are in the Broad way that leads to destruction; and
such that are the greatest number, who are in the broad way, are not in the
Religion in the purity thereof, as it is held forth in the Scriptures: likewise
many of you who Practice those things mentioned for Religion, are yet
unconverted to God, but live in wickedness, in the Pride and Vanities, and in
all the evil of this World, in Double-dealing, in Drunkenness, in Whoredom, and
in the Works of Darkness; therefore you are not of the true Christian Religion,
neither do your walk with God in Purity and Holiness, neither are you changed
by Christ into his Image, nor are guided by his Spirit; neither do you live to
God in any thing, but to this World in all things; and your Religion is
manifest not to be according to the Scriptures, but contrary. And so let all
people consider, whether or no you must be maintained in your Religion? Come
forth and plead your cause all ye that are called Presbyterians and
Independants, and all others, stand up, and prove if you can, your Practice in
Religion to be according to Scriptures; but seeing no man is able to prove
these things mentioned, which is practiced by you for Religion, to wit,
Sprinkling of Infants, and singing David's experiences in Rhyme and Meeter, and
Worshipping God in set-places, as Idol-Temples, and preaching for, and giving
great sums of Money for preaching, with other things practiced by you for
Religion; neither were these things ever commanded in Scriptures; neither is
there any example for the practice of these things in Scripture by any of the
Lords people; and therefore you cannot justly own a Title in the Protectors
Oath, to be maintained and upheld by virtue thereof in these your practices of
Religion; for it appears he is but bound only to uphold and maintain that
Religion, which is according to Scriptures, and not them who practiceth those
things for Religion, which are not according, but contrary to the Scriptures.
Likewise all ye, that are called gathered Churches; who holds sorth for
Doctrine, that the Scriptures are the Word, (by which the World was made) and
that the Scriptures are the Foundation; and that the Scriptures are the Way to
Salvation; and that the Letter and the Spirit are unseparable; and that the
Scriptures are both the Writings, and the thing fignified; and that except a
man be Baptized with Water; he cannot be saved: with such like Doctrines, which
have been held forth by some professing themselves to be of the Church of
Christ; all you are manifest not to be of the Christian Religion, because those
Doctrines are not according, but rather contrary to the Scriptures.

Likewise, All ye, whose Practice in the Exercise of Religion is but by
Imitation from the Scriptures, and you are not led by the Spirit of of the
Father in what you speak and practice; you are not of the true Christian
Religion, which the Scripture speaks of: for the Sons of God, and who are of
the true Religion, are led by the Spirit of God, and not by their own Thoughts,
and Imaginations, and the Traditions of men: And all that are not led by the
Spirit of the Father, are not of the true Christian Religion, as it is held
forth in the Scriptures; and not any, that are such, can justly own to be
protected in their Religion; because it is not according to the Scriptures.

Likewise, All ye that do profess the things of God and Christ, and that you
are Members of the Church of Christ, and profess Righteousness and Truth in
words, and yet live in Pride, and the Vanities of this World, and in
Unrighteousness, and the Customs of the Heathen, which are vain; and are not
cleansed from Unrighteousness, nor freed from the Body of sin and death;
neither do answer your Profession with a Conversation, showing that you are not
guided with that Spirit whose words you do profess: All you are Hypocrites, and
live in Hypocrisy; none of you are of the true Christian Religion, as it is
held forth in the Scriptures: For the Exercise in true Religion shows forth
in Life what is prosessed in words.

Come, try your selves, and prove your selves all sorts of people; for now your
Religion is to be tried, what Name soever you go under: And all you that
practice and profess those things for Religion, for which there is neither
Command nor President in Scripture, your Religion is concluded not to be
according to Scriptures; and so no Title or Privilege can any of you justly
own, of being upheld or maintained by the Protector's Oath. But, as I have
said, For sprinkling of Infants, and singing of David' s Experiences in Rhyme
and Meeter, etc. there is neither Command, nor President in Scriptures; and
therefore, you that practice those things, which I have mentioned, for
Religion, are not of the true Christian Religion, which is according to the
Scriptures, which is to be protected.

Likewise all ye that persecute by Reproaches, or Revilings and Cruelty, or
that cause the People of God to be persecuted; many of you there are in these
Nations, which profess Religion; yet are Envious Persons, and Persecutors of
the Innocent: Hereby it is manifest, that you are not of that Religion which is
according to Scriptures; for the Saints never persecuted any, but were
themselves persecuted for Righteousness sake; so you are not to be protected in
such Exercise, because it is not according, but contrary to the Scriptures: for
you have no Example from the Saints for professing and practizing Religion, and
yet persecuting such as are of the true Religion, whose Consciences are truly
exercised toward God, and toward all men.

Now seeing that it is discovered in part, who it is that are not of the true
Christian Religion, according to the Scriptures; it remains to be proved (if
there be any) who they be that are of the true Christian Religion, as it is
held forth in the Scriptures; and who they be that are to be protected in their
Practice and Exercise of Religion: And as concerning the despised and rejected
People, called Quakers; herein I shall speak for them, as a Friend to them, and
a Lover of their Ways, who is nor ashamed of their Practices in Religion; and
shall measure and try their Practices in Religion, whether they be according to
Scripture; and if it prove so to be, that what they practice for Religion, and
hold forth for Doctrine, be according to the Scriptures; then why should not
they own their Right and Privilege, to be upholden and maintained by the
Protector's Oath, who has sworn to uphold and maintain them and their
Religion, whose Exercise in Religion is according to Scriptures; being that
same People are, and have been faithful Subjects of this Commonwealth?

And first of all, They dare not own themselves to be Christians, nor to be
Members of Christ, nor to have any Right or Title to the Kingdom of God, but as
they witness converting by the Spirit of the Lord, and are changed from Death
to Life, and from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power unto the Power of
God, through the Operation of the same Spirit; and as in all their Works, and
Ways, and Exercises in Religion, they are guided by the same Spirit, who
leads them out of the World, and out of the Vanities and Evil-Works thereof;
and this is according to the Scriptures: And their Religion herein is justified
by the Scriptures, who witness, That Christ is in them, and that they have
received him through Faith, and thereby are cleansed from all Unrighteousness,
and have put off, and are putting off the Body of sin and death, and walk with
God in Purity and Holiness, being led by the Spirit of God therein; and with
God they have Peace, being reconciled by Jesus Christ, who is their Salvation,
and they have no other: And this is according to the Scriptures.

And again, As concerning their Meetings, and the manner thereof; They are not
contrary, but according to the Scriptures; for, though they meet in many Parts
of these Nations by great Numbers, some in the open Fields, and some on the
Mountains in some Places, and sometimes without Doors, and sometimes in Houses;
all this Practice is according to Scriptures: For, we read, Mat. 5. 1. in the
days of Christ; That there were great Multitudes of People that followed him;
and he went up into a Mountain, and preached, and taught them upon the
Mountain: And in Mat. 14. 14. we read, That there were great Multitudes, that
came out of the Cities unto Jesus, into the Deserts; and he had compassion
toward them, and did good unto them: And at that time there were many
Thousands met together, as you may read; and it seems, stayed many whole days
together; for they sat down on the Grass, and eat together; and then Jesus
sent the Multitudes away: And in Mark 6. you may read, how that Multitudes came
to Jesus out of the Cities into a desert Place; and Jesus began to teach them
many things in that desert Place; for, he had compassion on the Multitude: And
in Luke 9. how the people again followed Jesus into a desert Place, and he
preached unto them the Kingdom of God. Such Meetings then were counted strange,
as such Meetings are now, when the People of God meet together by great
Numbers, to preach, and to hear the Kingdom of God preached: But their Meetings
are according to the Scriptures; for the People of God, in Generations past,
met in the same manner as the People of God, called Quakers, meet now: For
sometimes Christ preached out of a Mark 41, 2. Luke 5. 3,
Ship unto the People that stood on the Sea Shore: And Act. 20.
Paul kneeled down and prayed among the Saints near the Sea Shore, at his
passing into the Ship: And we read, Acts 2. that there was Three Thousand
converted at one Sermon; then there must needs be a great Meeting, and a great
deal of People met together: Such Meetings now are wondered at; but such
Meetings are but according to Scripture; so that this part of their Practice in
Religion is agreeable to the Scriptures, and the same as the Saints Practice
was in Ages past.

And as for the People of God meeting together, sometimes in the Night-season
to wait upon the Lord, and sometimes sitting in Silence, and waiting upon the
Lord, and no words uttered amongst them; but every one sitting silent before
the Lord, having received nothing from the Lord to speak one to another; at
which the people of the World do wonder, and falsely judge it not to be a
Christian Exercise: But we read in the Scripture, Job 2. that Job (who was a
Christian; for he was a just and perfect man) he and his Friends sat upon the
Ground seven days and seven nights, and spoke not a word one to another; this
would be a strange thing at this day to see practiced: And in Ier. 8. 14. you
may read, where the Prophet Jeremiah exhorted the people to assemble
themselves, and said, Let us enter into defenced Cities, and let us be silent
there; for the Lord our God has put us to Silence: But such a Practice now is
thought strange by the people of the World, who are not acquainted with the
Ways of God; who are wise in their own Eyes, and know not what it is to wait
upon the Lord in silence, who never yet were put to silence in themselves by
the Lord. And you may read Ezekiel. 3. where the Prophet sat down among the
People of the Captivity, and they were astonished seven days; and at the end
of seven days (and not before) the Word of the Lord came to the Prophet: So
that you see it was the Practice of the Servants of the Lord oft-times to sit
and wait upon the Lord in Silence; though people wonder at such Meetings now.
And we do not read, That there was always speaking among the Saints in the
Churches, when they were met together: But, Acts 2. we read, That the Church
was met together in a Place, and the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and then they
began to speak as the Spirit gave them utterance; then it seems they had not
spoken before, though they had met together in a House; and then they spoke the
wonderful things of God; and some that heard, mocked, and others said, they
were full of New Wine, even as the people of the World do at this day, when any
of the People of the Lord are moved to speak as the Spirit gives utterance: So
that sometimes to sit in Silence, being met together to wait upon the Lord, as
many of the Servants of the Lord do in this Nation, is a Practice of Religion,
and not contrary, but according to the Scriptures; for many of the Servants,
and Assemblies of the Lord's People practiced the same thing in Ages past, as
the Servants of the Lord do at this day; and so this Practice is to be upholden
and maintained, because it is proved to be according to the Scriptures; for the
same thing was practiced heretofore. And we read, (Acts 20. 7.) That the Church
met in the Night; for Paul continued his Sermon till Midnight.

And as for their Practice in Speaking, either man or Woman, as the Spirit
gives utterance, this is according to the Scriptures, though it be much wondered
at, and cried against by the Wisemen and People of this Age; for we read, Acts
2. that they spoke in their Meeting as the Spirit gave them utterance, without
studying beforehand what to say: And the Lord promised, That Sons and
Daughters should Prophecy: And in Acts 21. 9. we read of one that had four
Daughters that did Prophecy: And diverse other places in Scripture do show,
That Women Phil. 4. 3.
labored in the Gospel; which does prove that a Woman speaking and declaring
the things of God, is not contrary, but according to the Scriptures; and that
any who are moved of the Lord, may declare the things of God, Man or Woman: And
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man has received the Gift, even so
minister the same one to another: So that this Practice in Religion is proved
to be according to the Scriptures.

And as concerning their call to the Ministry, some are called from their
ordinary callings, as from the Plough, or from handicraft work or tradings, or
such like; this is according to the Scriptures also, for we read Matt. 4. 18,
19. where the Disciples were called from their Nets, and some were called from
the receipt of Custom; and we read Amos 7. that he was a Herdsman, and a
gatherer of Sycamore fruit; and 1 Kings 19. 19.
Elisha was called from the Plough; and some others were called from keeping of
Sheep: So that their call to the Ministry, and Practice in the Ministry, is
according to the Scriptures; for the Servants of the Lord in former Ages were
called to the Ministry after the same manner; so in that they do agree to the
Scripture both in Ministry and ministering, and so may own protection herein by
the Protectors Oath.

And as concerning their going up and down through the Countries, and from City
to City, and from one Town to another, and from one Nation to another, this is
according to the Scriptures, though some seek occasion thereby against them,
and unjustly take them as for Vagabonds, and executes their envy upon them, yet
it was the Apostles Practice, as you may read in the Book of Acts, where the
Apostles traveled from Country to Country, and from one City to another. And
though some of the Servants of the Lord are moved now to speak and dispute in
the Markets, and reprove Sin in the Gates, and in the Streets, and in the
Highways; and threatening God's Judgments against the Wicked; all these things
are according to Scripture, and their Practice herein is justified by the
Scriptures: for we read, Acts 17. 17. That Paul disputed in the Synagogues with
the Jews, and with the devout Persons, and in the Market daily, with them that
met with him: And we read, Ier. 7. That he was commanded to stand in the Gate
of the Lord's House, and to speak to all that passed into it: And Ier. 26. we
read, That he was commanded to stand in the Court of the Lord's House, without
doors, and to speak to all the Cities of Judah: And we read in the Book of
Jonas, How he was commanded to go through the Streets, and to reprove Sin, and
to threaten God's Judgments against the Wicked; and these Practices were
strange in that Generation, as they are at this day unto the World, who are not
acquainted with the Ways of God: But all people may see, though the Servants
of the Lord do practice these things now as they are moved, their Practice
herein is according to the Scriptures; for the Servants of the Lord in former
Ages acted the same things; so that in this Practice the Servants of the Lord
ought not to be persecuted, but protected and maintained in it, and that by the
Protector's Oath, because it is proved to be according to the Scriptures, which
he is sworn to maintain.

And as concerning their crying against such, and declaring against them by
word and writing, That Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money; and seek for
their Gain from their Quarter, and such who go for Gifts and Rewards, and have
Sums of Money by the Year for Preaching; and though they deny such that act
those things to be Ministers of Christ, this Practice also is according to the
Scriptures; for we read in Mic. 3. that he declared against such as Preached
for Hire, and Divined for Money; and such were no Ministers of Christ: And we
read, Isa. ^6. that he declared against them that sought for their Gain from
their Quarter, which were Greedy Covetous men, such as are many of the Teachers
of England: Again, we read Mat. 23. where Christ declared against such, and did
not own such to be any of his Ministers, Who were called of men Master, who
stood praying in the Synagogues, and had the chief Places in the Assemblies:
And we read in 2 Pet. 2. and in many other places, where the Apostles declared
against such, and denied such to be Ministers of Christ, that preached for
filthy Lucre, and took Gifts and Rewards for Preaching, and by feigned words
made Merchandise of Souls, who were Heady and High-minded-men, as you may read,
2 Timothy 3. chap. and such men were denied to be Ministers of Christ by the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles: so that all people may see this Practice of
the Servants of the Lord at this day, who are moved to declare against such
men, that act these things mentioned, is perfectly according to the Scriptures;
for the Servants of the Lord, spoken of in Scripture, did the very same things
in this particular, as are done at this day: Therefore for this Practice they
ought not to be persecuted, as they have been, but ought to be protected and
maintained in it, and that by the Protector's Oath, who has sworn, to maintain
that practice which is according to the Scripture, and to declare against them
that preach for Hire, and have great sums of Money for Preaching, and that are
called of men Master, and that take Gifts and Rewards of people for Preaching:
I say, to do thus is a practice which the Scripture gives a large Example for;
and so it must needs be according to Scripture, and ought to be protected in
this Government.

Again, as concerning their denying to respect Persons, or to b^ with the Hat
or Knee, in respect of worshipping any Creature, this also is according to the
Scriptures, though the people of the World, who live in pride, and vain
customs, are offended with them in this Practice; for we read, that God
commanded, not to bow to any Likeness, Exodus 20. And we read James 2. the
Apostle exhorts, not to have the Faith of (...) Lord Jesus with respect of
Persons, but condemns that practice of respe^^ing such as are in goodly
Apparel, and gay Clothing, and have gold Rings, above a poor man in vile
Raiment; and he says plainly, They that have respect to Persons, commits sin;
and we read that the Pharisees said of Christ, he respected no man's person; and
he is our Example. And we read that the three Children were cast into the fiery
Furnace with indignation before the King, being bound before him, and cast into
the Furnace, Daniel 3. And we read that Paul, and all the Servants of God, did
Thou Kings, and Princes, and Rules; and they spoke plainly to all men, and
durst not give flattering Title to any, as you may read in Job 33. so that all
people may see their Practice in denying to respect Persons, and in speaking
plainly, without flattering Titles to any man, or denying to pull off the Hat,
or bowing to men i^ gay Clothing, or giving place to such that wear gold Rings,
and have goodly Apparel, before such as have vile Raiment, is justly according
to the Scriptures, though people stumble at such Practices; and the People of
God may claim to be maintained in this Practice of their Religion, seeing it is
proved to be commanded in Scriptures, not to respect the Person of any man; and
also it was the Saints practice, and therefore herein they ought not to be
condemned, but justified, as being a practice in Religion agreeing with the
Scriptures.

And as concerning their denying Obedience to Magistrates in some Cases, this
is according to Scripture also; for we read, that the Rulers commanded the
Apostles, and straightly charged them to speak no more i^ the Name of Jesus; yet
the Apostles did not obey Magistrates herein, neither did they cease to Preach
in the Name of Jesus: and though Christ was commanded, or besought to depart
out of their Coasts; y^^ he did not obey their request: and we read that the
three Children were commanded to worship the great Image, yet they did not obey
this Command of the King: so that all people may see it is lawful for the
Saints to disobey Commands of Kings and Rulers, where they command that to be
done or spoken which God does not, but the contrary.

And I say again, Where Kings or Rulers, Parents or Masters, does command or
require any thing of them that are under them, which is not according to God,
in such causes Subjects, or People, and Children and Servants are free, and not
required of the Lord to subject to any thing which is not justly according to
him; but yet we say, That Subjects, and People, and Children, and Servants
ought to subject to them that have rule over them, in all things which is
according to God in Truth and Righteousness; and by the Law of God all People
are bound to obey those that have Rule over them, not to disobey them in any
thing which may stand with the Exercise of a good Conscience to God; so that
though the People of the Lord now do deny to depart out of a Town or Place, and
though they will not cease to declare against sin and wickedness in Teachers
and People, though a Magistrate command it, this is but according to the
Scripture; for the Apostles went on boldly, declaring the Name of the Lord
after they were forbidden: And thus the Servants of the Lord do now, they
freely declare the Way of Salvation, and call People to repent, and reprove
Iniquity in all sorts of people, though wicked men command them to the
contrary, and falsely charges them, that they are disobedient to Government,
and Authority, though they are not, no more then the Servants of God, and
Apostles of Christ, who in the same causes did the same things; and the Lord
has commanded to cr^ ^^^ud, and not to spare, but to tell people of their
Transgressions; and therefore many of the Lords Servants do deny to be silent,
or to cease from declaring against sin, though a Magistrate command it: And
Christ has commanded not to swear at all; and therefore many do deny to swear
upon any account, in any place, though the Magistrates do command it; for the
Servants of the Lord do deny to put off a Hat, or to Bow, in respect of any
man's person, though a Magisttate command it; for the Scripture does say, He
that respects Persons commits sin; so that all people may see that what the
Servant of the Lord does in these things, are not contrary, but according to
the Scriptures; for all these things were commanded and practiced by the Saints
in former Ages, and they said, It was better to obey God then man; and we ought
to do it in all things, and that according to the Scriptures too. So that in
all these practices in Religion the Scriptures justifies them, and are as
Witnesses to them, and they might claim protection in the exercise of them by
the Protectors Oath; but if they be not maintained, but persecuted for the
practice of these things, then will the Light in every man's Conscience witness
the Oath is broken, and not kept; for it extends to uphold and maintain the
practice of Religion which is according to the Scriptures, as these are proved
to be.

And as concerning their Doctrines which the World stumbles at, yet their
Doctrines are according to the Scripture; though they say, Christ is the Light
of the World, and lights every man, or has given light to every man that
comes into the World, this is according to the Scripture; as you may read,
John 8. 12. and 1. 9. and though they turn people from Darkness to the Light of
Christ within them, and exhort people to hearken to that within them, and not
to seek a Christ without them, to ascend or descend to fetch him; these
Doctrines are perfectly according to the Scripture; for you may read, Acts 26.
18. P^ says, He was sent to turn People from Darkness to the Light, and from
the power of Satan to the Power of God: and Romans 10. you may read the Apostle
says, What says it? The Word is nigh thee, in thy Heart, that is the Word of
Faith which we preach; and they were not to say, Who shall ascend, or desc^ to
fetch Christ.

And though they tell people, They must witness Christ in them, (...) else they
cannot be saved: This also is according to the Scriptures, as you may read, 2
Cor. 13. the Apostle says, Jesus Christ is in you, except ye (...) Reprobates.

And though they say, Christ is the Word of God, and do deny the Scriptures to
be the Word, by which the World was made: This Doctrine also is according to
the Scriptures; for we read, Rev. 19. 13. That the Name of Jesus is called the
Word of God: And Luke 1. of the Scriptures it is sa^^, They are a Declaration
by those which were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word.

And though they press people to Perfection, and do say, Men (...) be p^ect
upon Earth, and complete in Christ Jesus: This Doctrine also is according to
the Scriptures; for you may read, 1 Cor. chap. 2, and 6. of (...) that were
perfect, who were men upon Earth; and the Minist^^^ of Christ spoke Wisdom
among them that were already perfect: And Col. 2. 10. the Apostle says unto
the Church, who were men in this Life upon Earth, he says to them, Ye are
Complete in him.

And though they press the people to live without sin, and do say, They that
are born of God do not commit sin: This also is according to the Scripture; for
it is Christ's Command, Mat. 5. Be perfect, as y^^r Fa^^er in Heaven is
perfect: And 1 John 3. there it is spoken of some that were the Sons of God
already, and he says, Whosoever is born of God, ^oth not commit sin; for he
cannot sin, because he is born of God: and says (...). As he is, [Christ] so
are we in this present World.

And now all people may understand, that in all these Doctrines which they do
hold forth, they do fully agree with the Scriptures; and they be^^ ^ness to the
Truth of their Doctrines, that the Servants of God, and the Apostles of Christ,
did preach the very same things for Doctrine, a^done at this day; and so these
Doctrines are not to be wondered at, not so much as they are by the wicked, to
be cried against for (...) and error; and these few particulars only I have
mentioned, at which the people of this Age the most stumble at; and all other
things whatsoever, which is held forth for Doctrines unto people I am able to
prove them by the Scriptures, that in all things they are according to the
Scripture, and not different or contrary to the Scriptures; so (...) all people
may take notice and see, that whatsoever they do practice for Religion, or hold
forth for Doctrine, they do herein justly according to the Scriptures, and they
justify their Practices and Doctrines in these things mentioned, and in
whatsoever else can be objected by any man.

And this I shall take in hand to prove before all the World, That the People
of God, called. Quakers, do practice nothing for Religion, or preach for
Doctrine, but what is perfectly according to the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and in the fulfilling of them; and so they are proved to be of that
True Christian Religion, which is according to the Scriptures; and so may fully
claim Protection and Preservation in their Practice of Religion; And this is to
be considered by the Protector, and all Magistrates and People in these
Nations, that they may know what the true Christian Religion is, and who is in
it, and who is not in it; and for this purpose is this written, for the
satisfaction of all people, that they may see who it is that has a Right and
Privilege to be protected and upholden by virtue of the Oath.

Likewise, all may understand, That what such practice and profess for
Religion, is not without good Ground; but that the very same things were
practiced by them that were of the true Christian Religion, and preached for
Doctrine by them that were Saints, which is now practiced and held forth by the
People of God; and the Scriptures do fully bear witness in all things, showing
that such are guided by the same Spirit, which the Saints were guided by in
Ages past; and as they had, so have these the Testimony, That they are of God,
and that the whole World lies in Wickedness.

And as concerning their being persecuted by many of the Rulers, Priests and
People, though they be sent to Prison, and banished out of Towns, and whipped,
and beaten, and scorned, and reviled; this is also according to the Scriptures,
and the Scripture is fulfilled upon them; for the same things were done to the
Apostles, and to the Servants of the Lord, as you may read through the Acts,
the people mocked the Apostles, and slandered them, and said they were full of
new Wine; and the chief Priests conspired against Christ, and the Apostles, and
incensed the Magistrates against them, and the Magistrates put Christ, and many
of the Apostles in Prison, and caused them to be whipped and beaten, and to be
banished, and many other cruelties done unto them; the Scripture is full to
prove this, from the beginning to the end of it; and Christ said, They shall
persecute you, and speak all manner of evil of you for my Name sake, and as
they have done unto me, so shall they do (...) you; ye shall be hated of
Nations: And the Apostle said, All that will give godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution. So that all people may see, though the people of the Lord
be persecuted, and reviled, and imprisoned, and cruelty done unto them; and
though it be done by the chief Magistrates, and chief Rulers, and the wise men
of this Age, all this is according to the Scriptures, and that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled; and the same things which are now done unto the people of
God, were done unto the people of God in Ages past, by the same Instruments, to
wit, the Rulers and Magistrates; and by the same means, to wit, by the
information, and false accusations of the chief Priests and Teachers; in
Jeremiah you may read how the Priests sought to take away his Life; and you may
read how the chief Priests consulted against Christ, and how they complained to
the Magistrates against him and the Apostles; and the same things are now come
to pass, and we do not strange at it; for they are the chief Priests of England
that do most seek the Persecution, and cause the People of God to be
persecuted, by their complaining and petitioning to the Magistrates; so that in
all these things, not only what is practiced and preached for Doctrine, but
also in what is suffered, is perfectly according to the Scriptures; and all
people that are not blind, may see that this Religion is in all things
agreeable with the Scriptures, both in what they do, and in what they suffer:
so that this is given forth for the good Information of the Protector, and all
Magistrates, that they may hear the Trial of all things, and may not falsely
conjecture or suppose, and thereupon give Judgment without any true Knowledge,
let them search the Scriptures, and try: I hope the worst of men have so much
Conscience, that they will stand in owe of the Breach of their own Oaths; and
that they will perform unto the Lord, and unto all men, what they have firmly
(and not compelled) sworn to do: and thus it may be hoped the w^ Persecution
will cease, which is lamentable to be declared, how the People of the Lord have
suffered in many things, even them whose Religion is proved to be according to
the Scriptures; who practice nothing for Religion, neither hold forth any thing
for Doctrine, but that which is perfectly agreeable to the Scriptures, as all
people hereby may understand; which Religion the Protector has sworn to
maintain and uphold: Then who shall presume to persecute the People whose
Practice in Religion is proved to be the very same which his Oath extends to
maintain? Surely no man will be so impudent, or show such Rebellion to
Government, as to endeavor to break down and destroy that People, whose
Religion is proved to be justly that which he is by Oath bound to maintain:
Some heretofore, before this Oath was taken, might pl^ Ignorance, and say, They
knew not the mind of the Protector; but now his mind is fully discovered; and
he does not only allow, but also has solemnly sworn, To maintain and uphold
that Christian Religion which is according to Scriptures: And it is proved what
People it is, whose Religi^^ is so.

And I say again, That same People mentioned, do practice nothing, neither hold
forth any thing for Doctrine, but it is either commanded, or there is President
for it in Scripture, or agreeable thereto; and therefore that same People is of
the true Christian Religion, which the Protector has bound himself to maintain
by Oath, in the Face of the whole Nations; so that none of the Magistrates now
can plead Ignorance: For, as he is sworn to uphold the People of God in their
Religion; so are they bound to be true to him and the Government, and to fulfill
the good Laws, and his Oaths and Enterprises: so that I say again, It may be
hoped, for the time to come, for Protection, and to be maintained, and no
longer to be persecuted and destroyed in their Persons and Estates, as formerly
they have been, if men regard their own Oaths, or there be any Truth or
Sincerity in the Heart of man.

And I say, by this very Oath mentioned, might the People of God own and claim
Protection and Defense in their Way and Practice of Religion, which is so
plainly proved to be according to the Scriptures, though none of them desired
such an Oath for their Protection, or sought after it; yet it being voluntarily
instituted and taken, why may not they own the extent of it, which reaches to
them more then to any besides, as is clearly described? And not for their own
sakes altogether do they own the benefit of it, but that he, who has taken it,
may be clear in the sight of the Lord, in performing of his Oath; for, his
Felicity, and the Increase and Continuance of good Government they desire, as
much as their own Protection: And they would not have any man so wicked, or the
cause of perpetual Infamy to be given to this Nation, so much as that any thing
should be destroyed or broken down, which is sworn to be upheld and maintained
in the Nation, lest the Heathen Rulers rise up in Condemnation against the
Doers thereof.

These, with many other Arguments, which might be produced, press many to
endeavor the fulfilling of the said Oath, for his own sake, who has taken it.

And that first of all, By that Oath the People of God may own Protection in
this Commonwealth, because their Religion is according to the Scriptures, etc.

Secondly, That some People might also own Protection in this Commonwealth, in
that the most of them, if not all, have been true and faithful Subjects of this
Commonwealth, and hazarded Lives and Estates for the Establishing of such a
Government, wherein the People of God might have full Liberty for the Exercise
of their pure Consciences.

Again, They may own Protection in this Commonwealth, (...) being at this day
a Harmless and Innocent People, not being offensive to any man's Person or
Estate, or in any other thing (except to sin and wickedness, and the Workers
thereof) And I say again, That they do not desire any thing but the Welfare,
and the Increase, and the Establishment of this present Government, wherein it
is according to God.

And this is written for the Information of all sorts of People, that they may
know unto what sort of people the Protector's Oath extends to uphold and
maintain; and concerning all those whose practice in Religion and Doctrines are
not according to Scripture, but contrary to it, as is manifest, and so not to
be maintained and upholden in their Profession and Practice of Religion by the
Protectors Oath; yet it is not desired, that such should be destroyed, or
overthrown, or bound, or imprisoned, or any cruelty done to them, though their
practice be not according to Scripture; but its desired, that such may live in
peace in the Commonwealth, enjoying their Religion to themselves, without any
molestation from any outward Law, or outward Power; for many would not that any
should be compelled to, or from any Exercise in Religion by an outward Law, but
let them defend themselves in their Religion, from those who may be moved of
the Lord to reprove them, or declare against them, or convince them; so that
many would have Religion to defend it self, and that the Magistrates, with
their Laws, may preserve the Peace in the Commonwealth, and men's Persons and
Estates, and not their Opinions and Judgments: And we would they may not limit
or stint tender Consciences; for many may be of a tender Conscience in those
things wherein their Consciences are not truly informed; and such should not be
condemned to Death, but to be won by sound Doctrine, and instructed by those
who are called of God. And so this is written that the whole Nation may
understand the Mind of the Lord's Servants in all these things.

And let no man blame me; for I have but with an equal Hand, brought all sorts
of people to the Line of true Judgment, that they may know who is to be
maintained (and who is not) in their Religion, and Practices thereof.

But if, after all this, the People of God be persecuted, and Violence be done
unto them, and Injustice and Unrighteousness acted upon them in this
Commonwealth, as of late Years has been, and yet it be suffered to be, and
none take any Notice to preserve and defend them, whose Religion is according
to Scripture, which he is sworn to maintain; then I leave it to the Light in
all men's Consciences to judge what a condition such are in, whose Oath is not
kept, but broken; for these things are of no less value, then either breaking
or keeping a man's own Oath, which solemnly has been taken: And this is not a
light thing, but to be seriously considered of, both by Magistrates, Teachers
and People in this Commonwealth.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the People of God do not boast in, or trust unto
the Arm of Flesh, neither are any whit the more confident in their Way, though
it be proved, That they ought in Justice to be upholden and maintained in what
they profess and practice, as aforesaid; for their Hope and Confidence is only
in God, who only is sufficient to protect and uphold his People in all their
Ways and Exercises; and though all men do forget their own Promises and Oaths,
yet will not the Lord forget his chosen People, to defend them from all their
Enemies, who has again appeared to gather his People, after the long and dark
Night of Apostasy; and his House and Tabernacle shall be exalted over all the
Earth.

An Objection, Now many may say, Seeing I challenge, claim and affirm, That
this Religion is the true Religion, which is according to Scripture (then they
ask, and say) Has there been no true Religion before this? or have all these
Religions been false before? And seeing this has but newly appeared in the
World, was there no true Religion before? And if there were any, where was it?
And what was that Religion, seeing there has not been for many Ages such a
Religion as this is? And after this manner do many reason and object to
themselves, and raise to themselves Stumblings; and conceit themselves, That
our Forefathers were of a Good Way, and many of them sure were saved, which
were not of this Religion, which did not profess and practice these things
which is professed and practiced by this people.

Answ. Now unto all these I do answer and say, That this Religion is the true
Religion which is according to Scripture, as is proved already, seeing they
profess and practice nothing for Religion, but what the Scriptures do justify,
and show the very Example of the same things; but that God had a People in all
Ages, and a Seed that never bowed to Baal its believed, and such as did
sincerely seek after God, according to what they knew, and they were accepted
of God according to what was made manifest in that Age and Generation; yet the
Testimony of Truth it self, and the Way of the Lord it self, for many
Generations has not so clearly and purely been held forth, as it is now in
this Age and Generation; for now the true Light has shined, and the Way of
Salvation is evidently made manifest, as by many Witnesses, and evident Tokens
which may be given, and was not so clearly for many Ages past, held forth and
known: and such who have been sincerely seeking after God, though they knew not
perfectly the way unto him, neither had they such a pure Testimony revealed to
guide them, as now is manifest, yet such do now rejoice, and own the Way of the
Lord, and the Seed of God is refreshed in them, and all causes of stumbling
removed, and the pure Light of the Gospel is sprung forth more clear in this
Age, then in any Age, for many Generations; for the Scripture shows, that a
dark night of Apostasy has been over the whole World, and the Beast has
reigned, and the false Prophet has deceived many Nations; and the whole World
has wondered after the Beast for many Ages; and the Beast has made war with
the Saints, and has had power to kill them, and has put a stop many times to
the Appearances of God, till now at length he does appear, and the power of
Hell and Death shall not stop it, and they do say, that they are come out of
the Apostasy, to the dawning of the Day again, and the same Power of God, and
the same Truth that was in the Apostles days, and the same Ministry by the Gift
of the same holy Ghost, as was in the Apostles days, is now witnessed; and at
the time of ignorance God winked, but now the eye is opened, and all is called
to repentance; so it will not excuse any man to plead how it was with our
Forefathers, or to say, Where was this Religion before these few years, and
such like? for now the Power of God it self is made manifest, which brings into
the true Religion, and all that are of God hear it, and shall own it, and shall
receive the Testimony which is given: Its known that there are many thousands
which have not yet owned it, in which there are true thirstings after God, and
a zeal for him; and such are not condemned to be altogether out of Religion,
for such seek his Face, and the Day is neither clear nor dark to them, in which
they are; and such shall own and submit to the Government of Christ; and they
that are not under the Government, are not of the true Religion, as I said;
This is the time of Restoration, and the Lord is bringing back again, and a
through Reformation will the Lord work in the Earth, such as has not been known
in Ages past. There has been a Seed sown, which the Devil has catched away;
but now the Seed shall grow, and become the greatest of all Herbs, and the
Fowls of Heaven shall lodge in the Branches.

And this is a plain Answer to all sober people; for according to the
Scriptures in the times of the Apostles, the Day of glorious Light is sprung
forth, and mighty was the Power of God at that Day; but since has Darkness
overshadowed all, and Antichrist has reigned, and the whole World has been
made drunk with the Wine of Fornication, which has been in the hand of the
Whore, who has sat upon the Beast, and upon Nations and Peoples; and the
Gentiles have trodden under foot the holy City of God for forty and two
Months; but now is the time of Restoration, as has been promised, That the
Lord is bringing back his People again; and the Tabernacle of God shall be with
men; and Christ alone must reign and rule, and his Kingdom set up ever the
whole World.

And let no man be offended at what I have done; for I have not reflected upon
any man's person, but on what he practices for Religion.

London the 10th Month, 1657. E. B.

A MESSAGE FOR INSTRUCTION, TO All the Rulers, Judges and Magistrates, to whom
the Law is Committed: Showing what Just Government is, and how far the
Magistrate's Power reaches, and what the Sword of Justice is to cut down, and
what it is to defend. Whereby they may learn, and be directed to discern
betwixt the Guiltless, and the Guilty; and betwixt a Matter of Wilful Wrong by
Evildoers, which they are to Punish, and a Matter of Conscience, by men that
fear God, which they are to be a Praise unto, and not a Terror; and in
particular, diverse Causes are discovered, which are proved to be Matters of
Conscience, and not of Wilful Wrong; though many therefore are unjustly
persecuted and afflicted as Evildoers. With an Exposition of some parts of the
Law; for the Edification of such, as desire to judge Righteously between Man
and Man, who would discern of different Causes; and Justify the Righteous, and
Condemn the Evil-Doer.
Concerning Government and Magistracy, this I have to say:
IT is an Ordinance of God, ordained of him for the preserving of Peace among
men; for the punishing and suppressing of Evildoers, and for the Praise of
them that do Well; that men's Persons and Estates may be preserved from the
Violence and Wrong-dealing of evil men: And for this End Government was
ordained of God, to be set up in the Earth, by the Institution of the Lord;
that Righteousness should go free, and the Wicked be bound and limited.

Now such as handle the Law, and are Executors thereof, who are ordained of God
to judge and govern the People, ought to be Just Men, fearing God, and walking
in his Law, and hating and denying every false way; that people may receive
Examples of Righteousness, and holy and lawful walking from their
Conversations. And they that are set to govern the people, ought to have the
Spirit of true and sound Judgment, to try into the Root of all Causes, whereby
they may be able to discern of different Causes, and to give just Judgment in
all things; and such will judge by equal Measure for God, and not for man, but
without respect of Persons; and such will be a Terror to Transgressors, and
will strengthen and encourage them that do well; and then the Execution of the
Law will answer the End wherefore it was added; for, because of Transgression
was the Law added to slay the Transgression, and to bind under the Trangressor,
and to make him stand in awe, and be afraid; for the just Law reaches to the
just Witness of God, and answers it in every man; and he that walks in the
Law of God, and has his Heart therein exercised, the Law of Man has no power
over him, to condemn him; but it justifies him, and defends and preserves him
from all Wrong: but who does not walk in the Law of God, but is exercised in
Evil, and transgresses the Light and pure Law of God in his Conscience, by
doing Evil, and by wrong and unjust Dealing; then the Law of man takes hold
upon him, and binds him, and judges him, and condemns him for the Evil done by
him, contrary to the Light in his own Conscience, which answers to the just
execution of the Law in condemning of him: And this is the Work of the Law in
the hand of faithful Executors, who justly executes the just Law, in defending
and preserving the Just and Innocent Men from Wrong-doing, and in condemning
and judging the Ungodly and Evil Men for Wrong-doing; whereby the Witness of
God in them both may answer to the just Government, in defending the one, and
in condemning the other: and this is a good savor to God, where the Just Laws
are justly executed by just men: But where Unrighteous Men are in power, and
the Execution of the Law in their hands, that are themselves Transgressors,
such will not judge for God, but the good Laws will be subverted unto wrong
ends, from their proper virtue, and the hands of the Wicked will be
strengthened, and the Evildoers will escape unpunished, and the Innocent will
suffer, and Justice and true Judgment will be turned backward; for when the
Wicked bear rule the People cannot rejoice, nor Justice and true Judgment
cannot be received from men, who are themselves unjust and unrighteous; for,
though the Laws may be good and just, yet the Executioners thereof being Evil,
and themselves Transgressors, worthy of Condemnation by the Law: The
Transgression of the Law in others cannot justly be judged by such, who are
themselves guilty of Judgment; and therefore the Laws will be subverted, and
Justice and true Judgment neglected; because such as handle the Law know not
God, but are in the Transgression of the Righteous Law, and of the Judgment
thereof are themselves guilty. So therefore they that handle the Law should be
men justified by the Law, and free from the Transgression; that they may the
more justly punish, reprove and condemn it in others; and may minister Justice
and true Judgment through the Law to all people under them. And no man ought to
be respected in Judgment, but every man's Cause ought to be heard, the Poor as
well as the Rich, and their Matters diligently sought into: And all ought to
receive just Judgment from Just men by the just Law; for the Law is a defense
about all the Righteous, to defend and preserve them; in Peace and Freedom,
from all their Enemies, who are to be limited by the Law, as I have said: And
they that are reconciled to God, whose consciences are exercised toward God in
all things, they are not under the Law, nor the Law has no power over them;
for the Law is fulfilled in them by Christ, who teaches them in all things to
walk without offense toward God and all Men, in Truth and in Righteousness to
God, and all Men; and such the Law of Man is to defend, and not to judge them;
to justify them, and not to condemn them; and to be a praise to them, and not
a terror; and such set to seal, that the Law is just, and good and holy; who
walk in Justness, in Goodness and Holiness, and does not transgress the good
Laws of any Nation, but walk void of offense toward all; for they walk not in
the Flesh, but in the Spirit, and are Doers of the Law, and not Breakers of it;
and so come not under the guilt of condemnation, in any thing, but are
justified in all things; for the Light of Christ leads them into all Truth;
and so out of all Condemnation; their Ways are righteous and pure, and their
Works are just and equal toward God and all Men; and they seek not the wrong
of any man's Person or Estate, but seeks the Good of all, forgiving their
Enemies, and praying for them, and seek not Vengeance upon their Adversaries,
but they bear all things patiently; and such are the Servants of God, and not
Transgressors of his Law, nor the just Laws of Man; and if such do suffer by a
Law, that Law is unjust, and so is that Magistrate that executes that Law; and
that suffering is not for evil-doing, but for a good Conscience sake; and the
Innocent can rejoice in such suffering, but the Executioners thereof shall howl
and weep: So that in all Ages there was such suffering, which was not for
evil-doing, but for the exercise of a pure Conscience; and such Sufferings
there are at this day: and this is because the Unrighteous and the Unjust bear
rule, which subverts the Law, and turns true Judgment backward, and oppresses
the Seed of God, and rules over it in Tyrany; and this is where Darkness rules
in the Heart, and Ignorance in the Mind; and true Judgment is wanting, for
Light is called Darkness, and Darkness Light, and Good is put for Evil, and
Evil for Good; and Truth is called Heresy, and Error is called Truth; and
because of this the Righteous are judged unjustly, and falsely condemned, and
the Guilty are set free; and thus is Judgment turned quite backward; where the
Seed of Enmity rules above the Seed of God; and such a Government is not
blessed, but made a Curse unto that Dominion, where it is seated, and this is
because such are set to rule and govern, who are not ruled and governed by the
Lord, but are in the transgression of the Just and Righteous Law; and are
Unjust Men, and not reconciled to God, upon whose shoulders the Government
lies, and the execution of the Law in their power, who cannot minister true
Judgment, nor discern of different Causes amongst Men.

And therefore all Magistrates are to weigh, and be considerate in all these
things, and so to act and judge among men, as they may give a good Account unto
God, and all men; and when a Cause is brought before them to give Judgment of,
or any accused unto them, that they should execute the Law upon, they should by
the Spirit of the Lord first try into the Ground and Nature of such matters, to
know whether it be a wilful and supposed Wrong or Injury done between man and
man, or it be of Ignorance, or want of better Knowledge, or such like; or
whether it be a Matter of Conscience, or about Religion, or the Worship of God,
whereupon the Controversy depends: and if it be a matter of wilful and
purposed Wrong, or of Ignorance, then good Reason and Justice will teach a
Magistrate to defend the Innocent from Wrong, or to restore his Wrong by true
Judgment, that his Person and Estate be freed and preserved from all Wrong; and
that the Wrong-dealer be restrained, and punished, and judged justly according
to his Offenses: but if it be a matter of Conscience about Religion, or the
Worship of God, then the Magistrates, with their Law, ought not to meddle
therein, or to judge of such Matters; for these things, concerning the things
that are Spiritual, are out of their Jurisdiction, and not in their power to
judge of: And if the Controversy between man and man depend about such Causes,
not having reflection upon Persons or Estates, but only about Spiritual
Matters, then Magistrates with their Laws ought not to judge in these Causes;
but Spiritual Men ought only to give their Judgments hereof, as they have
received from God: And though men be in controversy about Religion and the
Worship of God, yet if they be men of Peace, not wronging one another in their
Persons and Estates, they ought to be both protected in a good Government by
the just and righteous Laws. And here the Sword of Justice is laid only upon
the Evil-doer, to be a Terror and a Punishment to him, and to limit and
restrain him from Wrong-dealing; and this is the End wherefore it was ordained
of God to be among men, and not to be laid upon the Conscience, to oppress and
afflict the tender Consciences of the Upright, whose Minds are exercised in the
Law of God; for such should have Praise, that do well, by the Sword of Justice,
while it is a Terror to all Evildoers whatsoever: and this is the perfect End
wherefore the Law was added; and the practice of it herein by faithful and just
Executors, is Well-pleasing and Acceptable to the Lord.

And now as concerning this one thing, which is, Oppression in the Nation,
brought forth through the unjust and false Execution of the Laws, whereby many
tender Consciences are afflicted, and not for any Wrong or Evil-doing, but for
the Exercise of a pure Conscience. Whereas many for a pure Conscience sake do
deny and cannot pay any thing to maintain a Steeple-House, or Place of Worship,
which the people of the World do worship in, and where they commit Idolatry;
neither can they, for Conscience sake, pay any thing to uphold such Worship,
and such a Ministry and Ministers, which are not of Christ, nor ever were sent
of him, but of Antichrist, and such by which the people are led in Blindness
and Error, as manifestly does appear through the whole Land: And yet the
Magistrates, some of them being as blind and ignorant as the people, do compel
many people by their Writs, and Orders and Judgments, to maintain a Priest and
Steeple-house, which for Conscience sake they deny to maintain; and yet by
Authority from the Magistrates are the innocent Men's Goods spoiled by
Distress, and great Oppression Exercised upon many poor People, to maintain and
uphold the Ministry and Worship of this Generation, which is not of God, but
against him; and many hereupon are cast into Prison, and others have their
Goods taken from them by Violence, and great Havoc is made in the Countries
about this matter.

Now first it may be considered, That to deny to uphold and maintain a
Steeple-house, and Place where ignorant people in Tradition do meet to Worship,
is not a matter of wilful and purposed Wrong-dealing, or the breach of any
Bargan or Contract between man and man; but it is a matter of Conscience to the
People of God: and for a good Conscience sake they cannot do such a thing, as
to maintain a place of Worship, which Abomination is committed in by ignorant
and rude people, who are without the Fear of God, as daily is manifest; and it
is not manifest, that by denying of this they injure any man's Person or Estate
in any thing which belongs unto him by lawful Bargan and Contract, or
otherwise: Neither is there any Reason or Equity in this matter, That any
should be forced and compelled by Injustice and Oppression, to uphold a house
of worship, which others worship in, and not they; and they knowing that
worship to be Abomination to the Lord also, and not the True Worship of the
True God; and there is no Justice nor Religion in it, that any should be caused
by force to uphold a House, for other people to commit and practice Idolatry
in; if the house were for any good purpose, or honest practice, as for poor or
impotent people to dwell in, or such like, who had not Houses of their own,
because of their poverty; then that were a deed of charity to uphold it, and
the people of God would not deny it, but could freely give their money to such
a use or end; but because it is not to such a use, but only a place to commit
Idolatry in, and to worship God ignorantly in superstitions; therefore it is a
matter of Conscience unto many; and for a good Conscience sake, they rather
suffer the spoiling of their Goods, and affliction upon their Bodies, then to
pay their Money for such a use or end; and herein the Magistrates do great
injustice in the sight of God, and his Saints, and contrary to Reason, and a
good Conscience, in causing innocent men's Goods to be spoiled by cruelty, to
uphold a place of idolatrous worship, contrary to men's tender Consciences: for
as I have said, they do no wrong to any man, but only peoples wills are
offended, and their blind zeal turned into rage and fury against the Just, who
worship God in Spirit and in the Truth, and cannot uphold the Houses of false
worship; and it is a shame unto the people, and Ministers themselves, who
cannot uphold their own worshipping Houses; and it is a reproach upon their
God, and their Religion, who cause others to maintain their worshipping Houses,
by injustice and great oppression, and will not themselves maintain their
Houses where they worship their God; but people who fear God are greatly
oppressed diverse ways to uphold worshipping Places for others to worship in,
as in many parts of this Nation, is woeful testimony, which is a shame to the
Magistrates, by whose Authority these things are done, and a great reproach to
the very name of Christianity, that people, against a pure Conscience, and
contrary to good Reason, should be compelled to uphold and maintain a Worship
and Ministry which they do not partake of, but their very Enemies that
persecute them, whose Consciences are defiled, and not exercised: And their
Worship and Ministry, which stands not in the Exercise of a pure Conscience,
but in vain Traditions, and superstitious Idolatry, are the People of God
forced to maintain with Maintenance, by Oppression, contrary to their
Consciences: And the unjustness of these things cries for Vengeance upon the
Ungodly Rulers and People, who cause the Just and Upright to groan by
Oppression; and thus the Law is subverted, contrary to that End wherefore it
was added; and the Government is abused, contrary to that purpose wherefore it
was ordained of God: For the Guiltless are condemned and judged, and the Guilty
are set free; the Exercise of pure Consciences are oppressed, and the false
Abominations and Idol Worships are strengthened and defended: and because of
these thing is the Wrath of God kindled, and shall not be quenched, till it
has consumed the Wicked from off the Face of the Earth; that the just God may
be feared, and his People enjoy their Freedom and liberty in the Practice of
the the pure Religion, and the Exercise of their pure Consciences; and this
will the Lord bring forth in his appointed Time, according to his Promise, that
his People may rejoice in him over all their Oppressors and Cruel Taskmasters,
which do unjustly oppress the Seed of God.

And as concerning the maintaining of Ministers, it is the same in nature, and
as Unjust and Unequal, as upholding of Worshipping-houses; for though many, out
of a good Conscience, do deny to maintain a professed Minister, by paying to
him so much, or such a Sum; yet they do not hereby wrong him wilfully, contrary
to Right, in breaking any Contract or Covenant, formerly made with him by
themselves, or Predecessors; nor they do not withold from him any thing,
which properly belongs to him as Debt, or due for his Labor, by any Covenant
binding thereunto: Only the most that can be said is, That such a Sum or Gift
was formerly given out of that Estate to a man belonging to such a Parish, and
therefore now is claimed as due by Custom of many Generations practice, and so
ought to be done, as the Maintenance to that man because of his Labor in his
Ministry. Now to this I answer, What though it was formerly done, such a Sum
paid, and such a Gift freely given by our Ancestors, in the time of Ignorance
and Darkness; that Practice of theirs then does not bind any now to do the
same, seeing no Record can appear, That they bound themselves and their Heirs
for ever so to do; and now has the clear Light of the Gospel sprung forth, and
the light of the day has discovered all the works of Ignorance; and though the
man that claims such a Gift, or Hire, as debt to him, because of his labor,
let them pay him for whom he does labor, and who do partake of his Ministry
and Labor; and let others be free, who for Conscience sake cannot do it, who
know his labor not deserving of wages, but to be Deceit and Abomination, and
deceiving of Souls; and sees him to be a proud, covetous man, and an idle
person, who maintains himself by the fruit of other men's labors, in the vanity
of life, and without the Fear of the Lord, and this makes the thing a matter of
Conscience to many, that for no better use, nor to no other end they should pay
their Money (which cannot be justly claimed, as a just debt, but as a gift at
most) to the upholding of such men, and such practices, which are not
according, but contrary to God, in labor, life, and practice; and to uphold
and maintain a man as a Minister of Christ, which is not so, but the contrary,
as by his fruits is made manifest, and that in Ministry and Worship, which is
not the Worship and Ministry of the true God, but the contrary, as does appear;
this many of the people of God cannot do, for a good Conscience sake, except
they should transgress the Light of Christ, and the Law of God in their own
Hearts and Consciences, and so bring themselves into condemnation by the Lord.

So let all men take notice hereof, that though the People of God do deny to
pay any thing, to uphold and maintain such a Worship, and such Ministers, which
are not the Ministers of Christ, nor the Worship of the true God; but rather
gives their Goods to the Spoiler, and their Bodies to the Prison; yet this is
only for the Exercise of a good and pure Conscience, and not out of wilful
wrong or injury; and their Sufferings are not as they are Evildoers, but as
they are Saints, for a good Conscence sake, because they cannot be subject to
the wills of unjust men, in upholding and maintaining such things against their
Consciences; but are willing rather to suffer, then offend the Lord, and their
own Consciences; neither is there good Reason nor Equity in it, nor any part of
a good Conscience, that people by injustice should be compelled to maintain a
Minister, whom they know is not the Minister of Christ, by his fruits, and
effects, and practices; and so are forced against their own Conscience to
uphold a man in Pride, in Idleness, in covetousness, and in a vain and Evil
life, by unrighteous Wages: Now if their Money was to maintain a man that is
poor, or if that man had not of his own sufficiently to preserve his Wife and
Children from want, then it were a work of Charity to give something, if it
were every year, or oftener, to maintain him and his Family; and the People of
God would not refuse to give something for this end; no man should compel them,
nor have cause to spoil their Goods for it; but as he professes himself a
Minister of Christ, and a Labourer in the Gospel, but is not so, but lives in
pride, and the vanities of this World; upon such an account they cannot
maintain him, nor give him any thing at all, with a safe Conscience; neither is
there any reason in it, that they should; for they receive not his Ministry,
neither do hear him, neither do own him as a Minister of Christ, nor do not
partake of his Labors, nor do not set him on laboring; and this is greatly
unjust, that any man should pay, or be compelled to pay (by force and
oppression) Wages to a man, as his Labourer, and as his Servant, who does not
at all Labor for him, or do him any Service, neither does the man partake of
his Works or Labors, neither has any benefit thereby, but rather loss and
disadvantage because of his labors, which he does for others, and not for him,
nor by any order from him; for he knows his Labor to be nothing but Vanity,
and a Cheat, and deceiving of People; and for him to be compelled to maintain
such a man, in such ill employment against his Conscience, this is unjust and
unreasonable: and what man in the World would do it, or be compelled thereunto,
without crying out of great Oppression; as to maintain a Man with great Wages,
as his Labourer, and Servant who does not Labor for him, nor serve him, but
labors against him as much as is possible; and this is the very cause, between
the Priests of England in their Maintenance, in claiming of it, and receiving
of it, and the people of the Lord, who do deny to maintain them, or confess any
lawful due they have to challenge any of them.

And also it is a very shame to the people of this Nation for whom such
Ministers do labor, who cannot maintain their own Ministers themselves, who
labors for them, and of whose labors they do partake, but others are
compelled by injustice, to maintain them, who do not partake of any of their
labors, nor set them to labor, but denies them and their labor on that
account, and yet are forced to pay them Wages; and this is unjust and
unreasonable, that men should be constrained by force to pay, other men's
Servants, which works and labors for other, and not for them; and what man in
the World having reason in him, would do it or be forced to do it, without
complaining of heavy injustice, as to maintain another man's Servant with Wages,
who works for others, and not for him, neither was hired by him, nor set on
work, nor receives any benefit by him, but another hires him, and partakes of
his labors, and yet he is compelled against all reason, and equity to give him
his Wages; all will conclude this were unjust and not according to God, but
against him; and this is the very cause between the people of God, who cannot
pay to maintain false Teachers and the people of the Nation, who hires such
Teachers and receives of their labors and teaching and yet compells others to
give them Wages, contrary to good reason and Justice, and against the exercise
of a pure Conscience; And above all the Magistrates blindness and Ignorance,
and the unjustness and wickedness of some of them does appear, to their shame,
by whose authority these things are done, reaching out their power in those
things, further than they have received power from God, and abusing the Law and
just government, and subverting it to another end then wherefore God has
ordained it; for the Magistrates power and authority, is not to be laid on men's
Consciences to Oppress and Imbondage the tender Consciences of the Lords
people; in forcing things to be done contrary to good reason, and against a
good Conscience; and by these things is the Land filled with violence and
oppression, and the Innocent and Just do deeply groan; till the Lord arise to
plead their cause, and to bring deliverance unto them, through the destruction
of all their Enemies; and he will break down all the bonds of Cruelty and
Oppression, and will take away every yoke that does burden and oppress the
upright, that his people may be a free people, from all unjust men; and the
people of the Lord do claim this as their Privilege, belonging to them by the
just Laws of God and men, to Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and to uphold
and maintain that Worship only, without being compelled by force to maintain
any other whatsoever, and they claim as right unto them to maintain what
Ministers, and uphold what ministry, as they know is sent of God, by which
people are profited, and which they have received the knowledge of God through,
by his Spirit, and to be free to maintain how, and as the Lord leads them unto,
without being forced by any Law, or unequal authority, to maintain the false
Prophets and Hirelings, and Deceivers, who live in pride and excess, through
the Oppression of the poor and Innocent, and such (as Ministers of the Gospel
of Christ,) the people of the Lord cannot maintain, but rather give themselves
to suffer heavy and cruel things by unjust and wicked men, who violates the
just Laws of God and man; and the suffering is for a good Conscience sake, and
for righteousness sake, and not for any wrong or Evil-doing, and for a
Testimony that they are of God, and for a witness against their Enemies, that
they are of the Devil; who do his works, and these make war against the Saints,
and the Lamb, and the Beast seeks to kill all that will not worship him; for he
has been great in the Earth, and his seat upon Nations, and who have been able
to make war against him, for many Generations? again there is another suffering
great and grievous which is unjustly laid upon the people of God, which
suffering is not for Evil-doing, but for a good Conscience sakes as is
manifest; as because many are moved of the Lord by his Spirit, to go into the
Steeple Houses, and Meeting-places, or other places to reprove sin, and among
people, or to exhort them unto good, and to follow Christ, and to deny the
wickedness of this World, or such like, as they are moved, some are moved to
reprove a Hireling Teacher, who deceives the people, and walks in the steps of
the false Prophets, and lives in Pride and Vainty and evil, contrary to the
Doctrine and Practice of Christ and the Apostles; and this Practice of the
Servants of the Lord in reproving evil, and exhorting to good, is called a
disturbance of the Peace, and an unlawful Practice, and such like, it is
falsely judged by unjust men, who know not the Spirit of the Lord, nor the
moving thereof; and because of this, many innocent men are caused deeply to
suffer, contrary to a good Conscience; and some are sent to the House of
Correction, there suffering cruel things from hard-hearted men; and some are
put in the Stocks, and Whipped, and others Fined, and cast into Prison; and
such like Sufferings are unjustly imposed upon them, and not for Evil-doing, as
I have said; for though they reprove sin in Teachers, or in People, or exhort
them to good, whether in Steeple Houses, Markets, or other Places; yet they do
not hereby wrong any man's Person or Estate; neither is this any matter of
wilful wrong, or to such an intent, neither does it disturb the Peace, nor is
any unlawful Practice; but only out of a good Conscience to God and man is it
done; and it is a matter of Conscience to the Servants of the Lord to do so,
and they cannot leave it undone, lest they would transgress the Law of God in
their own Consciences; because they are commanded of God so to do, that people
may be instructed in the right way to God, and be converted out of every false
Way; and this is the very end of their work, and their intent in doing it; and
they ought not in justice to suffer for it, for it is according to the Law of
God, and in Reason and a good Conscience, and the Lord justifies them in it;
then that Law and Judgment must needs be corrupt and unjust, which condemns the
People and Servants of the Lord, as for Evildoers, for obeying the Commands of
God, and for the Exercise of their pure Consciences, and no man's Person or
Estate being wronged, or injured, but only Sin and Wickedness reproved, and
exhorted from: and hereby thus is the Law perverted, and true Judgment turned
backward, and the guiltless is condemned guilty, and the guilty is set free;
and the obeying the Commands of God, and the Exercise of a good Conscience is
unjustly judged a Transgression; and this is a shame, and will be great
condemnation to such, in the Day of the Lord, by whose Authority this is done;
even that the Exercise of a good Conscience, even reproving of sin and
exhorting unto that which is good, to follow that, and to forsake all evil,
should be judged and punished as a heinous Transgression in a Nation and
Commonwealth professing Christianity and pure Religion; and this makes the sin
much more great and unpardonable, because the practice and faithful exercise
in Chistianity, and in the pure and true Religion is adjudged Transgression,
and condemned by such who profess the same thing in words, and yet persecute,
and punish the Exercise of it in others; and this shows them unjust Judges, and
Hypocrites, who cause the Servants of the Lord to suffer, for the practice of
that which themselves profess in words, to wit, Religion and Christianity; for
I affirm, against all Opposers whatsoever, that it is a Practice in Religion,
according to the Scriptures, to go into the Steeple Houses, Meeting-places,
Markets, Highways, or other places, and reprove sin and wickedness, and cry
against evil in Priests and people, and exhort to good, and to forsake evil,
and therefore it ought not to be prosecuted and punished, but defended and
maintained, by the Just Government of a Commonwealth, and by Just Laws and
Magistrates; for this the Lord requires, that Justice and Truth, and true
Judgment be exalted, and the Innocent and Unright defended, in all their ways
of a good Conscience, and that Evildoers, and Sinners, and Transgressors, be
condemned, and righteously judged.

Also many of the Servants of the Lord do deeply suffer, and is deeply
afflicted by injustice, for the exercise of a good Conscience in other things,
as because they cannot put off their Hats and bow in respect to men's persons,
according to the vain customs of the Heathen; and because they cannot Swear
upon a Book, by kissing it, and laying the hand upon it, according to the
idolatrous form, and for such like causes, because many cannot fulfill the lusts
and wills of men, that live in pride and evil ways, in these and other things,
therefore are the people of God put to great sufferings, though they deny not
the honor due to all men in the Lord, without bowing the Hat, nor to affirm
the truth in every cause, in faithfulness without an Oath; now to keep on the
Hat, which is a cover for the head, to keep from cold or heat, for healths
sake, before any man whatsoever, though never so great or noble, is not any
wrong or injury to the man's person or estate before whom it is done, but only
the high mind and the proud nature, and that which is exalted above the fear
of God, which would be Lord over his fellow creatures, that same is offended
and troubled, which bears not the Image of God, but of the Devil, as Hamman
was, and would be bowed to, and had in honor, and respected, because of
knowledge or parts, and proud gestures or apparel; and the Children of the Lord
cannot do it, nor give honor to him, nor be subject, and pleasing to that man,
who is of that spirit and of that nature which is not of God, but exalted in
pride, and vainglory above the fear of God, and against him, and would be
worshipped, and had in honor and reverenced of his Fellow Creatures, who has
not so much riches in this World as he, nor is so proud in apparel as he; and
because of that he looks to be bowed unto with Hat or Knee, and is offended if
he be not, and then in his pride he rages and is vexed, and seeks revenge
against such as cannot honor him, and respect him in his pride and vainglory;
but as I said this is not done as a matter of wrong unto any, though the Hat be
not bowed or put off, but it is a matter of Conscience unto the people of God,
and for a good Conscience sake they do deny, and may not give obedience, and
honor, and respect, out of the fear of God, to proud flesh, and to men which
is not in the fear of God, which expects reverence out of the Lord, and they
know it is nothing else that is offended but proud flesh, and an exalted mind,
and a man that fears not God, neither walks in his ways; I say, it is nothing
else, nor any besides, that is offended or troubled, because the Hat is not put
off and bowed, and the people of God are not careful to please or offend that
in men, and men as such, for they know nothing of God; nor any man that truly
Fears God will be offended at the want of a Hat bowed to him, and thus it is a
matter of Conscience unto many, and for a good Conscience sake they do deny to
honor and subject themselves by obedience to any man, as he is a man out of
the fear of God, and in the glory of the vain World, expecting reverence out of
the Fear of God, and contrary to his Law, which forbids the respect to persons,
and all honor which is not according to God; for who does fear to offend a
man, as a man without the Fear of God, and does obey and honor any man, by
putting off the Hat before him, or otherwise, and not only in the Lord; such
are Servants to the wicked one, and not unto God; who fears the wrath of the
wicked, and subjects in honor to please the wicked by putting off, and bowing
the Hat and such like; and such knows not the exercise of a pure Conscience to
God; so this is a matter of Conscience to deny to honor, and to please wicked
men, as such, by bowing the Hat, and no man in justice ought to be made to
suffer because o^ it, for the Law of God justifies it, and that Law and
Judgment is corrupt, and perverted, which condemns it.

And likewise though many deny to swear at all, though not to testify the
Truth; yet they do not wilfully wrong hereby to any man's Person or Estate, but
it is a matter of conscience unto them, and with a good Conscience they cannot
swear, but do deny it upon all Conditions, because Christ has commanded not to
swear at all, and the Apostle does exhort, above all things, not to swear; and
therefore it is a matter of conscience unto many, and not a matter of purposed
wrong toward any man, and though here it may be objected; But for want of an
Oath, a just man may loose his just Cause; because Judgment depends upon
witness by oath: to that I answer, that is because, the Law is not according to
Christ, by which the Judgment comes, but is unjustly grounded upon the breach
of Christ's Command, viz. swearing; and whether ought the man to be blamed or
condemned as a Transgressor, who keeps Christ's Command, and cannot swear at
all upon any Terms, or whether that Law ought not to be corrected and
regulated to be according to the Law of Christ, and all that which is contrary
in the execution thereof to be condemned and removed, that a just man's witness
may be given and taken upon occasion, without an Oath; and his just cause may
go on against his Enemies, by just judgment, grounded upon the naked truth, in
plainness testified without swearing, this is to be considered; and though it
be again objected, but many, say some, makes more Conscience and are more
afraid to testify falsely upon Oath, then upon bare words without an Oath; so to
have the truth known wholly, that is the end of the Oath; to this I answer, a
man that truly and uprightly fears God, will be as much afraid and make as much
Conscience of speaking falsely, as of swearing falsely; and out of a good
Conscience will testify as truly, as if he swore: and for others, who fears to
swear falsely, and does not so much fear to speak falsely without Oath, this is
because there is a greater punishment to such, and it is accounted a greater
offense among men, to swear falsely, then to speak falsely, and for the
correcting of that, the punishment and offense should be changed, and such as
testify falsely without Oath, may be accounted Offenders and punished, as such
who swears falsely, and this will bind the wicked in a sufficient fear, and
cause them to be afraid, of testifying falsely, even as much as of swearing
falsely, if the testimony in causes among men, of such evil persons who cannot
make Conscience of lying, nor speak the truth without swearing, it ought the
rather to be had, and to be done, by binding by a Law, and punishing, if he
testify a Lie, then by causing him to continue in the breach of Christ's
command; but however, still I say, such who out of a good and tender
Conscience, do deny to swear, ought not to be persecuted and punished as great
Offenders; for while this is done, the Law and good Government is perverted,
and authority is greatly abused, to another end then wherefore it was ordained
of God, and that Law and authority must needs be unjust which oppresses, or
punishes the exercise of a good Conscience, as for evil doing; and this
shows the blindness and ignorance of men in authority to whom the Law is
committed who discerns not, neither makes a difference betwixt things done in
the Fear of God, and in the exercise of a good Conscience toward him, and
things done out of an evil mind to evil inte^ts, purposely and wilfully to do
wrong and injury to men's persons and estates; for all Magistrates ought to
learn this, and to distinguish, that their power and authority may justify the
one, and condemn the other, that true justice and sound judgment, may spring
forth in the Earth, and in the Nations, that all the Upright and Well-doers may
rejoice, and live in rest and peace, and all the Workers of Iniquity, and such
as do Evil may be afraid, and fear to offend just men, and just Laws; and thus
would the Name of the Lord be great in the Earth among men; and such a
Government renowned for ever, and such Magistrates would be a praise to
Generations after them, and a blessed example to Ages to come; But now some may
say, and object; how shall this be known? and who can tell and discern of such
Causes, and who it is that do their Works, out of the exercise of a good
Conscience, and who do their Deeds out of an evil Mind, and to an evil intent,
and so is wrong dealing, and worthy of punishment? this is a doubtful Cause may
some say, and difficult to be known and understood: But to this I answer, and
say, To all such as have the Spirit of the Father, and are led thereby, and in
their Judgment guided therewith, this is an easy thing to discern, and an
easy matter to know and find out; and such as cannot discern and distingush in
such Matters have not the Spirit of God, nor the spirit of true and sound
Judgment; neither is indeed ordained of God, nor fit to judge the People, nor
the honor of a Ruler and Judge belongs not to such a one who cannot find out a
matter, nor know and judge between the precious and the vile, how to justify
the one, and how to condemn the other; and indeed, this is the reason and cause
of so much Injustice and Oppression brought forth at this day; because the
spirit of sound Judgment is wanting, and such as are set to judge has it not,
to try, and discern, and give Judgment by it; and therefore Light is put for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light; and good is called Evil, and Evil Good, and
true Justice and Judgment is perverted and turned backward, and the guiltless
is condemned guilty. But, I say, if the work be done by a man, out of a good
Conscience, and as a matter of Conscience, then he does it in the Fear of God,
and in the cross to his own will, and in meekness and tenderness of heart, not
seeking himself in what he does, but is willing to suffer for the Truth sake,
and for what he does, and will not resist Evil, or the false Judgments of men;
but patiently, and quietly bears all things, for the Lords sake; and in all
what. he does or suffers, he gives the glory to the Lord, who works his works
in him, and gives him strength and patience willing to suffer for them: But
again, I do answer, by men that have the spirit of sound Judgment to rule and
guide them, this cause is easy to be discerned, and the difference may be
known, betwixt a thing done out of a good Conscience, and for a good Conscience
sake, and a thing done out of an evil mind and purpose, and to an evil end, to
the wrong and injury of another; for the ground from whence the works do
proceed, are contrary, and the spirit by which the works are wrought are
contrary, and the purpose and end to which they are wrought are contrary, and
the spirit of God, and of sound Judgment may, and does put a difference betwixt
the ground, acting, and end of all works; for it is the ground from whence all
works do spring, and the end unto which they are brought forth, that makes all
men's works good or evil, to be justified, or to be condemned; and where the
Measure of the Spirit and Power of God is the Ground of, and Leader in a work,
that work, as I have said, is done in the Fear of the Lord, and in uprightness
of heart, and in love and tenderness, and meekness and patience, without
seeking or exalting self; but the Glory of the Lord is only sought by that man
in all such his works. But on the contrary, where an evil heart and mind brings
forth works to an evil end, and to the wrong of others, such works are
maliciously and wilfully, and enviously, and peevishly done, in forwardness,
and headiness, and not in the Fear of God, nor in uprightness of heart; but
with a double mind, and in secret, or without the Counsel of God, seeking
himself in his works, and not the Lord, and such works are wicked, and wrought
by wicked men, who transgresses both the Law of God and of men, and must
receive according to their deeds; and the Law that is equal must pass upon
them, which the Light of Christ in their own Consciences may answer to, when
they are condemned for their ungodly works; against which Light they act, and
that is the reason and cause, wherefore their works are evil, and to be
condemned by the Law; for who acts according to the Light of Christ, and is
led thereby, fulfilleth the Law, or it is fulfilled in him; and his works are
wrought in God, and are the testimony unto men, that he is of a good
conscience, and for a good Conscience sake his works are done, and such men and
works are not to be condemned, but justified: And this is for Instruction to
all them that bear Rule, who are Magistrates, and Governors, and Judges of the
people, that they may now be wife, and learn wisdom, how to judge righteously
and justly among people, that they may fulfill the Will of God in what he has
called them unto, even that they may cherish, and defend, and strengthen such
as do well, and all whose pure Consciences are purely exercised, may live in
peace and rest under such a Government; and all Evildoers may be bound,
limited, and judged, and may stand in awe, and be afraid; and thus Justice and
true Judgment would be advanced, and Equity would run down as a mighty Stream,
and the Nation would be blessed, and yield content and satisfaction to her
Inhabitants; and hereby might the Rulers and Judges gain unto themselves a good
report, and an honor and renown would the Lord crown them withal in
Generations to come.

Wherefore, all ye Rulers, and ye that are set to judge the people, be now
awakened to just Judgment, and to a sound discerning, and put on the spirit of
true Judgment, even the Spirit of the Lord, that you may receive it, to be
taught in all things, how to walk with God, that you may answer his call, and
the End of your Authority, in judging justly all sorts of men, rendering to
every man according to his Deeds; even Condemnation and Judgment to Evildoers,
and a Praise and Defense to all that do well. And this is written in love to
you all, showing you how to put a difference betwixt the Precious and the Vile;
between the Just and Unjust, that you may be the more happy, if this you
observe; not leaving your names a Reproach, and a Scorn to after Ages, which is
the effect which does follow all such as pervert Justice, and turns true
Judgment backward, with Misery and Destruction upon themselves and Posterity
for evermore.

A True and Faithful Exposition of some part of the Laws of ENGLAND.
ALL ye Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, and all other Ministers of
the Law, and all ye to whomsoever the Law is committed, I warn you all to take
heed to your selves, that ye fulfill the Will of the Lord, in judging
Righteously and executing true Justice and Judgment: and let not Envy, nor
false Suspicions, nor Jealousies have any place in you; but with a single Eye
try all things, and with an upright Heart judge for God, and not for man: and
beware of causing the Innocent to suffer, whose Consciences are exercised
toward God, though they be contrary to the World in their Ways and Judgments;
for if you cause such to suffer, you do not execute true Judgment, but subvert
the Law; and the Lord will require that Suffering of his People at your hands.
Now consider, The Law was not made for a Righteous Man, but for Transgressors,
such whose Consciences are not exercisd toward God; and such your Sword is to
be laid upon; to be a Terror to them, and not to the Innocent; for they should
have Praise that do well: And you must take heed lest you abuse your Power to
another End then wherefore God has ordained it; for the Law was added because
of Transgression, to slay the Transgressor; and that is the End of the Law. Now
you must take heed of causing any to suffer upon bare Suspicion, or Evil
Jealousies, when as no Transgression is truly charged, nor justly proved
against them before you: And you are not to be both Accusers and Judges of any
one, in any Cause.

You have a late Act for the taking up, and punishing of idle, l^^se and
dissolute Persons; such as are Vagrants, and wandering Rogues, Vagabonds and
sturdy Beggars: Now this Law is good, if it be duly and justly executed upon
such as are truly guilty herein; and it is right that sturdy Beggars, and
Rogues, and idle and disorderly Persons, should be taken up from wandering, and
set on work in some good Employment in the Creation, which may maintain
themselves, and prevent them from worse things: But now you must take heed of
judging any to be such, who are not really so; for, many of the Servants of the
Lord now, as it was in Generations past, are moved to leave their own Country,
and Dwellings, and Relations; and go abroad in the Nations, to preach the
Gospel of Christ, and to bear witness of his Name in the World; to the turning
of People from the ways of Sin and Death, to the Way of Righteousness and
Truth: and it may be such cannot give you an Account, or sufficient Cause of
their traveling abroad (so as to satisfy you) For that is lawful in the sight
of God, which you may not judge to be so; for God's Ways are not man's ways,
neither are his Thoughts as man's thoughts: Therefore, I say unto you, If you
cause any such of the Servants of the Lord to suffer by that Law, you abuse
your power, and subvert the Law; for such are not Vagabonds, nor idle dissolute
Persons, nor Rogues, nor sturdy Beggars; no more than Christ was, who had no
where to lay his head; and the Prophets and Apostles were, some of which had no
certain dwelling place, but left their Countries, and Relations, and wandered up
and down the World, from Town to Town, and from one Country to another, even as
the Servants of the Lord do by the same Spirit, at this day, who can no more be
truly judged for Vagabonds, and Rogues, etc. than Christ and his Apostles could
be, who were a perfect example to us in these things; For it is a lawful
occasion, in the Sight of God, whatever you judge of it, to travel up and down
(not being burden some, or chargeable to any) to beat witness for the Name of
the Lord, and against all Sin and Iniquity, that people may be reformed, and
instructed in the right way; Therefore you must make a special distinction in
your Judgment, between such as are Rogues, and idle and dissolute persons, who
are hurtful to the Creation, and such as are innocent and harmless, and not of
evil behavior, (though you may through prejudice otherwise judge of them) this
is to inform you herein, that your Judgments may be according to God, and not
according to man, neither with respect of persons.

Also you have another late Act for the Observation of the Lord's Day, wherein
is inserted, That none shall wilfully, maliciously, or of purpose disturb, or
disquiet the public Preacher, or to make any public Disturbance in the
Congregation. Now the Law is good, and it is right that all such be punished,
who do maliciously, wilfully, or of an evil purpose disturb or disquiet any
man, or people, to the danger of breach of public Peace; and let all such be
punished according to their desert: But yet you must take heed in this cause;
for many of the Servants of the Lord are, and may be moved by the Power of the
Lord to come into a Congregation, or an Assembly of People to declare against
Sin and Iniquity, and the Ways of Wickedness in People; or to ask a Question
soberly of the Teacher, or to instruct People to Edification in the Way of the
Lord, or such like may they do, as they are moved, and yet not maliciously, nor
wilfully, nor of wicked purpose; for it was the Apostles Practice, and the
Practice of the Saints, to go in the Synagogues and Meeting-places, and to
dispute with the Teachers on the Sabbath Days, and sometimes they spoke to the
people by way of Exhortation, and the people bid them speak on; and yet these
were not Disturbers of the Assembly, neither were they malicious men, or
wilful, neither did they these things to any evil purpose; and it was the
Practice of the Saints, that all may speak one by one in the Church, when they
were assembled together; and this is the Practice of the Servants of the Lord
now; and yet they cannot justly be condemned by your Law, though they come into
your Assembly, as they are moved of the Lord, to object, or reprove, or exhort;
for they do it not in malice toward any, but in love toward all, and they can
no more justly be condemned than the Apostles, and Saints in the Primitive
times, who were unto us a just example in these Practices, as you may read in
the Scripture; and you may as justly condemn them, as us, who are guided by the
same spirit in the same things; Therefore you have need to take heed of
condemning the Innocent by a Law, lest you bring innocent blood upon you; and
you must make a perfect difference between such as comes among you, Wilfully
and maliciously, and on evil purpose to disturb, and molest any man, or
Congregation, and such who comes in the Name and Fear of the Lord, who are
moved of him, contrary to their own wills, an^ ^h love to all people; And in
these causes you have need of discerning and sound judgment, lest you condemn
the guiltless, and abuse your power, and subvert the Law, and so bring
condemnation upon your selves; And as you will answer it before the Lord in his
dreadful day, cause not any to suffer through your envy, and surmizings, or
false suspicion, through overreaching the words of the Law to a wrong sense,
and to a wrong end.

Also it is inserted in the same Act against many evil things, (...) drinking
in Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, Strong-water-houses, or to Tipple unnecessarily,
or any other house, etc. and also against traveling, and walking on that day
vainly and profanely, etc. Now the Law is good, that evil exercise be
prevented, and profaneness in every respect on that day, and on every day, and
that such be punished that are found in any evil exercise whatsoever; But yet
you must take heed that none of the Innocent suffer hereby; for many of the
people of God may, and do travel on that day to meet together to worship God,
and to wait upon him, to find his presence, and to receive of his refreshments
to their souls; But this cannot be judged an evil practice, or profane
traveling, or breach of the Sabbath; For we read of a Sabbath Days Journey,
Acts 1. and 12. where some of the Servants of the Lord returned from Jerusalem
to Mount Olivet, which is a Sabbath-dayes Journey, so that such, who now
travels to wait upon the Lord on that day, though it be several Miles to, and
from the place of Meeting, cannot justly be judged to be Sabbath Breakers, no
more than the Apostles, who traveled a Sabbath Days Journey in obedience to
the Lord to wait upon him; So that you must take heed, and make a noted
distinction betwixt such who travel on a profane, and an evil exercise, or
about the affairs of this World, and such who travel on a good exercise to wait
upon the Lord, and to serve him; For the Law it self excepts such from being
taken up, or judged Sabbath Breakers: So take heed that you subvert not the
Law, and abuse your power through false judgment, through your own envy, and
so you smite the guiltless, and brings destruction upon your selves; For herein
we own the Law of God to walk by, and the Apostles for an example, though we
may suffer unjustly by you.

Also there is a late Act, for Discovering and Repressing of Popish Recusants,
by presenting to such as are Popish, or Popishly affected, an Oath, as is
therein described, To renounce the Pope's Authority, and to deny all his
Doctrines; and to testify against the Authority of the Church of Rome, and
against any License given, thereby to bear Arms, or raise Tumults; or by
Violence to hurt the chief Magistrate, or Government of these Nations, etc. And
such as deny the taking of that Oath, are to be adjudged Popish Recusants, and
to be proceeded against accordingly.

Now that Law is good, That such, who are adherent to the Pope, and by his
Authority would raise Armies and Tumults, and offer Violence to the Hurt of the
chief Magistrate, or Government, or people of these Nations, etc. as it is
signified in the said Oath, should be discovered and repressed: But yet you
must take heed, and wait for sound Judgment in the Prosecution of the same: For
all are not to be condemned that cannot swear, or take an Oath; for many of the
Servants of the Lord, who are Followers of Christ, cannot swear for Conscience
sake, because Christ has commanded, Not to Swear at all; though such do deny
the Pope, and all his Authority and Doctrines, and whatsoever else is signified
in that Oath, who cannot justly be suspected to be any way adherent to the Pope
in Doctrines or Practices, except through wicked Envy you seek occasion against
them thereby; and you abuse your Power, and subvert the Law, if you judge such
to be Popish Recusants, because they will not Swear, because they cannot for
Conscience sake; but walk in Christ's Doctrine, who commanded not to Swear; and
follow the Apostle's Example, who said, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear
not at all, And such cannot justly be suspected or judged for Popish Recusants,
who are Followers of Christ, and keep his Commands. Therefore you must be
considerate, and search deep into those things that are thus weighty, lest you
cause the Guiltless to suffer, and thereby vex the Lord against your selves:
And you must make a special difference betwixt such as will not Swear, because
they are guilty; and such as cannot Swear for Conscience sake, though they are
not guilty, but clear and free in the sight of the Lord of such things, as may
be falsely suspected and charged against them by envious men, which may watch
for Evil, and give Information against the People of God unto you: But let your
Eye be single in all these things, that you may save your selves from Wrath and
Condemnation, which will be a Reward of all such, who subvert good Laws to a
wrong End, and seek to cover themselves in their Persecution of the Innocent by
making the Law a Cloak; but such Coverings will not hide in the Day of the Lord.

And my Friends, In the Execution of these, and other Laws, let the Fear of God
guide you, and true Judgment and sound Discerning, that you may try into the
Nature and Ground of every thing, and may not judge only by outward Appearance,
but judge Righteous Judgment. And this is a great Transgression in the Sight of
the LORD at this Day, even the false Execution of Good LAWS, and the subversion
of them to wrong Ends and Uses by some wicked men, who are in Authority, to
whom the Law is committed: And this we know by Experience, Be the Law never so
just and good, yet if the Executioners of the Law be unjust and unrighteous,
true Justice and Judgment is turned backward, and for want thereof the Harmless
and Innocent daily suffer; which kindles and increases the fierce Anger of
the Lord against these Nations.

And likewise, All you that are in Power and Authority, you ought not to
command any thing of any man, which the Law gives you no power to Command; for,
doing so, you make your selves Transgressors; as for instance, You have no
Power by any Law to command men to put off their Hats, when they come before
you; neither by any Law can you justly punish them, if they do it not: neither
can you justly punish such by any Law, who deny to Swear, because for
Conscience sake they cannot: But what has been inflicted upon some in such
cases, has been by Will and Malice, and not by any Law; and the Lord does
account such things against the Wicked, who cause such Sufferings. And of these
things I have given you Warning, and it is in perfect Love unto you all, as to
inform you truly, lest you cause the Innocent to suffer.

I am a real Friend to the Commonwealth, and a Lover of Justice and true
Judgment, and fully affected toward Just Government, and wish well to
Magistrates, E. B.
The 9th Month, 1657.
AN 1658
EPISTLE To go abroad Among Friends IN WESTMORLAND and CUMBERLAND, And elsewhere
among the Flock of God.
FRiends, my love and life, which is not of this World, but which is in the
living God does reach unto, and salute all you that are in the Light of Life,
and in the Truth it self, which changes not, which endures for ever, which we
receive of God the everlasting Father, through the Gospel, which came unto us
in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, to the changing of us from
Death, which reigned over us, to Life, in which we have power over Death, and
to the turning of us from the power of Satan, wherein we were held, unto the
power of the living God, wherein we became fruitful, and a good savor unto him
through Nations. Dearly Beloved, in the same Truth be faithful unto death, in
that which cannot sin, nor be overcome of the Tempter, which Satan has nothing
in, wherein only our fellowship and union stands one with another, as we
abide in the living Vine Christ Jesus the Light of the World, in which you have
believed unto Eternal Life, and have entered into the Rest which is prepared;
as you continue therein, you cannot be moved or shaken, but are as Mount-Sion,
established in the Power, and Life, and Wisdom of the Everlasting God, which
condemns Darkness, and all its works, and gives dominion and rule over all the
powers of Death and Hell, which works in the Children of Disobedience, who
know not God, nor receive the Truth, much more in them who turns from the Light
and Knowledge of the Truth, into the Liberty of the Flesh, to serve sin, having
made shipwreck of Fear, and of Faith and a good Conscience, who shall bear
their own shame and condemnation in the Sight of God and man, and shall have no
part with us in the Inheritance of Peace and Righteousness; but the later end
of such is worse then the beginning: Wherefore you that are in the Covenant of
Peace, where sin is not remembered, nor committed, nor the unclean thing
touched, dwell and abide in the Life of God, and in his Strength, which reigns
over all the World, with its temptations, and over all false Brethren, and over
all deceitful Workers, whose Eye becomes darkened, and heart hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, turning the Grace of God into wantonness, and giving
liberty to the unclean thing, which is accursed, and joined to the Harlot, and
become one Flesh; but in the Counsel of the Lord God walk before him, and keep
your selves pure and undefiled, and partake not of the deeds of the Wicked,
neither give place to the Devil, to be perverted by him from the Truth of the
living God, which is Truth in it self for ever, though the Backsliders despise
the Way of it; and every one abide in your own, and know a measure of the
Strength of Christ Jesus in you, to defend you from the Enemy, who seeks to
beguile and to devour, and to divert from the perfect Way of Life and Peace;
and dwell in your own measure of the Grace of God, which is perfect, which is
sufficient to teach, and lead and preserve in all the Ways of God, which the
Unclean cannot walk in; but he that keeps you, reproves, and condemns, and
casts out the Devil, and all his works and Workers, who abide not in Christ
Jesus, nor in the Truth, wherein we worship the Father, who are called of him,
and faithful and chosen Followers of the Lamb, who takes away our Sin, and
gives power over it, and overthe Tempter, who seeks to betray the Just One.

And from the Eternal God I warn you, Every one know a Hidingplace in God; the
day of great shaking comes upon the Garden of God; the Beast that had a Wound
by a Sword, whose deadly Wound is healed, may live, and power may he given him
for a Moment, to make war against the Lamb and his Followers; and Satan may
prevail to winnow you, and to try you for your Life; therefore be armed with
the whole Armor of Light, which manifests the Mystery of Iniquity, and the
working of spiritual Wickednesses in high places, and which defends you from
his power, out of the Snare of the Devil, in the Simplicity, as it is in Christ
Jesus, who is our Rock and our Strength, by which we overcome the fiery Darts
of the Enemy, which come against us; and dwell in the Truth, that you may know
the Life which stands in God, with whom there is no shadow of turning, but
is the same forever, and keeps Covenant with his own Elect, which cannot be
overcome of the Devil, nor deceived; in whom, you abiding, you cannot sin, but
are kept from being touched with the Wicked One in the Way, and in the Truth,
and in the Peace of God, lively and precious in his sight, to serve him in Fear
and Faithfulness.

And if any go out from the Light, the Living Way, they become as withered
Branches, to be cut off from the Body, no more to have Fellowship in the Body,
but is reproved and judged with that which keeps us in the Body. And though
some go from the Lord, yet his Faithfulness endures forever, and his Promise
is yea and amen to his own Seed, which keep Covenant with him, and fulfill his
Law of Righteousness and Judgment; and he that breaks Covenant let him be
condemned, that the Creature may be saved in the Day of the Lord; for who draws
back, such God's Soul has no Pleasure in them, but is oppressed with that, and
his Soul vexed: Therefore all walk in God's Wisdom, which is Pure and
Peaceable; and let not the Name of our God be spoken against through any of
you, who have been Partakers of the Word of Truth, through any Disobedience or
ungodly Walking; but rather deny your own Liberty, then make it an Occasion to
the Flesh, wherein Satan's strength stands; and so God's Blessing you will
receive, and his Nurishment unto your Souls, and will be preserved in
Faithfulness, not to end in the Flesh, you that have begun in the Spirit.

And this in pure Love toward you all, as a Testimony of my Love to the Seed
of God in you all, was I moved to write; as seeing in the Light the Day that
comes upon you, of which some may not be aware; and I am clear thus far of the
Charge committed to me of God toward you, and am in the Truth it self, which
cannot change, and am in it your Friend in the Service of the Lord God,

E. B.
This is to go abroad among all Friends in Westmorland and Cumberland, and
elsewhere among the Flock of God, carefully to be Copied over, and read in your
Meetings.



A Second General Epistle To all the SAINTS.
A Servant of the Lord and Minister of Jesus Christ, thereunto ordained and
called through the Powerful Operation and Gift of the Holy Ghost, unto all his
Brethren in the same Life, who are born of God, and Witnesses of his Power; and
unto all the Saints and Churches of Christ, who have believed and received the
sure and faithful Testimony, and are called with the Heavenly Call, to follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes; who is given to you, and received of you, a
Light, a Guide, and a Teacher in all the Ways of God: Unto you all that are
scattered abroad in the World, whether in Bonds or at Liberty, whether strong
Men or Children in Christ; unto you all I send Greeting; and above all things
wish, and desire and pray unto the Father, for your increase in the Knowledge
of him, and Faithfulness in all his Ways, and that the Increase of his
Government may abound among you; and that Grace, Mercy and Peace may
plentifully be enlarged, that nothing may be lacking to you in any thing of
that which makes perfect; but that in Christ Jesus you may be complete, and
that through him you may receive Power, and thereby be strengthened to do all
things.

My dearly Beloved, and much longed for, in the Fellowship of that Spirit which
has begotten you to be Sons and Daughters of one Father, and Heirs and
Fellow Members of that Inheritance of Life, Peace and Rest, which abides
forever. Oh, how I long to meet you all in this, and to find you perfectly
settled and established upon the sure Foundation, which God has laid amongst
you, beyond all Doubts, and Fears and Stumblings, above the World and all its
Temptations, and above Hell and Death, and all the ways thereof, having all
the powers of Darkness subjected under you, serving the Lord in righteous and
perfect Holiness, walking in his Strength and Wisdom, showing forth his Light
in the World, as his only redeemed People.

Oh, how is my desire more and more kindled and enlarged toward you all, that
you may perfectly attain to the Knowledge of the great Mystery of Salvation, to
wit, God dwelling in you! I say, my desire is, That you may know even as you
are known, and that you may receive him as you are received of him; and that
you may be a perfect Body, growing up together, and springing forth in all good
Fruits, of Truth and Righteousness unto the Father, who is glorified through
bringing forth much Fruit: And you very well know, that for this End he has
called you, and in this his appointed Day caused his Glory to shine forth, and
has visited and brought us to the knowledge of the hidden Mystery of Eternal
Salvation, which Mystery has been sealed up for many Ages, and is kept secret
forever, from the wisdom of this World; but unto us, that have believed in the
Light of the World, are they clearly discovered, as at Noonday; being revealed
to us by the Spirit which works in us the Will and Mind of the Father, and is
powerful and mighty, and subdueth and breaks down the Hardness of Hearts, and
through the working thereof every high Thought is brought into subjection to
Jesus: And this same Spirit quickens and makes alive to God, and changes
and renews into his Image and Likeness, and it raises up from under the
Bondage of Corruption, to live to God in all things in newness of Life, old
things being done away, and all things being made new through the working
thereof; and in this same Spirit is the Father alone worshipped, and by it God
is known; and his Promise is fulfilled, it witnessing in all things unto the
Father, and is the Earnest of the Inheritance which fades not away; and by it
know we the deep things of God, which the World by wisdom knows not; and
thereby are we sealed and bound up in Covenant with the Father: This is known
to you that are Children of the Light, and hereof you have the Witness in your
selves, and of God you are approved, and not of men.

And all ye my Brethren, who are called into the Work and Ministry of the
Gospel, unto whom the Word of the Lord is come, and the Gospel of Christ to you
committed; Dwell in the Life of God, and feel his Power and Authority, and live
in the same Life of which you minister to others, that you may bring People to
God, and may effectually turn them from the dominion of sin unto the Dominion
of Christ Jesus, People may be guided out of Darkness in the mavelous Light.
Cry aloud, spare not, proclaim the Mighty Day of the Lord in all the Earth; and
fear ye not, neither be ye dismayed at the Face of any man, but be bold and
valiant for the Truth upon Earth, and give your Testimony as you have received
from God; and preach Christ Jesus the Light of the World unto all People, that
they may receive him, and be converted, and live: For Blindness and Darkness
has covered the whole Earth, and all have gone astray from the Lord, as Sheep
without a Shepherd: Therefore awake ye them that sleep, and cause the Deaf to
hear, and the Dead to rise, that such as have been strayed may be gathered; for
this is the fullness of time, he is now seeking his Sheep that have been lost,
and bringing them Home that have been strayed; and you, as Instruments in the
Lord's Hand, has he chosen into this Work: Therefore get on the Strength of
the Lord, and preach the Gospel of Peace, even the Power of God, that Sinners
may be converted, and the Wounded healed, and the Weak may be strengthened, and
they that are ready to dye may be restored to Life and Salvation: This is the
Work of the Lord, whereunto you are called; therefore all who unto it are
called, be faithful unto the end, and not only by word, but by Life and
Conversation also, hold forth the Way of Life: For you must feel that in your
selves, of which you minister to others; and you must hold forth the Life, the
same which you minister in words; and thereby shall you be made manifest to
that of God in all People, and God's Testimony shall answer for you: And see
that in all things you divide God's Word aright, not crying Peace to the
Wicked, nor healing up the Wound falsely; but that true Judgment in all things
may be brought forth by you to all people; Judgment to the Fat, and Bread to
the Hungry; they that are Naked must be clothed, and they that are falsely
covered must be made bare.

Improve the Gift which God has given you, to him only, and not unto your
selves: Be not hasty to utter words before the Lord, but wait for Power from on
High, that the Way of God unto Salvation may be faithfully and truly held forth
by you unto all people: And faint not, though your Burdens and Trials be many,
but bare all things patiently: love not your lives unto death, that the good
Work of the Lord may be accomplished, which he has begun by us, and made
prosperous and powerful in our hands unto this very day; you have the Witness
(of this:) Our Cause is good; we seek Truth and Righteousness, that it may be
established in the Earth, and people may be brought unto God; unto this God
has called us, and has owned us in it, and will never forsake us; for the
Work is his, and the Power is his, and whatsoever he will, he brings to pass;
and therefore why should we doubt, or be weary? For we shall see the Travel of
our Souls; the Scattered shall be gathered, and a Remnant of the Seed shall be
brought in, which is scattered in every Nation, as dry Bones, unable to live:
How shall we hide that Treasure which God has given us, from them that perish
for want thereof? Or, How shall we rest satisfied till the scattered Sheep be
brought Home to the Fold? Our Hearts are troubled to see so many Thousands
walking in thick Darkness, and to see the Seed of Israel devoured by the
Destroyer.

Therefore, my Brethren, let us put on strength, the Lord is with us; let us
make War in Righteousness for the Lord, against all the Powers of Darkness; let
us continually be armed to do and to suffer all things for the Name of the
Lord, that People may be instructed in the right Way: we know no man can have
power over us, but what is given them from above, and all that which comes to
pass against us is not worthy to be compared with the Crown of Glory, and that
Inheritance of which we have already received the earnest, and sealed with the
spirit of Promise, and the Fathers Name is written upon us; therefore in all
things unto which he has called you, be faithful and obedient, that his Work
may be accomplished.

And all ye Children and Babes in Christ, that are begotten of God, and are
thirsting and seeking after him in Truth and Righteousness, he whom ye seek is
coming to reign amongst you, and his Dominion shall be set up and enlarged, and
the desire of your Hearts shall be fulfilled; Righteousness and Truth shall
meet in one, and Judgment and Mercy shall be exalted. Wait upon the Lord, and
feel his Power and his Presence continually, that you may grow as Plants of
Righteousness, and may partake of the Heir-ship with Christ, being crucified to
the World, and become dead to all its Ways, and no more you to live, but
Christ to live in you; through the Light which he has lightened you withal,
has he given you an entrance into the Inheritance of the Father: And as you
walk in the Light, you grow into Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son.
Abiding in the Son you cannot sin; for he keeps you from the wicked One, and he
has no power over you that abide in Christ, who is the Power of God, which is
the Salvation of all that believe, and a Condemnation of all that believe not:
therefore all you that are convinced everywhere, hearken to the Voice of the
Lord, that your Souls may live: and mind the Power of God, and the workings
thereof in your Hearts, which conquereth Hell and Death, and subdueth all the
Powers and Ways thereof: and every one be obedient to the Lord, as Children of
one Father, that of his fullness you may receive, and be filled therewith: and
meet together in every Place; and as the Day approaches exhort one another,
that you may grow up in Unity as Members of one Head: and mind always the
Testimony of Truth its self, and walk therein, and you cannot stumble: Have not
respect to Persons, but to the Truth only; for Persons may change, but the
Truth abides for ever: So let not an evil Eye look at Evil, when it comes to
pass, to take occasion thereby against the Truth; for then you stumble and
fall: but I say again, have respect only to the pure Testimony of Truth which
is sure, and cannot err nor alter, though man may change and err; and that is
the Testimony which is held forth for Salvation, evon the Testimony of God,
with whom there is no shadow of turning: Therefore all take heed unto your
selves, that you give not, nor receive any offense against the Lord, and
against your own souls; but know the Seed of God, in which stands the Election,
where the Covenant of God is sure, and unalterable: and a Birth you must all
know to be brought forth in you, which must inherit, and that is it which is
born of the Spirit, which does obtain the Promise; it is not that birth which
is of the Flesh, which works by willing, and running, and thinking; that
obtains not the Promise of God, neither is Salvation showed unto it, but in
Patience, and in Long-suffering is the Victory received, over all the Powers of
Darkness, which make war against the Kingdom of God: So all Friends, dwell in
that which lets you see before the World was, and that stops and limits all
Strife in the mind, and gives you victory over it: and none must glory in the
Flesh, for that glory must be confounded; but let him that glories, glory in
the Lord, in the Spirit, and not in the Flesh: And take heed that none of you
abuse your liberty, which is in Christ Jesus, neither turn it into fleshly
Bondage, and thereby the Just comes to suffer, and the fleshly part comes to
rule above the Seed of God; but dwell in the Cross which suppresseth every high
Thought, and whatsoever is against God, in the first motion; and thereby you
will be preserved from the Enemy, which watches for Evil against you, and
seeks occasion against the Way of the Lord, but mind that which keeps you pure;
for it is the pure in Heart, that sees God, and it is him that is of clean
Hands, and of a pure Heart, that inherits God's holy Mountain: And as
concerning all your Afflictions, and Sufferings, and Trials, and Persecutions;
and whatsoever is laid upon you by the Lord, or by Men; I say, bear all things
patiently, and endure all things in Long-suffering; these things are but for a
moment, and they are not worthy to be compared with the Price of God's
Inheritance; and if you dwell in the Counsel of the Lord, all these things will
be turned unto your good; in all Trials and Sufferings, the Lord's Arm will be
revealed, and these things must come to pass, that Truth may appear in its
beauty, in Victory over all that which does oppose it, and vengance is the
Lord's, and he will repay; for he does enquire after our Blood, though no man
lay it to heart, or consider the cause, or unjust Sufferings of the Innocent,
who are become a Prey to the Ungodly, and unjust Men, till God arise to plead
our Cause: And all Afflictions and Sufferings are but for to try, and prove;
they are not to confound or destroy the Lord's People, and therefore in
patience they must be born, and the Life of God felt, which gives Dominion over
all these things: And receiving all things as from the Hand of the Lord, then
in all things your Peace will remain, and God's Testimony will witness Peace
and acceptance with God.

And of all Injustice, and Abuses and Cruelty acted upon you by any, at any
time, keep account of it, and draw it up in short and plain words, the occasion
and manner of it, and at every Quarter Sessions, let a true Declaration of all
unjust Sufferings be presented in prudency and singleness of heart to the
Justices, or Grand Jury, by such as are wise and faithful; and appeal to the
Witness of God in them in such Causes, that that of God in all Men may witness
for us. Let this be done, as cause is seen, at every Sessions, in the Wisdom
and Authority of God, that in all things Justice and true Judgment may be
sought after, and in Patience waited for, till the Lord alone, our King, and
Judge, and Lawgiver, comes to reign over all his Enemies; when all that now
suffer for him, shall reign with him.

A Servant to the Churches of Christ, E. B.

To the Elect and Chosen Seed of God in London. 1657

TO the Elect and Chosen Seed of God most dear and precious, who are redeemed
to God, and joined in Covenant with him, and have tasted, and felt, and heard
of the Love and Peace of the Father; and to all the Faithful and Called of
God, who are Partakers of the Power and Presence of an Endless Life; in
particular unto you the Flock of God in and about London, who fear the Lord,
and wait upon him, and over whom he is the chief Shepherd. The Salutation in
the Father's Love, by me a Brother and Companion unto all the Children of Sion,
and chiefly unto you a Friend in Heart; and nothing more desiring for you, then
your increase in God, and that Grace, Peace, Love and Fellowship from the
infinite Father of Heaven and Earth may be largely increased, and abundantly
multiplied amongst you, and in all your hearts, that you may shine forth in the
Beauty of the Lord, and the Garment of Righteousness, and Truth may be spread
over you all; and that the Spirit of Holiness may rest upon you, that the fruit
thereof may greatly abound in you, and spring forth from you, whereby the
Father, who has begotten you, may be glorified through the Nation, and among
his Saints through the World; and my Soul wishes, that the Fear of the Lord be
amongst you, and his terror upon all your Enemies, Amen.
DEarly Beloved, and much desired after in the Lord, the Spirit of the Father
in upon me, to put you in remembrance of these things of the greatest price,
which belong unto your Peace, which have been hid from you in the time of
Darkness, but now are revealed unto you, whereof your Eyes have seen, your Ears
have heard, your Hands have handled, and your Hearts have perceived; and now be
not unmindful thereof, but take heed unto the precious Treasure of Life
Eternal, which the Father has given unto you; I mean, the Knowledge of
himself, who is manifest to dwell in you, and to walk in you, and to lead you,
and to guide in all his Ways of Peace and Truth; and this is that Treasure
more desirable, and of greater price then the Glory of the whole Earth; yea, it
is Peace to the soul, and Gladness to the heart, and Refreshment to the life,
to feel and witness the Teaching of the Spirit of the Father, leading into all
Truth, and preserving out of all Transgression. Wherefore I beseech you all,
let this be your whole desire, and the full practice in your life; and then
shall the Countenance of the Lord shine upon you, and his Face shall make you
glad, if in all things you look unto him for Counsel, and wait upon the
teaching of his Spirit, which dwells in you, which the Father has given unto
you, because you are his Children; and this he requires from you, that his own
Spirit in you, which has begotten you, may be the root and moving cause of all
your works and words, and herein will you receive acceptance with him, and
Peace from him, and righteousness in him, and everlasting joy by him
continually; and and this is the Inheritance unto which you were begotten Heirs
to possess for ever: wherefore let your love, unity and felloship be in the
Spirit, and let your Knowledge, Judgment, Meeting, and Waiting be in the
Spirit, and let your ministering and receiving be in the Power of God, and in
the Spirit, and so shall you never suffer loss nor condemnation; but all your
works shall abide the Fire, and shall not be consumed when the trial of all
things come, and the Foundation of every work is discovered: And I say again,
if the Spirit of Life, even the Spirit which quickens to God, the second Adam,
who is the quicking Spirit be your Guide, your Leader and Teacher in all
things, then you shall have perfect Peace with God, and your Fellowship will be
increased, and his Presence shall go before you, and his Righteousness shall be
your Justification, and Desence, and his Covenant of Life and Peace shall be
confirmed unto you; and there shall be no more going forth, but the Tabernacle
of God shall remain with you always, and his Habitation shall be in you
forever, and the Promise of the Father shall be sealed unto you, and his Mark,
and express Image written in your Foreheads; and that quickening shall live in
you, and not you unto your selves, and hereby shall all know that he is your
God, who lives in you in Power and Dominion, and that you are his People who
lives unto him in Truth and Righteousness; and this is the Covenant and the
Promise to be waited for by you all, that you may be married to the Lord in
Righteousness and Loving Kindness, and your Maker may be your Husband, and you
subjected under his Power, to rule over you, and to govern you in the Way of
Peace.

And now, dearly Beloved, mind that Word of God which has begotten you from
Death to Life, and to be Heirs of his Inheritance of Life; and feel the Word
which is quick and powerful dwell in your hearts, always dividing in you
betwixt the precious and the vile, and as a Hammer, and a Fire, always beating
down, and burning up that ground and fruit which is in the disobedience, from
which the cause of Condemnation does spring, and so shall you be saved from
every appearance of evil, and shall not be overcome thereby, nor led captive at
the will of the Enemy, but shall be saved from Sin, and the Wages thereof, and
no condemnation shall be unto you, if your hearts be kept clean, and undefiled,
by the Word of God which is pure, and sanctifies, and is but one in all his
Children, and it begets unto one Life, and to be of one Mind and Soul, and
by it only dwelling in the Heart, is the increase of God received, though by
the ministering of it, one may Plant, and another may Water, yet it is my Father
that gives the increase, who is greater then all, unto whom the Ends of the
Earth must look for Salvation, and unto him must you all look for to partake of
increase, of his hidden Treasure daily, that you may be refreshed as the
Heritage which he has chosen, and may grow therein, as Plants planted by his
own right Hand, growing from strength to strength in him, and renewing your
strength in him, and may not fain, nor be weary.

And forasmuch, as mighty has been the Power and Presence of the Lord amongst
you, and his Love great unto you, and caused his voice to be heard, when you
were Dead to raise you unto Life, and many of you have had the taste and
feeling thereof, who have seen the Way of Life before your face, that you
should walk therein, and live: I do warn you all in the Name, and by the Spirit
of the Lord, therein to continue unto the end, having your Faith established in
the Power of God, and your building standing on that true Foundation which can
never be moved nor shaken; but that perfect victory over Death, and the Grave,
and the powers of Darkness may be trodden down through the obedience of the
Cross, whereby victory is obtained over all the World, and the Affections and
Lusts thereof condemned; but such as goes from the Cross, perceives not the
Power of God, neither can overcome, but are overcome of the Enemy, and
shipwreck is made of Faith, Truth, and a good Conscience, and the latter end of
such is worse then their beginning; for the Lord is dishonored, and their
condemnation will be great.

Wherefore, my Friends be watchful, and be armed with the strength of Christ
Jesus, and feel his strength in you to resist the wicked One, that he may not
touch you, to betray you of your Life and Peace, and bring you into
condemnation; for I am not ignorant of the many temptations which are near unto
you in that place: Wherefore I say again, feel the Strength and Arm of God
reaching to you, by which you may do all things; and dwell in his Life and
Power, and that ye may overcome by the Word of God, and by the Testimony of
Jesus, and then will your Peace be increased, and your Fellowship with God; and
Angels shall minister unto you, as you overcome the Enemy, which would subvert
your minds from the obedience to the Truth, and then your rest in God will be
sweet unto you, as you dwell where nothing can make afraid, Sin and
Transgression being removed far from you, not having a place in you, but the
Life reigning which Satan has nothing in; and this is the freedom of the Sons
of God, who are redeemed unto him, to live in him, who being dead to sin,
cannot live any longer therein; but are washed and separated from all the works
of Death; Death having lost his sting, it cannot hurt nor wound you; and the
Grave having lost its victory, it cannot overcome you who do witness this; for
Transgression is hid, and Iniquity is put under, and Life it self reigns
through Righteousness over all; and here the Seed is brought forth, in which
there is no Iniquity seen, nor Transgression charged against it, for it sins
not; but rules over the Sinner, and fulfils the righteous Law of God, and does
his Will in all things; and for this you must all wait to feel God's Promise
perfectly fulfilled in you, and sealed unto you by the Eternal Spirit.

And again, Friends, feel the Life of God in your own particulars, even the
Bread of Life which comes down from Heaven, which nourishes the Birth which is
immortal unto eternal Life, never to taste of death, and therein have
Fellowship in the Covenant of Life, and be at peace with God, and one with
another; for that is blessed of the Lord, where Brethren dwell in unity,
showing love, kindness and subjection one to another, being of one spirit, and
like-minded, serving one another in love, not exalting your selves, nor
accounting your selves above another, for that must come down with shame; but
every one approve your selves to God in all things, and be known to him, and
not unto the World; but let his Spirit witness for you, and approve you, and
not man; and the work of the Spirit springing through you let be the Evidence
unto all people, that you are by Grace what you are; and this is well-pleasing
unto God, that his Spirit witnesses for you, and that Love, Unity and Humility
be amongst you; and none think of themselves above what the Spirit of the Lord
witnesses, and works in them, and this a sweet savor will be amongst you to
the Lord, you being kept in his Wisdom and Counsel, in good order, and subject
unto him, walking as Examples of Righteousness, to edify one another, and to
be a strength one to another; and in all your Conversations to be manifest to
God's Witness in all people; and thus shall you have praise of God, and be
approved of him, and he will justify you in the sight of all your Enemies: I
write this unto the Faithful who do not minister Self, but Self your Servant
for Jesus sake.

And as concerning disorderly spirits, who are not subject to the Wisdom of
God, nor to the Law or Christ, such have no part with us, but are judged with
the Life of God, and cast out; and such as are not faithful in the Lord's
Treasure, and hear the Word, but do it not, having the words, without power,
and hold the Truth in unrighteous, such have no reward in God, but their
iniquity stands uncovered, and their transgression is manifest, and not hid;
for Death reigns through disobedience, and they are not circumcised in heart,
but live in the flesh and their portion is of this World, and the Inheritance
of Life is not their Heirship; for the birth which should inherit is not
brought forth, but an untimely birth, which receives not the Possession of
Life.

But, Friends, dwell in the dominion over such, and in peace abov^ them, and be
not troubled, but believe in the Truth, and bear all things patiently, and be
not offended in Christ, though hitherto you have seen occasion of stumbling,
yet the Lord will remove them, and the Path of Life has been plain before you;
for to such as walk in the Light, there is no occasion of stumbling, but
Offenses are seen through, and beyond, and the ground thereof judged; and
therefore be diligent in the Work of God; that is his Work which his Spirit
calls you unto, and that is his Worship which his Spirit leads you in, which
exercises your hearts always to God; and keep your Meetings in the dread of
the Lord over all your Enemies, that the Weak may be strengthened, and the Lambs
sed; and watch over one another, as the Family of God, among whom his dwelling
is who is the good Shepherd, that keeps his Flook, and feeds them into
eternal Life, whose Presence and Arm be amongst you for evermore: Feel Christ
the Power and Wisdom of God to reign in you, and govern you all. Farewell.

E. B.
This is to be read in the Fear and Wisdom of God in all the Meetings ^f
Friends, in and about London.



TO 1658
^harles Fleetwood, Steward; Robert Hatton, Recorder; Sackford Gunstone, Henry
VVilcock, Bailiffs: Being Judges in the Court of Kingstone upon Thames. ^he
state of the Controversy laid before you, depending in your Court, between
Richard Mayo, Plantiff, and Edward Borough, Defendant.
FRIENDS,
THE Innocence and Truth of my Cause does lift up its Head unto all People, and
stands justified in the sight of God, and all just Men; and in Justice and
Righteousness it cannot be con^emned, or judged guilty by any man: And it is
upon me yet once ^ore, to state it before you, that you, and all men may see
the counte^ance and favor thereof, for it dares show its Face unto you, and
all people, though much already has been written and spoken about it, which
you have not taken notice of (as you ought to have done) but ^et many are
informed in the truth of the matter, and what has been ^poken is not in vain,
though my just Cause lies always at the Stake, and hardly thought upon by you,
and vilified, and evil spoken of before you ^y my Adversary, who always seeks
false Judgment against me, to ^stifie himself in his iniquity, and to condemn
the Guiltless: But the Lord knows, and just Men know, and the Witness of God in
your Consciences may show you, That I have not wronged Richard Mayo, ^or spoken
of him any thing, saving the truth, and because thereof; and without any other
Cause, am I thus prosecuted by him, in his ^leading before you, and begging of
you for false Judgment; which, if ^e should obtain it, and you should give it,
yet should I be clear in the ^ight of the Lord, though by you I may deeply
suffer: And your own ^nrighteous Judgment (if it proceed from you) will return
one day upon your own heads, and the weight of your own Iniquity shall the Lord
^ay upon your own Consciences, in the Day when he judges the secrets of all
Hearts: And to God I have appealed in this thing, who justifies me, because of
Truth; and then who shall condemn me, while Truth is on my side, and I not
convinced to the contrary?

Therefore in the Fear of the Lord God, I say unto you, Take heed what you do
in this Matter; but deal impartially in the sight of the Lord, in the
Examination thereof; and try, whether I have spoken the Truth, or whether I
have spoken Falsely; and hearken to my PLEA, which I have often asserted before
you, and do yet once more lay before your view; and I do appeal to the Light of
your Consciences, and let that justify me, or condemn me.

And this I testify, as my sufficient Plea, unto you (which no man has truly
answered before you) That I have spoken nothing but the Truth of Richard Mayo,
my Adversary; to this I stand to be justified; and if I be condemned, it is for
this; this rests with me forever; and if I fall, I f^ for it (viz.) For
speaking the Truth; and if I stand, I stand by it, and no man whatsoever can
convince me to the contrary; and hereof am I invincible, and if you condemn me
for this (to wit) For speaking the Truth, it will be upon you, and I am clear.
And this is my only Plea, which I have often, and may by the Spirit of the
Lord, always clearly demonstrate: and I do indeed wave all the multitude of
Arguments that have been, or can be made, by the Lawyers in this Business; and
not by words of man's wisdom, but by Truth must I be justified.

And I do here again return to my first manner of proceeding, and stand to the
naked simplicity of Truth, and I have no other defense to shelter under,
neither do I choose any, nor no other Weapon to resist my Enemy with, but the
Word of the Lord, which is Truth; and if Truth will not justify me, I will not
be justified; and if it will conde^ me, my Mouth shall be stopped; for, by the
Truth I stand, and if I fall, fall for it in this matter: and therefore you my
Judges, patiently hear few words again, as to the beginning of the matter
betwixt Richard Mayo and me, which is thus, He sent for me by a Messenger to
come to him, an^ being come to him, he challenged me to speak what I had
against him and again under his own hand he challenged me to dispute, either in
public, or private with him; and he again bad me call him Deceiver if I
durst: and upon all these four particular Invitations and Challenges, and also
knowing him to be guilty, as I am still able to prove, I did say to him, That
he held forth Damnable Doctrine and Error, and that he was a Deceiver; and this
was the beginning of the Controversy: Whereby I would have you to take notice,
how Unrighteously he has dealt with me; first to invite me, and challenge me
several times; and then for speaking the Truth of him (which I am able to
prove) to Arrest me, Imprison me, and thus to prosecute me: Is not this
Unchristian-like, and not like a Minister of Christ? And this I proved in your
Court, His challenging of me: And also I have manifested diverse particular
Saying of his, which do appear to all sober men to be damnable Doctrine, and
Error. And for the manifesting of my innocent Cause further, and that you may
know, that you ought not to condemn me (neither c^ you with a safe and good
Conscience in the sight of God) and to lay the Truth as plainly as I can before
you; therefore I do here insert the particulars to you again, which I proved in
the open Court against Richard Mayo, which I do say is damnable Doctrine and
Error, all, or some of them at least.

1. That Paul, as a Minister of Christ, exhorted Saints (the Corinthians) to
follow and obey a Light, which was not Christ, nor the Light of the Gospel. 2.
He did exhort the people of Kingstone, as a Minister of Christ, in his
Preaching to them, To follow and obey a Light, which (said he) is not Christ,
nor the Light of the Gospel. 3. He said, That a man may be a Righteous Man, and
not a Godly Man, without distinction. 4. Also at another time before that,
Richard Mayo affirmed, That the Light of Christ, which every man is lightened
withal, John 1. 9. is Carnal, and Darkness. 5. He did affirm under his own
hand, That Christ was not the Word that David walked by. 6. He affirmed, That
the Devil is the Power of God. 7. He affirmed, That the Gospel is not the Power
of God, no more then a Rose Cake is; which he laid his hand on in the Window,
at that present of his so saying. 8. He affirmed, If one man murder another, he
did it by the Power of God.
Now hereby it may appear to you (if you do not wilfully harden your selves
against the Truth, and the Righteousness of my Cause) that I have done Richard
Mayo no Wrong, only I have spoken the truth of him: I said, He held forth
damnable Doctrine and Error; which saying is truth, and I had a good Cause to
speak it; for he invited and challenged me diverse times to speak it: and then,
when this is considered by you, let your Consciences judge what wrong I have
done him; seeing it does appear, I have spoken the truth of him, and had good
Reason so to do. Ye my Judges, at whose Door my Cause (which is Innocent) lies
despised, and ready to be condemned, come but to plainness and honesty in your
own hearts, and be not passionate toward me; but use Meekness, and let the
Sincerity of your hearts tell me, whether I have lied, or spoken truth: But if
you do the worst that can be done against me, I must, and have already
committed my Cause to God, and I doubt not but he will avenge my Cause, and
recompense my Adversaries in his Season.

Now again consider, If Richard Mayo did make his Invitations to me, on purpose
to ensnare me (as it may be justly supposed that he did) that he might have
occasion to execute his Malice upon me; then you ought not to give Judgment
against me, and to be his Executioners; for, if he has laid his Plot to
ensnare me, how can you justly give him power over me? And he has no power
over me, except you give it him by unjust Judgment; and you can but give him
power over my Body; for my Spirit is at Liberty, and in dominion over you and
him; because I have the Truth on my side, and it is hard for you to strive
against that; for it cannot be buried; but the Truth of my Cause will always
live to vex its Opposers. But and if his Challenges to me were not to ensnare
me, but for Information (supposing himself to have been clear from all damnable
Doctrine and Error) then he had done well to have owned my words as a Reproof,
and to have repented, and not to have held forth any more such Doctrine: And
you ought not, for my reproving him, to condemn me; for, r eproving any man for
Evil ought not to be condemned; Good Men will not do it, neither would he (were
he not an ungodly man) prosecute me thus violently, and thus continually beg
your Judgment of 100 l. against me, for reproving of him, and declaring against
his false doctrine, which he delivers to the people; when as himself invited me
to speak to him: And the Lord knows, the Souls of people are so dear to me,
that where I hear false doctrine held forth, which would destroy the innocent
Souls, I cannot but reprove it, lest people receive false Dostrine for true, to
the Destruction of their own Souls; and upon that account I spoke in this
Cause. Wherefore take you into Consideration, what Richard Mayo's End was in
inviting me; and do not you fulfill his evil purpose, which I believe, if he had
power over me, would execute his farthest Cruelty upon me; I have good Reason
to believe it; for many cruel threatening words have proceeded from him already
against me; but the Lord can deliver me from them all; but if he will not, He
will give me Patience to bear it, whatsoever is suffered to come to me.

But if any shall doubt, and cannot receive these things, and believe, that
these particulars are damnable Doctrine and Error, as they are laid down in
themselves; and if what is spoken already be not sufficient, I may upon any
just Opportunity, prove unto you, and unto all men, in the sight of my Enemies,
That these particulars held forth by Richard Mayo, and alleged by me before
you, are damnable Doctrine and Error: And if I could be convinced to the
contrary by him, or any man, in sober Arguments, according to the Scriptures,
and if he shall be able to prove that these things are true, and found and
saving Doctrines, then may I confess, That I have wronged him, which never can
be done: Therefore can I never confess (without lying against my Conscience)
that I have wronged him; but God justifies me, and just Men, and my own
Conscience excuses me from all wrong in this matter; and here, or hereafter,
shall you and he know it also, that I am without Offense to him in this Cause.

And if I suffer, be it upon you that are my Judges, and the Guilt of my
Sufferings will be upon you one day. For, for the Truth's sake am I not afraid
nor ashamed to suffer whatsoever you lay upon me.

And whereas it is chiefly pleaded by my Adversary, and his Council, That he is
damnified, and much endangered, by the speaking of my words: And because I
said, He held forth damnable Doctrine; Therefore (say they) he is in danger to
lose his Place, and so He, and his Wife, and Family cannot tell how to live,
etc. These things they plead, and upon this account beg Judgment against me,
because he is, or may be in danger to be damnified.

To this I reply, and Friends, I would have you to consider, He has not yet
proved to you the Damage of the value of Two Pence, nor is he in any outward
Estate worse, by loss of any thing outwardly, by any thing that I have spoken;
and it is unjust to condemn me in an 100 l. upon supposed Danger and Damage,
which may come, while as he has sustained none at present. And further I say
unto you, I have had no Intentions of Evil against him, nor Purpose in my
heart, to endanger or damnifie him in any outward thing, God is my Witness; but
that nakedly and simply I spoke the Truth of him: And if speaking the Truth to
him does endanger him, and damnifie him, according as they plead, then is he a
bad man, and an evil person, and not well worthy of your taking part with him,
if you be just Men (as yet I k^w nothing to the contrary) nor worthy of giving
your Judgment against me for him: If the speaking Truth to him can so endanger
him, then consider you what a man he is; for speaking of the Truth can never
hurt an honest Man, nor damnifie a good Man; for honest Men rejoice in the
Truth, and the speaking of it is an Honor to them: But the speaking the truth
may indeed damnifie a bad Person, as to discover his Wickedness, and to prevent
him of more Wickedness, which he may intend; but speaking the truth cannot
damnifie a good Man. And if it be so, that Richard Mayo (because of his
badness) be damnified by my speaking the Truth to him; must I therefore be
condemned for speaking Truth, or ought you to do it? Let that of God in you
answer: Will you justify his false doctrines, and condemn me for reproving
him? Did ever any good Men, or just Judges of old, condemn any man for speaking
the Truth? Or will you shame your selves in the sight of Wisemen, by acting
contrary to a good Conscience? Which, if you do condemn me for speaking the
truth, I do, and must tell you (while I live) That your Judgment is Unjust, and
you act contrary to a good Conscience, and are Unrighteous Judges; and that you
commit the great Abomination, in justifying the Wicked, and condemning the
Righteous.

And is it not a Shame to him that professes himself to be a Minister of
Christ, to plead, The Loss of his Livelihood, and of his Calling, and the
Poverty of his Wife and Family, etc. because of my speaking the Truth to him?
Never any of Christ's Ministers pleaded any such thing: Were not they
reproached, and much spoken against? And they were called Deceivers, and
Seditious Men, and such like: And did they proceed on this manner, as he has
done against me? Nay; They forgave their Enemies And if I had spoken falsely of
him (as I have not) he ought not to have done thus, if he had been a Minister
of Christ, as he professes: And does his Livelihood, and his Place, and his
Maintenance of himself and his Family, depend upon my forbearing to speak the
Truth? For, he pleads, That he is damnified and endangered in all these, by
what I have spoken.

And I still testify, and all good Men know, that I have given no Offense,
saving then speaking the Truth: And rather then he shall be damnified by my
speaking the truth of him, will you unjustly damnifie me for speaking the
truth? Is this the Way of JUSTICE, to condemn the Truth that I have spoken, to
save the Guilty from supposed Danger? Consider of this, and save your selves
from Unjust Judgment, lest the Lord justly judge you, and condemn you.

This I show in short, and much more I might, as to the Unjustness of the
Action prosecuted against me; and now I come to show something of the unjust
Proceedings in this matter against me, in the time of my Trials and other
times; and some part thereof I here lay before you, that you, and all may see I
have had as unjust Proceedings against me in the matter, as an unjust Action at
first brought upon me.

At my first appearance, in my first Answer, I demurred to the jurisdiction of
your Court; and showed, That your Court and Judicatory being Temporal, you
could not (in that Court) take Cognizance of this Cause, being of a Spiritual
Dependancy, and ought only to be tried in spiritual Jurisdiction, by spiritual
Judges (if there were any such) and showed out of the Laws of England
reasonably, that your Court had no power to try this matter: But one of the
Bailiffs, John Forth, said (which should have been my equal Judge) They would
overrule that, and they would try the matter; without showing any just Reason
out of the Laws, against my Argument grounded upon the Laws; and they did
overruled me in that.

And the Court-day before the Trial, when the Jurymen were to be chosen and
nominated, I told them, That the Jurymen should be such as had the Gift of the
Holy Spirit, and the Holy Ghost in them, or else they could not try the Matter,
because it was Doctrine that was to be tried, which none could try, but by the
Spirit of God; neither could I cast my self into the Determination of any in
this Cause, but such. And the Bailiffs, Obadiah Wicks, and John Forth,
answered, If they were men that could take the Evidence, that I spoke my words
against Richard Mayo, they were sufficient to try the Matter: Whereby it does
appear, that they had unjustly determined in themselves, not to try the
Doctrines, but to have a Verdict against me however.

Again, Some that were called to be of the Jury were heard to say, before they
saw me, or ever heard the Matter; If I came into their hands, they knew well
enough what to do with me: Hereby it does appear they were not equal men, but
malicious, and prejudiced against me.

And moreover, In the very time of the Trial, some of the Jury at the Bar,
said, They would not believe any thing, or take any Witness for Testimony,
which any of these on my part, that were called Quakers, spoke: And this was
also the Witness of their malicious and envious spirits against me, who were
rather as a Party against me, then my Equals: And were not these unjust men for
the Trial of such a Matter?

And moreover, When all his Witnesses could not say enough to give color for a
Verdict against me, one of the Bailiffs, John Forth by name, who was one of the
Judges upon the Bench, proffered to come down off the Bench, and swear, as a
Witness against me; and when some spoke against that, he sent for a man into
the Court, out of the Town, James Levite by name, and whispered with him upon
the Bench, and told him what he should swear; and he went to the Bar, and took
his Oath against me, That I followed Richard Mayo with Reviling Language, in
three several Rooms, in Bailiff Gunstone' s House: Which I do testify was a
false Oath before the Lord, and all men; and many know that I speak the Truth,
and that that man took a false Oath, who was sent for into the Court, and told
by one of the Judges what he should swear.

I suppose Bailiff Gunston himself knows, that this was a false Witness; and
are not these unjust Proceedings? I appeal to your Consciences, and upon such
proceedings as these, was a Verdict gained against me, by much ado, in above
three hours time; and the Foreman of the Jury himself said, he would not have
brought a Verdict against me, but only for the man's Oath, James Levite, which
as I have said, swore falsely, being sent for, and told by another man what he
should say.

Again, when the Foreman of the Jury said, they could not try the Cause, and
desired it might be referred, the said Bailiff Forth on the Bench cried no, and
told Richard Mayo; he should have a Verdict first, and ought my Judge thus to
have spoken? No, he appeared to be rather a Party against me, then my equal
Judge; and to all sober men, these Proceedings may appear to be unjust: And I
hope some of you will make more conscience of your doings, then to pass
Judgment upon such an Unrighteous Verdict: And moreover, the Jury did not try
the Cause, which only ought to have been tried, which was, whether I had
spoken truly, or falsely of Richard Mayo, that is to say: they ought to have
tried, (and that was the thing in controversy between us) whether these
particulars alleged by me against Richard Mayo were true, and sound Doctrine,
or damnable Doctrine and Errors; for if the Particulars mentioned be true, and
sound Doctrine, which were affirmed by Richard Mayo, then I have wronged him,
and I must confess it, and assent to your Judgment: but if the Particulars be
false Doctrine and Error, then I have done him no wrong; for I have spoken
nothing but the truth, and for that; how can you condemn me? And this was the
Cause to be tried, which the Jury themselves confessed they did not try; and
therefore the Matter is not yet tried in truth, neither have I had a legal
Trial before you; and then how can you give Judgment against me, being the
Action it self is so unequal, and the Proceedings so unjust also, and the
Matter yet not fully tried? Do but consider of these things in the coolness of
your spirits, and let not me receive worse dealing from you, because I am a
Stranger, neither because I am a Quaker so called; but deal justly, and truly,
for I desire nothing else of you, but true Judgment, for that will justify me,
and clear me: and respect not Persons, but have respect to the Law of God,
which commands you to hear, and judge the Cause of the Poor, and the
Strangers, without respect of Persons; and if you give regard to the Law of God
in this Matter, you cannot give Judgment upon this Verdict, which is unjustly
brought in, by partial men, as is manifest, and you must either wholly arrest
Judgment, or at least you must bring it to a new Trial, else you do me much
wrong and injustice, and all good men will so judge of it: And further, diverse
sufficient reasons has been showed by men of knowledge in the Law; first
against this Action, and also against the Proceedings herein, which might be
reasons to you not to go on in Judgment against me, but to clear me; and even
in your own way, (as I may say) you have been dealt with, and you have been
showed my Innocence; so that if your Hearts be not hardened, you cannot go any
further against me, but go contrary to the truth of my cause, and contrary to
your own Law also: and though it was the dear love, and respect of Friends to
the Truth, in freeness of their love to me, more then any desire of mine, or my
knowledge; I do own their love, and justify it; yet much that has been spoken
in forms and tricks of Law, and puntillio's of Law I do wave, and let it pass,
and keep always to the naked truth of the Matter, as before laid down: And
therefore if any Jury shall upon their Oaths justify, Richard Mayo's Doctrines
to be true and sound Doctrine; and if you your selves, upon your Oaths, dare
give Judgment, that Richard Mayo's Doctrine is not damnable Doctrine, and
Errors; then I must lie patiently under your Judgment, and under the breach of
such Jury-mens Oaths, and of your own Oaths also: and therefore I demand of you
according to right and justice let me be cleared, otherwise let me first have a
fair Trial before I be condemned, which yet I have not had, because the Matter
was perverted from that, whether I had spoken the truth, upon which the true
Issue depends, and upon no other thing; Whether I spoke maliciously, was a
straining of the Cause to a wrong head, and perverting it from its proper
Issue, and hereby was the just Cause of the Innocent clouded over, and
rejected, and vilified, and even betrayed into another meaning, more then it
ought to have been; but it can show its face above all this, and Truth cannot
be daunted, though it may be veiled, and lie hid for a season; and though I be
condemned by the Prejudiced and unfaithful Jury for speaking maliciously, yet
the Lord bears me witness to the contrary, that I have no malice in me against
any man, and I love your Souls better, then that you should endanger them to
destruction, and to everlasting burning, by giving Judgment upon your Oaths
against me upon this Verdict, in this Cause which is thus unjust and unequal in
it self, and in its Proceeding also; for if the Jury had tried, whether I had
spoken the truth, or whether I belyed Richard Mayo, then it would easily have
been known, whether I spoke maliciously; for if I belyed him, and if his
Doctrine be true, and sound, and not Error, then may it be easily judged, that
I spoke maliciously, because I spoke not the truth; but if his Doctrines
alleged by me, be not true and sound Doctrine, but damnable Doctrine and
Error, then I have not belyed him; but spoken the truth in love, and not
maliciously; for Truth and Malice goes not together; and till this be tried, to
wit, whether I have spoken truly or falsely, who shall be able upon their Oaths
(without forswearing themselves) to give it upon their Oaths, that I spoke
maliciously? nay, how shall any men lawfully swear, that one speaks
maliciously? it is a hard cause to swear, that any man speaks in malice; for
who enters into the heart of another man, to know the thoughts, save God, and
his Spirit.

And this I say at least, and safely too, that that Jury, which gave into the
Court upon their Oaths, that I spoke my words maliciously against Richard Mayo,
have greatly endangered the forswearing themselves, and the breach of their own
Oaths; and some of them know before this day, that they did transgress therein
against God, whom God suddenly after cut off with Judgment, and took off the
Earth by death; and though they that are yet living may be insensible of their
own wickedness; yet let all good men fear to dye out of this Body with that
burden upon their Consciences, as some have, and others of them may have, in
this particular, for breach of Oaths; and though they have given it to you upon
their Oaths, that I spoke maliciously, yet ^wo will be unto you, if you shall
upon your Oaths justify, they have done well, and condemn me falsely upon their
false Verdict, and if you do condemn me, it is upon their false Verdict,
because I spoke ma^iciously against Richard Mayo; and you cannot do that, but
you for^wear your selves, and act contrary to your trust, who are set in place
to judge justly by what does appear to your view; and cannot, nor dare not, I
know, upon your Oaths say, that I have spoken falsely and maliciously against
Richard Mayo; but and if you do, one day you will feel that you have spoken
against your own Oaths, and Consciences, and against God, and against your own
Souls. And this is all that I can lay before you, as to this Particular, to
warn you, that you do judge justly, and that you condemn not the innocent and
just Cause of the Upright, but that you may save your selves from the anger of
the Lord, who will be avenged upon all false Swearers and Unrighteous Judges,
that judges not in righteousness the Cause of the Poor, and of the Stranger;
and the Cause yet remains before you, to show your selves just or Unjust,
Righteous or Unrighteous Judges in this Matter. And whereas Richard Mayo, and
some of your selves spoke to me, to confess I have wronged him, and would have
me to acknowledge that I am in a fault, and that I have spoken wrong of him;
yea, it was said to me, if I had not wronged him, could I not confess that I
had, to preserve my self, etc?

To this I must answer; Nay, I cannot confess contrary to a good Conscience,
and contrary to Truth, that I have wronged him, if my life stood upon it, as it
is but my liberty at most; for God has given me to make Conscience of my
words, and to keep it void of offense toward him and all men; and to confess
that which is false, to be true, would stain a good Conscience, in the sight of
God and his People, and that I may not do, no, not for my own preservation, and
the Lord deliver me from the Judgment of such, who would have me confess that
which I am not guilty of; for that is all one to say; I am clear, when I am
guilty, as to say, I am guilty, when I am clear; and I rather choose to suffer
what may be imposed upon me, then to transgress the Truth in my own Heart, and
if I should say, his Doctrine were sound and true Do^^rine, and not Damnable
and Error, I do believe the Witness in your own Consciences would rise against
me, and many more would say, I then spoke falsely, then does now; for I hardly
ever heard any, no, not your own selves say, that his Doctrines alleged by me
against him, are sound and true Doctrine, neither can you in good Conscience
say it; So I say, I cannot lie against my Conscience, what ever come^ of it;
for to walk with the Lord, and to have his Peace, and not to lose his Presence,
is of more worth to my Soul, that is immortal, the^ all the Sufferings that you
can lay upon me can be damage to my mortal Body; for my life and soul you
cannot touch, but therein am I free, though outwardly entangled amongst Briars
and Thorns, which wo^ pierce me, and seek to catch me* and if there be no other
way for me to be preserved, but by confessing contrary to my Conscience, that I
have wronged Richard Mayo, I freely give up my self to suffer, rather then to
be preserved by such means; and you do evil in putting such a thing upon me,
and expecting it from me, which I cannot give, b^ transgress the Law of God,
and offend him, and my own Conscience; and if you defer the determination of
the Matter, upon such hopes* that I may confess that I have wronged Richard
Mayo, I desire, you would not defer it one moment longer, but let me be quitted
of your Temptation, for it is your Temptation, and not true love; for I cannot
confess any such thing, though I do acknowledge it has now depended in your
Court, and at your door, near two years, and I should be glad that it were
ended justly, because I am not a man given to Suits of Law, neither do I love
it (though it be so that I am fallen into it) to offend any man, or be offended
in that way by any, yet may I not use any unlawful means, or any indirect way
to obtain an end of this business, but the rather I am content with what the
Lord suffers to come to pass, though it be the very greatest Malice of my
very devouring Enemies; and because I would have Peace with all men, and have
all men reconciled to God, and one to another, to live in love and unity one
with another, upon that account I would this business were ended, and though I
do not doubt my Cause, nor am faint of it, but can freely receive the
determination thereof in the Court, be it for me or against me; yet I would
have it ended, and have sought it in justice, and once did to my Adversary say,
I could refer it to any sober men; and another Friend being with me, Oliver
then Protector, or Charles Fleetwood, or Col. Pride, all these were mentioned,
and to any of these, I could have referred my Cause; and though before he
seemed willing, and said, That if any sober man in the Nation, that was no
Quaker, would say, that his Doctrine was not sound, and that he had not wrong,
etc. But when these men were mentioned, he was unfaithful to his word, and
would not refer it.

And also not long ago, a day and time was appointed by his own advice and
consent, by a Friend of his own, to bring the Cause before Alderman Tichburn,
to which I was willing, and that he with some other man might hear and
determine the Matter, and the time appointed, we met at the Alderman's House,
and the Alderman with some more of us waited for Mayo's coming, till near the
9th hour in the evening, and he never came, so ungaretful and unjust was he to
his own Friend, to Alderman Tichburn, and to me, that we waited all for him
some hours, and he came not at all, though his own Friend, by his own consent
and desire did bring that appointment about; and thus I would have you to know,
that I seek peace with all men, and with him, upon just and equal means, and
can refer it to honest men to hear and determine; for who are truly just
toward God, cannot condemn me, nor my Cause: and likewise ye may see how
unwilling my Adversary is to bring his Business to hearing and determining by
wise and discreet men, and how unfaithful he is to his own words and desires;
only he thinks he has gotten a Verdict that will do something for him, and
upon that he depends, waiting also for your unjust Judgment, and because he
hopes always for your Judgment, which, I say, is unjust, if you condemn me in
this matter: Therefore he will not bring his cause to be heard and determined
by any other, because he supposes you will proceed according to that unjust
Verdict, which if you do not, you offend him, and lose his unjust cause; and if
you do, you offend God, and condemn the guiltless cause of the Just; and
whatever ye do, this follows upon ye; and if you offend God and despise the
cause of the Innocent, and the Truth; ye must bear your own burden, in the
sight of God and Just men; And if his cause were good, he need nor thus shrink
and faulter, to let any man hear the matter, but his hope of your unjust
Judgment nourishes his heart in his unrighteous cause-

And these things were in me to lay before you, that it may not be said by you,
we know not these things, for I would have you to know them, and take notice of
them, and to compare all things in equality, and to Judge according to the Law
of God, and the good Law of this Land; I am not careful at present to answer or
say more to you about this matter, only this remains with me; the Lord God can
deliver me from the Teeth of the wicked if he will; but if he will not, I
cannot bow to the Devil; but has given up my life, to live to him, or to
suffer for him; and this Testimony remains for ever; not as I will, but as he
will, who brings all things to pass, according to his pleasure.

I am a Lover of your Souls, and a Sufferer for the Elect seeds sake, and a
witness against the malice and injustice of evil men, E B

To all that are Moved to go into other Nations.
ALl ye my Brethren and Companions in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ,
unto whom the Word of the Lord is come, who have received power from on high,
even from the Father, to bear witness of his Name, and of his Kingdom in the
Earth, unto Peoples and Nations: and all ye that are Anointed with the Holy
Ghost, and that are moved with the Power of the Lord to go into other Nations,
to manifest the Way of Life, and the Word of the Kingdom of God, which you have
handled, tasted, seen, and felt; in the Name and Power of the Lord God Almighty
go ye on in faithfulness to preach the Power of God, the Gospel of Peace and
Reconciliation to every Creature under Heaven, without exception of Nations or
Peoples, that Sinners may be converted unto him, from the power of Satan to the
Power of God, the Creator of all things, and that such as are lost from his
Presence, may be brought home into the Covenant of Life, and that such as are
out of the way may be turned into the Way of Peace and Salvation: In the dread
and fear of the Lord God go ye on and prosper in your way; proclaim the Name of
the Lord, and declare his Majesty unto all People; sound forth the Word of his
Power in the Ears of all Nations; show forth the Light of the Glorious Gospel
in the whole Earth; preach Christ, and hold him forth unto all the Children of
Adam, who is given of the Father into all the World, and he has lighted all
Mankind (without exception) that comes into the World, and is given for a
Covenant, and for a Light unto all people, that he may be Salvation unto the
Ends of the Earth, and may bring Salvation and Life Eternal unto as many as do
receive him. Cry aloud, and spare not, and show this unto all people; set the
Way of Life, and the Way of Death before them; cause the Deaf to hear, and the
Blind to see, and the Dead to arise; lift up your Voice, and spare not, that
all Nations may know the Salvation of our God, which to us is come, and may be
Witnesses of the same Power and Deliverance of which we partake; ye are sent
forth as Lambs amongst Wolves, and as Birds among Fowlers Snares, be ye
therefore wise and innocent: And I charge you all, dwell in the secret Counsel
of God, and enquire of him in all things, that his Wisdom may defend you from
the subtilty of men, and his Power and Authority through you may bind and chain
the Uncircumcised, and reach to the Witness of God in every Creature, and to it
in all people you may be made manifest that you are the Servants of the Lord;
be bold and valiant to give your Testimony unto all Nations; fear not man whose
Breath is in his Nostrils, nor be afraid of high looks, but lay your Sword on
the Neck of the Uncircumcised; and spare not the Proud, nor pity not the
Children of Babylon; and lay the true Measure upon all People, that they may
see themselves, how they are all drove from God, and in Transgression and
Enmity against him, Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Destruction, upon whom the
Wrath of God abides, and are subject to the Curse every moment; and this is
the state of all Mankind: And the Light in every one shall answer this Measure,
and witness you, and your Word to be the Word of the Lord; which Light, if they
love, it will bring every one to know the Power of the Creator, to reconcile
them, and to bring them into Fellowship with him, and to receive his Blessings,
and his Inheritance, being changed by the Power of God into his Image: But if
they hate the Light, and deny the Power of God, and his Covenant, and will not
have Christ, who has lighted them, to teach them, and to rule them; but do
continue Enemies in their Minds to the Lord, and will not receive your Message,
then they perish forever, and you are clear; seal your Testimony against them,
and the Lord shall be justified when he arises to Condemnation against them
all, who cannot own this Message, and receive you in the Name of the Lord. Be
bold and valiant, and spare not to show all people this Message, and to Declare
unto them in the Name of the Lord, by whom you are sent.

And I warn you all, Let the Fear and the Judgments of the Lord be in your
Hearts, and stand wholly in his Will; and be obedient to the moving of his
Power in all things, that you may be armed against all the Swelling and Roaring
of the Proud Waves of the Sea, which will beat against you; put on the whole
Armor of God, that you may withstand all the powers of Darkness, and may
overcome all the Temptations of the Devil: Look beyond your life and your
liberty, and beyond all things of this World; and the Life of God know and feel
in you, to give you Dominion over all, and with his Word and Power to reach to
his Witness in all, that you may leave a Testimony behind you for him.

Thick Darkness you will find covering all people, their Ears deaf, and their
Eyes blind, and the Ground wholly barren and untilled, you will find overgrown
with Cursed Fruit, and wild Branches, which must be cut up, and cast into the
Fire; and abundance of Idolatry, and vain Superstitions, and great Hardness of
Heart you will meet with, and find all People in the Degeneration, ignorant of
God, and without him in the World; and abounding in all Unrighteousness and
Unbelief, worshipping their Idol godds, which will grieve your spirits; but be
you Patient, and Long-suffering, and be not offended at any of these things;
but Plow in Hope, and Sow in Hope, and Thresh upon the Mountains, and beat them
to dust, ye Children of Sion; and bring all people to know the Fear and
Judgments of the Lord in them: You are sent forth to beget People unto him, and
to turn them to his Knowledge, to till the Ground, to pluck up the wild
Branches, which cumber the Ground; and the tender Grape must be spared:
Therefore let the Word of the Lord dwell in you; and divide the Word aright;
and cry not Peace to the Wicked, neither cry Judgment to such as are of a
Broken Heart; feed the Hungry with Bread, and feed the Fat with Judgment.

Be ye good Stewards of the Lord's Treasure; cover the Naked, but make bare the
Harlot, and discover her Abominable Whoredoms; let all the World know how they
have committed Whoredom with the great Whore, who has sat upon Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues and Peoples. And proclaim unto all Nations, That the Lord God
is risen for the Deliverance of his Chosen; and he will make War in
Righteousness against all his Enemies, and they must lick the Dust of his Feet,
and bow under his Scepter: And openly declare unto all the World, That God is
setting up an Everlasting Kingdom, and the Dominion thereof shall reach over
all the Earth; and the Kings of the Earth must bring in their Glory to it: In
the Name and Power of the Lord God go ye into all the World with this Message
and Testimony, which shall be answered to be the Message of the Everlasting
God, with the Light which he lightened every man withal; that you may bring
Glory, and Honor, and Dominion unto him, who has called you to bear witness
of his Name in all the World.

This I was moved of the Lord to give forth, unto all that are moved to go into
other Nations; by a Companion unto all that follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, E. B.

A General Epistle to the SAINTS.
To the Seed of God, Elected and Chosen of him before the World began, and now
called by his Word and Power into the Kingdom of Peace and Righteousness, to be
Heirs of the Inheritance of Eternal Life, that never fades away.
DEarly beloved Friends, who are called and sanctified through the Grace of God
that has appeared unto you, and in you; be mindful of your Calling, and make
your Election sure, that you may feel it, the Seed of God, and the Heir of Life
born and brought forth in every one of you; that the Promise may be fulfilled
in you, and you may sit down in the Kingdom, feeling the immortal Crown of
Life, as the Reward of all your Sufferings, and Trials, and Patience; for the
Inheritance of an endless Life is the Portion of the Righteous, who have
followed the Lamb through his Sufferings, and laid down their Crowns at his
Feet; and now his Feet are treading down, and will tread down all mortal
Crowns, and stain the glory of all Flesh, and bring it into contempt, and set
up his Kingdom to have Dominion over all.

And so Friends, you in whose hearts the Day Star has appeared, of Light and
Life, feel the growth of the good Seed in your selves, which must rise in you
all, over the contrary part, and over that nature which is related to the
Kingdoms of this World, that must be kept down in you all, and all must be
subject to the Lambs Power, and to his Dominion; every Work, Word and Motion
must be brought in subjection unto him, that he, who is Light, and Life, and
Righteousness, and Truth, and all Virtue and Goodness may alone reign in you,
and over y^^av^ and the contrary may be kept in the subjection, and the Body of
Si^^^ and Death may be wholly put off, and Immortallity brought forth in you
all, by the Gospel which has been sounded forth amongst you in Power and Life,
and not in the words of man's wisdom; and this Gospel, which we have received,
and you have heard, has wrought its effect wherefore the Lord sent it, and
many are turned from darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God; and the
Lord has gathered his Jewels, and is gathering of them; and he has planted
his Inheritance with a pleasant Plant of Righteousness and Renown; and his Arm
has wrought great deliverances in the Earth, and has raised up the Poor, and
exalted the Meek and Lowly; and he has brought down the Mighty from his Seat;
and these things has he done in us, who has wrought all our Works; and he
has broken the Chain of Antichrist, and will tread down that spirit more and
more, till whole Babylon be sunk, as a Stone into the midst of the Sea, and
till Righteousness alone sit upon the Throne, that his People may rejoice in
him for evermore, when they see their Inheritance in him, and their Souls rest
in him, where he is become the everlasting Light, and the days of Mourning
ended.

Now Friends, all of you keep in the Life, and Power, and Wisdom of God; dwell
and walk therein, in all things, and feel the Head Christ, and have no Master
but him, and in all things seek the Glory of the Lord; for they that turn to
seek themselves, become as the Dross, and as withered Branches, whom the Lord
will take away, and such shall not cumber his Ground: They that go from the
Life, and Light, and Word within them, they go into Error, and turn aside after
Vanity; and these shall never see the Countenance of the Lord, who continue not
unto the end in the Faith, but make shipwreck of it, and of a good Conscience;
and these become Antichrist, and Servants of Sin, and deny the Lord that bought
them; having lost Sincerity, they run into a feignedness; and having lost the
true Hope, they become unstaid; and such will be tossed, and change their way,
and so become hardened. And therefore, Friends, I say unto you all, live in the
Power of God, and feel the enjoyment of his good Presence in you Hearts, in
your Families, and in your Meetings; and live in the Power of Godliness, and
not in the Form without Power; for that is but Idolatry, where people are
zealous in the performance and practice of Righteousness, and wants the sense
of the Lord's Presence: but keep out of this, and look at the Lord, in all
things stand in his Counsel, and fulfill his Will, and walk in his Spirit that
leads into all Truth; and feel that Kingdom, that Power and Government which is
not of this World, but over, and above the kingdoms that are earthly; and in
this will be your Peace, and your Comfort, and your Assurance for evermore.

And Friends, the Lord has not only stretched forth his Arm to bring
Redemption, and Salvation unto you, and his deliverance out of spiritual Sodom;
but his Arm has also wrought great deliverance for us without, and he has
appeared for us in much Loving kindness; in that he has stopped the way of his
Adversaries, whose mout^ were opened to devour us; and doubtless it was in
their wicked He^s to have cut us off, that themselves might be exalted: but the
Lord eminently broke their Counsel, when they were in confederacy together, how
to overcome us by Craft and Guile; and the Lord scattered them by a secret
Hand, and this was one great Deliverance.

And again, when they were risen in Numbers, with their Hearts full of
devouring Envy, they were suddenly confounded and brought to naught; and
certain it is, that both these Deliverances were chiefly to us, though others
have good thereby; and I cannot but mind you of them, that you may prize them,
and receive them as from the Hand of the Lord, and may walk worthy of all his
Mercies that are reached forth unto you from time to time; and for his Name
sake, and for his Seed sake are these things done; and he will gather his Seed
yet more and more, and make up the numberless number of his Chosen, that his
Heritage may be pleasing unto him, and therein he will delight, that
Righteousness may sit upon the Throne, and Truth, and Justice, and Mercy flow
down, that his Soul may be delighted.

And now as concerning Places among men, for the service of your Nation, as
men, this I have to say; mind Gods Wisdom to guide you, and if such things be
put upon you, do as you have freedom in the Lord, though these things be less
then the eternal Election, which gives to see over, and feel over men's kingdoms
(and in the Election does your eternal Peace and Inheritance stand in God) yet
in man's kingdom Truth and Righteousness must rule, Justice and just Judgment
must have place on the Throne; and this we wait for, that Righteousness within
and without may be exalted; for the Gospel of Light which we preach, destroys
not, but brings the Nation into equal and just Government among men, and Truth
brings the Nations into good order, and ye must salt the Earth. So keep over
these things, in the Life that gives you Dominion, to act only for God, even as
men that may glorify him in your Bodies, and in your spirits, even in your
daily Practices amongst men: and keep in the Power of the Lord, which keeps the
heart pure; and feel the Word in your hearts, and then you will not be
corrupted, but will be kept in singleness and uprightness to God and man; and
in that will be your Crown, as men, in seeking the Glory of the Lord, and not
your own. And so, Friends, have respect unto the Lord God in all things, that
his Truth may guide you in all things, even as men, and therein stands true
honor in this World, and in the World to come. And so keep your Meetings, and
live in good order, let no strife be amongst you; for that will eat out the
good, and quench your love, and deadness, and barrenness will cover you, and
you will become unfruitful to the Lord.

And all you that are moved of the Lord to go abroad, to whom the Message of
the Gospel is committed; I charge you all, to live in the Life of God it self,
and then Life will speak through you; and keep in the Dominion over the earthly
part in your selves, and over all false spirits in the World, that you may feel
through the corruptible in all people, and may answer the Witness, which will
slay the Evil, and wound the Wicked, and convert the Soul to God: and let your
Conversation be holy and just, that you may answer the Witness in all. And
though we have seen the fruit of our Labor, and has our Reward with the Lord
hitherto, yet it is the beginning of the Harvest; for there are Mountains to
thresh, and Darkness to beat under; for the World has been as a Wilderness,
and now it must be planted with the good Seed of the Kingdom of God. Wherefore,
be valiant for the Lord God, and for his Truth, and sound forth the dread of
the Lord among all People: the false Church, the Whore, must have the Cup of
God's Wrath given unto her, through your hands; and as she has done unto us,
so we must give unto her double. So go on in the Name and Power of God, and the
Lord God Almighty be with you all.

Let this be read in all your Meetings, and copied over, and sent abroad among
all Friends. E. B.

Two Epistles to Friends in London; being a Testimony against deceitful
Spirits, and such as professed the Truth, and turned from it, and were
unfaithful to the Lord.
FOrasmuch as in these our days the God of Truth has made manifest his Name
and Truth in the hearts of his people, and has gathered the minds of thousands
into it, to worship him in the Spirit, and in the Truth, in which he is
accepted; and of this Truth which is but one, and there is not another, are we
made Witnesses, and Ministers of, and has the Testimony in our selves, that we
are of God, and are a good savor unto him, in them that believe, and in them
that perish; and we have the Testimony, that he that is of God hears us; and
we know the whole World lies in wickedness, and who are in the Truth, in the
Light, and in the Life, have followship one with another in Holiness and
Righteousness, in that which comprehends the World, and condemns all the works
thereof which are evil; and this Truth, and Worship, and Fellowship stands in
Christ Jesus, the second Adam, whose Kingdom and Rule is not of this World, but
from Heaven; who according to his Promise, in his Counsel, has made known his
Power, to the raising up a righteous Branch, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar
People, zealous of his Name, to show forth his Praise and Glory in Justness and
Righteousness, in Love, Mercy, and Peace, and works of Purity, having our
Conversation in Heaven; and since that Day of the Manifestation of this Truth
of the Gospel of Peace and Salvation, which is the same now, as was in the
beginning, which is in Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is the same to
day, yesterday, and forever, and changes not: I say, since that very day has
the Lord prospered his Truth, to the renewing of many into his Image and
Likeness, and to the turning of many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's
power to God, by the Mouths of his Ministers, and through great Sufferings,
and Tribulations, and Afflictions, and Labors, has the Lord honored his Name
and his Truth in Nations, and given it a praise among all that fear him, and
has honored it, and exalted it in the sight of the Heathen, to the
confounding of the Wise and Mighty, and to the bringing out of the Captivity of
Darkness, Sin, and Death, wherein in times past all have walked, while
Strangers from the Life of God; so that thousands who have received the Truth
are established in it, and cannot be moved nor shaken, but are built upon the
sure Foundation, their Faith standing in the Power of God, with whom the Arm
and Presence of the Lord God is, defending and preserving continually, and unto
such the Truth is precious, and the Way of the Lord, and his Name and Honor is
dear, yea, more then life or liberty, or any other thing which passes away;
who for the Truth's sake as is it in Christ Jesus do daily give up themselves
to suffering, and to reproach for welldoing, and not for evil, and loves not
life unto death, that the Lord God and his Name and Truth may be honored, so
that in the Truth which is received, and learned of the Father, daily do we
walk in all Purity and Holiness of Life, answering the Mercy and Love of the
Lord, in the exercise of a good Conscience both toward God and man, in
Patience, and Long suffering, and Wisdom toward all, to the putting to silence
of Gainsayers, rendering love and mercy toward our Persecutors, and are set in
our hearts to fulfill the will of God in all things: And now whereas (that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled) some may, and have denied the Truth, which once
was received and loved, to the making shipwreck of Faith, and of a good
Conscience, abusing the Mercy and Grace of God, which to them appeared, and
follow the counsel of their own hearts, and not the Lord; having lost the
feeling of the Spirit of the Father, and are, and may be separated from us (in
the self-separation) through an evil heart of unbelief, that it may be made
manifest they are not of us, though they arise from among us, and may, by
disorderly walking contrary to the Truth, cause the Truth to be evil spoken of,
giving occasion thereby to the Enemies of God to blaspheme his Name and Truth
in the Earth, and may be a stumbling to the weak, and an offense to the Way of
the Lord before the Simple, through their Disorders and Confusions, raising the
rage of the wicked against the Lambs of Christ; being not led in the Wisdom of
God, but in the Confusions, taking liberty to their own hearts desire, full
filling the will thereof, without the Fear of God, above the Cross of Christ,
in the nature uncrucified, and speaking high Words in the presumption, and not
in the Light and Power of God; and acting in the vanity of the Mind (in the
pretense of Truth, and moving of the Spirit) such things as Truth, and the
Children of it, who are guided with the Spirit cannot justify; but is judged
and denied, and cast out from among the Children of Light, who walk in the
Truth, and do try the Spirits whether they be of God. Therefore in the Fear of
the Lord God this is written to go abroad among Friends, and others, to inform
and show unto all, that the Truth, and we that are in it, and Ministers of it,
do stand clear from all such who act and speak out of the Truth; and contrary
to it, in the Disorder and Confusion, and not in the Fear and Counsel of God,
and with the Truth such are judged and denied, and fellowship with them we have
not, nor of their works do approve, though such once owned us, and were
convinced of the Truth, and received the Seed of the Kingdom into the
unprofitable Ground, yet being separated from us, and gone out from the Truth,
and are not subject to it, and its Government, but are unruly and disorderly,
we, and the Truth do such deny, and the spirit that rules them, being not the
Spirit of Christ Jesus; and such have done evil against their own Souls, and
against God, and are Troublers of the Righteous Seed, and have, and do
dishonor the Lord, and his Truth in the sight of the Heathen, causing the
right way to be reviled, and reproached, and evil spoken of, through the
offense by them, to the making sad the hearts of some, whom God has not made
sad; and even more especially in that they pretend to the Truth in their words,
but in works deny it; and profess to be in it, yet secretly condemning, and
openly reviling the Ministers of Righteousness, which God has blessed, and
does daily bless with his eternal Power, to the turning many unto God, and to
the strengthening of the weak and feeble, which we with many others do witness
to be the Ministers of Life and Reconciliation, and there is no other, and are
established in it, and cannot be moved by the temptations of the Devil; though
the wicked one may revile for a moment, to winnow some, and to try them, and to
draw the hearts and minds of others into a Snare, out from the obedience to
Christ Jesus, which do become Mockers, and Despisers, and Subverters of the
simplicity of the Gospel of Peace, and of the Ministers and Ministry thereof,
which is the Power of God unto Salvation, and there is no other, though some
harden their hearts through unbelief, and blind the Eye, till they be past
feeling, through rebellion against the Truth, which they hold in
unrighteousness, and not in the Power of God, having made the offense of the
Cross to cease, yet boasting in the Liberty of Christ, while they are
unmortified, having run from the Judgment, and not truly came through it, in the
finishing of Condemnation; and that spirit that goes out of the Cross is
subverted, and seeks to subvert others from the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and
that spirit is denied fellowship with, though it have the conformity in the
Hypocrisy. Wherefore this is the Word of the Lord God unto you that err after
that spirit, Be awakened, be awakened, and remember, and repent, and come to
your first work, to that which condemns you, lest the Lord by his hand of
Wrath and Judgment upon you, make you an Example and of Misery and Destruction
to all that shall hereafter deny the Lord, and his Truth: Hear, and consider,
to the Light in you all I speak; have you another Truth then that which has
been known and declared from the beginning? is there any other way to Life,
then which we have been Witnesses of? who have not handled the Word of God
deceitfully amongst you, nor sought yours, but you, nor preached our selves,
but Christ Jesus, and hereof we have the witness in our Consciences in the Holy
Ghost: and is there any other Salvation, then that which God has manifested,
which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World? Be awaked, and consider;
Wherefore then do you separate your selves disoderly, and resist the Word of
Life, which once begat you toward the Lord? Consider what you are doing, and
whither you are walking; the End of your way is Perdition, and that is accursed
which preaches another Gospel: How do you dishonor the Lord in the sight of
the Heathen, before whom you discover your Nakedness, and your Shame does
appear, having put off, and cast aside the Armor and Weapon of Truth, whereby
you might have been defended: But Scorners and Fools take occasion through your
disorders and confusions to blaspheme the Name of the Lord, and it is through
you. Be stirred up, and consider, and search your hearts, and come to the
trial, ye that vex the Lord's Soul, and grieve his Spirit, lest it cease to
strive with you, and you be wholly given up to fulfill wickedness, till there be
no place, nor time of repentance found; and this is a warning to you all, in
the Presence of the Living God, that you may return to your first love, to fear
before the Lord, and to walk in his Truth, if there may be mercy, and to fulfill
his Will, which is the Light which you are lighted withal, by Christ Jesus, who
is the Lamb of God, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the Author and Finisher
of Faith, and there is not another: And know this, ye that deny him that is
given, yea unto you all, he will deny you before his Father; and of all your
Blood I am clear thus far, whether you resist or receive, who am the Lover of
your Souls, sometimes loved of you, while you were Lovers of the Truth, and am
now a Witness for the Lord, and his Truth, and against that spirit which leads
you in the Rebellion against the Government of Christ, which is Order and
Peace, out of which you have erred, to the piercing of your own Souls; and
though you now exalt your selves against me, and the Truth, and boast your
selves, as though you reigned; yet in the day of the Lord shall the Light in
you all, which is now darkened, bear witness to me, and of my faithfulness in
reproving you; and the Truth is for ever dear to me, and my soul delights no
less in it, though you rebel against it, in the heady exalted presumptuous high
wilful spirit, which is not subject to the Government, nor Authority of the
Ministry of Christ; but Truth is over you all, and the Mountain of the Lord is
established above you all, and all your words, and works, and boastings, and
feignedness, and disorders are denied, and in them we have not fellowship, but
the contrary; and do in the Authority of the Lord, even by the same Authority
which has begotten us unto God, and called us, and carried us in his Work unto
this day, deny you all, in the ground and state wherein you stand, till
repentance, and turning from whence you are fallen, to the Light which Christ
has lighted you withal.

And all faithful Friends, this is the Word of the Lord God to you, hear and
fear, walk in the Truth which you have heard, and learned, and received of the
Father, in it dwell and live, and know there is no other then that which is
made manifest, which is sure to you all, and cannot deceive, nor be deceived;
and be not shaken in mind, nor troubled, though some deny the Lord; but let
their fall be a Warning to you, to be more watchful, to be kept to the Lord,
lest you be tempted; and dwell in the Mountain of Holiness, which no Beast can
touch, where is a hiding place to preserve you in the time of trial. And I
charge you all in the Presence of the Living God of Life, let your minds be
settled, and hearts staid in the Truth, which is the Foundation of God, and know
the Armor of God to gird you up to God, where no offense is taken against
Christ, nor against the Way of Truth; but the Power of God does remove that
which would be offended, and tramples upon that which gives the offense, and in
this you will be preserved until the day of Salvation; and beware of that
spirit that boasts above the measure, and of that which makes the offense of
the Cross to cease, for there hardness of heart and unbelief enters, and so
another is followed then the Light, and another joined to then Christ Jesus,
and there is the way to perdition; who goes from the Light within them, they
deny God, and his Truth, and follow the imaginations of the soolish heart, and
runs in rashness, and in the forwardness, and that ground receives the unclean
spirit in again, with seven worse, and the latter end is worse then the
beginning; and this Truth does not change which is the begotten of the Father,
but is the same for ever: So in it all be faithful and fruitful to the Father
in your Places and Callings, showing forth in all wisdom, and pure
conversation, among yo^ Enemies, to the putting them to silenc^ when they speak
evil of you; and be Examples of Holiness one to another, that the Lord God may
dwell amongst you, and may never have cause to withold his presence from you,
which is Life, and Peace, and Rest for ever: And believe not every spirit, but
dwell in that which discerns spirits; and if any say, Lo here, or lo there is
Christ, go not after them, without you, for you have not been so taught; but
know the Christ of God, the Lamb of God within you, and follow him, and obey
his voice, and be established all of you on this sure Foundation, whom God has
laid, and no man can lay any other; and if you build thereupon, and thereby you
s^ll never suffer loss, but your Work shall abide the Fire; and in the Fathers
House your Bread you shall receive, and never shall hunger no^ Thirst, but the
Life will be refreshed and increased daily, and you Lamps will always shine,
and you shall never be darkened, not st^ble; for that which stumbles is out of
the Truth, and the ground stands to receive the seed of Satan, who is a
Devourer of the Simplicity, and the Betrayer from the Truth. Therefore I charge
you all in the Presence of the Living God, that you hold fast the Faith and
Hope which you have received through the Gospel, that you may never be moved
(...) the Grace of God, and from the Love that has abounded in you; ^t may be
found watching in the Door, with your Light shining, when the Bridegroom
comes; and behold. he comes quickly, and his Rew^d is with him, blessed are
they that tarry for him.

This is the Testimony of my Love unto all the Seed of God, who am as a
Deceiver, and yet true; and as not known, yet well known unto the ^d. E. (...).

To such as have Backslided from the Truth.
WHEN the Life in you all does arise, it shall witness me, and answer the Word
of the Lord unto Life, or unto Death.

Friends, all you to whom the Word of the Lord came, and ^n whom the Way of
Truth was made manifest, hear and consider: How ^t has the Love of the Father
been unto you? How many and infinite have been his Mercies from day to day,
often visiting you with his Power and with his Presence; yea, when you sat in
Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, his mavelous Light appeared unto you;
and when you were held captive in the covenant of Sin and Death, he stretched
forth his Hand to redeem ^; he loved you while you knew him not; and he brought
Deliverance out of a ^nge Land, where you were strayed among Devourers, and
scattered, and g^^e a^^ray, as Sheep without a Shepherd; yea, when you were
dead in Transgression, he said unto you, Live; and he also bound you up when no
eye pitty'd you, even then when you were Enemies to him, walking in the
Va^^t^en of your own hearts, and knew not him who lives forever, who had been
soug^^ by you, but not found; in that very day he sent to visit you with his E^
Gospel of Peace and Truth, to gather you unto himself (I am a (...) and he
caused his powerful Voice to be heard, and his Name to be (...) among you; and
his Truth was declared in the Demonstration of the ^rit; and the Power of the
Lord was made manifest in you, to the bringing of you from Darkness to Light,
and from Death, which had reigned over you, (...) know a Measure of the Life of
God: Yea, the Way of Life Eternal was set (...) you, that you might not perish,
but live; and his Witness in you all, (...) i^ but one, the Word of the Lord,
reaches unto you by the Mouths of (...) ^ts, to the revealing of Sin, and
judging it by his Righteous Law, (...) in your hearts, causing his Terror to be
known among you, and his ^udgments reached your hearts; and in that day
beautiful was his Presence (...) you, and precious was his Truth among you, in
your first Love; and his Li^^t and Power, and the Knowledge of his Ways were
pleasant to you; and the S^l of the Kingdom of God, which you received with
Joy, grew up in you, and ^per'd at that day; and the Lord loved you, and his
Presence was with you, ^g his own Children, whom he begat by his Everlasting
Word, that you (...) be a Praise unto him forever: And when the fear of the
Lord and his J^^g^^nts were placed among you, and your Hearts were broken, and
while you were of a hungering Soul, and thirsty after the Lord, then was it
well with you, and the Day of Peace dawned unto you, and the Word of the Lord
was ^we^t unto you; and he was gladly received that came in the Name of the
Lord.

B^t O how have some of you lost your first Love, and are again darkened, and
ready to faint, and to turn aside for a thing of naught? And how do such grieve
the Spirit of the Lord, and vex his Righteous Soul, and are become a S^^de^ to
him, in dishonouring his Name; the envious man having entered, and sown his
Seed in some of you, and brought forth Strife, and Divisions, and Disorders
among you, which are not of the Father, nor of the Truth, and Prejudice, and
Evil-Surmisings, and secret Jealousies one against another is risen in you; all
which is to be condemned, with the Light, for the Fire; I judge it all under my
Feet, in the Power of the Lord God, and am in that which reigns over it all;
and through these things Unity is decayed, and Love is waxed cold, and there is
fainting in the way, and the Zeal for the Name of the Lord perishes, which
ought to be among you; and Rendings and Tearings, Biting and Devouring one
another, and striving for Mastery there is, which ought not to be, which the
Wrath of God is against, all this is out of the Light, out of the Wisdom and
Counsel of God. My Spirit is vexed, and my Heart is troubled within me, because
of these things (not for my self, but for you, and for the Glory of the Lord,
over whom I am jealous with a Godly Jealousy) that you may not perish, nor his
Glory be despised among the Heathen? What mean you thus to deal against the
Lord, in dishonouring his Name in the sight of the Enemy, even to the wounding
of your own souls, and to the piercing of the hearts of the Faithful, who have
watched over you, and been Messengers of Glad-tidings unto you from the Lord?
Every one of you in particular be awakened and stirred up; and fear before the
Lord; and come to the Light, which the Son of God has lighted you withal; and
search your own hearts, and try your selves, that the ground of these things
may be seen, and condemned, and removed; and Love may yet spring amongst you to
the Lord, and one to another. O Friends! Consider, It was one Father that begat
you into the Truth, which is but one, by one Word of Life, which is not
divided; and you were begotten unto him, and not unto your selves: And Christ
Jesus (which is but one, the same to day, yesterday, and forever; who is the
Foundation of God, and abides forever) was preached unto you all, to be the
Way, the Truth, the Life and Salvation, and there is none besides him; why then
are there Divisions amongst you, and some for one, and some for another? And
herein are you carnal, and your minds abroad, and not'staid upon him, which
gives the increase; and all this is to be judged with the Life of God:
Wherefore I beseech you, in the Fear of the Lord, as you love him and his
Glory; yea, as you love your own souls, Come to the Light, which lets you see
all this, and condemns it: and strive not one with another, nor exalt not your
selves one above another; but let all that be condemned; and all your evil
Surmisings, and foolish Jealousies, and separate Worshippings, and Backbitings
be brought to Judgment, and let condemnation pass upon it all, never more to
appear to hinder your Fellowship with the Lord; and know the Life of God in you
all, which is but one, which is not at strife, nor divided; and let that arise,
that all Vails may be taken off, and Hardness of heart judged, and the
Countenance of the Lord may shine upon you; when that exalted spirit, which has
appeared in some, is brought down, of which I charge you all to beware, lest
there be a total departing from the Lord, and his Name be reproached through
you among the Heathen; and it had been better for such they had never been born.

Therefore, I say unto you all, lay it to heart, till the Judgments of the Lord
take it away, and purify your hearts from all these things which arises out
of that which is not of the Father, that my joy may be renewed, who have been
in travel for you, tell Christ be formed in you, that he alone may rule in you
over all those things, which are at enmity against the Life, and hinders your
grow^^. And if you yet harden your heart against Reproof, who are stubborn;
well, the Lord will ease him of his Adversaries, and break you as a Potter's
Vessel: And though you oppress the Life of God for a moment, yet my Peace with
him ^^^ll these things never take away; but over all these things I tread, and
am not offend^^ in him who is my Peace forever: And though those things cause
sadness of heart, yet the Lord gives no cause of Sorrow to them that are
faitful to him; but will arise to confound all Deceit, and Deceitful Workers,
who err from his Way, and count the Knowledge of his Ways a Burden; and of you
all, though you perish, I am clear, who am not hated of the Lord, though falsely
judged by his Enemies, over whom I trample, as the Dust; and the Living God
gives Victory over you all.

I am not of this World, E. B.

Something of TRUTH Made Manifest (In Relation to a Dispute at Draton, in the
County of Middlesex, in the first Month last) In Opposition to the False
Account given of it by one Philip Taverner, in his Book, styled, The QUAKERS*
ROUNDS, OR A Faithful Account, etc.
FOrasmuch as one (who has (I suppose) ambitiously styled himself Mr. Philip
Taverner) has taken in hand to set forth to the view of the World an Account,
and Relation of a Dispute, happening in the eleaventh Month last, at Draton,
near Colebrook; to which Relation I am a little engaged to write something by
way of answer thereunto, that all people may know the Truth; and being the
Truth is somewhat concerned herein, that is the Reason wherefore I have taken
in hand to write a little by way of answer to his Relation, being without any
prejudice toward the man, as concerning any Wrong he has done to me, though
me, as well as the Truth, he has wronged, as may appear to such who desire to
know the Truth.

It Is true, a public dispute I had, the time and place mentioned, with a
company of Priests, and this same Philip Taverner was one of them; and the
occasion of the Dispute was thus; I being a few weeks before at a Meeting with
some Friends in the said Town, one Richard Goodgroom in his relation mentioned
was present at the hearing of what was spoken, but at that time did not object
any thing, though afterward in London, and other places, he went up and down,
in a backbiting manner, and gave forth, That I had held forth blasphemous
Doctrines, or the like; whereupon I much desired a Dispute for the trial of
those things; and it was accomplished; and that day the Truth was much made
manifest, and Deceit confounded.

And as to all the things objected against me by Richard Goodgroom, which he
would have seemed to have taken great occasion thereby, as if some great matter
of Heresy and Error had been uttered by me: I say, the very Truth of all these
things was demonstrated, according as I had laid them down, and his Arguments
against them made of none effect: And though such as hardened their Hearts
might go unsatisfied, and in greater Unbelief then they came; yet I am sure,
the Upright-hearted, and such as desired the knowledge of the Truth, were wholly
satisfied; and this many can give Testimony of with me.

And though by his Relation it may appear otherwise to some, yet wherein he
has related falsely, it shall fall upon his own head; and his Folly shall truly
more appear in the End, then he would have, or seem to cause any in me to
appear at this present; and so he might with more Credit to himself been
silent, then to have meddled in that wherein he has showed himself so
imperfect.

For I believe, That this same Philip Taverner has given a Relation of four
times as much as he did speak at that Meeting; and has related; as though he
spoke that which he never uttered, by so many times fo much as I have said; and
has not related so much by many times, as was spoken by me, and them of my
part, as many may witness: Which Work of his seems not to be perfect, neither
yet altogether honest, as sober Men may judge; but such a thing must redown
more to his own Dishonor, then to the Truth's Disadvantage.

And first, As to the Title of his false Relation, which is styled, The Quakers
Rounds, or, A Faithful Account, etc.

To this I answer, That the very Frontispiece, and Title of his Book, savours
of a vain, light, scornful spirit; and so every Spiritual Man may judge of it
to be so. But why do thou Philip Taverner say, A Faithful Account, but that
to confirm Falsehood with audacious words, having a show of Confidence upon it,
thereby the more easily to enter ento the Hearts of the People, as if it were
irreprovable; coming also from the hand, and under the hand of a Mr. Philip,
etc. having so styled thy self to make thy Fame great, and to publish thy Work
under a seeming Authority; but had thou had more Humility, less Pride would
have appeared, and had thou had a better Heart, less of Unfaithful Dealing
would have proceeded from thee: But, as I have said, Evil shall fall upon
himself, that hatcheth it for another.

But why do thou say, Faithful Account, in the Title Page? Signifying to the
World, that all in it is true, and nothing of Truth wanting in relation to that
Dispute; and yet in thy Epistle say, Thou do not undertake to set down the
multitude of words that that day was filled withal: and page 29. say, That a
third man of the Company made a large Discourse concerning the Person
justified; but relatest not one word what was said by him; and here thou have
not dealt faithfully, nor given a faithful Account: And page 31. thou say, E.
B. at such a time, did multiply many words; but do not relate his particular
words; and so have not in this dealt faithfully, nor given a faithful Account:
And also in many other things thou have not related what was spoke at all; and
thus thou have contradicted thy self, in saying, A Faithful Account; and yet
confessing in effect, Unfaithfulness.

And thy own words being compared together, prove a contradiction in thy own
Mind and Pen; for, to give a Faithful Account, as thou say thou have, is to
relate the whole Truth, and not to keep any back; neither to speak more then
the Truth, by adding thereto any thing.

But again, thou say, Thou undertakest not to relate the multitude, or every
particular of words; neither do relate what particular words such a one and
such a one spoke; but say, He said so, and multiplied many words, not saying
what his words were: And therefore thou have heaped a Contradiction upon thy
own head, and it shall remain, till it has made thee ashamed.

And now as to the particulars, upon which the Dispute depended, so far as they
are truly laid down in my words; and in my intent and meaning I am ready to
justify them; yea, at any place or time convenient; or before any Auditory
whatsoever, upon lawful Occasion; but as thou have laid them down, or some of
them, thou have wronged me and the Truth, and either not understood my meaning,
or subverted and perverted my words to thy own Advantage.

And whereas in the Epistle thou say, I would not own them, viz. The
Particulars laid down, to be mine, at first; and yet owned every one of them in
the Discouse, etc.

Answ. I did not own them; but how? and how did I own them, but thus? The
Objector had laid down some of the Particulars, not in my words, which made
them vary from the intent of my meaning; and others of the Particulars he had
laid down utterly false; and so I did deny them, as coming from him: but as to
the substance of some of the Particulars, I did own, having laid them down
according to my own honest Meaning, in my own sound Expression of words; and
thereupon I engaged a Dispute upon the Particulars, having first denied them,
as laid down by him, and in his corrupt Expressions; and then owned them in the
simplicity, in the words, as by me uttered; I mean some of them, but some I
altogether denied.

And as to speak of that Text, Ioh. 5. 39. By which (say thou) I endeavored
to skin over what I spoke, but to no purpose. I do deny thy words; for, that
same verse shall stand a Witness for me: and against thee, in all the World;
and that verse shall prove, that some of the Scriptures were spoken to the
World, and not to the Saints; and the Truth it self is my Covering, and I need
no other thing to skin over, as thou scornfully speak.

And whereas thou say, There was just matter of Reproof in the Dispute, in
both Parties, etc.

Answ. Whilst thou have condemned others, thou have judged thy self, who was of
the one Party, a strong Contender for the Priests Party; and having now accused
both Parties, would clear thy self to be of neither, but can not; for, it
is known thou did take their part: and in the Title thou say The Discourse
was betwixt a party of them called Quakers, with Mr. Philip Taverner, etc.
where thou do own thy self to be one (and reckonest thy self the foremost
Master) of the Disputants: And now, upon better considerations I think, when
thou have searched into their Folly, with whom thou wast joined, thou would
absent thy self to be none of them, but a third Party: But let me tell thee,
What Disorder, Prejudice and Passion, as thou speak of, that was amongst the
Priests, thou have a part in, and must own their Sin, and their Condemnation;
for thou art also guilty: And that there was any Passion (except pure Zeal for
God and his Truth, which thou might falsely so call) or Prejudice, or such
like amongst us, I do deny it, and know thee to have born a false Testimony;
and all thy Covers, as if thou were a Moderator, or the like, in thy speaking,
will not hide thee, nor cover thee from what I have said of thee.

But as to the things in particular, I now come, and may show what my words
are, and the Ground of them, and how I laid them down, and upon what Occasion
in the first Meeting, whereupon the Dispute did arise; and I do not here go
about to give a perfect Relation of that Dispute; for my Memory has not
contained what passed; but as to the intent and meaning of my words, I would
give all the true knowledge thereof, and how far I do own the Particulars
charged against me.

First, As to that, The Scripture are not the WORD of God, because the Devil
spoke something, and Pharaoh something, which is there written.

Answer, There is some truth in this; but my words were drawn up by him at the
shortest, and the most for his own Advantage laid down by him: For I do
remember, That in the first Meeting, I was speaking concerning the Word of God,
and concerning the Scriptures, which are a Declaration thereof; and showing the
difference betwixt the Word, and the Letter, and Scriptures; for the Word of
God was in the Beginning, and the World was made by it, and it endures
forever: But the Scriptures were not in the Beginning; for Moses was the first
that wrote any thing of the Scripture, who was long after the Beginning;
neither was the World made by them; neither can they endure forever; and
therefore the Letter, the Scriptures, are not the Word of God, which the
Scriptures call the Word; for, also in the Scriptures are written what the
Devil spoke, and what Pharaoh, and other Wicked Men spoke; and therefore they
are not the Word of God, but (as I have said) a Declaration of the Word; and
what is written of is the Word: but the Scriptures (the Writings) are not, but
a Testimony and Declaration of the Word. Much more as to this might be said,
and was spoken by me at the Meeting, which is not particularly related; and
this is sufficient to any honest man, that is Spiritual, who has an
Understanding to judge hereof.

Now I suppose themselves, none of them are so ignorant, as they will say, The
Scriptures are that WORD which was in the Beginning, and which shall Endure
forever: But (say they) the Scriptures are another Word, a Declarative Word, or
such like terms. Now when we dispute, or contend with any about the Word of
God, we dispute what that Word is which the Scripture says is the Word; and do
deny that Word to be the Scriptures (Writings) though still we do own the
Scriptures a Declaration of that very WORD of GOD; and that the Scriptures, in
any place, do call themselves the Word, or signify so much, I do deny it; and
it is left for any of our Opposers, to prove it that can; if they do, I will
confess it to be the Word, and revoke all that I have spoken to the contrary.

And as for thy Deductions and Consequences, drawn from my words, I do deny
them; for they are not to me, but will turn upon thy self; for thou say, A
strange kind of Assertion, as if nothing of the Mind, Will, and Counsel of God
were declared in the Scripture: And whitherto can be the tendency of such giddy
Doctrines, then to a weakening of the Authority of the Scriptures, and
begetting Slightings and undervaluing Thoughts, and that the effects may be
lightly esteeming the Scriptures?

These and such Deductions, have thou drawn, through thy Ignorance, from my
words; from all which I am clear, as having no Intent to any such things; nor
any Intent, but to testify to the Pure Innocent TRUTH: And thy Deductions are
far more ignorant and impudent, then my Assertion is strange; and let thy
Consequences be what they will from my words, the truth of my words will
justify me in the Sight of God and his Saints; for, I do honor the Scriptures
above other Writings, and give them the Authority, and Esteem, and Respect due
unto them, and more I dare not.

And some of thy pages I pass over, as not worth taking notice of; only I do
say, Thou have wronged me, in not relating so much as was spoken by us, by far;
and in relating more then was spoken by thee, or thy Party.

And the next thing I note is this, where R. G. said, he would, and went about
to prove, That the Letter is the Word of God; but was not, nor is ever able to
prove: and thou have changed the words of his Argument in thy Relation, from
what they were as he laid them down in the Dispute, from called, to owned; for
thus his words were laid down, at that time, said he, That which Christ and the
Apostles called the Word of God, is indeed the Word of God; but Christ and the
Apostles called the Scriptures the Word of God: Ergo.

Now I denied, and do yet, that it can be proved, That ever Christ and the
Apostles called the Scriptures the WORD of GOD; and neither do thy Proofs now,
nor his then, of the minor Proposition, prove, That the Scriptures (viz.) the
Writing, were ever called the Word; although it be true, that the Pharisees
made the Word of God of no Authority by their Traditions: But that Scripture
does not say, That the Letter is the Word, which thing he was to prove, or else
he said nothing to the purpose. And as to the other Scripture, 1 These. 1. 13.
that will not prove that the Apostle called the Letter the Word; for it was the
Gospel which they received as the Word of God, and not the Letter: The Gospel
is the Word of God, not denied by me, but sealed unto: but the Gospel is not
the Letter, and Writings; but the Gospel is the Thing written of; and that is
it which the Apostle means to be the Word of God; for that is the Word, which
he preached to the Thessalonians, and which they received: And so thy Arguments
and Proof of thy minor Position is denied, and so the major Position falls to
the Ground: And by this, nor any other Argument, can all you Priests of England
prove the Letter of the Scriptures to be the Word of God, which thing R. G.
took in hand to prove, but could not; and would have cried against it in me, as
a great deal of Heresy, for denying it; but Error is fallen upon his own Head.

The next thing I note, is in page 13. where thou would seem to cover over R.
G. thou say, his words were not, That I had the thing signified in my hand,
when I had the Bible; but that I had that which declares of it.

Now to justify him in Evil, thou have wronged me and the Truth; for he did
say, when I held up my Bible, I had in my hand the thing herein signified, upon
this very Occasion, I holding up my Bible in my hand, and saying to this very
effect, That in my hand, I had the thing which did signify in words of such
and such things; but I had not the thing signified: And Richard Goodgrom made
answer, and said, But I had the Thing signified; and this some can witness:
Whereupon I made answer, and said, If it be so, that I have the Thing signified
in my hand, then I have God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and Heaven, and Hell,
and Men, and Beasts, and all things that herein are written of; and then he saw
the Folly of his own Ignorance, I perceive.

And much more, might be related as upon this Subject, which was said on both
Parties, which I desire not much to recollect, only what I have said I can
certainly remember, and can justify it: And I must confess that, Philip
Taverner has done pretty fairly, though in some things he has not done so.

And no was to the next thing charged against me in the Relation, being placed
the second, though it is the third, That evil Motions, not consented to, were
not sin.

In the first private Meeting, I remember my words were laid down thus, and so
I owned them in the Dispute, That Temptations or Motions unto evil, are not sin
to any man, who does not consent and obey to serve Temptations or evil Motions,
and they are not sin to the man, except they be consented to by the man; and
this was proved in the Example of Christ, who was tempted of the Devil, and had
motions to do evil, yet did not consent nor commit sin; for he resisted and
overcame the Tempter; and so the Devil's Motions and Temptations, which were
sin in themselves, yet they were not sin to Him: And this Proof then they could
not deny, neither can any sober or upright Man.

And so in the Dispute the thing was put to a farther Question, thus, But are
not those Motions, which arise out of a Man's own Heart, Sin, except they be
consented to?

To which I was willing to speak something, and to own the very TRUTH; and to
justify, that there is a State, wherein Evil Motions may rise out of a Man's
own Heart which are Sin in themselves, and Sin in the man; yet not sin to the
man, if he does not consent to them, obey them, and fulfill them; and the
Scripture does prove it, Romans 7. where he says, It is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me, for in his Mind he served the Law of God, and with
his Mind did not consent to the Motions of Evil and Sin; and the Sin was not
his, nor reckoned against him by the Lord, because with his Mind he consented
not; and this no Upright Man can deny.

And also, I applied my self at that time, for Witness, to the Experience of
sober people and Christians, Whether many times there had not been evil Motions
in their Hearts, presenting themselves, to which they had not consented; but
the Lord had given them Power over them, to resist them, and deny them, and
they were not overcome of them? And whether ever they were accused and
condemned for such Motions, which the Lord gave them power against? Or, Whether
the rather they had not Peace and Joy in the Lord, who had discovered to them,
and given them power over the Evil which had presented it self? And I also gave
them that which I had witnessed concerning the thing, as a Testimony, agreeing
with the Scriptures, to that particular: And though the Relation says, as if I
spoke of my present State to be so; but herein the Hearers were mistaken, if so
they understood me; for, my present State is another, then what it once was; I
bless the Lord, I speak without Boasting: And my present State I did not then,
nor now shall declare; for I am not known to the World, nor desire to be, as
what my State is: But this was my Intent, and is in these things; My State was,
say I, yea, I believe from Ten Years old, till many Years after, that many
times I had Evil Motions arising in my own Heart, which sometimes overcame me,
and sometimes the Lord gave me to overcome them, so that I consented not to
them, nor obeyed, nor followed them; and when they did overcome me, and lead me
aside, then was I troubled and condemned of the Lord; for they were reckoned to
be my Sins, when I consented; and many times the Lord gave me power over them,
and I consented not, but resisted them, and denied them, and then had I great
Peace and Joy in the Lord, and no Condemnation; and this was my Experience for
some years together, though my present State be another Condition, of which I
shall not speak, as not being needful at this time; and this is the Truth,
which no sober Christian can deny.

Its true, we spent a little time in disputing upon those things, but to little
purpose, as on their part; for what I then said, many of the people saw to be
the very Truth; and all were well satisfied, except such as might harden their
hearts: and much more passed betwixt us.

And as to this thing, which I cannot relate, only P. T. as he began, so he
goes on, giving a Report in his Relation of much more then himself spoke, and a
great deal less then we spoke, which thing in him was not very fair not honest:
For, I then proved by many Scriptures, That some were perfect in this life, 1
Cor. 2. 5. even perfect without Sin, John 1. 47. 1 John 3. 7. and yet I did
declare at that time, That many of the Saints and Children of God, were not
come to the State of Perfection, which admits of no Addition; for many of the
Saints daily receive more and more of God's Wisdom, and of his Power and Life
revealed in them, wherein they grow up to God from Strength to Strength: And
though they did so much contend against it, yet in the end were forced to
confess to the substance of what we spoke, as to the particular of Perfection.

The next thing is concerning Perfection; and I am charged with holding, That
Perfection is attainable in this Life; which thing I did hold forth and contend
for, and am not now ashamed of it; and my very Proofs, which then I used, some
of which are related by P. T. are sufficient to prove the particular, if I
should say nothing more; and even as the thing is related, though what I spoke,
the whole is not related by much, as about this particular of perfection; but
what is related shall stand as a Witness for me, and against them that do so
much plead against Perfection, even of such perfection to be without sin in
this Life: And to this I shall say little more, but leave his own Relation unto
the consideration of sober People, only must say, that P. T. has belyed his
own Memory, in saying his Relation is A faithful account, and yet has related
much more then he spoke also about this Particular.

As to the next thing which is objected against me, That the Scriptures were
given to the World, and not to the Saints: this is utterly false, and was
neither thus spoken by me, nor yet my meaning; and at the Dispute I did deny
that I spoke the words, neither had I any such intent as they have deducted,
though still I do confidently affirm, That that Scripture, John 5. 39. was
spoken to the Unbelieving Jews, that went about to Kill CHRIST, who had never
heard God's Voice, nor seen his Shape, nor had not Christ's words abiding in
them, and to them he spoke that Scripture mentioned; neither had I any such
meaning, but that the Saints and all sober people, and all people might search
the Scriptures, though such a bad consequence they have drawn upon my words,
and said, It is a giddy assertion that has dropped from me, and yet himself is
forced to confess what I spoke is true, to wit, that that Scripture in the
fifth of John was spoken to the unbelieving Jews, and not to the Saints; and
yet P. T. to confound himself, confesses that I said, The Epistles were given
to the Saints; and this is a Contradiction from his own Pen: First, to say,
that I asserted, the Scriptures were given to the World, and not to the Saints,
and yet says, I confess the Epistles were given to the Saints, which are some
part of the Scriptures.

And whereas P. T. further speaks, questioning in himself, how far I own the
Authority of the Scriptures, and such like, which shows his ignorance, or his
unbelief; for I have, and do here again speak plainly, That we do own the
Authority of the Scriptures, and we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures have had hope: and they are able to make the man of God perfect
through Faith; and what Christ and the Apostles owned the Scriptures to be, the
same we do, and neither more nor less; and in this we are approved of God, and
let men judge what they will.

And whereas P. T. further speaks something of Jesuits, and says, he does not
apprehend me to be of that measure of subtilty, which is found among men of
that Brotherhood, unless says he, I have more then an ordinary Art of hiding
my self, etc.

To which I answer, Jesuits I deny, and all of that Fraternity, and whatsoever
savours of Popery; yet am I hidden from people, and what I am he knows not,
neither the World; for, from that Wisdom am I hid, neither can I manifest my
self to that Wisdom that is devilish, and knows not God, nor the least of his
Sons and Servants; for in all those things of which we then discoursed, the
depth thereof could hardly be spoken of; because of the darkness of peoples
understandings. And especially concerning Justification I was very sparing, and
could hardly freely declare my self; yet what I spoke was a great satisfaction
to many then present, though the one half that I spoke is not truly related;
though so much as is related shall stand a sufficient Witness for me, and
against them that oppose me, and that my words and meanings were honest.

This was the thing charged upon me, That no man was further justified, then he
was sanctified. Now my intent and meaning in this was honest; and as about this
Particular much was spoken, which now I do not recollect to repeat; only P. T.
has hinted in short at things how they passed, and my words shall be for ever
witnessed, That Sanctification is a Witness of Justification, and no man can
further know himself to be justified, then he is sanctified; nor justified,
then he is restored. And had P. T. but laid down my full answers as I spoke
them at that Dispute, there would have been no need to have written any thing
in answer; only I do remember I did stand to manifest, that the New Birth,
Sanctification, and Justification were all agreeing in one, and not one without
another; and that Christ wrought Righteousness perfectly without us, and also
fulfilled Righteousness in all that believe; and no man is justified by the one
of these without the other, and that has not the other; and they hold the
contrary: and R. G. did publicly affirm, that a man was justified by Christ,
excluding the New Birth, and the work of Sanctification, which I denied and
must always deny, that any man, who is not born again, but is in the old
nature, and not sanctified, but is in the Pollutions of the World, is justified
by Christ's Righteousness; neither can he in that State, till he be born again,
and Sanctified, have any benefit, or manifestation of Justification by Christ;
and this all men shall witness, though because of this I now may be falsely
judged: And though R. G. did openly testify, that Christ justified Sinners, as
Sinners, yet say I, all that are justified, are justified through Faith; and
Faith does purify the Heart, as was largely spoken by diverse of us at that
Meeting, which is not particularly related; which definition of our
Justification, they could not except against; for we never were, nor are
ashamed to declare what we hold concerning Justification, which is through
Faith in the Blood of Christ, the Seed of the Covenant: and though at that time
they made much jangling, yet to no purpose, as to convince us of any Error, or
any sober men there present, of any Error in us, as concerning that thing.

And whereas it is related, as if I should say, We are men brought up at
Plow-tayle, and understand not Schollar-like terms: my words were not thus
spoken, but upon the occasion of their speaking words which is not in Scripture
Language, as inherent Righteousness, or the like; Whereupon I desired them to
keep to the Form of sound words, and of Scripture Language, that people might
understand what they spoke; for said I, ye are Scholars as you profess, and
some of us were brought up at Plow or Cart, and may be do not understand
Schollarlike terms, though I did not mean all of us; and what some of us do
understand, as to that, I shall not now speak; yet this I say, the least of us
do understand betwixt Truth and Error, and betwixt that which is Righteous, and
that which is Unrighteous, and in that is more peace, then in the knowledge of
Arts or Tongues; and our knowledge in that, is as Dung and Dross in comparison
of the other.

And as to Justification, upon which Subject we contended a long time, though
they foolishly charged us with it, we do deny utterly the works of man, and the
works of man's righteousness, as in relation to our Justification, and that it
is only and wholly by the Grace and Gift of God, and the Righteousness of
Christ, who is revealed in all that believe in him, by which Justification
comes; yet say we, That Faith without works is dead, and will not justify a
man; but by that Faith which brings forth works, even the works of God in us
and through us, by that Faith are we justified, and according to the Apostle's
words, so we believe; not by works of Righteousness which we have done, nor by
a dead Faith without Works, but by a living Faith, which works in us, are we
justified; let vain men deduct what they may, this is truth in the sight of the
Lord, and all men.

These indeed are the Particulars upon which the Controversy depended; and
having been some hours together, they were willing to depart, and R. G. would
give little hearing to me, when I charged him with something uttered by him, at
diverse times in my hearing, which I should have proved to be unsound Doctrine
and Error, had he had that patience to have stayed: and whereas P. T. does
speak of having a Pope in our Bellies, with such like scornful words, which a
discreet man would not have defiled his Mouth withal; but that he must show
himself to be of that Generation of Priests, who persecuted the Innocent in
every Age: and for his telling of our Error, and recovering of our feet out of
the Snare, and delivering us from the Delusion; its true, his words stand but
upon a supposition, and that supposition stands upon the Report of others, as
he seems to intimate, which is but a thing far off true credit; for what Error,
and Snares, and Delusion, did P. T. convince us of, in five hours discourse?
not any at all; but the rather, was forced to confess to the most part of what
we delivered; then what need was there to utter these his words in writing, as
if he had heard some great Matter of Delusion or Error? but all these his words
I do bear; and if he has harbored such thoughts of us, as it appears too much
by his words, let him cleanse his Heart by Repentance, lest his intended evil
bruise his own head.

And whereas he has commented upon a Book, called, A Standard lifted up, which
Book I own, and that which is therein written, and himself is forced to own,
what himself objects against, and comments upon: If says he, E. B. means so
and so, then his words are truth; but if so and so, then it is Pope-like, or
such like.

Alas poor man! Must I be judged upon thy own meaning? nay; or must thy
interpretation be the judge upon my words? We have no such law, my words stand
true, as I have laid them down, to be received by such as are Spiritual: and
such as love to raise constructions falsely, where there is no just ground;
their judgment I do deny; and Charity will teach P. T. to judge upon the best
sense; and so let him own my words as truth, and judge himself for his false
construction of true and upright words; only this I take notice of, says P.
T. A perfect Conformity to the Law of God in our own Persons, though not
wrought in our own strength, but in the Strength and Power of Grace, the Spirit
working all in us, and for us, is no other then the Righteousness of the Law.

I need not much strive to confound this black Doctrine by many Arguments, or
multitude of words; for the thing, as laid down in his own words, is vile and
abominable to the understanding of any spiritual man; for say I, if it be the
Spirit working in us, and for us, not in our own strength, then is it God that
works in us, both to will and to do, and the fulfilling of the Righteousness
of the Law in us, and not the Righteousness of the Law wrought by us; and if it
be in the strength and power of Grace, and not in our own strength, then it is
the work of Christ in us, and the Work of God's own Righteousness in us; and
any man that knows the least of God in Truth, will witness to this, and against
his imagined Doctrine held forth by P. T. I might demand a Proof of him from
Scripture, where it is said or signified, That the working of the Spirit, all
in us, and for us, and the working of the power of Grace in the Creature, is
reckoned to be our own righteousness, the Righteousness of the Law; and my
words stand true from which he draws his false Consequences, and lays down his
dark Assertions, and my own words I do own, which are, Such as are taught by
Christ, and guided by him in all the Ways of Righteousness, are justified by
him, and none else; not in any word or work whatsoever, but in what they are
led to fulfill by him: and in these words there is neither Contradiction nor
unsoundness, though he has ignorantly charged them with both; but the words
shall stand for a Testimony against him, and all his false deductions; and he
and all shall know, That God justifies the Righteous, and condemns the Wicked,
and that it is the New Man that is justified, and not the Old: And let
Righteous Men judge what can be in such a man's heart, who can draw so bad
Consequences from such upright words.

But further, he goes on, and has transcribed more of my words, as, Christ
Jesus the Son of God is the Light and Life of the World, and has enlightened
all mankind that comes into the World, with the true Light, etc. now says he;
How do these agree with man's State in the first Adam? In transgression is a
State of perfect Enmity, and Death reigns in every man, and he is possessed
with blindness and unbelief, etc. I say, these do very well agree, and they are
both true; for Death reigns in every man, and he is in Unbelief and Ignorance,
and in a State of perfect Enmity against God, as he is in the first Adam, yet
Christ has lightened him, and the Light of Christ, shines in Darkness in him,
and the Darkness comprehends it not, and he is enlightened, that he may be
changed from Death to Life, and from Ignorance to Knowledge; and though he walk
in Darkness, and is in Blindness, and in a State of Enmity, it is because he
does not walk and believe in the Light which Christ has lightened him withal,
and in my words there is no disagrement, nor contradiction, the Darkness is in
his own Mind, who cannot comprehend the Light, nor the words that proceed from
it.

Further, he questions upon my words, of having the Witness in themselves, of
being restored again. First, whether none are restored again, but such as have
the Witness in themselves? I answer, all that are restored again, and do
believe, has the Witness in themselves; and none do believe, nor are restored,
but they have the Witness of it. Secondly he queries, whether all are restored,
but some want the Witness in themselves? I answer, All are not restored, nor do
believe, and such want the Witness in themselves, that are not restored to God;
but them that are restored want it not. And again, he queries, whether the
Light which is in all, is sufficient without any thing of further Grace
superadded, to bring up every Man to believe in Christ, etc? I answer, The
Light which every man is lightened withal by Christ, is sufficient to bring up
every man to believe in Christ, that loves the Light and walks in it, and unto
such is Grace added and increased daily; for as every man improves the Measure
of the Gift of God, so it is increased, the Light is increased, Grace is
increased, Faith is increased; but still the Light of Christ in it self is
sufficient.

Again, from my words, to wit, The Spirit is given to be the Guide and Rule of
Life to the Children of God; from whence he queries, whether the Spirit is so
given to be a Guide and Rule of Life to the Saints, that they have no more need
to attend upon the Scriptures? I answer, It is promised, that the Spirit shall
lead into all Truth; and such do own the Scriptures, but not as their Teacher;
for the Anointing dwells in them, and they need no man to teach them, but as
that Anointing teaches all things, and they have no need of the the Scripture
to teach them; for all the Children of God, are taught of God, and need not any
other Teacher, nor need not to say one to another, know the Lord; and yet all
such do own the Scriptures to be the Testimony of that which they believe, and
have received. Again, from my words, to wit, The Light of Christ in every one
shall give testimony to the truth of what I speak, unto which I do commend my
self; from this he queries; can these be Witnesses to me, and of the Truth in
me, who are ignorant of the Life and Power of the Creator, etc. who are
following the counsel of their own hearts, which are evil, etc? I answer, Yes,
the Light of Christ in such shall judge one day, and to it I commend my self,
and by it one day shall be approved, though now the Wicked hate the Light, yet
does it witness against them, and for us, that we are of God; though its true
they cannot judge between Light and Darkness, between Truth and Error; yet the
Light in them, which shines in their darkness, does judge and put a difference;
and when the Book of Conscience is opened, it shall justify us, and condemn
our Enemies.

Again, he queries, whether I make the Holy Ghost and the Eternal Spirit two? I
answer no, they are one, neither do I seem to make them two, it is want of
knowledge in him, who cannot understand, but raises Objections where there is
no cause.

Again, from my words, this is acceptable and well pleasing to God, above all
words and outward conformity etc. from this he questions, whether the doing the
greater things of the Law is acceptable, where the less are neglected? I
answer, no; for every tittle of the Law, less and greater, must be fulfilled by
Christ in us, in whom we are accepted: and thus I have returned a few words to
the consideration of people, and particularly to the people of Draton, and the
Country there about, to whom I direct my speech, thus.

All ye people, who are scattered, as Sheep without a Shepherd, and know not
Christ the Everlasting Shepherd to lead you, and to rule you; Cease, oh cease
from all your Teachers without you, who are dumb Shepherds, which do not gather
you to God; such are they that preach for Hire, and divine for Money, and that
take Gifts and Rewards for preaching, who through Covetousness, by feigned
words, do make Merchandise of Souls: Such do keep you always learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth under their Teachings; your
Souls are starved under them, and you perish for want of true Knowledge; and
Death raigns amongst you; and many are in the broad way, that leads to
Destruction; but few in the strait Way, that leads to Life: and Iniquity and
Wickedness abounds amongst you; and like Teachers, like People; for, from the
least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
Covetousness, Jer. 6. 13.

Great Ignorance has blinded your Minds, and great Darkness is over your
Hearts; and your Teachers do deceive you, and they cause you to err; and you
give your Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which
does not profit; even as the people of Israel did, so do you, and in their
Transgressions do you walk; and your Teachers are in the steps of the
Pharisees; they are called of men Master, as the Pharisees were; they stand
praying in the Synagogues and Temples, as the Pharisees did; and they have the
chief Seats in the Assemblies, as the Pharisees had; and they even shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, as the Pharisees did, and will not enter in
themselves, nor suffer them that would.

Cease from all your outward Priests, and hearken to the Voice of the Lord,
which breaks down that nature which is contrary to God, and raises up the Seed
which is Heir of God's Kingdom; and turn your minds to the Light in you, which
Christ has lightened you withal; which Light shines in your Consciences, and
convinces you of your evil Deeds; it reproves you for Vain words, and Ungodly
speeches; it will let you see what your hearts go after, and what your love
goes out unto; and if you love that, it will lead you to Christ; and he will be
revealed in you, to teach you, and to give you the Witness of Peace and
Reconciliation with God: The Light is your Eye, by which you may see God; it
will lead you out of all idolatrous worships and works, and from your false
worships, which are an Abomination to the Lord; and you must be converted and
changed into a new Nature, and you must put off the Old man and his Works,
before you can worship God aright; for he is worshipped in Spirit and in Truth
only; and such the Lord is now seeking to worship him.

Therefore cease from your Steeple-house-worship, which is in the Traditions of
men, and not in the Spirit of the Lord; and that worship must be confounded;
for its Root is corrupted, and its Branches will wither; and the Breath of the
Lord is kindled against it. If you love the Light of Christ, and walk in it,
there is your Teacher; and if you hate it, there is your Condemnation.

The next day after the Dispute, this was written, and sent in a little time
after to Draton, and up and down that ways.
Richard Goodgrom,
FRiend, has not thy Ignorance, Folly and Wickedness toward me now appeared?
And is it not manifest in the sight of many people (And now thou may cease
to boast, and also to backbite for the time to come; and no more secretly to
surmise behind my back, to the raising of unruly spirits against me, so much as
in thee was possible: and had thou been more crafty and more subtle, more
Mischief thou might have done; but the Innocent is delivered, and thou art
taken in the Snare thou laidst for another, and false doctrine is proved to
proceed forth of thy mouth: And thou and thy Company may be ashamed, when you
consider the managing of your Work against me, who many times appeared
immoderate, in speaking many at once, confusedly; and also were unreasonable,
in not being satisfied with just Answers; but it shows your Blindness and
Unbelief, who cannot understand the Truths of the Gospel of Christ, but contend
against them, though in the end you are forced to confess to them, as was
sufficiently witnessed that day of the Dispute; and thou in particular, who
reproachedst me behind my back, in diverse places, where I have heard of it by
my Friends, whom thou judg'dst had not been so; yet they have discovered the
naughtiness of thy heart, both in the Country, and in the City: Thou have given
forth, that I had preached false doctrine, and such like wicked reproachful
backbiting language behind my back, not like a man faithful to God and thy
Neighbor; but one that has surmised Evil against the Harmless: And thou
may remember, all these things thou objectest against, who would have made
a great matter of them against me, yet are they sufficiently proved to the
Understanding of many honest People. And if thou and thy Company will be blind,
it is because you harden your hearts against the Truth; and I am clear in the
sight of the Lord: and all shall know, that have an Ear to hear, That what I
profess, preach and practice, are the saving Truths of Jesus Christ; though
they may be branded to be Heresy by such as thee, who may call Light Darkness,
and Darkness Light, and put Good for Evil, and Evil for Good: And at a
convenient Opportunity I may take in hand to prove, That thou thy self have
held forth that which cannot be justified by the Scripture, but are condemned
thereby. Many things fell from thee in my hearing, which I may object against,
and prove the contrary; and I shall not go behind thy back, as thou have done,
to slander thee; but I shall rest contented, and wait the opportunity to lay
open thy Nakedness and Weakness in the sight of all people: And whatsoever thou
judge, The Scriptures (the Writings) and the things written of, are two
things; the one is the Word of God, but the other is not; and this all sober
men confess to, though thou do jangle and twist about it with thy lame
Arguments, to no purpose at all, except to show thy Weakness and Folly. And
also, No man is justified by Christ's Righteousness, until he receives it, and
as he receives it; and this thou shall one day witness: For, though
Righteousness be in him, sufficient to justify; yet by it art thou, nor any
man justified, but in the receiving of it, and dwelling in it; and this shall
thou confess to be truth, in the Day of the Lord: and in the mean time let me
bear thy false censure, in calling this Heresy. And also, a man may be tempted
to sin, and there may be evil motions to him; yet he not being overcome of the
Temptation, not consenting to the motion of sin, it is no sin unto him, neither
shall sin be imputed to him, if he commits it not; but he that commits sin,
though he profess never so much of Justification, yet for his sin shall he be
condemned; and this shall thou witness in the day of Judgment. Also, That there
is a Perfection attainable in this life, even to be perfect, and without sin in
Christ Jesus; and this I affirm to be the Truth of the Gospel, and that wherein
the Faith of God's People stands: and though thou made a twisting and a
wrangling against it, yet it is too strong for thee; and in thy wisdom, and thy
arguments is thy folly and thy weakness seen; and Truth stands over thee, and
thou can not it nor me reprehend. And also, That some of the Scriptures were
spoken to the World, and not to the Saints; this I also have sufficiently
proved, and thou art not able to detect it; and all thy snarling in opposition
to these things is confounded, and thy Arguments made without effect; and all,
whose eyes are open, see thee to be of too short a measure, and of too weak a
capacity to understand the deep things of God, which are hidden from thine Eye,
and them thou savourest not in that wisdom; though thou have the words, yet
thou art ignorant of the Life; and the Life is in dominion over thee, and to it
must thou submit, and lay down thy Crown: And from thee am I hidden in that
Life and Truth which I do profess. And though I be as a Deceiver, yet am I
true; and though I be slandered, and reproached, and back-bited by thee, yet it
is for Christ Iesus's sake, and for his Truth's sake, and not as an Evil-doer.
But Friend, learn more Wisdom, then to judge a man before thou hear him, or
to condemn the matter before thou hear the Proof of it; for, by these things
thou have not gained a good Report, but God condemns thee for it, and men see
thy shame in it; and the burden of it one day shall thou bear, even thou, and
all that own thee in these things.

And now thy spirit is tried, and it is found too light, and cannot stand in
Judgment; for it is unsavory; and though separate from the World in
appearance, yet is thy spirit of the world, and reaches not the knowledge of
the things that are eternal; but art imagining in thy mind, not being guided by
that Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures; and so thy knowledge is natural,
and cannot contain Spiritual Things: Therefore Friend, come down to God's
Witness in thee; the Light which shows thee sin, and convinces thee of evil;
that Light is thy Teacher, if thou love it, and thy Condemnation, if thou
hate it. I have diverse particulars against thee, at a convenient season, to
manifest thy Folly and Weakness by them: And whatever thou judge me, I am a
Friend to thy Soul,

Edw. Borough.


Richard Goodgroom held forth at the Dispute at Draton, the 18th day of the
11th Month, 1657.

HE said, The Letter was the Word; and by the Letter (he said) he meant the
thing contained in the Scriptures: And when I said, I had the Letter in my hand
(meaniug my Bible) but not the thing signified; he said, But I had the Thing
signified. And he said, People were justified by Christ, excluding the New
Birth, and the Work of Sanctification; and Christ justified Sinners, as Sinners
(that is) while Sinners remaining in sin.

At Justice Fortescue's house, in the year 1656. he did deny, That any was
converted to God by a Light within: And then I asked, If it was not that same
Light that converted, which gave the Knowledge of God? and they confessed, Yea:
and yet did deny, That the Light within converted to God; though I showed them
that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. 6. which did confound the Deceit.

At Uxbridge one time he said, Christ needed not to have come to have judged
the World; for there was sin enough in the World to judge it before he came:
Then I asked, If Sin judged the World? and he answered, Yea: and he said, They
were in the Covenant of God spoken of, Nehem. 9. which turned the Law of God
behind their backs.

E. B.

A TESTIMONY Concerning the Estate of the True Church, What she has been, and
what she is: Being given forth from the Motion of the Spirit of the Father.
COncerning the true State of the Church, what she has been, and what she is
at this day; and concerning her Increase, and Decrease, through Ages and
Generations past.

And her present State is this, Returning again out of the Wilderness, where
she has long been fed, having a place prepared of God.

Now the Apostle saw her a Woman, clothed with the Sun, covered with the Light
of Heaven, and with the Glory of God; having the Moon under her Feet, the Light
which was ordained to rule the Night.

Thus she was, and this was her state in the days of the Apostles, when many
were converted out of Darkness, and renewed to be Members of this Church; for
her Glory shone through the World, and she flourished through Nations; and this
was her state in the Apostles days: And she traveled to bring forth the
Man-Child, Christ Jesus, which is the Child and Husband of this Woman, which
was clothed with the Brightness of the Glory of God, the elected Spouse of
Christ, the Lamb's Wife, and his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; having
Power and Dominion, and treading under all contrary: And thus was it with her
in Generations past, whose Seed spring forth, as Branches, fruitful and
glorious.

But in process of time it came to pass, That this Woman, the Spouse of Christ,
his Body, the Wife and Mother of this Man-Child, she was bereaved of her
Beauty; and her Garments were taken away; her Seed was made War against, and
was smitten, and overcome; and she fled into the Wilderness, and there has
sat desolate, as a Widow, lamenting the loss of her Children; and being
deprived of her Husband, and the Man-Child, which should have ruled the
Nations: For she has been fled into the Wilderness, and her former Beauty has
not appeared to be, and her former Glory has seemed to be gone; and she has
been driven away from her Head, from her Husband, and from her Seed.

Behold all people the Estate of such a Woman, and read this Parable who can, A
Woman most Glorious and Fair, having her Husband Ruler of the whole Earth, and
having an Heir born to rule over Heaven and Earth, being covered with the Light
of Heaven, and of the Everlasting Day, and having the Light of the Night under
her Feet; yet has this Woman been deprived of her Glory, and sat desolate in
the Wilderness, a mournful place, separated from her Husband, and made
Childless, and without Seed: And what Eye that sees this aright, but must
Mourn? and what Heart that truly perceives it, but must lament? A Woman so
Great, and so Glorious, and so Fruitful, as to bring forth the Heir of Heaven
and Earth; yet has she been left as a Mourner, as without Husband, and without
Issue for many Generations: This has been her Estate and Condition for Ages,
since the days of the Apostles, which John saw (in a Vision) would shortly
come to pass after him, and we see it has been come to pass within this
sixteen hundred years: And this has been the Estate of the true Church for
many Ages, A Woman childless, whose Heir has been taken from her, and whose
Seed has been made war against, and killed, for many Generations.

But her time was decreed, and she should but be thus for so many days; and
now are the days expired, and she again shall receive her Heir, that has been
caught up from her; and her Seed shall spring forth; and her Slain shall live;
and her Beauty shall be given her; and her first Glory shall be increased; and
she shall feed no longer in the mourning Wilderness; but she shall be fed upon
the Mountain of God's House, which is to be established upon the top of all
Mountains; and her Seed shall spring forth numberless; and her Heir shall rule
with an Iron Rod; and her Marriage Day is come, and the approach thereof nigh;
and Life shall be revealed: Thus she has been, and thus she shall be; the Lord
has said it.

Now as for all those Multitudes of Sects and Peoples, that have professed
Religion; and as for all those Churches, so called, that have gone under that
name, which have professed Christ to be their Head, and made a show of him in
appearance; the Papist's Church, the Protestant's Church, and all the Sects
that have risen out of them; they have not been the true Spouse, the Lamb's
Wife; but Children of Fornication, and not of the Seed of that Woman that was
once clothed with the Sun; and they are come up, and their Original begun,
while this true Woman, this Spouse of Christ, has been Childless: None of
these are clothed with the Sun; nor none of them have brought forth the Heir of
Salvation.

Come, let us reason with you; Who was your Mother? who brought you forth? and
in what Womb were you bred, you that have appeared in the world, and for many
Ages, for the true Spouse? The Mother of the Heir has been childless, and as a
Widow banished from her Husband, and her Heirs separated from her, and her
Seed killed, and made War against; She has not born you, nor brought you
forth; Then of what Womb did you spring, all ye of the Papist's and
Protestant's Church, and all the Sects that came out of you? answer me this:
None of you have been fled into the Wilderness; for you have appeared in the
World: None of you have been as a Widow, mourning; for you have been
practizing Ordinances, and rejoicing in the World: None of you have been
without Issue, nor your Seed made War against; for you have been fruitful in
the World, and one Sect brought forth another, and one Church brought forth
another; therefore none of you have been that Woman which John saw: For never
none of you, from the least to the greatest of you, were ever clothed with the
Sun, nor had the Moon under your Feet, nor ruled the Nations with the Rod of
Iron; therefore none of you are the true Spouse, the Lamb's Wife; he is not
Husband to any of you, nor is he your Child nor Heir.

And this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, you Churches and Sects, Your
beginning and springing forth was from another Womb, while this Woman lodged in
the Wilderness, and while she was childless, and without Seed: and the Mother
of Harlots brought you forth, the great Whore, whose Superscription is, Mystery
of Babylon; and her Character is, Mother of all Abominations: For, while this
other Woman has been fled into the Wilderness, which John saw was fled
thither, this woman, the Mother of Harlots, which brought you forth, has been
fruitful and flourishing, and has had an Husband, and many Children: For John
speaks of two Women; of a Whore, and of a Virgin; of one, the Blood of whose
Seed was drunk; and the other drunk the Blood; yea, one that was made war with,
and against; for the Saints were killed, and their Blood drunk; and that other
killed the Saints, and was made drunk with their Blood: the one was fled into
the Wilderness, he saw, of which I have spoken, (...)other making all Nations
drunk with her Fornication and ruling over all the Nations of the Earth, as a
Queen: And while the one of those, the Virgin, the Lamb's Wife, has been fled
into the (...), and left Childless, without Seed; the other, the Whore, has ^,
and brought forth many Children, taken great Pleasure in the (...) and
committed Fornication with the Kings of the Earth: And these things (...) saw
were to come to pass; and we see (that have John's Spirit) is come to pass
already.

And (...) all ye Sects upon the Earth, and Churches so called, that have been
in the World for many Ages; Which of those two Women are you of? (...) the Seed
of whether of them are ye? Who of these two was it that brought you forth?
answer me, and make it appear.

But I have said already, The Virgin brought you not forth, the Lamb's Wife did
not bear you, nor you are not of her; for you were brought forth while she was
bani^hed* and deprived of her Heir, and without her Husband; and you are of the
Seed of that Whore, the product of her Fornications, generated by the seed of
Adulrerers: And though you have been warning, and fighting and striving one
against another, yet you were bred in one womb, and are of one seed. And thou^^
^^me of you, in one appearance of the Whore's beauty brought forth, have made
War against them brought forth in another appearance of her, and ^^^ned her
flesh; yet have ye given your power to the Beast; and John saw that also, which
we see is fulfilled; Some that should hate the Whore, and make War against her;
yet should they also give their power to the Beast: This have we seen fulfilled
amongst you Sects and false Churches, and your beginning we know, and the first
beginning of Whoredom, and when the Whore began with her Fornications since
which time all Nations have drunk her Cup; and her scent has been upon Nations,
and Multitudes, and Peoples. Her first Whoredom John speaks of in his Epistle,
and her beginning; They went out from the Body, from the Spouse; and from the
Virgin; they went out from the true Church, being false Members, not as ever
being of the Body of Christ, nor of the true Church; but such as had been
amongst the Members of the true Church, and were once convinced, which had got
the Form, and put on Sheep's Clothing upon the Wolvish-nature: and here was the
beginning of her Whoredom, She went from the Spouse, and went into the World,
and the World heard her, and received her, and they drunk of her Cup, and
committed Fornication with her; and she played the Whore in the Unbelieving
World, after she departed from the Saints; she went out from them, and they
denied her, and it was manifest she was not of them: and this was the beginning
of Whoredoms.

And she was but young yet in her Whoredoms, and little in the world, and had
not yet deceived many; but in process of time it came to pass, she increased so
mightily, that she made all Nations drunk, and overcame them; Kings and Rulers,
Bondmen and Freemen, they all drunk of her Cup; and she became so great, that
Nations, Kindreds, Multitudes and Peoples were her Seat, her place of
Government, where she sat Ruler and Queen, having Dominion over all; and all
were bewitched by her, and made drunk with her Cup: And of this Woman came ye,
all ye Sects upon Earth; and you are the Multitudes, Kindreds and Peoples, upon
which her Seat has been, and over whom she has had her Government.

And this is she that has drunk the Blood of the Saints, and overcome them; and
the Heir and Seed of the other Woman, the Virgin, has long been made war
against; and killed and slain by this woman and her seed; and this has been
the State of the Church for many Ages, since the days of the Apostles: she has
been fled, and her Seed made war against, and killed, and her Heir caught up to
God; and the Nations, which should have been ruled by her Heir the Whore has
set upon them; and the Peoples and the Multitudes, which he should have
governed, have been the Seat of the Harlot, the Mother of all Abominations: And
was it not like to be so? and how should it be otherwise, when the Man-child,
the Woman's Heir, has been caught up to God, and he has been as prevailed
against, and the Remnant of the Woman's Seed made war against, and killed? and
this has been since the days of the Apostles. And so all you Churches and
Sects, by what name soever you are known in the World, you are the seed of the
great Whore, and she has brought you forth while the other Woman has lodged in
the Wilderness, and remains childless: If any man has an Ear to hear, let him
hear.

Now it may be objected unto me, and thus may it be said, By this Account the
Church, the Lamb's Wife, has been prevailed against by the Whore; because it is
said, She has killed the Saints, the Members of Jesus, and of the Church: This
seems to she^, as if the Church of Christ had been prevailed against; but
Christ says, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them, but she should
remain forever, [and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her: And how
do those two things agree? it seems doubtful to us, may some say.

Answ. To all this I do answer, The true Church, the Spouse of Christ, in her
self was never prevailed against, so as not to be in being, or that she was
not; but in her self has remained in being, and not prevailed against, so as
not to have a Place or Being; and Christ's words are true, she has had a Place
and Being to wit, in the desert Wilderness, which place was prepared her of
God, there to be fed for such a time: So she has a Place, and has a Being*
though in the Wilderness, a place desolate, and of mourning. So she has not
been prevailed against, as that she has not had a Being; but the Lamb's Wife,
the Mother of the Heir, that which is perfectly so, which was and is to be
joined to Christ, which is of his Flesh, and Bones taken out of him, that
cannot be prevailed against, never was, nor never shall be; for the Devil nor
Satan have nothing in him, of whose flesh and Bones she is, which is taken out
of him; and it is as possible for to prevail against him, as to prevail against
her; for she is of him, as Eve was of Ad^^; if any have an Ear to hear, they
may hear: But her Offspring has been overcome, her Seed made War against, and
her Heir taken away, and caught up from her; so she not prevailed against, nor
overcome, though banished into the Wilderness, fled thither, and there has she
fed, and had a place, and has been left Childless, as I have said: So the
Mother, and the Lamb's Wife, has had a Being, and in her self never prevailed
against, nor overcome; and Christ's words are true: Yet has her Seed been
killed, and made War against, and overcome (as John said) and both these are
true, and this is my Answer; and if any have an Ear to hear; they may hear;
though a Parable to the World, yet plain to the Seed, which now God has
raised, and is raising; for the Woman again is returning, and her Seed again is
springing, and she is becoming as fruitful as ever, and her Glory shall be as
great; the Light of Heaven shall cloth her, and the light of the Night shall be
under her Feet as perfectly, when she is restored, as it was before the
Apostasy, though People cannot believe this in the Apostasy.

No Revelation, nor immediate Teaching, nor Miracles now to be expected, cry
the Professors, and these false Sects and Churches; It was extraordinary Times,
and extraordinary Manifestations were amongst the Apostles and Churches of old
(say they) but the same now are not to be expected, nor never to be looked for;
but thus they are in* Blindness, and Ignorance, and Unbelief.

But we believe, the Glory of this Woman, that has been long fled into the
Wilderness, and has been long without Issue, while she hathbeen fled, shall
have the same Fruit and Issue, and the same Clothing that she had before she
fled: When the Whore and her seed is removed from the face of the Earth, the
Glory of the Lamb's Wife shall be as great, her Beauty as fair, her Fruit as
plentious as before the Whore was; and they that believe it not, believe not
the Scripture; for that testifies of the Glory of the Church to be the greatest
in the last days, as we are sure, and certainly know it shall come to pass,
when the Waters are dried up, which have been the Seat of the great Whore.

Now though all those Churches and Sects of People, are said to be, and known
to be the Seed of the Whore, and not of the Virgin, as I have declared; and
though Nation, and Peoples, and Multitudes have been all running to
Fornication, and been deceived, and made drunk; yet this I have to say, In all
sorts of People, and amongst all those Sects, amongst Papists and Protestants,
and all Sects risen out of them, in thousands of people, notwithstanding the
Darkness, and all the Apostasy that has ruled in the general; yet in some of
all Sorts and Sects there has been a Sincerity, and Simplicity, and a Desire,
and Zeal for God, and of God in them, and amongst them; yet the Sincerity,
Simplicity, and Desire, which has stirred in some of all Sects, it has no
sooner appeared, but it has been smitten, and betrayed by the wicked without,
and so by the error of Judgment within: For even amongst the worst of Sects, we
know there are some in whom there is Simplicity, and Sincerity, and Zeal; and
yet err in Judgment; for this is possible, and we know it is so with Thousands,
and ten Thousands at this day. There may be a Simplicity, and Zeal, and
Sincerity of Heart, and yet err in Judgment, and the Judgment not truly guided
by the Spirit of the Lord; but a false spirit, and a false thing, even the
spirit of Whoredom it self ruling the Judgment, and be chief there; and this
destroys, and murders, and betrays the Zeal and Simplicity: and this is, and
has been ever since the days of the Apostles, great error in Judgment, and
the Judgment of all those Sects have been mis-guided and misled, and a false
thing, and not the Spirit of the Lord has guided the Judgment; and thereby the
true Sincerity, Zeal and Simplicity has been enslaved, and held under, by
reason of the erring in Judgment: And the State of such is truly to be
lamented, where Simplicity is devoured, and Sincerity betrayed, and held
captive by the Whorish spirit, that sits Ruler in Judgment. I do not speak of
all people of all Sects, that they have Zeal and Simplicity; but of some people
in all Sects, and through all these false Churches; and so the spirit which
has guided the Judgment, that has abased the Zeal, and abused the Sincerity,
and betrayed it; so people have been a running, running after the Form, and
blind in Judgment, and lost Sincerity, and Simplicity that has been betrayed in
them, though sometime appearing and stirring; and so the wrong part in people
has fed upon the Form and Appearance, and the Seed starved, and the Sincerity
eaten out; and so one Sect has made this the Rule of their Judgment, and
another Sect another thing the Rule of their Judgment; one cries, Tradition;
another, Scriptures; another cries, The Practice of Saints before us; and none
of all have been guided in Judgment by the Spirit of the Lord: and where the
Spirit of the Lord is not the only rule of Judgment, guiding the Judgment in
all things, that people, and that man are in Error, and the Sincerity in them
has not its free course, but bound under, with a spirit which is Bondage, and
leads into Bondage: And when people come to be turned to the Light of Christ in
them, and receive a measure of the Spirit of the Lord to guide the Judgment,
then the Sincerity, and Simplicity, and Zeal will grow, and thrive, and be
increased; but till then the Good is eaten out, that lies under, and is
oppressed, and ever, and always the Desire quenched, the Sincerity lost, the
Simplicity betrayed by the spirit of Whoredom, which rules the Judgment; and
these things are manifest in our Age. Therefore all people come out of your
Sects and false Churches; for the Woman is returned, and returning out of the
Wilderness; and the Seed shall spring forth, as in the days of old.

E. B.

THE True State OF CHRISTIANITY, Truly Discribed, and also Discovered unto all
PEOPLE: What it was in its Beginning, and Purity; and what it now is in its
Apostasy, and Degeneration. And here, by true Testimony, is declared to the
whole World, how, and wherein, in diverse particulars, the Christians through
all the World (so called) now are fallen, and gone backward, and revolted from
what the true Christians once were. And this shows unto all the World, the
woeful State and Condition, wherein them that are called Christians now stand;
being departed and revolted from the Spirit of Christ, and from his Teachings.
And this is given forth, that all People may understand concerning the Times,
and the changing of Times; and concerning what has been, what now is, and what
suddenly comes to pass in the Earth.
BEhold and hearken, give ear and listen diligently all ye People through the
whole World, that are called Christians: All you, I say, that go under that
name, and that bear that name, and are named Christians, from one end of the
Earth to the other, through all Nations and Countries, whither you are
scater'd, upon the face of the whole Earth.

Behold and take notice what the Word of the Lord is unto you, and what the
Testimony of Christ is toward you all; for the Line of true Judgment is laid
upon you; and the Measuring-Rod is put forth to reach over you; and the Servant
of the Lord has viewed your State and Condition, and what you were in your
beginning and increase, and what you now are in your Decrease and woeful
Apostasy, into which you are fallen, and degenerated from the Life of
Christianity.

Oh! let your Ears be open to Instruction, and regard well what I through the
Lord do say unto you, even all you, and every particular of you under Heaven,
that make a Profession of Christ in words, and are known through the World by
that name of Christians; hearken, I say, and consider, and remember from
whence, and into what you are fallen, and return and repent: The Lord has with
you a Controversy, and he will plead with you because of your Backslidings
and Revoltings; for you are gone away backward, and you are turned aside from
the Life of Christ, and from his Spirit; and are now without that which was the
Reason and true Ground of your Name, Christian; and you have lost the true*
Character of the Name, and now have only the Name, without the Life and Power
thereof; and are dead to Christ and his Life; and have a Name to live, but are
dead; and having lost that which gave you a true title to the name of
Christian, you deserve not that Name, nor to be called by the Name of Christ,
because you are departed from his Spirit: And this is to be declared to you in
the Name of the Lord, that you may take a view of your own estate, to the end,
that you may be awakened, to return from whence you are degenerated.

The Lord had a People in all Generations, unto whom he was a God; and they
feared him, and served him, and worshipped him; and his Name was precious
amongst them, who were his chosen People, and with whom he dwelt; and his Power
and Presence was amongst his People, that did walk with him, under what Name
soever they went in the World: But the first time that ever the People of the
Lord were called Christians, or known by that Name, from other people, it was
at Antioch, in the time of the Apostles, who were Followers of Christ, as you
may read, Acts 11. 26. And the Disciples were first called Christians in
Antioch: and before that time the People of the Lord were never called
Christians; and this Name was given to them by the Heathen, because they were
for Christ, and of his part, and did follow him, and preach him to be followed,
and in all things exalted his Name, and did and suffered all things for the
Name* of Christ, therefore were they named Christians; and that Name was true
unto them; for they had upon them the express Image and Character of Christ,
and followed his Spirit, and preached him unto all people for Life and
Salvation, and that all people might come to Christ, and become Followers of
him; and therefore they were rightly named Christians, to be known by that Name
from all other people upon Earth, who were not Followers of Christ; who could
not rightly be called Christians, because they were not of his part; and from
thence forth unto this day, all people whatsoever, that believed in Christ, and
became Followers of him, and that professed him, were called Christians from
that Original and Foundation of the Name, which then was laid.

Also you may read, Acts 26. 28. And Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou
pers^adest me to be a Christian: Here again Paul followed Christ, and preached
him, and was on his part altogether, and highly extolled his Name; therefore
King Agrippa called him Christian, and was almost persuaded to be a Christian;
to wit, A Man for Christ, to take part with him, and to be on his side: and the
Name, interpreted, this is the signification; and all that have this Character
do truly deserve the Name of Christians; for they are anointed People; and this
was the beginning of the Christian Name.

And before that time, as I have said, were the People of God never called
Christians in any Generation; and ever since that time, through all Ages, all
that professed Christ, and believed in him, throughout the whole World, were
called by the Name of Christians; and the Name and Religion of Christians were
honorable, and greatly beloved of God; for that People was the peculiar
People, a chosen Generation, as you may read, 1 Pet. 2. 19. and whilst the Life
of Christ was manifest, and the Spirit of Christ did lead them and teach them
in all their Ways and Practices of Religion: And whilst, I say, they retained
the Power and Life of that of which they had the Name, the Power and Presence
of the Lord was amongst them; and above all the people of the Earth were they
blessed; and more then all people upon the Earth besides had they the
Countenance of God shining amongst them, and upon them, and pure unity with
God, and one with another, had they in his ^ife, whereby they were made a
terror and a fear to all Nations, while they stood in the Counsel of God, and
were Christians in life, and power, and practice, as well as in name; and the
Lord greatly increased them in number; for, as you may read through the Acts of
the Apostles, through all the World many believed in Christ, and became
Followers of him, and received the Knowledge of him, and became anointed
People, and received the name of Christians; sometimes Thousands at one Sermon
were converted to the Faith of Christ, and became subject to his Spirit, and
had his Mark upon them, and all such were called Christians; and the Apostles
went through many Nations, and of the Jews, and Greeks, and of the Heathen, and
all other people, some of each were converted from that way in which they had
walked, to follow Christ, and they became Christians; and here was the increase
of Christianity; and through many parts of the World they planted Churches and
Assemblies of Christians: And, as I said, while they stood in the Counsel of
God, the Name and Religion was of him greatly beloved.

But now the Christians are Apostatized and degenerated from the Spirit of
Christ, and from that which gave them the true Name of Christians; and the name
is retained only, and the Life and Power lost; and now many have a name to
live, but are dead; and that is departed from, which gave the true interest and
title in the Name.

Hear this all ye Christians, That Life, Light and Power of God, which was
amongst the Apostles and Christians once, you are departed from, and have lost
the sense and knowledge of, and have the Name and not the thing, which was the
Reason and Ground of the Name.

Wherefore all ye through the World, that are called Christians, look back to
your Original, look unto the Apostles, who were the first that were called
Christians, from whom you had the Name, and see how you are degenerated, and
fallen from the Life that they were in, and though you retain the Name of
Christians, yet you are not Followers of Christ, nor ta^ght by his Spirit: and
none in the days of the Apostles were truly counted or called Christians, but
who followed the Spirit of Christ, and were first converted to him, and changed
by his Power from Sin to Righteousness, and from Death to Life; and such as
were so, were truly called Christians.

But now all such as are called by that Name, and are not followers of the
Spirit of Christ, nor converted to him, neither changed by his Power from Death
to Life, and from Sin to Righteousness, such are in the Degeneration, from the
Life of Christianity, and have a Name without the Life and Power thereof.

And now it remains to be showed, how, and when the Degeneration came upon the
Christians; and wherein they are apostatized and degenerated from that ^ife,
and Spirit, and Practice, which was amongst the Apostles, that were first
called Christians.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke through the Apostles, and foretold of a falling
away from the Truth, and from the true Christian-life; and Paul said, Acts 20.
29, 30. said he, Grievous Wolves shall arise, and enter in, who would not spare
the Flock; and from among themselves should men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw Disciples after them: And he also said, 1 Timothy 4. 1. That some
should depart from the Faith, and give heed to seducing spirits: And he also
said, That it should come to pass, the people should become wicked, departing
from the Truth, having the Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof;
and such were led away with diverse Lusts, and men of corrupt Minds, and
reprobate concerning the Faith.

And the Apostle Peter also foretold, That there should false Teachers arise
among the Christians, who should bring in damnable Heresies, and many
Christians should follow their pernicious ways, by reason of which the Way of
Truth should be evil-spoken of.

And the Apostle John saw, That many false Prophets were gone out then, and
many Antichrists were then come in among the Christians.

Now all these do show and declare of a Degeneration, and falling away of
Christians from the Life of Christianity; and we see these Prophesies
fulfilled, and Flocks of Christians are devoured from the Life of Christ, by
devouring Wolves which have entered among them, who have led them into
pernicious ways, and into damnable Heresies, whereby the Name of Christianity
is become reproachful amongst the Heathens, that never were called Christians;
and many Thousands are departed from the true Faith, from that Faith which did
purify the hearts of the Saints; and many Christians have given heed to
seducing spirits; and have the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof;
and they are led of diverse Lusts; and are become men of corrupt minds; and are
reprobate, and without the true Faith.

And the Apostles prophesied of the Degeneration, which we see fulfilled in
these our days; and even while some of the Apostles were yet living, they saw
the Christians Apostatizing, and falling away; and the Spirit of the Lord spoke
through John, Rev. 2. 3. to the Christian-Churches in Asia, who were already
departing from the Christian-Life; some of them were departed already from
their first Work and some of them were given to the doctrine of Balaam, and to
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing the Lord did hate; and others of
them were seduced by Iezabel, and taught to commit Fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols; and others of them had a name to live, but were
dead; and others of them were neither hot nor cold; and the Lord said, he would
spue them out of his Mouth.

Now here the Christians were falling away you may see, and as before it had
increased, so now the true Christian Life began to decrease, and the glory
thereof became darkened through all Asia: And also Rev, 13. 11. 1. 16. John saw
one Beast arise out of the Sea, and another out of the Earth, which set up a
Kingdom over the whole World, and caused all people upon Earth to worship the
Beast; and the Beast has been great in his power, and he has ruled over the
World in great dominion; and all that would not worship him, he has had power
to kill, and has killed them; so that the true Christian Life and Religion, as
the Apostles received it, and practiced it, has been extinguished for many
Generations; and People have had the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power,
and lived under the Name and Profession of Christianity, but have been without
the Life; and this is to be considered of, and diligently searched into, by all
you that go under the Name of Christians through all the World; for unto you
only I direct my words.

And now it remains to be showed what the state of Christians is at this day,
and wherein particularly they are apostatized and degenerated from the true
Life and Practice of the Apostles, who were the first Christians; for wherein
the Christians now are contrary, and not agreeable to the Apostles, in Faith,
in Practice, in Worship, in Ministry, and in the entrance into Christianity,
and in any other thing whatsoever.

I say, wherein they are contrary, and not agreeable to the true Christians of
old, to wit, the Apostles, therein are they degenerated, and fallen from the
true Life of Christianity; and this shall be the Rule of Judgment to try all
you that are called Christians upon the face of the Earth: wherefore awake, and
come forth to Judgment, for the measuring Rod is laid upon you all, whereby you
shall be truly measured and compared with them that where the first Christians
upon Earth; and the Heathens shall see your nakedness, and your shame, and his;
at you, when they behold how woefully you are fallen from that Life, in the
Purity thereof, of which you do profess the words; and shall not they rise up
in Judgment against you; who never had the name of Christians, who are not fallen
nor degressed from what they have professed in any measure, comparable to you,
who now retain only the name of Christians, and are departed from the Life of
Christ.

First, concerning the entrance into Christianity, and the way and means
whereby people are now made Christians, and receives that name; In this will
your fall and degeneration appear.

For the Apostles and first Christians upon Earth, before they were Christians,
or were called so, they were first converted, and changed and translated from
Death to Life, as you may read, 1 John 3. 14. and Col. 1. 13. and they first
received Christ, and became followers of him, and received his Spirit to teach
them, and to guide them: For the Apostle said, If any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. to wit, no Christians; and the Apostle
said, as many as were the Sons of God, were led by the Spirit of God; and also
it was promised by Christ to all that were his, the Comforter should come, the
Spirit of Truth, and he should lead them into all Truth; which promise, all
that were Christians did receive, and they were led into all Truth by the
teachings of the Spirit of Christ, which dwelt in them; for all that were Sons,
God sent the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, which Spirit sanctified them
through the obedience thereof.

Now these were Christians, and were truly so called; For they had the mark of
Christ and his Image upon them, and he dwelt in their hearts by Faith, Ephesians.
3. 17. These I say were truly called Christians; and none but such at that day
of their Original were called Christians, or had Fellowship in the Christian
life: nor were any looked upon by the Apostles to be Christians but by them
that were such.

But look back all ye Christians upon Earth, and see your fall, and wherein you
are contrary, and not agreeable to the true Christians in their first and pure
Estate. I say, look to your Original, and see how you are Apostatized from them
in your entrance into your profession of Christianity; for though you have the
name of Christians, yet you were not made so, nor received that name by being
first converted and changed, and translated from Death to Life, and from being
the Children of disobedience, to be the Children of God, through the work and
operation of the Spirit of God in you; for hereof are Thousands and Ten
Thousands of Christians now wholly ignorant, and altogether without the feeling
of the Spirit of God, to change them, to convert them, and to translate them,
but are accounted Christians by tradition, or natural education, and because of
being sprinkled with a little water upon the face, being Infants, or by a bare
confession and profession of the Name of Christ in words, and professing of a
bare belief in the Scriptures, by this way and means were you made (and
received you the name of) Christians without any real change from darkness to
Light, and from Satan to God, as I have said.

Now here appears to be a woeful degeneration in the very entrance of the thing,
and this is not agreeable, but rather contrary unto that way of Christianity,
wherein the Christians in their beginning were so made and called; for then
none were Christians, or so called, but who through the preaching of the Gospel
were first converted, changed, and renewed as I have said, but now in these
Nations all are called Christians that are spinkled upon their faces with
Water, by a Teacher, when they are Infants, or that do but profess Christ in
words, though they are not guided particularly by his Spirit; neither have
received Christ to dwell in them, and to be King over them: and here again
appears a woeful Apostasy; for none in the beginning of Christianity in the
World were made Christians, or so called, but who received Christ, and in whom
he dwelt, and was in them; as you may read, 2 Corinthians. 13. 5. and who were
Followers of him, and had his Spirit in them, the Comforter to teach them, and
to lead them into all Truth; but now thousands upon thousands, who have the
name of Christians, have not received Christ to dwell in them, nor to rule
them, neither is he manifest in them by his Spirit to teach them, and they are
not led into all truth; but live in deceit and unrighteousness, and are not
Followers of Christ, but follows their own hearts desir^, and their own hearts
Lusts, and are condemned in their own Consciences, and have not received the
Comforter, the Holy Spirit, to be their Guide and Leader out of all
Unrighteousness; and here appears a woeful Degeneration. And that you
Christians, through all the World, are revolted, and gone backward from
Christianity, as it was in its Original; a Lamentation may be taken up because
of this woeful Fall, into which you Christians are fallen: Consider of your own
state, and return, and repent.

Again, The Christians were begotten of God, and born of him, 1 John 5. 18. And
they were born of the Word of God, and of the incorruptible Seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
And they were created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. And they
were New Creatures, and old things were done away, 2 Cor. 5. 17. They had put
off the Body of Sin and Death, Col. 1. 18. And were the Servants of
Righteousness, and free from Sin, Romans 6. 22. as you may read.

But now also, Woeful are you Christians degenerated from this; for, Thousands
upon Thousands of you are not born nor begotten of God, though you have the
Name of Christians; neither are you born of the Word of God, which lives
forever, nor of the incorruptible Seed, neither are created again, nor become
new Creatures, nor have put off the Body of Sin and Death; neither are the
Servants of Righteousness, nor free from sin.

But on the contrary, Are the Servants of Sin, and free from Righteousness, and
are in the corruptible state, and are old Creatures, and are not washed, nor
purified as the Saints were, as you may read, 1 Cor. 6. 11. and here is a woeful
Degeneration of the Christians now, from what the Christians were in the
beginning: The Christians then were New Creature, and put off the Body of sin,
and were washed, and sanctified: But the Christians now are not so, but the
contrary; to wit, Unwashed and Unsanctified, remaining in the Pollutions of the
World, and are of the birth which is born of the Flesh, and are in the old
nature, serving sin and the lusts of their own Hearts; and thus are you fallen
from that which the true Christians possessed; for, being compared to them, you
are not agreeable, but rather contrary to them in all these things and the Lord
is now come to search you, and to try you; and to all People shall you be
discovered; for the Lord is now risen to bring all to Trial, and to Judgment.

And again, Herein will the Apostasy of the Christians appear, in respect of
Unity and Fellowship; for the Christians, in their Beginning, while yet the
Life of God was not darkened amongst them, They were of one Heart, and one
Mind, and one Soul, as you may read, Acts 4. 32. And the Lord promised, That he
would give unto his People one Heart and one Way: And Ezekiel. 11. 19. the Lord
promised, To give his People one Heart, and a new Spirit: Which Promise the
Christians received; and they that believed were of one Heart, and there was no
lack amongst them; but some sold their Possessions, and distributed to them
that had need: and they were Members of Christ, and he was Head amongst them,
and over them: And they were Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.
23, 30. And all the Christians were of one Faith, Ephesians. 4. 5. and had Unity and
Fellowship in the Life which was made manifest in them; for they had tasted,
and handled, and seen, and heard the Word of Life; and they had Fellowship with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

But all ye Chirstians upon Earth, how are you degenerated? and how great is
your Fall in this? For you are not of one Heart and Mind, nor in Unity and
Fellowship one with another; but are of diverse Sorts and Sects, and are run
into many Opinions, and Divisions; and are of many Ways, and Minds, and
Hearts: Diverse sorts there are of Papists, and diverse sorts of Protestants, so
called, which are all divided in Opinions, and striving and contending about
Faith, and Religion, and the Worship of God; and are opposing one another, and
putting one another to Death, because of a difference in those things; How
great is the difference through many Nations amongst Christians about those
things? which shows that the Christians are woefully fallen in respect of
Unity, and it is manifest such Christians have not received the Promise of God,
as the Apostles had; for now the Christians can suffer one another to lack, and
to perish, and die and starve for hunger and want: Behold in all this all ye
Christians generally how you are fallen; then, in the beginning of
Christianity, no lack nor want was amongst them; they that had much, sold it,
and gave to them that had none; but now thousands are oppressed through Want,
while others have too much; some are feeding and clothing excessively, with
their multitude of Dishes and changes of Raiment, while others have scarce
whereon to seed, or to cover their Nakedness; and this manifests, that you
are not Members of the Body of Christ; neither is he Head in you, nor amongst
you; but you are Members of an Harlot, and joined to a Harlot, and one with a
Harlot; for you profess many Faiths; some say, They believe Christ is given to
all; others believe, Not so: some say, They believe he died for all; others
they say, They believe contrary to that. And thus the one Faith, which the
Apostles had, the Christians of this Generation have lost; and they have lost
the one Head, Christ, and have many Heads; every Sect has their Head: Many
Heads among the Protestants; many Heads among the Papists; but thus it was not
in the beginning of Christianity; therefore you Christians are subverted from
the true Life of Christ. The Christians then were of one Faith; but now of
many: The Christians then had one Head, Christ; but now the Christians (so
called) have many Heads: The Christians then could lay down their lives one for
another, and were written in the Hearts of one another by the Spirit of the
Living God; but the Christians now are in Envy one toward another, and in
Strife one with another; the Great Men do oppress the Poor, and they go to Law
one with another for Earthly things; and one Stealing from another, and one
Hanging another, and Murdering one another, and making Slaves one of another,
and Robbing one another, and seeking utterly to destroy one another; and yet
such have the Name of Christians, amongst whom all this is acted.

But consider, How woeful is your Fall? and how wicked is your Degeneration from
the Life of God, and from the true Christian Life and Unity which was amongst
them in their Beginning? Then they were of one Heart, and of one Way; but now
divided, and in Strife and Contention about Religion, and the Worship of God;
and also about Earthly things; for which they destroy one another, and seek so
to do: Then they could lay down their lives one for another; but now they are
taking the life one from another, through wickedness; a woeful Apostasy, and
great night of darkness is upon you: then none among them had lack of any
thing, nor none destroyed through wasting any thing upon their Lusts; but now
Thousands perish for want, while others have too much, and are destroying it
upon their Lusts: Then had the Christians one Head, Christ; but now the Beast
reigns, that has many Heads: Then they were of one Faith; but now the
Christians profess many Faiths: Then the Christians handled, saw, heard and
felt of the Word of Life in them, and they had Fellowship with the Father and
with the Son; but now Thousands of Thousands of Christians are without the
sense, and feeling, and knowledge of the Word of Life in them, and walk in
Darkness and in Ignorance, and have no Fellowship with the Father, nor with the
Son.

Behold, behold, ye Christians, how ye are fallen, and how great is your Fall!
A Mourning and Lamentation may be taken up for you: The Garment of
Righteousness is rent from you, and the Beauty of the Son of God appears not
upon you. Alas, alas, What does it advantage you, to have the Name of
Christians, seeing you are thus woefully degenerate from that Love, Unity and
Life, in the Fellowship of God, which was among the Apostles, who were the
first Christians, and from whom ye derived the Name; but are without the Life,
as hereby is manifest to the World.

Again, Herein does the Apostasy of the Christians appear, in respect of
Holiness and Purity of Life; for, The Christians were of a holy Life and
Conversation, the Apostle said, 1 These. 4. 7. God has not called them unto
Uncleanness, but unto Holiness. And as you may read, Tit. 2. The aged Man were
to be Sober, Grave, Temperate, Sound in the Faith, in Charity, in Patience; and
the aged Women likewise, their Behavior was to be as became Holiness; and the
young Women were to be Discreet and Chaste; and young Men were to be Sober
minded; and Servants were to be Obedient to their Masters, and to show good
Fidelity: For says the Apostle unto the Christians, The Grace of God had
appeared, teaching them to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this
present World: for that end was Christ given, that he might redeem them from
all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works.

Now here, in short, is a true Description of the true Christian Life and
Conversation, which was exhorted to, and no doubt but practiced by the
Christians, in the days when Christ was manifest amongst them; but from this
Practice are the Christians degenerated: For, How are the aged Men and Women
now given to Covetousness, and Earthly-mindedness, and are Peevish, and
Perverse, and Immoderate, and in the Works that are Evil; showing that they are
not in the Apostles Doctrine, and not in the Christian Life, but to it are
become dead, bringing forth Fruits contrary to the Fruits that the aged Men and
Women brought forth in the beginning of Christianity; showing they are not of a
holy Life and Conversation, as the Christians were, and ought to be: And also,
how are the young Men, and the young Women degenerated from the true Christian
Life, and now are given to Wantonness and Pleasures of the World, and the
Lusts, which are evil; following Vanity, and Pride, and Vainglory: And Masters
and Servants being corrupt in their places, serving themselves one of another,
and making a Prey one upon another? And thus all sorts of Christians are fallen
from the Christian Life, and Holy Conversation; and show, that they own not the
Grace of God, which has appeared to all men, to be their Teacher, as the true
Christians once did: For it is manifest, That the Christians now (so called)
have not denied all Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts; neither do live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, as the Christians did; but on the
contrary: How are ye Christians fallen from the pure and Holy Life, abounding
in Wickedness and in all Ungodliness? How does Pride abound among Christians?
How does Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness and Whoredom, and all the works of the
Flesh abound; Dissimulation, Backbiting, Envy, Wrath, and all that ever can be
called Evil is abounding amongst ye Christians, so called? This shows that your
Apostasy is great from that Life and Conversation which the Apostles, and
Churches of Christians were in, who had denied all Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts; but generally ye live in all Ungodliness, and worldly Lust: judge ye of
this Backsliding into which ye are fallen; they were taught to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World; but ye live unrighteously, and
ungodly, and out of the Fear of God, and the Grace of God is not your Teacher,
as it was theirs: Also you may read how much the Apostles exhorted the
Christians to a holy Life and Conversation; the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 3. 17. The
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, speaking to the Christians: And he
said, Ephesians. 1. 4. They were chosen in Christ, that they should be Holy and
without Blame before him, in Love: And Col. 1. 22. They that had been sometimes
Enemies to God in their minds, were reconciled, to present them Holy and
Unbl^meable in his sight.

And 1 Pet. 1. 25. The Apostle exhorted the Christians to be holy in all manner
of Conversation: And Phil. 3. 20. the Christians witnessed, That their
conversations were in Heaven.

Now herein does the fall of Christians appear, in respect of their Life and
Conversation, and walking; for the Christians in the Apostles days were of a
holy Life; and exhorted all thereunto, but the Christians now, both Teachers
and People are degenerate in their conversation, and live in all
Unrighteousness, as I have said: And the Conversation of Christians now, being
compared with what the Christians Conversation was then, it is altogether
contrary, and shows, That though you have the Name of Christ, ye are not
Followers of Christ, nor led by his Spirit; but by the spirit of Antichrist.

Oh, how woefully are you fallen, you Christians, from the Life of Christ!
having a Name to live, but are dead: The Lord God is coming against you, to
break you to pieces; for you have poluted his Name, in that you profess to be
his People in words, but in works do deny him.

Oh! Remember, remember from whence you are fallen, and return, lest the Anger
of God consume you from off the Earth; for your conversations greatly dishonor
the true God. Oh, what Gluttonny and Drunkenness is amongst Christians? What
Pride and Vainglory? What Cruelty, Envy and Murde^ one against another? what
Whoredoms and Fornication? what Cozening? what Cheating? How does all
Wickedness abound amongst you, in your lives and conversations? Let the Lord be
Witness, and your own consciences be Witnesses against you for your
Abominations; they that were true Christians, who followed Christ, lived not
in, but were redeemed from such Transgressions; but you live in them, and act
in them, wherefore be ye Witnesses against your selves, that ye are fallen and
digressed from the true Christian Estate.

Again, Herein will you Christians appear to be degenerated from (...)
Christianity, in respect of your Ministry; for the Ministers of Christ, in the
beginning of Christianity, they were made Ministers by the Gift of the Holy
Spirit, which was given to them; for they were commanded to wait at Jerusalem
for the Promise of the Father; and they were not to go forth, till they had
received Power from God by the Gift of his holy Spirit; and when that was come,
they should be Witnesses and Ministers of Christ, Acts 1. 4, 8. And as they
were waiting with one accord, in one place, the Holy Ghost fell amongst them,
an filled them, and then they began to speak, as the Spirit gave them
utterance; and they went up and down, and testified to the World of what they
had heard and seen, Acts 2. 4. Now this was the Call of Christian Ministers,
and this (...) the Authority by which they went forth into the World, to wit,
The Spirit of God poured upon them; and by Authority of this only they went up
and do^ the World, and declared what they had handled, seen and tasted of the
Word of Life, 1 John 1. And as every man had received the Gift, so they might
minister the same one to another, 1 Pet. 4. 10. And this was the Practice of
the Christian Ministers, in the beginning of Christianity, concerning their C^^
to the Ministry.

But how are the Christians here degenerated from what the Apostles were in,
for by another way, then this, are your Ministers made, not by the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, received from God; neither do the Christians now wait for such a
thing, to go forth by Authority and Power thereof: but they are made Ministers
by Natural Learning, and Education at Schools, having Authority by man, and are
approved of man, and not of God: And a man knows which of his children he
will make a Minister, when they are Infants, and thereupon puts him to Schools,
to learn Arts and Knowledge of Earthly things, for so long time, till he has
gained so much Knowledge and Craft to be approved of such and such men (and as
is his Knowledge, and Opportunity serves; withal, having a great Place provided,
where there is great store of Maintenance) such a man becomes a Minister, and a
Preacher to others; having never received, nor thought to receive the Gift of
the Holy Ghost; neither having heard, seen, tasted nor handled any thing of the
Word of Life from God, in his own particular; neither has he received the Gift
of Christ to be made a Minister by. This shows greatly your Degeneration from
the true Christian Spirit; none then Ministers among Christians, but them who
had received the gift by the Holy Ghost, and power from on high; but now
Ministers are made and approved, and sent forth amongst Christians, because of
natural learning and education, without receiving the Gift of the holy Spirit:
And the Ministers of Christ then spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance; but
now Ministers study for what they speak, and read old Authors to gather forth
Matter to preach to the people: Then the Christian Ministers heard, and tasted,
and handled of the Word of Life in themselves; but now the Ministers have their
Knowledge from Books, and what they have heard and read without them.

Oh! How great is your Apostasy, ye Christians? and in respect of your
Ministry, how greatly are you degenerated from the Ministry which the
Christians once had? Behold and consider this all ye Christians upon Earth:
Your Ministry is proved not to agree, but rather to be contrary to that
Ministry which was amongst Christians, in the purity of Christianity, as here
by is manifest: and you are fallen from the Ministry made by the Gift of the
holy Ghost, to a Ministry made by natural Learning; Consider all ye Christians
how great is this Fall.

Again, In respect of the Maintenance of your Ministry your Degeneration does
appear; for the Ministers of Christ amongst Christians, as they were called by
the Spirit, so they were maintained in the Work of their Ministry by the (...)
Gift of the people, who received their Ministry; and they were to give freely,
and minister freely, as they had received freely, Mat. 10. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 7. The
Apostle preached the Gospel of God freely, and would not make it chargeable to
any, 1 Cor. 9. 18. And the Ministers of Christ among Christians at that day,
went through the World, and preached freely the things that they had received
from God: and they sought no man's Money, nor Gold, nor App^^el, Acts 20. 33.
And says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 14. I seek not yours, but (...); and that was
their end altogether, to bring people to God by their Ministry: only Christ did
allow, Luke 6. 4. Into whatsoever House they entered, that was worthy, (...)
might there abide, eating and drinking such things as were set before them. And
it ^s the Apostles practice sometimes to reap carnal things, where they had
sown Spiritual things; and it was a small matter that they did so: Yet by a
free Gift they desired to reap it, and not by Force and Violence did they ever
obtain any thing.

^t concerning this, Great is the Degeneration of Christians in this Gene^n;
for now the Ministers amongst you Christians are maintained by an ^rd power,
through compelling Maintenance of Tithes, and other Set-W^, from the people,
even from them that do not receive their Ministry, and they do not preach
freely, but makes their preaching chargeable to whole Nations, and the
maintaining of Christian Ministers is become a bur^n to whole Nations, and
great Oppressions upon the poor; and now the ^ers seek men's money, and gold;
and it does not appear, that they only seek a people to God; but on the
contrary they seek peoples money to themselves; and it does not satisfy the
Ministers now to eat and dri^k such things that are set before them in a House
that is worthy, but they must have so much a year and so much a Sermon, and so
much for every particular man of his Parish, be they worthy or unworthy, to the
value of a hundred, or two hundred pounds by the year; whereby poor people are
greatly oppressed; and they will reap carnal things by force and violence, from
them to whom they sow no spiritual things; for they are suing at Law, and
putting in Prison, and distraining peoples Goods by Force and Cruelty, to
maintain them and their Families in Pride and idleness, which things the
Christian Ministers formerly in the days of the Apostles never did; but were
often under great Sufferings, in Fasting often, and in Cold, and Nakedness
often: L^ring with their hands, 2 Cor. 11. 27.

Wherefore ye Christians, behold how you are fallen, and how your Ministry
(...) generated both in its Call, and in its Maintenance, being diverted quite
contrary to what the Christian-Ministry was once: Behold, I say, how you are
fallen! and your Ministry quite subverted from what the Ministry (...) in the
days of the Apostles: Then the Maintenance of Ministers was by a free Gift
from them that received their Ministry; and they would not make their Ministry
chargeable to any: But now the Maintenance of Ministers is by Force and
Cruelty, and great Oppression of many people; and their Preaching is chargeable
to many Nations. Then they sought no man's Gold, nor Money, nor fought Riches
from the people; but only sought the people to God; But now men's Money and
Riches are sought, and taken from them by Violence, without regard of seeking
people, or bringing people to God. Then to eat and drink (in a house that was
worthy) such things as were set before them; and to reap carnal things, as Meat
and drink, and Necess^^^es, by a free Gift, from them that received their
Ministry; this was a sufficient Maintenance for the Christian Ministers: But
now, so many Hundred Pounds by the Year, to maintain themselves and their
Families in Pride and Idleness, and to reap it by Compulsion and Injustice from
poor people: In this manner are the Christi^^ Ministers now maintained, which
is manifest to be quite contrary to the Practice of Christian Ministers in the
Apostles days.

Behold your Fall, ye Christians, and how you are degenerated! The Lord is come
to try you; and to search you; you are weighed, and are found too light; you
are measured, and are found wanting; what the Christians once were in their
Purity, you are not, in many things, but the contrary; which shows that you
have the Name of Christians only by Tradition, but are without the Life; and
being paralelled with the Christians, who truly followed Christ, you are no
whit equal to them in any thing, but wholly contrary in all things; showing you
follow another spirit, then they who were Followers of the Spirit of Christ; so
witnessing to the whole World, that you are degenerated, out of Christ, the
true Vine, and are Branches in a degenerate stock, which brings Fruit forth
through you, which hononreth not God, but grieveth his pure Spirit: And be
Witnesses against your selves, that you are fallen and degenerated from that
Life and Practice which was amongst the Apostles and Christians.

Again, As concerning your Worship; which is now practiced amongst you
Christians through the World; herein also will your Apostasy greatly appear;
for the Worship of the Christians was one, and guided by one Spirit, and was in
the Spirit, and in the Truth, says Christ (John 4.) concerning the Worship of
Christians, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Sp^
(...) in Truth. And says the Apostle, We are the Circumcision, that worship
God in S^ rit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the
Flesh, Phil. 3. 3^ (...) these were Christians. And also, Romans 6. 7. They
worshipped God not in the O^ness of the Letter, but in the Newness of the
Spirit; and the Spirit guided them i^ all things, and was their Teacher in all
their Worship; for, the Spirit (...) them to pray, and they prayed in the
Spirit; and they knew not what they should ^ray for, as they ought, but the
Spirit made intercession for them, Romans 8. 26. And the Christians were exhorted
to pray in the Holy Gh^st, Jude 20.

And the Preaching of Christians, it was in the Spirit, and by the Teachings of
the Spirit; For they preached as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2. And
Philip was led by the Spirit, and the Spirit of the Lord moved Philip to go and
pre^h to the Eunuch, Acts 8. And the Apostles went up and down, as they were
moved and led by the Spirit; and preached and prayed in what place, and at what
time and season, as the Spirit moved them, and gave them utterance; sometimes
in the Fields, and sometimes in Houses: This was the Practice of the Christians
in their Preaching and Praying.

And also the Apostle said, I will pray with the Spirit, and with
Understanding; I will sing with the Spirit, and with Understanding: And he
exhorted the Christ^. To speak in Psalms, and spiritual Songs, singing to the
Lord, and making Melody in their Hearts to him, Ephesians. 5. 19.

Now this is the Testimony concerning what the Worship of Christians was, its
manifest, that it was in the Spirit, and by the Teaching of the Spirit, their
preaching, praying, and singing were in the Spirit, taught and exercised
therein by the Spirit which they had received from God.

But now the Worship of Christians at this day, is not agreeable to this, but
being said to the line of Judgment, is proved contrary: for first, the
Christians n^w are divi^ed in their Worship, and have many Forms of Worship,
some worshipping after one manner, and others after another; so that amongst
the Christians ther^ diverse Forms of worshipping, and they are striving and
con^^ding about the Worship, every one praising their own Form, and striving
one against another Form of Worship; and this shows, that the Christians now
are not guided nor exercised by the one Spirit of God, in their worship; and
this shows that the Christians now are degenerated from the true Worship of God
in Spirit, which once the Christians Worship stood in; for then the Worship of
Christians was one, and in one Spirit; but now the Worships of Christians are
many, and diverse, and divided one from another, and they are not in unity in
their Worship, (...) in strife and division; and herein you are apostatized
from the Life o^ ^ristianity, and its manifest that the Worship of Chr^s now,
is not in (...) S^t, and in the Truth, but in vain Traditi^; learned in natural
knowl^ge by people that are not converted unto God, and any part of the Worship
which is now practiced amongst Christians, whether amongst Papists of any sort,
or Protestants of any sort; I say; every part of the Worship now practiced
amongst Christians through the World, may by taught unto, and learned of, and
exercised in, by a man that knows ^^t God, neither is in the Truth, nor
converted to the Truth; neither has the Spirit of God guiding nor leading of
him: And I say, That which may be done, or practiced by a man, that is not in
the Spirit, nor in the Truth, not is yet converted to the Knowledge of God, nor
is not in any measure gu^^ed by the Spirit of God, is not the Worship of the
true God, which is in the Spirit and Truth; but, as I have said, any part of
the Worship now pr^sed amongst Christians, may be done and practiced by aman
that is out of the Spirit, and out of the Truth, and unconverted to the
Knowledge of God; (...) therefore the Worship now pract^^ed amongst Christians,
is not the true worship of the true God, which is in the Spirit and in the
Truth, and which c^^not be practiced without it.

Many more things might be said, as to prove the Worship of Christians now,
(...) practiced by them, is not the true Worship of the true God; but this is
(...) which I have said, that which is practiced without the Spirit of God, is
not the true Worship of God, which must be in the Spirit, and cannot be
practiced without it; but such is the worship of Christians; for the Christians
^^ow generally pray, some after one Form, and some after another, in their own
wills and times, and know not the movings of the Spirit of the Father
t^ereunto, nor guiding them therein, but in such a manner as they set unto
themselves, or as the custom of the Country instructs them therein, and know
not the intercession of the Spirit of the Father in them, nor know not the
praying in the Holy Ghost: and as for the preaching of Christians, it is not
now practiced as the Christians of old practiced it, nor by the same Spirit:
now they study for what they speak, and gather out of the Scriptures; ^ome
having it written in a Book what they will preach to the people and this is not
to preach as the spirit gives them utterance, neither is this from the teaching
or moving of the Spirit of God, but by humane Art, and humane Craft, knowing
beforehand, what, and how much to speak, so much as they have collected in
their thoughts from such a Verse, and how long to preach, till a Glass be run,
and know what to have for preaching: and this, and such like, is the manner of
the Preaching now among Christians, which has no savor in it of God's Spirit,
or of the Teachings and Leadings of God's Spirit in it; but altogether
contrary, to wit, This Practice savours of Idolatry, and of vain Traditions and
Superstitions.

And in short, This Practice of Preaching among the Christians now, is not in
the same manner, neither by the same Spirit, nor for the same End, as the
Preaching of the Christians was in the days of the Apostles; which shows,
that the Christians now are Apostatized, and greatly Degenerated from what the
Christians were then: For again, The Christian Ministers now do not go as they
are moved of the Lord up and down, from Country to Country, to convert people
to God, as the Christian Ministers did then: But enquire for places of great
Maintenance, where there are great store of Tithes, and Set-Wages; and if they
can, there they settle themselves, and preach in manner as I have said. And
this practice savours nothing of the Teachings of the Spirit of God, nor of the
Movings of that Spirit whereby the Christian Ministers of old were guided;
which shows, that the Christian Ministers now are in the Apostasy, and in the
Degeneration from God, and from what the Christian Ministers were then.

And as concerning the Practice of Singing no^ amongst Christians, it is not in
the Spirit, nor with a good Understandi^ but in a vain Form and Tradition, and
not in the Spirit of the Lord (...) now the Christians, many of them, in a Form
sing the Conditions (...), as David's Prayers, and Praises, Troubles, and
Afflictions; when as themselves are in a condition quite contrary to what David
was, and so sing that which unto themselves is false, as being out of that
condition of which they sing; and this is not singing with the Spirit, neither
is it to sing spiritual Songs: And others of Christians have another manner of
singing, all which singing of Christians now has no savor of the Teachings of
God's Spirit in it; neither is it according, nor by the same Spirit, as the
singing of the Christians once was.

A woeful Apostasy is fallen upon you, ye Christians through the World, and you
are fallen, you are fallen from the Life of Christ, and the true Pra^ of
Christianity, as the first Christians were in; then their praying was in the
Spirit, and the holy Ghost; but now without the Spirit, in Forms and
Traditions; Their Preaching then was as the Spirit led them, and as it gave
them utterance; but now by humane Learning and Policy, at such a Place for so
much a Year, an Hour by a Glass, what they have gathered by study upon other
men's Works: Then the Singing of Christians was in the Spirit, and their whole
Worship was spiritual, in the Spirit, and in the Truth; but the Singing of
Christians now, and all their Worship, is in vain Traditions, exercised without
the Leadings and Movings of the Spirit of God: Then the Worship of Christians
was one, and by one. Spirit, now it is diverse, and in division, and in many
contrary spirits.

Alas, oh ye Christians! consider how great is your Fall, and how wo^^l your
Degeneration, in respect of your Worship; fallen greatly from the teaching of
the Spirit of God, in your Praying, in your Preaching, and in your Singing, to
follow humane Learning, and worldly Policy, and vain Traditions, the Customs of
the Country, and your own Imaginations, in your Praying, Preaching, and
Singing, as I have proved unto you.

Oh consider how great is your Apostasy from the true Life of true
Christianity! Greatly do you err from the pure Way, wherein the true Christians
walked, and being truly paralelled with them, and measured with the Spirit of
true Judgment, you are found not equal to them in any measure, but rather
contrary altogether; showing you are guided by another spirit then once the
Christians were, and that you follow another Teacher then once they did; your
Practices do make it manifest, which are contrary, and not according to what
the Practice of the Christians once were: Is not my Judgment just upon you?
Have you not lost that, and are departed from it, which gave the Name of
Christian; and so have the Name without the thing; a Profession of
Christianity, but no true Title therein; but having lost that which gave the
true Title to the Name? So that this is your state, and this is your Condition
generally, ye Christians through the World; A Name you have of Christianity,
but to the True Life thereof, in every Particular, are you dead.

And now all ye Christians upon Earth, Behold, behold how you are fallen and
degenerated in all these things, and many more, which might be named I Fallen I
say from the true Christian Life and Practice, wherein the Christians once
were; showing fully to all the World, that the Spirit of Christ does not now
guide you Christians, but another Spirit, which brings forth through you other
Works and Fruits, and of another nature then what the Christians once brought
forth; and being compared with them, you are no whit equal; in the very way and
means, whereby you are made Christians, you differ from them, and in all your
practices, and in life and conversation you are contrary to them: And in
respect of your Worship and Ministry, in every part thereof, are you altogether
contrary unto what the Christians once were; yea, in your very Apparel you show
a Degeneration from the true Life and Practice in Christianity, for the Apostle
exhorted the Christians to adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
Shamefacedness and Sobriety; not with brodered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly Array, 1 Timothy 2. 9. And the Christians were there exorted, That ^^eir
Adorning should not be the outward plaiting of the Hair, or of wearing Gold, or
putting (...) of Apparel.

But now amongst ye Christians is a practice found quite contrary; What Vanity
and Excess is in your Apparel, striving to excel one another in Pride and
Vainglory, in your Gold, and Silver, and costly Array; spending the Creation
of God to satisfy your lustful Minds; showing another spirit then was amongst
the Christians of old, whose words and Name ye p^^fess, but are degenerated
from the Life, in things of greater and less moment.

Alas, alas! Oh woe is me for you! How is my spirit often oppressed in the
remembrance of your woeful Fall? What shall I say unto you but this? You are
revolted, and gone away backward from the Way of Life; and you have altogether
forgotten God; and are degenerated from Christ, the living Vine; and the Anger
of the Lord is now greatly kindled against you, to consume you, and to confound
you, because you are revolted and turned aside from the pure and perfect Way of
God, which once was manifest amongst Christians.

And your Backsliding and Apostasy is truly compared to that of the Jews, who
did retain the Name of the People of God, after they were turned aside from his
Commandments; even as you do retain the Name of Christians, though you are
departed from Christ: For the Jews had seen and known much of the Power, and
Presence, and Hand of the Lord, in many great Victories and Deliverances; and
the Lord had chosen them above any other People at that day, to place his Name
with them, and amongst them; and yet after all that, they forgot his wondrous
Works, and rebelled against him, and became a Stiff-necked and Hard-hearted
people, much more then any other besides them; and they would not be
instructed, nor reclaimed by the Voice of the Prophets, but smote them, and
slew them; and when Christ their Savior came, they would not receive him, nor
walk in his Ways; but crucified him, saying, They would not have t^ Man to
reign over them.

And to this, in every particular, are the Christians now found equal, and
agreeing with Backsliding Israel; for much of the Hand and Power of the Lord
were the Christians made Partakers of; and the Lord wrought great Deliverances
for them, when they were few in number, and under heavy Yoaks and Bondage,
through Persecution and cruel Dealing; yet then the Lord was with them, and
increased them greatly in number, and gave them Victory in a great measure over
all their Enemies; but now are they revolted, even as the Jews, and have
forgotten God, and greatly rebelled against him, and have turned his Love to
their Lusts, abusing his Loving Kindness, and are become a stiff-necked and
hard-hearted people, as ever were the Jews; and now you will not be instructed,
nor reclaimed from the Error of your ways; but abound in all manner of
Unrighteousness, and will not hearken to the Voice of the Lord, nor return to
him; but are a gainsaying people, and will not return unto him from whom you
are fallen; but hate the Light which Christ has lightened you withal, neither
will have Christ to reign over you, but crucify the Life, as the Jews did.

And as the Sacrifices, and Oblations, the Sabboth-keeping of the Jews, and all
the Works of Righteousness, were an Abomination to the Lord, after they were
departed from him; even the very practice of those things, which God had once
commanded them to perform, became a Burden to the Lord, and his Soul could not
away with them; even their New Moons and Sabboths his Soul hated, Isa. 1. and
all their Sacrifices were, as if they cut off a Dogs Neck; and their Oblations,
as if they offered Swine's-blood; and their burning Incense, as if they blessed
an Idol, Isa. 66.

I say, The very Practice of the Jews, after they were revolted, and become
disobedient Children in those very things which God had commanded them to do
and practice, and which once the Lord accepted the doing of by his People; yet
after they were turned aside from the leading of his Spirit, the practice of
the very same Works were hateful in the sight of the Lord; when they performed
Works of Righteousness to him, and yet their Hearts went after their
Covetousness, and their practizing of that which God had once commanded to be
done, their doing of it was Idolatry, and was a Burden to the Lord's Soul; and
their Righteousness, and all their Practices therein, were as filthy Rags, even
loathsome in his Presence, when their Fear toward him was taught them by the
precepts of men, and they had lost that pure Fear, which (...) was taught them
of God; but they were gone from his Fear, which should have kept their Hearts
clean; and their Hears were defiled and poluted, and therefore not any of their
Performances to him could be accepted, but were altogether become an
Abomination.

And even thus is it at this day, as concerning the Sacrifices and Performances
of Christians; being (as I have said, and made manifest) departed from the
Lord, and from the Spirt of Christ: All their Prayings, and Preachings, and
Singings, their Baptisms, and Breaking of Bread, and even all that which you
perform as unto God, as the Worship of him, is not accepted, but Abomination
unto him; and his Soul is burdened with all these things, you not being led
with the Spirit of Christ: And even your practizing of these things, which the
Saints and Christians once practiced, and were accepted of the Lord in so
doing, while they were led by the Spirit of Christ; I say, The very practice of
those things now by the Christians, being degenerated, is become Idolatry, and
Abomination to the Lord.

And this I declare in the Fear and Presence of the Lord, Even all your
Praying, and Preachings, and Profession, all your Sabboth-keeping, and
Set-dayes of Humiliation, and even all your Practices of Religion, which you do
and perform, are Idolatry, and a Burden to the Lord's Soul, in the state that
now you stand, not being led by the Spirit of Christ, but being from it
departed; and your works not brought forth by it, but by another spirit.

And now says the Lord unto you Christians (who are degenerated from the
Spirit of Christ) To what purpose is your Preaching, Praying and Singing? They
are a Vexation and Burden to the Righteous Soul, and the Lord has no delight
therein; away with it, away with it: Your Profession and Practices stincks in
the Nostrils of the Lord: All your Baptisms and your Sacraments, which ye
perform in a vain Tradition* and not by the Spirit of the Lord, they are
hateful in his sight; away with them, away with them; they shall crumble to the
dust, and immediate Desolation in one day; the Lord will break them down, and
never build them up again. Your Preaching by a Glass, for so much a Sermon, or
so much a Year, what you have gathered out of Books* and studied for from other
men's words; town with it, down with it; it is (...) Abomination to the Lord.
And your Ministry, which is made and sent forth at Schools; and (...) natural
Learning, through the attainment of such Arts and Sciences, and being approved
of such and such men, and sent forth to such and such a Part (...) have so much
Money by the Year for preaching what has been studied for and not by the Gift
of the Holy Ghost; away with this Ministry, away with it; its a mocking of God,
and a deceiving of Souls; the Lord will confound it, and bring it to
Destruction. And your singing of the Saints words in Rhyme and Meeter, and
their Conditions, which your selves never knew; this is Abomination to the
Lord, and a Practice which his Soul hater; away with it, the Lord is risen to
confound it. Away with all your Worship, which is not in the Spirit, nor in the
Truth; but in vain Traditions of (...), practiced by you in a vain Form, and
not the Power of God: The Lord will being it down to the ground, and restore
and establish his own Worship, which (...) in Spirit and in Truth; and he will
give, and has given his Ministry again by the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which
has been lost for many Ages, while this Night of Apostasy has overspread the
World; and the Lord shall (...) longer be worshipped in vain Traditions of men,
but his people shall be re^^red and renewed, to worship him in Spirit and
Truth; and the Christian ^ife shall again be brought forth, and the Spirit of
Christ shall be the Leader and Teacher of his People: And now the Day of the
Lord's Visitation is again revived, for togather his People, and to restore
them again to his perfect Way and Worship.

Therefore hearken, and behold, ye Christians, this is the Testimony of the
Lord ^erning you; You have been fallen and degenerated from the Life of
Righteousness, and from the true Way and Worship of the true God; and you have
long been slumbring and sleeping in this long Night of Darkness, which
overshadow'd you, and darkened that glorious Appearance of the (...) of God*
which once shined upon the Christians; and in Blindness and D^ have (...)
walked for many Ages, and your Worship has been subscribed; To the Unknown
God; and woefully have you been wallowing in unclean Paths; and you have erred,
you have erred from the Life of Christ, and from his Spirit; and you are gone
from your Husband, and followed other Lovers; and you have been ^ed in
Iniquity, and altogether poluted by Transgtession; and the state in which you
now stand, is a state separated from God, a state of great Ignora^ and
Darkness, and a state of heinous Rebellion against God, whose Soul and Spirit
is greatly oppressed and grieved because of your Degeneration, who (...) become
more ignorant of God, then the Ox is of his Owner, o^ the Ass of his Master's
Crib; and even the very same Vision is seen concerning you, as the Prophet saw
concerning Israel.

Therefore hear oh Heavens, and give ear oh Earth; for the Lord does speak unto
you Christians: I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me; and the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib,
but the Christians do not know, the People do not consider.

Ah! sinful Nation, a people laden with Iniquity, a seed of Evildoers,
Children that are corrupted, that have forsaken the right Way, and provoke the
Living God to Anger, and ye are gone away backward; the whole Head is sick, the
whole Heart is faint, and from the sole of the Foot, even unto the Head there
is no Soundness; but your Conditions are Wounds, and Bruises, and ^fying Sores;
you are not closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with Oy^ent; and your
Country is desolate; and your Cities are burnt as with Fire* your Land
Strangers devour it in your presence; and it is desolate, and overthrown by
Strangers: and but that the Lord of Hosts has left us a soul Remnant, even a
Seed, ye Christians would have been as Sodom; if any man has an Ear to hear,
let him hear: This Vision is as true unto you Christians, throughout all the
World, as ever it was unto the seed of the Jews: This is your state, and this
is your condition, and thus ye stand in the sight of the Lord, though in your
beginning (in the beginning of Christianity I mean) the Lord brought up the
Christians, and nourished them by his Living Word, and with his Word he
cherished them, and they grew unto a goodly state, and were ^pleat in Christ,
Col. 2. 10. And they were come to the (...) of ^st Men made perfect; and unto
Mount Sion, the (...) of the Living God, the H^ly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; and to God, the Judge of all, Hebrews
12, 22, 23, 24.

TO this state were the Christians nourished and brought up, in the days when
they were first brought forth, when they were begotten and born again of the
immortal Word, that abides forever; and they were sanctified, and purified, and
made clean; unto this were they nourished, and brought up out of Darkness, and
from under the shadow of Death. But notwithstanding this, the Christians now
have rebelled against the Lord, and do rebel against him: And though the Lord
has been unto them as an Owner to the Ox, and as a Crib to the Ass; even as
thus has the Lord been unto the Christians, yet they know it not, neither do
the Christians consider; but are indeed grown sinful, and laden with Iniquity;
and the feed of Evildoers brings sorth its fruit through Christians, being
become children that are Corrupters, having forsaken the Lord, and his Way,
which was made mantfest in the days of the Apostles, and the Lord is greatly
provoked; for the Christians are gone backward, from what they were in their
beginning, as I have fully made manifest: And this Vision of the Lord is unto
you, all ye Christians, even as a (...) that is of the most precious Seed, and
the most noble Vine that is planted in a good S^ ^at is dug, and dressed,
and grown to a goodly stature, and bringing ^th some acceptable Fruit unto the
good Husbandman, for a season; yet this Tree becomes blasted by an unwholesome
Air, and becomes degenerate from its virtue, and property and nature; and
becomes a wild Vine, and a Pla^ of great Disgrace, ceasing to bring forth any
good Fruit, and becomes fruitful i^ all evil, and the Labor of the good
Husbandman is lost; for, while he loo^ for good Fruit, nothing appears, but
Fruit of an evil Taste, which is altogether loathsome unto the good Husbandman.
This Parable is unto you Christians, and this is your state and your condition;
Therefore behold, What shall the Lord do unto this Tree? Shall he nor cut it
down to the ground, and call it into the purging Fire? Shall he not lay his Ax
to the Root, and cause all its Branches utterly to wither, and cause it to
cease in being, even as it has ceased in bringing forth Fruit? Shall not the
go^ Husbandman destroy this (...), with all its corrupt fruit? And shall not
his own Hand accomplish the Purpose of his own Heart? This Tree shall be Fuel
for this Fire of his Anger; he will pluck it up, and not plant it again,
because it is degenerated.

Give ear, all ye Christians, to the Testimony which is concerning you, You are
fallen, you are fallen; and being compared to what the Christians were, you are
in (...) equal, but are diverted in all your Practices, from that Spirit which
led the Apostles (...) Christian Churches; and your works show another Spirit,
then the Spirit of Jesus* Wherefore great is your Fall, and to be lamented; and
though you have the name of Christians, yet you want the Life.

An Objection. But whereas it may be objected by some, and said, Seeing the
State of Christianity is thus descovered, what it was in its beginning and
purity, and what it now is in its degeneration; and seeing the present State of
Christians is thus condemned, what do I believe concerning the state of
Christianity to come? What shall succeed this present Degeneration? And may it
be expected, that ever Christianity shall be restored to that state of Purity,
as it was in its beginning? And whether may people expect to come into the same
Life again, and to know the same power, and Worship and Unity, which was
amongst the Apostles and first Christian Churches? And whether do I judge, that
ever the Ministry can again be received by the Gift of the holy Spirit only,
without natural Learning and Languages? And whether the same Spirit is to be
waited for, and received? And whether the same Anointing can be known in this
Age, or any Age to come, as it was in and among the Apostles and Christians,
before the Apostasy and Degeneration.

Answ. To all this I answer, and do say, That the present state of Christianity
is woeful, and to be condemned of the Lord, as being degenerated from his Life,
Power and Spirit; whereby all hearts are darkened, and all minds estranged from
the Covenant of Life and Peace, and from the sense and feeling of the Life of
God: and now in all the Ways, and Worships, and Practices of Christians, they
are fallen and degenerated from that Life in which the Christians once were;
and the Beast has reigned over all for many Ages; and because of his Power,
and Greatness and Dominion, who has been able to make war with him? he has
killed the Saints, and has subjected all Nations under his power; and every
Nation has received the Mark of the Beast, and born his Image for Generations;
and all Flesh has staggered, and has been made drunk with the cup of
Fornication, that has been in the hand of the Whore, who has sat upon this
Beast, who has caused both small and great to worship him; and all that would
not, he has had power to kill them. And this Government has ruled over the
whole Christendom, and the Worship practiced has been but the Worship of the
Beast, while people have been erred from the Spirit of Christ, and not guided
by it only: And people have been compelled to Worship by Laws of Men; they have
been compelled to sprinkle their Infant,; and they have been compelled to go to
Steeple Houses; and compelled to keep a Sabbath; and compelled to hire Priests,
and to pay them Wages against their wills; And all this compelling by an
outward Power has not been the Worship of God, but savored altogether of the
Worship of the Beast; for you may read, Rev. 13. 12, 15, 16, 17. how the Beast
caused all, both Small and Great, to worship him; and all that would not
worship him by his power, he has had power to kill them. And all compelling,
and causing to worship by an outward Power, is the worship of the Beast, for
Christ, nor his Apostles, never caused any to worship God by an outward power:
For while Christianity kept its Purity and Authority, they begot People to God,
and to worship him, by the Word of God, and by the power of the Spirit; and
they did not bring any into their Sect, nor to worship with them, by an outward
Law and Authority; for that is in the Government of the Beast; it was he that
first caused both small and great to conform to his worship, and it is his
power that upholds it, and maintains it unto this day.

But now the Seed of God is arising, which is able to make war with the Beast
and his Kingdom, and his Worship shall be thrown down to the ground; and all
this causing and compelling to Worship; causing to keep a Day; and causing to
hire Teachers, to maintain them; and this causing to go to Steeple Houses, and
to maintain them; and all this causing to pay Tithes; it shall fall to the
ground, and be beat down by the Seed of God, which is arising, and they shall
be no more found among true Christians; nor the Beast shall not be worshipped,
nor his Authority any more of force; for the Day of the Lord has now appeared,
and the Light is sprung forth, which has made all things manifest, and now the
difference is known, between the worship of the Beast, and the worship of the
true God. And concerning the state of Christianity to come, this I know and
believe, a glorious Restoration thereof shall appear throughout the whole
Christendom, and Christianity shall again be restored to its former purity; and
Christians shall, and may receive the same Spirit from which the Christians
have been degenerated; and the same Life, the same Power, and the same Worship,
and Unity shall be revived amongst Christians in the Restoration; even the same
that was in the beginning before the Apostasy; and the Glory of God shall again
appear among his people, and they shall again worship him in Spirit and in
Truth only, as they did before the Apostasy; and all this traditional worship,
and false imitations which has been set up since the Apostles days, shall be
overthrown and confounded; the Lord is risen, and will dash down, and overthrow
all this Idolatry now practiced amongst Christians: And a great shaking and
confounding shall suddenly come among Christians; for the Lord will break down
that which has been builded, because it is polluted; and he will pluck up that
which has been planted, because it is defiled; and a mighty work will the Lord
work in the Earth, the Kingdoms of this World will he change into the Kingdoms
of Christ, and Christ shall reign in and among his People; and his Spirit shall
be the Teacher and Leader of his People; and all false Teachers will the Lord
confound and consume; all these Hirelings who go for Gifts and Rewards, and all
this manner of Preaching and Teaching, which are come up since the Apostles
days; all this Preaching which they study for, and by a Glass, and for so much
Money a year, all this shall be tumbled down into the Pit: God's Vengeance
shall come upon it all, and the Anointing shall be received, and it shall dwell
in People, as it did in the Apostles; and the people shall need no other
Teacher, but as that Anointing teaches all things; and for this Spirit and
Anointing all that fear God may wait to receive it in this present Age; which
Spirit brings into the same Unity and Life, into the same Worship and
Fellowship that was amongst Christians in the beginning, before the Apostasy;
and this State may Christians be restored to; and for this State all that fear
God, and love him, are to wait; for this shall come to pass in the World.

And as concerning the Ministry, I know, and do believe it may be, and is
received again, as the Apostles and Christian Ministers first received it, to
wit, by the eternal Spirit and Gift thereof, through the Revelation of Christ
Jesus in them: and such may and do preach the Gospel freely, as they do receive
is freely, and without natural Learning and Languages.

For by that can none be made Ministers of Christ, nor by any thing without the
Gift of the holy Spirit; and Christ's Ministry shall again be received thereby;
this I believe: and all this Ministry made, and sent forth by natural Learning,
and without the Gift of the holy Spirit, the Lord will confound it in this Age;
for this is come up since the Apostles days, to make Ministers by natural
Learning, and it stands in the Apostasy, from the Life and Spirit of Christ,
and its call, and work, and maintenance savours not of the Kingdom of Christ,
and the Lord will bring it down, and the Gift of his Ministry, will he restore
by his Spirit; and this is, and shall come to pass, and it may be waited for in
this present Age; and the Lord will restore his Ministry, as in the beginning,
and his work shall be glorious; for many there are, is, and shall be converted
to God, and brought out of the degeneration, and to that shall people come
which all Christendom has been apostatized from, and shall receive the same
Spirit, and the same Anointing which was amongst the Christian Churches; and
life and immortality shall again be brought to light through the Gospel, which
has been hid for Ages while darkness has been over the minds of people.

And I say and testify before all the World, That Christianity shall be
restored to its former state; Life shall spring forth; and Truth shall be
increased; and Faith shall wax strong, even the same Faith that the Apostles
had, which gave them Victory over all the World, which shall again give People
the same Victory; and this shall be known in the Earth. For the Marriage of the
Lamb shall come, and all his People shall be joined unto him; and there shall
be one Way, and one Worship, and one Teacher; and every one shall sit under
Christ's Vine, and none shall make afraid: Yea, and more then a Vine shall he
be known, and more then a Door, and more then a Shepherd shall he be known to
be to his People, and greater then a Rock shall he be witnessed to be, and more
then a Teacher in the Wilderness: If any man have an Ear to hear, let him
(...); more and greater is he becoming to his People, then is lawful yet to
utter: Eye has not seen, nor it has not entered into the Heart of man; but it
is revealed to us by his Spirit. The joyful Day is approaching, the Lamb's Wife
is making her self ready; the Wedding Garment is putting on, and all that which
is polluted is to be done away: And Blessed is he that comes to the Marriage
of the Lamb, that he may become one Spirit with the Creat^r. Here is Glory and
Rejoicing forever, when this is known, That the Wife has not power over her
own Body, but the Husband; nor has the Husband power over his own Body, but
the Wife: Where this is known, Death is swallowed up of Life, and Sin is
overcome of Righteousness, and the Inheritance of Life Eternal comes to be
possessed, and Death and Hell is cast into the Lake, and he which has deceived
can deceive no more; And blessed is the Eye that sees this, and the Heart that
understands.

Wherefore all ye Christians upon Earth, Awake, awake, and put away your
Whoredoms, cast off your Idolatries, and strip you, and make you clean of all
your Adulteries; drink no longer of the Cup of Fornication, nor eat no longer
of the Abominable Flesh, nor wear no longer your Garments of Unrighteousness;
but strip ye, strip ye, make ye bare; all your old Garments must be put off,
before you can appear before the Lord.

A great Work will the Lord work amongst you; he will shake and overthrow all
your Altars. Images and Idols, which you have set up and worshipped; The Lord
has uttered his Voice; the Beast that has many Heads and many Horns shall
tremble; and one Head, and one Horn only shall be exalted, and the Government
shall be set up, of whose increase there shall be no end; and people shall be
brought into that, and they shall go forth no more; for who come to this, Time
is no longer, and the Kingdom and Government is delivered to the Father, and he
is become all in all.

And all that ever come to know these things, must first come to the Light of
the Lamb in them, with which every man is lightened that comes into the World:
And all that ever know these things, must first be brought to the Principle of
God in them, which they have transgressed against. And all that own the Light
of Christ, and walk in it, shall come to know these things, which to know, and
be in them, is eternal Life.

Therefore all ye Christians, come to the Light which Christ has lightened you
withal, and that will let you see the Government of Satan, and of sin and
death, which has been ruling in you; and the Light will teach you to war
against it, till it be subdued; the Light will discover unto you that nature,
in which the kingdom of Satan bears rule; it will let you see the Devil, who is
the Prince of darkness, who is the Adversary of God, who is out of the Truth,
and he has drawn all people out of the Truth; but if you love the Light of
Christ in you, it will teach you to war against him, and against all that that
is out of the Truth; for all that is of Satan's Kingdom, that is out of the
Truth, and must be destroyed by the coming of the Kingdom of Christ; whose
coming is in the Light, which Christ has enlightened every man withal; who
comes to destroy the Devil, and his kingdom, and all his works: So to the Light
must all minds be turned, which will reveal the kingdom of the Man of Sin, and
consume it: The Appearance of Christ is Light; and Christ is the Light of
Israel, which is as a Fire, to consume all fruitless Trees, which cumber the
ground, which the Lord will consume by the brightness of his coming.

And now is the Man of Sin revealed, even in the hearts of Christians, so
called; and he has long showed himself to be God; but now the Lord will bring
him down: For, Antichrist has ruled for many Ages, and the Lord of Life has
been crucified in spiritual Sodom; but Sodom shall be consumed by Fire; and the
Lord will avenge himself of all his Enemies; and all People and Nations shall
know, that there is a God, who executes Justice and true Judgment, who is a God
near at hand, to reward his People with Everlasting Life; and to give unto his
Enemies, Judgment and Condemnation.

Written by a Friend to the Creation; a Servant of the Lord, E. B.

A DECLARATION To all the WORLD Of our Faith; And what we believe, who are
called, QUAKERS. And this is written, that all People upon Earth may know by
whom, and how we are saved, and hope for Eternal Life, and what we believe
concerning God, Christ, and the Spirit; and of the things that are Eternal,
appertaining to all Mankind to know and believe.
Concerning God, Christ, and the Spirit, thus we believe*
FIRST That there is only one true God, who is a Spirit; and his Presence
fills Heaven and Earth; and he is Eternal and Everlasting* the Creator and
Preserver of all things; that Heaven and Earth, and all things therein by him
were framed and brought forth; and all things ^in unto this day by his Power;
and whatsoever he wills in Heaven and Earth* he ^^ings to pass by his Word
and Power.

And we believe, That this God only is, and ought to be feared, loved, obeyed
and worshipned by all Creatures; and no other thing besides (...) in Heaven and
Earth.

A^ we believe, That his Worship, and Obedience, and Fear and Love is to be
given in Spirit, even in what his own Spirit moves and leads his People unto.

And we believe, His true Worship, required and accepted of him, (...) not by
the Tradition of men, in outward Observances, or Set-dayes, o^ Places; but he
is worshipped only in Spirit ^d Tr^th, without respect of Time, ^ces or things;
and that none can worship ^^m in Righteousness, but his ^n, who are born of his
Spirit, and are led and guided thereby.

And we believe, That this God has given his Son Christ J^ (...) ^^e World, a
free Gift unto the whole World; and that every (...) that co^eth into the World
is lighted by him, that every man mi^ (...) (...) (...) said.

And we believe. That he is given into the World, and no Nation* (...) or
People excepted; but unto all Mankind is he given of God, and (...) (...) them,
and every man through the World, that believes in him, and receives Christ,
who is the Wisdom and Power of the Father, shall be saved with eternal'
Salvation; and every one that believes not in him, shall be damned, and shall
possess everlasting Misery.

And we believe, That Salvation, Justification, and Sanctification, are only in
him, and wrought by him, and no other: for there is no other Name given under
Heaven, but him alone, by which Salvation is.

And we believe, All that receive him, and believe in him, are recon^d to God,
and are made alive to God, to live to him in all things, an^ do receive the
Forgiveness of Sins, and are set free from all Unrighteousness, and from the
Body of Sin and Death, and have the Witness of the Spirit in them; and the
Spirit of the Father they, have received, and it witnesses in them of the
Father and of the Son, and of the things that belong unto their Peace; and it
is the Earnest of the Inheritance, and the Seal of the Promise of Eternal Life,
and by it are the deep things of God revealed to Mankind, and by it the Father
and the Son dwells in the Saints, and by it have they Fellowship one with
mother; and the Father, Son, and Spirit are one. And this we faithfully believe.

Again, concerning Christ, we believe,. That he is one with the Father, and was
with him before the World was; and what the Father works (...) is by the Son;
for he is the Arm of God's Salv^ion, and the very Power and Wisdom of the
Creator; and was, is, and is to come, without Beginning or End.

And we believe, That all the Prophets gave Testimony of him, and that he was
made manifest in Judea and Jerusalem, and did the Work of the Father, and was
persecuted of the Jews, and was crucified by his Enemies; and that he was
buried, and rose again, according to the Scriptures.

And we believe, He is now ascended on High, and exalted at the Right Hand of
the Father for evermore; and that he is glorified with the same Glory, that the
had before the World was; and that even the same that came down from Heaven, is
ascended up to Heaven; and the same that descended is he that ascended.

And we believe, Even that he that was dead is alive; and lives for evermore;
and that he comes, and shall come again, to judge the whole World wi^^
Righteousness, and all people with Equity, and shall give to every man
according to his deeds, at the Day of Judgment when all shall arise to
Condemnation (...) Justification; he that has done good shall receive Life,
and he that has done evil everlasting Condemnation.

And we believe, He is to be waited for in Spirit, to be known after the
Spirit, as he was before the World was; and that is the Knowledge unto eternal
Life, which all that believe in him do receive; and he subdues Death, and
destroys him that has the power of it; and restores from Death to Life, and
quickens by his spirit all that the Father has given him: and we believe
such he justifies and sanctifies, and such are taught of him; but he condemns
all that believe not, but continue in unbelief, and are not taught or him. And
this we faithfully believe.

And we believe, That unto all people upon the face of the whole Earth, is a
Time and Day of Visitation given, that they may return and be saved by Christ
Jesus, who is givn of the Father to call the worst of men to Repentance; and
the most ungodly of Sinners are convinced by him of their ungodly deeds, that
they might believe, and be converted and saved.

And we believe, Herein is the Love of God manifested to all Mankind; and (...)
(...) are shut out by him before they were born into the World; but unto all
men is a V^ation given, and they that do perish it is because they do not
believe in Christ; and destruction is of a man's self, but Salvation is of God,
through believing in his Son, who takes away sin, and renews into his own
Image, that they may become Heirs with him.

And we believe that there is a Crown of Eternal Glory, and an Inheritance of
Eternal Life to be enjoyed for evermore by all that believe, and are chosen of
God; and that there is an everlasting Misery and Destruction to be possessed by
all that believe not, but continue in the state of Reprobation, and are not
changed from the ways of Sin and Death; but walk after the ways of their own
Hearts Lusts, fulfilling the will of the Flesh, in the Evil of this World, and
follow not Christ, the Light of the World, that they may be saved: And we
believe upon all such the Wrath of God abides, and that they have no part in
the Inheritance of God.

And we believe, That it is only he that is born again of the Spirit, and that
walks after the Spirit, who is changed from Death to Life, and who is redeemed
out of the World, and all its ways; such only must inherit the Kingdom of God,
and they only have right thereunto, and none besides, even they that are washed
and cleansed from all Unrighteousness by the Blood of Jesus, by which their
sins are remitted; For his Blood cleanses from all Unrighteousness and Sin;
yea, all such that walk and abide in the Light, which Christ Jesus has
lightened the World withal.

And we believe, That the Saints upon Earth may receive forgiveness of sins,
and may be perfectly freed from the Body of sin and death, and in Christ may be
perfect and without sin, and may have Victory over all Temptations by Faith in
Christ Jesus

And we believe, Every Saint, that is called of God, ought to press after
Perfection, and to overcome the Devil and all his Temptations upon Earth; and
we believe, they that faithfully wait for it shall obtain it, and shall be
presented without sin in the Image of the Father; and such walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, and are in Covenant with God, and their Sins are
blotted out, and remembered no more; for they cease to commit Sin, being born of
the Seed of God.

And we believe, The Gospel of Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation, and
that it ought to be preached freely unto all people, and Christ to be held
forth unto all Mankind, by the Ministry sent of him: And we believe this
Ministry is received by the Gift of the Holy Ghost; and all they that receive
it, are lawfully called to the Ministry; and they may preach the Gospel of
Christ freely, as they have received it freely: And this Ministry is not of
Man, but of God, and is made powerful to the converting of Sinners, and to the
bringing of people to God, and to the Knowledge of his Ways. And we do not
believe, That any man is a Minister of Christ, without the Gift of the Holy
Ghost; or that the Gospel can be received by natural Learning or Education.

And we believe, Such as preach for Hire, and have Hire for preaching, are not
the lawful called Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; such as are Proud, and
High-minded, and Covetous Men, who do not profit the people at all; such as
have run, and never were sent of Christ, who calls by his Spirit into the
Work of the Ministry; and as every one has received the Gift of that, his
Spirit, so he may administer to others.

Concerning Rulers and Governor, we believe, That there ought to be Rulers and
Governors in every Nation, City, Country and Town; and they ought to be such
men as fear God, and hate every evil way; who will judge for God, and not for
man; and will judge righteously, equally and justly, and will give true and
sound Judgment unto all men, without Bribery, or Respect of Persons, not
regarding the Rich above the Poor; but being a Praise unto all that do well,
and a Terror to all Evildoers whatsoever; having knowledge in the pure Law of
God, and themselves continnally exercised therein. And we believe, That every
Law of man ought to be grounded upon the Law of God, pure Reason, and Equity
being the Foundation thereof, that God's Witness in every man may answer to it:
and the Law ought to be known unto all people, before Trangression be charged
or punished in any man. And we believe that every Transgression ought to be
punished according to its nature; and that the Punishment exceed not the
greatness of the Transgression; neither ought any Transgressor to ^ape
unpunished; neither ought any upon false Suspicion or Iealousies, to be caused
to suffer, without the Testimony of true men, or the Confession of the Party.
And we believe, that the Executors of the Law ought to be Just Men, and not
given to Pride, Drunkenness, or any other Evil whatsoever; and ought to be
chosen every year, or otherwise, by the Consent of the people; and that no man
be stopped of his free choice, except justly taxed. And we believe, that all
Governors and Rulers ought to be accountable to the people, and to the next
proceeding Rulers, for all their Actions, which may be inquired into upon
occasion; and that the chiefest of the Rulers be subject under the Law, and
punishable by it, if they be Transgressors, as well as the poorest of the
People: And th^^ true Judgment and Justice will be brought forth in the Earth,
and all that do well will have Praise, and live in Rest and Peace; and all
Evildoers whatsoever may stand in awe, and be afraid of God, and just Men, and
the Execution of Just Laws.

Concerning Religion, we believe, That it is only the Spirit of the Lord that
makes men truly Religious; and that no man ought to be compelled to, or from
any Exercise or Practice in Religion, by any outward Law or Power, but every
man ought to be left free, as the Lord shall persuade his own mind, in doing,
or leaving undone this, or the other Practice in Religion; and every man, of
what Profession in Religion soever, ought to be protected in Peace, provided
himself be a man of Peace, not seeking the wrong of any man's Person or Estate.

And we believe, That to oppose false Opinions, and unsound Doctrines and
Principles, seeking to convince them that oppose themselves, by Exhortation, or
sharp Reproof, by word or writing, ought nor to be counted a Breach of the
Peace; or to strive about the things of the Kingdom of God, by men of contrary
Minds or Judgments, this ought not to be punishable by the Magistrates and
their Laws; for we believe, the outward Laws and Powers of the Earth are only
to preserve men's Persons and Estates, and not to preserve men in Opinions;
neither ought the Law of the Nation to be laid upon men's Consciences, to bind
them to, or from such a Judgment or Practice in Religion: And we believe, that
Christ is, and ought only to be Lord and Exerciser of men's Consciences; and his
Spirit only must lead into all Truth.

And we believe, That Obedience and Subjection in the Lord belongs to
Superiors, and that Subjects ought to obey in the Lord those that have Rule
over them; and that Children ought to obey their Parents, and Wives their
Husbands, and Servants their Masters, in all things which are according to God,
which stands in the exercise of a pure Conscience toward God: But where
Rulers, Parents, or Masters, or any other, command or require subjection in any
thing which is contrary to God, or not according to him, to such causes all
people are free, and ought to obey God rather then man: and we believe, That
herein God will justify them, being guided and led by his Spirit in all that
which is Good, and out of all that which is Evil.

Again, We believe concerning Election and Reprobation, That there is a state
of Election, and a state of Reprobation, a state chosen of God, and a state
rejected of God, and that all Mankind are in one of these states; all that are
elected, are elected in Christ; and all that are out of him are in the state
Reprobate, bringing forth fruits of Death and Darkness, being Children of Wrath
and Disobedience, in the alienation and separation from God, in the
Transgression, unreconcil'd to God, the Enmity ruling in the Heart, being in
the Fall, and not restored to God again, but ignorant of his Power, and of his
Wisdom, having the Understanding darkened, that they cannot see nor perceive
the things that are Eternal; and in this condition his best Works are Sin, and
whatsoever he does, he cannot be accepted of God; for he is dead to God, and
alive to all evil, b^inging forth all his works out of that Ground which is
cursed. This is the condition of all Mankind upon the face of the Earth, in the
first Ad^, and this is the state of Reprobation; and all that abide herein are
rejected of God, and ^ll never inherit eternal Life, but go in^^ Perdition; yet
have all such a Day of Visitation, that they may return out of the state of
Repr^tion; (...) (...) ^ledge, and des^sing the Love of God, ^^ey con^ i^ ^he
(...) (...), (...) (...) Wrath of G^d abides upon them. ^t they t^t (...) (...)
of God, (...) (...) (...) Wrath; for they believe in the Light, and bec^ ^ldren
of the Light, and are renewed in Mind and H^, and recei^ the Love of the
Father, and become planted into Christ, the second Ad^, (...) are (...) (...)
him to bring forth Fruit unto the Father, and ^ll their Fruit (...) (...) ^^om
(...) gr^d which is ^ssed; for they are led by the Spirit of the Fa^r; and ^ch
are in the state of Election, who are ^ade He^rs with Christ (...) (...) Eve^
Inheritance, that never fades away. And this we faithfully believe, That ^cy is
not showed to the Reprobate, nor Judgment to them that are chosen of God.

And this is to go abroad in the World, that all p^ple m^ (...) (...) (...)
(...), and wh^^ (...) have received of God; and they that believe this, and
walk^ (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Father shall be saved; but they that
belie^e (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) be condemned, because they
do not believe. (...) (...) (...) be ^tten, (...) in ^rt, this is given forth,
by one that has believed and received the Knowledge of th^se things from God,
A Friend unto all People, E. B.

Some of the (...)
PRINCIPLES OF THE QUAKERS (Scornfully so called by men) VINDICATED, And proved
Sound, and True, and according to the SCRIPTURES: In Opposition to the False
Charges, and Lying Reports, given forth against the Truth, in two Printed
Books; put forth by one Philip Taverner, a supposed Minister of the Gospel, in
Middlesex near Uxbridge. And hereby Truth is Manifested and Discovered, and the
Controversy determined by the Judgment of Truth, between Philip Taverner
aforesaid, the Accuser, and Edward Buroughs, Defendant of the Truth, who
contends for the Faith of the Gospel, and for the Word of God in the Heart,
against all such Gainsayers, as have the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power;
and many such are in this Age.
WHereas P. Taverner, one of Truth's Opposers (whether thro^ Ignorance or
Subtilty, I now determine not) has again appeared against me and the Truth in
Print, as in Vindication of himself, and his former Work; who about four
Months ago, gave a false Relation of a Dispute; but instead of mending the
matter, he has made his own cause the more vile, as may appear to such who
take a perfect view of the Proceedings from the beginning to the end thereof:
Now the intent of this my Reply is to clear the Truth further, and to take off
his false Aspersions, which he has cast upon my innocent words in my former
Book, in answer to his first. And as for the rest of his Book, which has no
relation to mine, nor to the Dispute, I shall pass it by.

The Title of my first Book was, Something of Truth Made Manifest, etc. To
which say thou, A plausible Title to cover a Railing and Bitter spirit under,
that it may walk in the World less suspected, etc.

Reply, My words are truth; for in (...) ^^ok Truth was made ^^^ifest to ^y in
relation to the former Dispute, to the Satisfaction of many: and as (...) ^ing
an^ ^^^^erness of spirit, I do deny; only I am zealo^^ for the (...) Truth* to
speak plainly, by reproving them that gainsay it; and to (...) (...) God in
every man's Conscience (...) I desire to be manifest, and seek not (...) wor^ to
cov^^ E^, th^^ (...) may not be s^ (...) ^^ou (...) ^y to (...) ^t: but let all
my Enemies s^ct what the ^ill; (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...) to stand
approved, and no^ of man (...) for (...) ^ew in^rd (...) (...) (...) of man,
but of God: And as for railing Language, and (...) (...) ^^^inst thee, I have
used none, but spoke the truth in Plainness.

(...) (...) ^^ing thou ^est to st^ at, is, where^^ I s^d [I suppose thou (...)
(...) ^d thy self Mr. Philip Tavern^^.] and ^^ou now (...) to hide (...) s^
from the force of my words to the sight of the World^ (...) appears (...) to
^ke upon thee with some Shame; and thou say, The (...) not pre^ Mr. before
thy Name, but the Stationer did it; who (say ^^ou) w^ pleased to (...) (...)
Man with that Title, etc.

Rep. No^ instead of clearing himself, he has showed mo^e guilt of Ambition,
(...) before; and my words were, [I supposed] and not an absolute (...) (...)
says; and had not I good Reason to suppose it, (...) (...) was his A^n, being
also contrary to the express Command of Christ, Mat. 23. (...) in^eed, I hardly
ever read any Superscription like to it, by the greatest (...) (...) of men, as
men accoun^; and it is a thing far above Humility, (...) (...) ^^^^^ming any
man, much less one that professes himself to be a (...) of Christ, to
subscribe himself, o^ be with his consent, Mr. such an (...) (...) seems to
cover himself from Ambition, because says he, he did it (...) himself, but
another; I say, I shall not charge him here with Falsehood; but I (...) (...) it
is very unusual for any man to add any thing to another man's Book, without his
knowledge; I never knew it done by any Stationer, who has had (...) knowledge
of their Ways: but yet he acknowledges it was done in Honor to him, to
subscribe him Master; and here he has justified the thing; and (...), that he
is indeed guilty of Ambition, who confesses, that it is an (...) to him, to be
subscribed Mr. by another; for he says, The Man that (...) ^^ Honored him
with that Title: And here men may take notice what Honor ^^is my Adversary
looks after, even the Honor that Christ forbids, who (...) ^^ his
Ministers, Be not ye called of men Masters; but the man has honour^ (...)
Taverner with titling him Mr. as he says.

T^^ next thing treated proves also that he is Ambitious; for he plead^ much
the lawfulness of Titles, of Civil Respects, as he calls it; and this is all to
justi^ the Title of Master to himself, and thereupon has wrested diverse
Scriptures: (...) though the Unbelieving Greeks used the word, Master, or Sir,
John ^2. (...) ^e has quoted, is this an Example sufficient for Christians to
break the ^and of Christ? Mat. 23. 10. Neither are any other Scriptures a
Warrant (...) thy man so to do; though for a whole Page he treats only as for
the lawful^ of ^^ch Titles, yet in the end would shut guilt from his own Door,
that he (...) not Titles; for he says, This he speaks not that he would have
it so done to (...). And this his seeming to justify himself proves himself
guilty, knowing that he had given truly occasion for People to judge he would
have it so; and in the end would blind the minds of the Simple with words of
seeming Humility, that he would not have it so done to him, as if he cared not
for it.

And whereas I said in my first [That I am without any Prejudice toward the
man (viz.) P. T.] He says, I must give him leave to question it; first, from
my Railing Words against him; secondly, from my Scornful Pity expressed, etc.
(says he.)

Rep. I have no Prejudice against him, God is my Witness; and he may que^ what
he will, who is in the Unbelief; for its manifest by his former, that he
questions where he has no just occasion, showing much prejudice in himself,
for he said in his first Relation, commenting upon some of my words, If by such
words I meant so, then it was truth; but if I meant so, then it was false: And
(...) not this a perfect sign of prejudice in him, who had not just occasion to
except against the words as they lay; nor could not condemn them, but upon
giving his own Interpretation of them first? Whereupon I said in my first
Answer, p. 14. [Alas poor man! must I be judged upon thy own Meaning, etc.] and
yet in (...) words I showed no scornful Pity to him, though he falsely
supposes it, and s^ it; and so while he cannot believe that I am without
Prejudice against him, (...) has showed himself guilty of prejudice toward me
and my words, to be see^, and justly believed by many.

And whereas he sait^, Its doubtful how^ I own the Authority of the Scrip^;
because I say in my first, [We through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures
(...) (...) Hope] have had Hope, says he: Now it seems, because I place my
words, (...) have had Hope, his unbelieving doubtful Heart questions whether I
own the ^^thority of Scriptures; and would falsely conclude, That through the
Comfort of the Scriptures we have no Hope now; and says he, Are you now flown
so high that you need not, etc. page 3. And therefore I may now answer further,
Ye^, through the Promise of the Lord, declared in Scripture, we have Hope (...)
this present, That God will bring down and overthrow all such that deceive the
(...), who are made Ministers by man, and of man, at Schools and Colleges; and
all this set Maintenance by Tithes, and casting people into Prison, and
spoiling their Goods to maintain Ministers, as at this day in the Nation; many
Hundreds have been cast into Prison, and many Hundred Pounds worth of Cattle,
(...) Bedding, and all kind of Goods have been distrained for to maintain the
Ministry. I say, We have Hope, according to the Scriptures, That God will being
down all this, and your preaching for Money, and bargaining with people (...)
so much the year, and your preaching what you have studied for from the
Scriptures, by a Glass in a Steeple-house, where the Mass used to be said; God
will confound all this, and poor people shall be delivered from the Mouths of
those Deceivers, that make a Prey upon them, and preach for Hire, and seek for
their Gain from their Quarter; and these things, with many other, we hope for
at present: Wherefore think not in thy self, we now do not hope; for we (...)
do, and and have had Hope, through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures.

Whereas I charged P. T. in my last, [That he had wronged both me and the Tr^^^
in his Relation, etc.] which he says in his Answer is false; and he says, He
(...) not apprehend me and the Truth so well agreed, that it is possible to
wrong us both (...) (...) etc. page 4.

Rep. That he wronged me it appears, in his not relating all that I said (...)
the Dispute (the Ground of this Quarrel) not by half and more I k^; and in
relating more then himself spoke, by far: And let sober men judge ^ther he did
not here wrong me, in relating a thing that passed between us, (...) relating
much more then ever he spoke, and much less then I spoke; if the truth of that
Matter (were it wrong or right Matter) and my self also, be not by this kind of
Doctrine wronged, I appeal to all honest People, whilst both he and I (...)
silent: so the False-Dealing and Wrong in his first Book, is upon him still,
according to my Charge, unremoved.

And the Lie in this his last Book, in that he says, I say Falsely; when I have
spoken the Truth, which is a Lie in the highest degree, in saying when I spok^
the truth, That I spoke Falsely; and his Proof, in that the Truth and I do not
agree, is, because I said in my first, [The Saints have no need of Scriptures
to teach them; but the Spirit of the Father leads and teaches into all
Truth.]

Rep. My words are justifiable; for, It is the Spirit that leads into all
Truth, John 16. and the Saints need no man to teach them, but they have the
A^^inting within them; and they know all things by the Unction, 1 John: and the
Spirit of the Father is given them, by which the Scriptures were given forth;
And the Lord is the Teacher of his People; and they need not any to say to
them, Know the Lord, Ier. 31. Ye they that witness this, do not make the
Scripture of none effect, but own it in its place, yet not as their Teacher;
for then they should deny the new Covenant, Ier. 31. and then something besides
the Spirit leads into Truth, and they have something to teach them besides the
Anointing: but if this be all the Proof that can be given against me, That I
and the Truth do not agree, I doubt not but ^ll Spiritual men will see the
Emptiness and Weakness of the Witness against me; and will be more confirmed,
rather then shaken, that I and the Truth do fully agree, though P. T. speaks
otherwise falsely against me; and as if I had contradicted the Apostles words,
which he quotes against me, who says, Whatsoever things were written before
time, were written for our learning; which Scripture I do own, and no way
contradict; its the Error of his Judgment, which so judges; for, even they for
whom the things that were written, were for their learning; yet they were led
into all Truth by the Teachings of the Spirit, and they were taught of the
Father; and what was written to them, was not written because they knew not
Truth, or to teach them Truth, 1 John 2. 21. let him learn what this means.

The next thing he notes is, whereas I said [I then proved (meaning at the
Dispute) b^ Scriptures, That some were perfect in this life, 1 Cor. 2. 5. even
perfect without sin, John 1. 47. 1 John 3. 7.] And to gainsay this he has
brought, 2 John 1. 8. If (...) say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us: and says he, Who speaks truth in this E. B. or the
Apostle? as if I had spoken contrary to the Apostle: Solomon also (says he)
tell us, There is not a Just Man upon Earth, that does good, and sins not:
which also he brings as a Witness against what I have affirmed.

Rep. Its true, I held forth a state of Perfection to be waited for, and
attained ^^to upon Earth; and I am not ashamed of my Principle, neither is it
found too light, For that Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 5. does testify, that some were
perfect upon Earth in the days of the Apostles; and if they were so, the same
is to be waited for and witnessed in this Age; for the Hand of the Lord is not
shortened: And that Scripture, 1 John 3. Whosoever abides in him, sins not;
and (...) is born of God does not commit sin, verse. 6, 9. does clearly
manifest, there is a ^^^te upon Earth free from sin, wherein Power is received
and felt over all Temptations, and over the Devil, even such an estate, That
the Wicked One can^ ^^ch such that are born of God; and this was the thing I
held forth, and do vindi^e against all Opposers; That the Saints may wait for,
and witness upon Earth, to have power over sin, and over its Temptations, and
free from the committing of sin, by the Power of the second Adam living and
dwelling in th^^: And thus must thou believe P. T. or else thou believe not
Scripture, ^^^ that any are born of God, or abide in Christ; if thou believe
not that, t^ confess thou errest in Judgment, who art unbelieving of what the
Script^ bears witness of. Therefore tell me plainly if thou believe, That
there ^y that are born of God, and abide in Christ; then must thou believe,
(...) do not commit sin; el^e thou deniest the Scripture: And what I held forth
herein, I do not contradict the Apostle, nor Solomon's words; for its true the
Apostle said, If we say we have no Sin we, deceive our selves: but art thou so
blind that thou do not see, he speaks there of a state before Confession of
Sins; and the words says the Apostle, If we confess our Sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us (...) Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness;
so I do agree with the Apostle's words, and do not contradict them: For I do
say, If any say they have no sin, before they do confess their sin, and forsake
their sin, and be cleansed from it, I do say they are Liars, and the Truth not
in them; and I also say, If that after a man has confessed his sin, and be
cleansed from it, and has his sin forgiven him, and witnesses that he is born
of God, and does not commit sin; I say, he (...) the Truth also, and the Truth
is in him. And though Solomon did say, There is not a just man upon Earth, that
does good, and sins not; yet is my affirmation true notwithstanding; for
Solomon forgot the Lord, and his Heart went after many strange Women, and
became a Transgressor, and in that state did not know the Birth born of God,
which does not commit Sin; for he was but under the Administration of the Law,
which does not make perfect, as pert^ to the Conscience; and peradventure in
that state; he being erred from God, he did not see any that did not sin: These
things will be plain to some* though perhaps thou may shut thine eye against
them; and Solomen was not our Example in Conversation, I am sure, nor hardly in
Doctrine. And thus I (...) weighed thy Text, which thou seem to say before,
I have not weighed; and my Principles are proved sound, and thou and thine too
light, and the (...) the Lord will scatter them.

And P. T. confesses, Every Real-hearted Christian may be, and is in (...)
called Perfect.

Rep. Then wherefore does he oppose me, who testifies the same thing? and he
now confesses even, That every Real-hearted Christian may be, and is called
Perfect in Scripture: And is not he here guilty, in that he charged me falsely,
in page 21. of his last, With going Rounds, like unto a Horse in a Mill, who
sometimes denies Perfection, and sometimes confesses it, to be attained in this
life? but he is forced in the end to confess to the Truth, and to justify me*

And also the Scripture does testify, The Saints were already perfect and
complete in Christ, while they were in the Life upon Earth, Col. 1. though
there be a time wherein all the Saints do complain of the Body of Sin, in their
Warfare and Travel; yet there is a state also, wherein they have put off the
^doy of Sin, and are the Servants of Righteousness, and free from Sin, Romans
(...). 22. But P. T. shows little Experience in those states, as of the Travel
under the Body of Death, and also of the Victory over it; and so what he spe^
is but by guess from other men's words, and then it is no marvel if he errs in
^udgment, and bring one Scripture to contradict another, not having the inf^
Spirit that gave it forth, nor feeling the States, nor the passing through these
Conditions declared therein, for there is a time of Traveling, and complaining
under the Body of Sin, and its Burden; and a time of Freedom from it, and
Victory over it, yea, even in this life upon Earth.

And whereas I said in my last, [Many of the Saints daily received more and
(...) of God's Wisdom, and of his Power and Life revealed in them, wherein they
grow in to God from strength to strength.] Now says he, But whether he does
not own some to have attained so high, that there can be no Addition, is a
Query; my soul (says he) (...) not been able to enter into his secrets in this
thing, (because my words were, Mary of the Saints, etc.)

Rep. My first words it seems he cannot contradict, but owns them to be the, so
I need not defend them; only he supposes a Question, in which there is not
much Edification to be answered; and I have no secrets in what I speak; for to
the the Children of Light my words are plain, though to P. T. and such, they
may be Parables and Secrets: But as for my own particular, I now here answer
(...) Question, and further reply, I do grow up in Wisdom and Knowledge daily;
and never knew so much of P. T's. Deceit, as now I do, since, and at the
Dispute (the Ground of this our Debate) so I thought good to let him know, that
I do grow in Truth, which does daily discover more and more Deceit in him, and
them that oppose Truth; and so also grow in the Knowledge of his Error of
Judgment and Ignorance, that I may condemn it, and judge it.

And whereas I said, [The Light which everyman is lightened withal by Christ, is
sufficient to bring up every man to believe in Christ, that loves the Light,
and walks in it; and unto such is Grace added and increased daily, and.] as in
page 16 of my first more appears,

In opposition to this, to overthrow it, as he supposes, he has nominated
that Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of

^

(...) Now my words are true, and no Contradiction to the Apostle's words;
(...) to such as are blind, that cannot discern between Light and Darkness;
(...) will judge falsely, and out of an evil mind make an appearance of seeming
(...) where there is none; for the Light that lights every man that (...) the
World, is Christ, John. ^.9. and that Christ, the Light, that (...) every (...)
that comes into the World, is sufficient to bring every man, (...) loves the
Light, and walks in it, to believe in Christ; these are my words, (...)mind;
and would any man, that were not stark blind, make (...)this Doctrine; or bring
a Scripture to prove the contrary? (...)I own, and do no way contradict; For
the (...) Man does (...) the things of God, nor know (...): yet this is not
Contrary to what I say, (...) Christ Jesus lights every man that comes into
the World (...) Light (...) is sufficient; and he changes men from Natural to
(...) so they (...) to believe in Christ, that has lightened (...)say, or hold
forth, That the natural man (...)God, and that the natural man has Faith,
(...) never (...)to my mind to say: so he has drawn (...) evil Consequence
(...)and then confounded his own (...)for my saying and intent is, that
(...)the World; and his Light is (...)natural to spiritual, and to give
(...)things of God, and of his Spirit (...)is no Contradiction to the Apostles
wor^^ though (...)understanding, I suppose, rather than (...)Principle is
proved sound, and the Title of the (...) a Lie.

And whereas I said, [That Christ wrought Righteousness perfectly (...) and
(...) Righteousness in all that believe, and (...)or that has not the other.]
page 12. of my first. He says, Whither I do (...) Justification and
Sanctification, he leaves all rational men to judge, etc.

(...) That Christ wrought Righteousness without us is not denied by him,
(...)the Righteousness of the Law in the (...) he cannot well deny; (...) read
Romans 8. 4. and that no man is justified by the Righteousness that (...) wrought
without, who believes not, nor is converted to God, but in the (...) of Satan:
This all the Children of God believe, and know, That none (...) justified by
Christ's Righteousness without (...) who are convert^^ to God (...) received
Christ; and he is in them, (...) else they are (...) and not justified: And so
I am not ashamed of my Principle (...)to be too light; for he that has not
Christ, (...)is a Reprobate, and not justified by an^ Righteousness without.
Neither (...) found. Justification and Sanctification, which be (...)are one in
Christ; for he is made unto us Sanctification and Justification; and (...)that
is in the Pollutions of the World, unsanctified, is not justified (...)
condemned and so none are justified by a Righteousness without them, but (...)
in the same corrupt (...) with him, must not I be judged (...)justify, If any
Work be (...)in the Strength and Power of (...)strength, then (...)and that no
Work or Word is justified, but what the ^: And though P.T. ignorantly
commenceth (...) these words, yet are they words of (...) and Righteousness,
and all that he says (...) nothing to the (...)

And whereas I did ask him, which he had Ignorantly affirmed in his (...) that
Righteousness, which Christ works ^, in his Strength and (...)is called Our
Righteousness?] which he see^^ to answer, but (...)my words; for I meant not
Ours by enjoyment, but Ours (...)

the Prophet speaks, when (...)Righteousness that Christ works in us by his
Spirit, and the Power of his (...) is Ours by enjoyment in the second Adam, as
the Gift of God to us; but (...)in the first Adam, in the Righteousness of the
Law, in the (...)and that was the strength of my Query* where that
Righteousness* (...)us by the Spirit and Strength of Christ; and not in our
own, is called our ^^^^teousness, ours as in the first Adam: But I see thou
have not understood (...)of my Query for weakness of Understanding; and then
how should (...) rightly answer it?

Also I Queried, [How Christ working Righteousness in us, by the Power of (...)
not by our own strength, can be called the Righteousness of the Law] (...)Now I
meant, the Righteousness of the Law in the Flesh, and not (...) Spirit; I know
the working of Christ (...) in us to will and (...) do by (...)and Strength,
and power of Grace, is the fulfilling the Righteou^^^^^ (...) the Law (...)
Christ in us, but it is not the Righteousness of the Law in the (...)But to
this thou have not answered, (...)conceiving, and not the innocence of my
Queries.

And whereas he stumbles, and is offended, because I said, [ No (...) is (...)
in any word or work, but what they are led unto by the Spirit, and those Words
(...) the Spirit leads unto, (...)no other words or works.] And from (...)
would falsely (...) I^^^ification by Works, and by something (...)

I say, No, (...)shall no Flesh living be justified, (...)that moves and
leads (...) and Works of Truth and Righteous^^^^ (...) Words and Works which
he is (...)and this is not (...)Apostle's words, which he seem^ (...)against me
(...) While we were sinners, Christ dyed for us; (...)justified by his Blood,
^: This is not (...) what I say, for we do (...) the Blood of Jesus to
justify, but yet not (...) are not cleansed by it, and (...) by the Spirit
into all Truth, but it is (...) are justified only, who are led into all Truth
by his Spirit, such are (...) by his Blood in the Spirit, and (...) from W^^^^,
who are born of the (...) Word, but they (...)are not justified, nor saved ^.

Then he Querieth* Whether I (...) Pardon of Sin out of Doors?

(...) I answer, No, for they that are (...) into all Truth by the Spirit
(...)are pardoned, and forgiven, and (...) no more, but blotted (...)cannot be
read; for they are ^leased from it, and commit no^ sin.

Then he asks, Whether (...)Causes of Justification; the one, ^?

Re^. I say, (...)and the Work of Righteousness is in God, (...) free Love and
M^^^^, which is ov^^ (...)Works, and they receive the (...) of it, and the Gift
of it, that are led by the Spirit, as the Effect thereof, (...) none else.
Though he asks, Whether Forgiveness of Sin has its rice from (...) Christ
works in us, or from what Christ has done and suffered for us? I say, (...)
soever Christ has done and suffered with (...)while man has not rece^^^^
Christ, nor the Work of Christ in him, but remains in the first Adam, in
Tra^^gression, the true Work and Ground of Justification he knows not, nor
(...) not, neither knows the Mediator-ship between God and him.

Then (...) the conclusion of this matter P.T. says (...) for to ^^ow, E.B.
(...) the Truth are not so (...)forsake (...) etc.

Rep. Hold Friend, come back again* What (...) thou proved yet any thing
against me, save that I hold the T^^^^? Thou have (...) a Co^^^^sion too soon,
without sound Evidence, and thou (...) not be Judge in thy own Cause; neither
have thou proved me and the Truth to disagree (...)may judge. It appears thou
art the man that seem to be Righteous in thy own eye (...)

(...)

none falsely herein; for, who can clear themselves from the Guilt of it, of
that Generation? if any, I condemn them not; but can P. T. do it? ask his
Neighbors. Has not he sums of Money by the Year, Tithes, or other Wages for,
preaching? try him a little, give him nothing for a Year or two, and then if he
preach to you, and never complain for want of Wages and Money, then I (...)
believe he is clear, and then he may better boast than he can now: And as for
(...) verse of that function in that Country, they have cas^ men into Prison,
where they yet lie, and taken suit of them at Law, and taken their Goods,
because some could not for Conscience sake give you Hire, and Tithes, and
Money; and (...) ^hese free; or guilty of my Charge? let the Lord judge, and
all his Saints.

He says, He does not plead for all who go under the name of Ministers in
England; he fears there is many of them no better then Wolves in S^^ep's
Clothing* ^^c. Then why does he not come out, and cry against them, but remain
^^^^^gst them (...) their Practice? For wherein can he clear himself of anyone
thing, which they are guilty of which he confesses are Wolves in Sheep's
Clothing? Was not his Call the same (...) theirs? ^^d is not his Practice in
Ministry and Maintenance gen^rally the same with theirs? If he has ought to
say, to clear himself, we will answer further (...) other^ise all men shall
Judge. That while he accuses some of England's Ministers to be Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing, himself is found also guilty; except* I say he can make
appear a perfect difference between ^his Call, Practice, and Maintenance, and
theirs, which he is never able to do, or to justify that he is not of the same
nature, and by the same spirit, but contrary to theirs, that he accuses* and
(...) to be ^^lves in Sh^^^^ Clothing: and I have as much gro^^^ to suspect him
to be one of the Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, as he has ground to suspect his own
Companions and (...) to be such.

And in that he says, (...) of the Quakers* have been found guilty of
Blasphemy and that some of them are found vain light Person^* or ^eady, and
high-minded.

Rep. He does here secretly charge and prove nothing; for Blasphemy (...) (...)
come out of and have denied all lightness after the Flesh and High-mi^, and if
any such come among us, they are denied, and are not of us till (...) be
converted to God* and turned from all evil: But this his secret charge against
others is but that himself may seem cl^^*

Then he asks, Are all guilty of preaching for Hire, and divining for (...) and
^^ds me. Not condemn the Generation of the Righteous; and then ^^nfesses* (...)
take that (...) the (...) (...)* or that which they have given by Persons; and
justifies it, and says* (...) (...) (...) a Preaching for Hire, etc. page 19.
of his last.

R^p* All that I (...) to be guilty* are so* for I charge not the (...) but
(...) the Country People ask them how many of their Teachers are (...) and have
not Money. Tyth^^* nor other things for preaching* And I have (...) heed of
condemning the Righteous, and yet dare not let the Guilty go (...) ed (...)
unreproved (...) therefore (...) I do reprove: And now in the (...) has
justified preaching for Hire (...)in the same page seemed to den^ (...) but
(...) Maintenance according to Gospel Ministry, as pract^^^^ in the (...) of
Christ, and his Apostles; or whether that comes not (...) accounts (...)
Preaching for Hire, in taking Gifts, (...) (...) States, and Gifts of (...)*
which thou justifiest: No such Maintenance did Christ allow to his Ministers*
as to take sums of Money yearly for preaching, nor such things were never
justified (...) Christ* But into whatsoever House ye enter* eat such things as
are set before you (...)* Christ; And that is Balaam's practice, To take Gifts
of the State, or (...)would have taken the Gift of Balack. So by their own
account the (...)(for some of them ^^ou pleadest not for) go (...) Gifts and
Rewards, (...) false Brethren did in the days of the Apostles; for* though you
would seem to clear them of preaching for Hire, yet have thou proved them
guilty of preaching for Gifts and Rewards: And is not their taking * Gifts from
the State and Persons, which thou justifiest, a perfect Preaching for Gifts and
Rewards, as ever the false Brethren, which the true Apostles declar^^ against?
And so out of thy own mo^th they are proved such (even the best of t^ (...)
thou vindica^est) as go in* (...)'s (...)* preaching ^or Gif^^ and R^* And is
it not time now for people to (...) from you, who are found, (...) (...) own
^^^fession, in Balaam's way, and in the way of the false Apostles* ^ing ^or
Gifts and Rewards from persons, and from the State; and so but of (...) ^^^th
I Am justified, and your selves condemned.

(...) (...) I ^d, [Who are D^^^ Sheph^rds, which do not gather you to God,
(...)* And he ^aith, There are many, who lift up their Voices, as a Trumpet, to
tell (...) (...) ^^^s, etc.

(...). It app^ (...) through all the Nation, that people (...) not gathered to
(...) (...) does (...) Wickedness abound, and people show forth an unconv^rted
(...)* and (...) ^gh man^ may out of Hypocrisy, and for Ends to themsel^ (...)
(...) Si^ in others, and live themselves in the same, people hereby (...) (...)
(...) ^t all; (...) such as have run* and not been sent, do n^^ profit t^ (...)
(...) (...) ^^r while themselves live in that, which they cry against in
others, (...) (...) (...) the Lord is not with them, to convert Sinn^rs. But
for a better di^ (...) ^he Teachers of this Generation* I refer the Reade^
(...) a Book (...) (...) (...) Lawful Trial of the Teachers, etc. wherein th^^
are set forth what th^^ (...) (...):

(...) (...) ^ing he has observed, is, where I charged him in my last, to have
given ^on of much more then he spa^^; said I, [I bel^^ve f^^^ (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) less then I spoke at that Disp^] and at this he seems to (...)
(...) (...) himself guilty, but not (...) ^o mu^ as (...) (...)* Well, (...)
(...) were there present, who h^ (...) (...) (...) M^^ter* may (...) (...) to
my Charge in this particular; (...) (...) (...) n^ (...) cl^^r himself at (...)
(...) (...) (...) ad to confess himself guilty by (...)* (...) (...) (...) n^^
^o much (...) ^s I spoke; and yet called his Relation, A faithful Acc^; (...)
was (...) ^d ^faithful, though (...) he would seem to cover himself, and (...)
(...) (...) charging him too deeply; (...) (...) wo^^^ ^^^ain true upon him,
(...) (...) former work was ^^^ther p^* no^ ^together honest* and (...) th^^ he
(...) (...) whit amended it, but the rath^^ (...) his Weakness more (...), as
(...) ^est Reader may judge.

(...) where^^ I charged him with a ^ain* (...)* (...) spirit; because his
(...) (...) ^d, T^^ (...) (...)* and (...) wo^^^ (...) himself from my (...),
and says, That it was a N^ accor^g (...) (...) (...), etc.

(...) My Charge on him w^^ true; for (...) Title did favor of a scorn^^^
(...) (...) the name, (...) ^as given in Scorn and (...), and (...) ^o (...)
did (...) (...)* A^^ as for going Ro^, o^ which (...) spea^* (...) (...) (...)
^ilty* a^ before I have shew^* (...) ^ing a thing (...) then (...) (...)*

^ged, [ Th^] (...)proved in my Charge, (...) he is not a^ (...)and False
(...), by (...)more (...)(...) then I spoke; and this he confesses ^^ll; and
that I (...) su^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...); and untrue; and he (...) no^
himself ^f it, (...) (...) (...)* (...)^.

Their ^, in that (...)(...) relate truly: but he has taken in hand to relate
that (...) (...) (...) (...) truly, as in my ^st I did make (...) (...) (...)
seen, (...) (...)* something of Tru^^ (...) (...), etc. (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...)*

(...) wh^ ^e again charged the (...) with a spirit of (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of the Sp^; (says (...)) etc.

Rep. He here again charges falsely; for we know that Scorning and Jeers aft^^
the Flesh are not Works of the Spirit, nor Fruits of it, but that we have
d^nyed and its ca^^ out, (...) do we scorn or jeer any, ^^ing a^ in Isa. 3^.
Then he no less then confesses his Wrong-Dealing, who in his last changed (...)
words, from called to ^^ned, which word is of much consequence in that (...)
but would cover R. G. by saying, That R. G. (...) not undertake to prove the
Sc^ considered as mere Writings, but the thing contained in the Scriptures, to
be the (...) God, etc.

Rep. Here P. T. has endeavored to mend the matter, by his Concep^ (...)
Meaning given to R. G's. words; now the words of R. Goodgroom were, (...) He
would prove the Letter the Word; and upon that brought his (...) (...) is not
the Letter mere Writings, and nothing else, but when (...) see they (...) not
make good their own words, then they turn off the stren^ of (...) by They meant
so, or they meant so; and no man ever ye^ could, or can prove (...) all the
Scriptures, That the Letter (the Writings) are called the Word (...) as I still
confessed, that which is written of is the Word; and the W^ the words that
declare of the Word, which was in the Beginning. But (...) would fain ^^concile
this Difference between us; say they, The W^ Letter, are the Word; say I, That
which is written of, is the Word: Now (...) these are great difference, as
Spiritual Men may judge; as much as (...) dead Trumpet; and a living Breath
sounded through it: Nay, its hard (...) concile that which is contrary in
nature, they must leave preaching for (...) and ^ease to take Tyth^^ and (...)
Preaching, before I can be at (...) another Bi^th (...) speak and liv^ them,
and that which now lives in th^^ (...) be slain, and their cr^wn (...) dow^
before reconciled I can be to them, (...) to me; though I have (...) against
Persons, more the^ the (...) (...) them that opposed the Truth; nor no Weapon
shall I use against them; (...) (...) that is Spiritual, and the Sword that
goes out of the Lamb's Mouth. (...) the many Scriptures which he quotes, page
23. ^o neither say nor sig^ (...) the Letter (the Writings) are the Word, (...)
(...) ^^^^ed; though: M^ (...) 5. 5.) ^id, He would (...) them (...) (...) of
the Lord; did he then show (...) Letter, the Writings, the Scripture? I say.
No; therefore he did not (...) Writings and the Letter the W^rd of God, as you
affirmed, and s^ (...) prove: but tho^ ^test (...), an^ ^rovest nothing (...)
(...) though many times the Word o^ the Lord came to such a Prophet, and to
(...) Prophet, as thou (...) proved (...) (...), I^^l, and others; yet did the
Wr^ and the Letter come to them, or that which the Letter and Writings (...)
(...) let Wise Men judge: That, no^ all thou can ^ay, does not prove, (...)
Writings, the Letter, is ^e (...) of God, or the ^ver any (...) (...) (...) of
God called them (...): (...) that (...) better Proof be given, which I ne^^^
(...) need not revoke any (...) that I have said contrary,] viz. Th^^ (...)
Letter (...) tings are the Word, (...) (...) (...) Holy Man (...) (...) so
called: But still I say, The (...) tings and Lette^ are not the Word (...) the
^^ing wri^^en of, is the Word (...) that lives forever.

Then (...) that I charged R. G. with saying; wh^^ I had my (...) in my (...)
the Dispute, I had the ^ing signified in my (...), (...) (...); which thi^^
(...)first Relation had much ^^^^^fied, but now he see^ to acknowledges (...)
(...) and excuses it, by supposing it was, A Slip of his T^, the highe^^ ^tter
of (...) in it*

(...). ^s for the words, (...) only (...) self, but di^ others do will
(...)them spoken by R. G. (...) Fellow D^tant; and had he or (...)a S^ of the
Tongue, (...) had gone no ^ther; (...) (...) th^^ (...), in thy (...)lation,
gave a wrong Account thereof and had laid down the thing qui^^ (...)wise then
he spoke it, this made the matter more a Transgression, and thy (...) count to
be false; neither am I rea^y to catch words from the (...) of (...)pon^^t, as
thou charge^^ me; bu^ that Char^^ ^ ^ ^ust needs make use of it, to show the
Folly (...) s^^h men that will so do, (...)of their own Mouthe^ often, and by
their own words to confound them; (...)^hou have me to give away (...) just
Cause, through neglect of hearing (...) ^ing notice of such fou^ words; as to
say, I had the Thing in my h^d that was (...)(...) the Bible, when I (...) the
Bible in my hand; and so ^et Deceit a top on me (...)of reproving Evil* I am
otherwise taught, do thou judge what thou (...)my Principles are found to agree
with the Script^re; for it (...) shall be ^ed by (...) words, and by his words
shall (...) be condemned.

(...) ^y Answers to his Q^eries, raised from some words of mine writ^ (...),
The Standard, etc. My Answer; say thou, is little else (...)thing over again,
etc. Now I say, It^ needless here to tran^ (...) and An^rs over again; but let
them be looked in my first (...) (...) Something of Truth Made Manifest, etc.
when it may be seen, that (...)suffici^^t, and laid down to the satisfaction of
all reasonable (...)be resolved; though thou say, Th^^^ i^ (...) (...)
evidence of Truth (...)first; but do not at all discover the falsness (...)
them (...) any parti^ar, (...)been right for thee to have ^^^e, and not to ^ave
charged evil (...)my Answers, and prove nothing; but (...)believe him, ex^
(...)^is words (...) (...) Oracle* for them ^t ^^^e rec^^ved the good
(...)cannot believe him.

(...) Conclusion, he charges me (...) ^sh kind of (...), (...) (...) [W^ can
be in the (...) of such (...) that (...)so ba^ (...) (...)s^ (...) w^^ds?] when
in his former he (...) ^luded, That I (...)Doctrine, and weakened the (...) o^
(...) Scri^, to (...) ^ng thoughts of them; and such (...); because I ^d affi^d
the (...)saying, [The Devil (...) (...) (...) ^ing (...) (...) Scri^] (...)I
not Reason to question what is in his heart, who had the boldness, (...)^o
(...) evilly against me, as he d^d (...) proving (...) (...) ^o what I said:
And in that I did charge Dark^ess (...) (...) upon (...) I do, and may still,
till he Repen^^; for does he not accuse me falsely in (...) things, as in
saying, My Principles (...) (...) light, etc. but proves not parti^ his Charge:
and in his first Book accused us, as if we had a Pope in our (...), which words
are both Lies and Scornful? and are not* th^^^ things true (...) that he is in
Darkness and Blindness; and so my Charge is (...) false upon (...)

(...) he says, He will not judge E. B. ^astily, etc.

(...). Have not thou falsely judged me already (...) many things, as I have
showed? (...)the Lord in time may let thee see thy judgment is false, and
awaken thy (...)to Repentance; and then shall thou confess, I have done thee no
(...)but the Wrong-Dealing lies at thy Door: so that by what is said, the
(...)thy Book is a Lie, and utterly false; which is, Some Principles of Edw. ^,
called a Quaker, Examined, and found too light.

(...) Now in this I shall not be Judge altogether in my own Cause, but leave
(...)the view of sober Men, and require their Judgment, when they have read
(...)^erly over, what one particular, instanced by him, is proved to be un^ound
(...)light? for, according to the Testimony of the holy ^en of God in Scrip^
^^^reby may I confirm the Truth of what I have, and do hold forth; and to
(...)^ns Conscience do commend my self, to be approved in the sight of God;
(...) good Report or bad Report of men I regard not, but tr^^d over them both;
(...) ^^^rein the Truth is wronged, I am bound to give my Evidence for it, and
(...)opposers; and that is the very end of this my present Work to contend
(...) (...) Truth, and not for Mastery, though Truth does give me Mastery over
(...); and to hold forth the same Faith, Light and Truth which the Apostles
(...)before the Apostasy, which has been clouded in all this dark Night of
^cy, which has been over the World for many Ages, since the Man-child (...)
^ght up to God, and the Woman ^^ed into the Wilderness, spoken of in the
Revelations; but now the Light is made manifest, and the Glory of the Lord is
revealing, and the Day is dawned, and the, Night is over to ^y, and the
subversion of this Ministry now in England, is clearly seen from (...)Ministry
of Christ was in the days of the Apostles.

And now as concerning this Controversy, between P^. T^^^^^^r and (...) (...),
whoever is not satisfied herewith; but desires a full and true Account of the
(...), may peruse his first Book, called, The Q^^kers-Rounds, etc. (...)
(...)Answer called, Something of Truth Made Manifest, in Opposition to a False
(...), etc, and then his second Book, called, Some Principles of E^w. Burr^,
(...), and then this my last; let them be all read in order, and so^ly, by
(...)not satisfied about the matter, and I doubt not but thereby you may (...)
who is in the Truth, and who is in the Error: and they may fee, that (...)he
has not faithfully answered, but passed by many material particul^rs,
(...)something has no way seemed to clear himself of what I have truly (...)
(...) on him, but he remains under the guilt of my Charge; and to the Ligh^
(...) (...) in every man's Conscience; and to all whose Judgments are thereby
(...)* (...) refer my self to (...) judged; and what I have written, I leave to
be judg^^.

And diverse other things there are held forth by Philip T^, (...) (...) have
said little to; but they are recorded as his Principles, among a ^* ber of the
Priests and Professors, in a Book answered to go abroad, called (...) Priests
and Pross^^s Principles, (...) the Quaker' s Answer to them; w^ (...)desire
further to he satisfied may in reading many hundred of particular (...)and
affirmations of Doctrine, held forth by Preaching and Print by the (...)which
are ans^d, (...) the Error of them shown; to which I refer (...) (...)to know
more if what I have here written be not enough: For the ^* tion of Truth is my
Crown and Life, over all the World.

London, the 20th of the 7th Month, 1658. Edward Burr^

A TESTIMONY Against a Great Idolatry COMMITTED: And a True Mourning Of the
Lord's Servant, (...) the many Considerations of his Heart, upon that Occasion
of the great stir about an Image made and carried from* (...)Place to another;
happening the 23th day of the 9th Month.
IT came to pass, and happened, that being at Kingston upon Thames, the the
22th day of the ninth Month, it was ordered the next Morning, that I came from
thence to London; and as I entered in at Charing Cross, I be^^ld a very great
Multitude of People gathering together, and thronging and pressing exceedingly;
and the whole Streets were filled, from one side to the other, upwards and
downwards, so far as I could see; with abundance gazing forth at every Window,
and upon the Belconies, and House-tops; and the Glass was ^d down for people to
look out into the Streets; and an exceeding number of people there was, all the
Streets so thronged, that I thought it could not be possible that any more
could throng in, or pass by: and there were Guards of Soldiers, both of Horse
and Foot; and they stayed me, and stopped my Horse; and said, I might not pass
that way; neither indeed could I well, by reason of the throng of people: and I
stayed a very little, but presently passed back another way, in a kind of
wondering at this great stir I found in my way; and I beheld all spirits of
people were up in a Wonderment and Admiration, and gazing they were, and
hurrying, as if some mavelous and great thing had happened to them, or were
to be seen by them; and I felt the spirits of Men, Women and Children were all
on Fire, and they were in an admiring frame, and in a condition not usual. And
as I passed along, I turned in my Mind, to see of the Lord what this thing
might be, and what might be the End of it, and why was this gathering, and
running, and thronging of Multitudes in this manner, and in this frame; and
presently, upon consideration, I perceived that a dead Image, and invented
Picture would be carried that way; and that all this pressing, and stir, and
the gathering of this great Multitude, was only to see and behold a dead Image
without life or breath; and then my spirit was grieved, and my soul was vexed
within me; and it run through me, Vanity, Vanity, Folly, and Madness: What is
all this setting of Guards, gathering of people in such thronging Multitudes,
and pulling down the Glass, and gazing of Men, Women and Children, high and
low; rich and poor, people of all sorts that were come together? Is all this
wondering of people and inflaming of spirits in this admiring mood? Is all this
(said I) but to see a dead invented Image of Wood or Wax, arrayed and decked
with some foolish Inventions? Said my spirit, Oh Abominable! Oh Idolatry! Oh
Folly and Vanity! and my life was grieved. What is all this preparation of
people in this wondering frame, but to behold an Image carried, and to see
simple foolish people following after it in their Idolatrous Rob^^ and
Gestures, such who had invented it, and been at cost with it? And then my
spirit was burdened, and the very smell of Idolatry and Abomination entered upon
me, and the weight of all this Iniquity came into me, and vexed the Righteous;
and the very sense of this Abomination seized upon my Life, and I felt the
burden of their so great Wickedness; the making the Image I felt a burden, and
all the foolish Circumstances about it, for many days, and the peoples Folly
and Madness, that so gathered and pressed to behold it, and so wondered after
it, was a burden to me, and they that carried it in their foolish gest^^^: All
this is Iniquity and Abomination, said my spirit; and I was laden therewith,
and said, Certainly the Judgments of God will meet with this Work, and the Lord
will be avenged because of it; and their Souls should once feel the burden of
it with Terror, as mine at this present. And it came into me, It might be some
would be wounded, or pressed to Death, or some Wickedness would come out of
this Wickedness, that the Anger of the Lord might break forth, and smite such
as were the Foundation of this sinful Abomination; and my spirit had a deep
sense of the greatness and sinfulness of this high and mighty Idolatry; and it
wounded me, and made me sad: But immediately (from that temper) on a very
sudden my spirit was changed, and I was filled with the Indignation of the Lord
God against this Image, and this stir about it; his Plagues, and Fury and Fire
run through me to cry, Plagues, Plagues and Vengeance against them, because of
this Abomination: And I found my spirit set on fire with the very Power of God
rising in me against this Idolatry, that if I had been moved to it, and it had
been possible to have done it, I could have ridden through the Guards, and over
the Multitude, to have sounded the Judgments of God, and his Woes amongst them,
and through them; and I could then have engaged the loss of my life, that the
Lord might have been revenged upon this Image, and Image-Makers, and
Image-Followers, and Image-Wonderers after, that my Soul might be freed from
its present burden, through this grle^ Wickedness: Said I What silly, foolish,
blind, ignorant people are these? What a power has the Devil over them! and
how are they led captive at his will! What an influence has the sight of a
dead Image upon their dead hearts and carnal minds! Was ever the like, said I?
Is there greater Abomination at Rome? What Blindness and Sencelesness is over
the hearts of this people? And after this manner, for a good season after, my
spirit within me aggravated and unfolded this great Abomination, tumbling it
over and over in my own Breast, with a secret pity for their Souls which were
ensnared and captivated through all this Wickedness. But further, I considered,
that all this Abomination and sinful Idolatry is about the Funeral of the late
Oliver Cromwell; then said I, What for him! Alas for him! who was once a great
Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, to break down many idolatrous Images, and
grievous Idols; and did not the Lord once stir up his heart against all such
things? And did not once his Children, Officers, and his brave Soldiers and
Army, pull down all the Images and Crosses, and all such like Popish stuff
where ever they met with it? And said my spirit, What grievous and abominable
work is this? Have they now made a costly Image of him? and are such as were
once his Soldiers now guarding it, and watching over it? and his Children and
Officers following it, and Multitudes of the Inhabitants of London wondering
and gazing after an Image of him? This is sad, said I, and great pity, What a
change is this in so short a time? Was it but a few years since that he, and
his Army, and his Servants, and his Children, and Officers, were so zealous to
throw down Images, Pictures, and I^^l^, that they could not endure the sight
and worshipping of them? And have they now made an Image of him, which his
Officers, Children and Kindred are carrying from place to place, and following
it, and Multitudes caused to wonder after it? What a change is this, said I? Oh
sad! Are people run^g after Images again, as in the time of Popery? And have
they made an (...) and decked it with costly array, and set it up for People to
visit a long time, and then haling it from place to place? Are they doing this
in London, as they do at Rome amongst Papists? This is Pitiful: But how comes
this to pass?

I began to consider, and said, I knew the Man, when he was living, and (...)
the knowledge of his spirit; and I was persuaded; if it had been asked him in
his life time, If such work should be acted about him, such an Image made like
(...), and laid for so long time in a (...) place, and manner, and them carried
by his ^ed, and Children, Kindred, and Army, and then set up in such a place,
and he removed from place to place. I say, I believe he would have denied it,
and said, it shall not ^e thus for me when I am dead; I suppose he would not
have suffered it thus to have been; he was more wife, I thought, he would have
said; Nay, what, to man Image of me, and deck it diversely from one form to
another, and visit it; and then carry it from place to place, up and down! this
will be a shame to (...) Children, and a disgrace to my Kindred, and a reproach
to my Officers, and whole Army, and all the Nation will mock and be offended,
and they may (...). These are they that were once Enemies to all Images and
dead Idols, and (...) them down, and broke them down; and are these now making
an Image, (...) setting it up, and wondering after it from place to place? Nay,
(might be have said) if thus it be done, they at Rome may laugh us to scorn,
and the Pa^s may say, We have learned of them, and put their Persons from among
us, and ba^, and killed them, and set up their Practices: sure he would have
said thus; (...) I am certain, the Witness of God in his Conscience might truly
have said it, because it is Truth.

But upon another consideration, I said this is come to pass after this manner,
though he was once zealous against all Popery, yet he did too much forget that
good cause, and too much sought the greatness and honor of the World, and
loved the praise of men, and took flattering titles, and vain respects of
deceit^^l men, and many great Abominations were upheld through him, as Tithes,
and Old Mass-houses, and ordaining of Ministers by man's will, and the false
^ips, and Sprinkling of Infants, and such like Popish stuff, first invented at
Rome; and he suffered the Servants of the Lord to be persecuted, and imprison^,
for denying and crying against such things as were Popish, and which himself
sometime seemed to deny; and because of this, said I this may justly be come to
pass, that an Idolatrous Image and Picture, should be made of him ^^en he is
dead, and decked, and laid in a sumptuous manner, and visited, and then carried
from place to place, (as was usual in the time of Popery) for mul^es of foolish
people to gaze upon, and wonder after, and admire, and praise^, that all men
might see the first cause is lost, and that zeal, which his kindred and Army
had once in their hearts against Popery, is extinguished, and people are turned
again (...) gaze after Images, which is Popish; for such practices that day
between Somersett-^ouse and Westminster were first ordained at Rome, and
practiced by the Papists; and he that suffered many to be imprisoned; for
denying and crying against such Worships and Practices, as were in themselves
Popish, and which he himself once fought against; its happened now, when he is
dead; and its suffered now that they should make a Fool of him in a Popish way
and manner: For such Practices are no other then Foolery and Foolishness,
tending to the Dishonor of a good Man. but in the midst of my Considerations,
a pity struck through me, for once noble Oliver, that is now dead, and his
place no more found; and I was grieved he should be thus abused, being dead, by
such a stir about an Image made of him, for many weeks together, as has been;
and I began to recall my former acquaintance with him, and the former dealings
of God toward him, and what a gallant Instrument for the Lord he once was; and
how many glorious and noble Victories God once gave him; and what good parts,
and what a gallant spirit there was in him, and how once he showed me, and
declared what the former dealing of the Lord had been upon his Soul; and how he
was troubled in conscience formerly; and my spirit run through many such
things, with a great deal of sexiousness and pity: And then said I, Alas,
alas! Is it ended all in this? all his former good service for God and the
Nations; all his Victories, and his good Actions, and his beating down
Superstition; Is this the end of it all; the making of an Image, and carrying
it from place to place? is it ended all here, what formerly he has been, and
what he has done? how has this cloud of Folly cast a stink and darkness upon
his former brightness, and glory, and nobleness? and is this the end, and final
farwell of once noble Oliver? what, only the sight of an Image carried and set
up? Has the City of London, and the Nations to better Memento of him? But, oh!
had he been faithful to the end, to God, he would have left a more lively and
heavenly Character to have been read for his sake, then an Image of him, and
such Idolatrous practices; and my life could have sorrowed upon some
considerations passed through me about this business, and for some hours my
spirit could not rest; and in the very time it lay upon me to write this: And
after all this, said my spirit; Where are all the old Priests now, and his
ancient Teachers, who once had a great zeal against all these things, and
against all such practices? Where are they now? are they blind also, said I,
that they cannot see this abominable Idolatry, and cry against it? had they any
hand in it? or were they Consenters to these things? What is become of them? Is
their zeal for the Lord, and against Idolatry quite gone? thought I, they might
have prevented this disgrace to their old Master, who has served them well,
and set them in great places, and put them in large Benefices, and they might
have done something for him when he is dead, and have prevented this Folly, and
Idolatry, which is acted upon him this day; for certainly all people in the
Nation that fear God will be offended, and judge in their hearts such work, the
framing of an Image, and sounding Trumpets, and beating Drums before it, and
clothing Horses in Mourning, and Trayling their Pikes; and even the very
Honorable of the Nation clad in Mourning, and following this Image, and all
this stir, and cost, and preparation for many Weeks beforehand, and such
decking in Mourning Attire of great and noble Men, and all but to accompany an
Image from one place to another, whereby people are deceived, who might look
upon it to be the Burial of Oliver Protector; whenas it was but an Image, made
by hands, and decked and trimed in a vain manner, as if it had bin some Poppit
Play; which if it had been indeed his Bones, they had accompanied to the ground
in such a manner, that had bin less condemnable, and I should not had ought
against it: But for the Wisemen in the Nation to be chief in these things, and
to exercise themselves in such Folly and Vanity, this grieves the Righteous
Soul; and if I should justify it, the Lord would condemn me: but the shame
will fall upon themselves that acted it, and chiefly upon their Priests and
Teachers, because they were consenting to such Vanity, and piece of Popery, as
this was: And had these old Doctors and Teachers feared God, and their Hearts
been aright toward him, they would have endeavored the stopping of this
Abomination; and another way might have been thought upon, whereby a more
lively and godly Monument of their old Master might have stood to Generations.

What shall the making, and visiting, and carrying, and setting up of a dead
Image, for foolish people to gaze upon, and run wondering after in their wicked
minds? Must this be all the Monument? And shall we have no other Representation
of once noble Cromwell? Is his Life, and former Glory and Nobleness shaddow'd
with the sight of a dead Image? Alas! This presents nothing at all to such as
fear God, but Folly, and Ignorance, Vanity, and Idolatry; and when they look
upon it, they shall be grieved in their spirits, and vexed when they can find
no more Monument of that once noble man, but an invented ^ge and Picture; and
the Priests shall be ashamed, and may have the greatest rebuke; for they that
lead the people have caused them to err.

And now upon the whole matter, from the very beginning to the end thereof, I
do declare against it; and that a fearful Abomination has been committed in
the sight of the Lord, in relation to this Image; and you have vexed the Lord's
Soul; and his Hand you shall feel upon your Consciences, and the weight thereof
in the time to come: the spending of so much of the Creation, and wasting
Money, and other things, the Lord will lay to your charge; and the whole City
has been abused with running and wondering after the work of your own hands.

And now all you that have gone to gaze and wonder after an Image; What saw
you? What beheld you? What wondered you after, ought except folly and vanity,
and a dead Image, whereby* the man and his Nobility was abused, in honor to
whom they say it was done? And when many days were spent, what were you the
better? What were you edified? were you not convinced of your (...) Folly? And
might not your Wickedness reprove you? And did not the Li^ in your own
Consciences check you, and prick you* and condemn your vain minds, that wondered
after Folly? Though now you may be hardened, yet (...) day you shall confess,
when the Witness of God in you does arise, and bring all your deeds to
remembrance; then shall you say, This work was Abomination, and (...) great Sin
in them, who invented it, and caused it to be brought forth, and your selves
that (...) wondered after it; and the Judgments of the Lord are against all
these things.

E. B.

A MESSAGE PROCLAIMED, BY Divine Authority; From the chosen Assembly of the
Redeemed People in England, to the Pope (chief Bishop) of Rome, and to his
Cardinals, Jesuits and Priests, and all other the Officers of the Romish
Church, where it shall meet with them through the World: That they may appear,
and come forth to Trial; and show if they have the same Faith, Power, Spirit,
Authority and Government, as had the Apostles and true Churches, before the
Apostasy. And this is a full Invitation and Challenge to the whole Church of
Rome, and the beginning of Controversy with her, for the perfect manifestation
of the long hidden Truth; betwixt them that are in the Truth it self, and such
as have the Form, but not the Power; that all things may be brought to Light,
and true Judgment.
WHereas we, a poor, despised, and rejected People, among the Nations of the
Earth; yet Dreadful and Mighty, because the Majesty and Presence of the Lord
God is with us, who has called us, and chosen us, and gathered us, and
redeemed us from among men, out of Kindreds, and Multitudes and Peoples, into
one Body and one Spirit, out of all the Sects upon the Earth; and we are of one
Mind and one Soul; having Fellowship with the Son, and with the Father; being
come through great Tribulations, and many fiery Trials, and are refined and
purified, and made clean and white in the Blood of the Lamb; being fully
recovered out of the great Deluge of Darkness and Apostasy, which has
overflown and drowned the whole World, and all Nations, since the days of the
true Churches and holy Apostles.

And know ye, That we are none of all the many Sects, nor of the diverse Ways,
and formal Worshippers, that are but in the Imitations, fiegned of what the
Saints of old spoke and performed in the Power and Spirit of God; which has
been spoken and practiced by all the diverse Sects and false Churches, without
the Spirit, Power and Life, that was in the Apostles; so that all Religion has
been, and the Profession and Practice thereof, for many Ages; but as the
floating of a broken Vessel upon the Waters, driven with the several Winds,
wanting Anchor, and skilful Mariners, which have not carried to perfect Rest
the Hope of Eternal Life.

But know ye, that now at last, through our long and wearied Travels, and after
all our tedious Seekings, and our zealous Practices and Profession in
Christianity performed by us, while Darkness covered us, and the Earth; has
the Lord set us safe upon the Rock Christ Jesus, upon whom the Church of Christ
firmly stands, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against; and he has made
our Habitation sure upon the Mountain of his House, which is established upon
the top of the Mountains, whereunto we now are gathered, and rest in a certain
hope and tried confidence, and does view the whole World, and the state of all
Mankind, and measures the times and seasons thoroughout Generations; and the
state of the Church we perfectly know, by the inspiration of the Almighty, her
estate before the Apostles days, and in the Apostles days, and since the
Apostles days, and her increase, and decrease, and estate, since the beginning
of the World till now, and at this present time, to us is certainly known, by
the Spirit of Jesus, and the Light of the Lamb, which now is risen upon our
Mountain, and shines in our Habitations.

And first we certify you, as for the many false Sects and Churches (so
called) and many of the diverse worshippers, and separated forms of Churches,
risen up since the Apostles days, from the least of them to the greatest, we
have searched and examined, and are not fully satisfied (but rather the
contrary) that they are perfectly sound in the Faith, but rather degenerated,
from the Power, Spirit, and Life that was in the Apostles, and among the true
Churches before the Apostasy; and we have sought out their first original and
root, and we find they fall short of the true Church and the Apostles; first in
respect of time, many Generations; and also in respect of life, and power, and
purity, and they want the spirit, and dominion, and Government, that the true
Churches and Apostles possessed; and we certainly believe, they are many of
them come up, and risen in a dark Night, long since the days of the Apostles,
while the Sun was yet unrisen, and while the Mountains of Ignorance, Blindness,
and Wickedness covered the face of the Earth, and the Clouds of Darkness
remained upon the face of the whole Heavens; and while yet the Man-child
remains in God, being caught up to him, and the Woman lodged in the desolate
Wilderness, being thither fled because of the great red Dragon.

And we believe not, that any of them are the Lambs Wife, lawfully joined to
him, neither are they the Virgin, in which there is no spot; nor the Spouse,
truly in election to Christ the Bridegroom; for we have had controversy with
them this diverse years, and weighed them, and measured them in the balance of
equity, and they appear to us, not to be of a true descent from that Vine, into
which true Church was planted; but their original may be of a latter race.

And to say no more of them, we certainly know they are foully spotted, and
have not the favor, nor parts, nor garments of a Virgin; and Christ the
Bridegroom they have deeply wronged, for many false Sects have risen out of the
great Whore, the mother of Harlots, who has been in open and secret
Fornication, ever since the days of the Apostles, and such are her offspring,
and not of the true Seed, elect, which is heir by right, of the inheritance of
Life eternal, the Kingdom which has no end.

And for as much as the Church of Rome has openly pleaded, as we have heard,
and some of your Members also to our faces, that she is indeed the true Church,
and she alone, and none besides, and that you can fetch your original by line
truly from the Apostles, and Church of the Saints, and are not degenerated in
any particular of Faith, Doctrine, nor Practice, from the Life, and Power, and
Government, and Spirit which was among the true Church, and in the Apostles.

These things, with others the like, have we heard of you, and concerning you,
by many: And now, because the Lord has put it into our hearts, to have
controversy with you, and to seek out perfectly your original, and to justify
you, or condemn you accordingly; and having the certain infallible Spirit of
the Lord God to try all things, we are purposed in the Lord to visit you, and
to examine to the Foundation, your rise, and first beginning, from whence you
come by descent, and what you truly are in your present Estate; and whether you
be indeed the true Church, and have the true Spirit; or whether you are
otherwise; that all the World may be satisfied, and more perfectly know the
full Truth concerning the Church of Rome; and your Seed and Root we will
examine, and your Birth and Original we will search out; and your Faith, and
Worship, and whole Religion we will lay to the Line of true Judgment, to
justify you, or condemn you eternally; for the Saints shall judge the World;
and your Garments shall be stripped off, and your Secrets discovered, and your
whole Body, and Members made fully manifest, that the very truth of all things
may appear, and be embraced, and the Whoredoms of the whole Earth may be laid
open, that the Just and the Innocent, that has long lain groaning in great
Captivity, may be delivered from under all Bonds of Oppressions, Whoredoms, and
Iniquities; and this will the Eternal God, by us, speedily bring to pass
amongst you.

Wherefore thou Pope, greatly admired, and highly exalted, and to all thy
Cardinals, Friars, Jesuits, and Priests, and all other Officers under thee; I
am moved of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, (who is the only Holiness, and
highest of all) by this Message to visit you, requiring you, and charging you,
in the Name and Authority of the Dreadful and Mighty God, before whom all men
and Nations are as nothing in comparison, but may be turned at his pleasure,
and dashed to pieces by his Mighty Hand; and unto whom all the Sons of Adam in
the World must give an Account: and as you will answer it to him i^ his
dreadful Day of Judgment and Vengeance, and as you love and will obey your God
and Christ whom you profess and serve; and as you would honor your God, and
bring People to your Way and Worship, and Religion, upon these Engagements, and
by the Authority of the Almighty, I lay it upon you to answer, and for you to
return your knowledge and opinions to the Particulars following, which I am
moved by the Lord to query and demand of you, that your Doctrines, Practices,
and Worships, and whole Religion, in every part thereof, may be viewed, and
examined, and measured according to the Saints and Apostles writings, and may
thereby be cleared, or otherwise reproved and condemned: And if your Profession
and Practices in Religion be sprung from the true Grounds, and true Spirit, and
your Church be indeed the true Church, that can prove her pedigree truly
descended from the Church of Christ, before the Apostasy, and clear her self
from all degeneration in every degree, and that she is perfect in the faith,
and worship, and practices of the holy Church and Apostles of old; then shall
all that love God, and fear him, and hopes for life eternal, separate
themselves from all Sects, and Apostates, separated from you, and come in, and
return again to you, as to a faithful Mother, and join with you in all things,
and add themselves to your Church only, and renounce and deny all the contrary,
that is not of you; and so shall your names and honor be increased through all
the Earth. But and if after lawful trial, and just examination, and searching
out the matter, it be proved against you, that you are degenerated from what
the true Church and Apostles were, and are not builded upon Christ the true
Rock and Foundation, but diverted from the Power, Life, and Spirit, and true
Religion which the Apostles were in; and that your Church is not the true
Church, but a false Sect, and your original cannot be fetched from the
Apostles, but is of a latter and more corrupted Race; then shall you deny all
your Religion, and Church, and renounce your Profession and Practices, and come
to them, and join with them, that can prove their Church to be the true Church,
and can fetch their original from the Spirit of the Apostles, and that is
builded upon Christ the everlasting Foundation (whoever this shall be proved to
be) wherefore appear and come forth to trial, upon this condition, join issue
with us, and answer these things in plainness, and let us know your Judgments,
that a return you may re^^ive.

First, Whether you are indeed the only true Church of Christ, his Body, of
(...) Fle^^, and of his Bones, called, and gathered, and united by the eter^
Spirit of Jesus, perfect in the Faith of Christ, perfect in Doctrine, and
perfect is ^ip, as were the Churches of Christ in the days of the Apostles?
and (...) the Eternal Spirit dwell in every particular Member of your Church,
and does lead each one of you into all Truth, insomuch that you need now no
(...)teach any one of you, but as that same Spirit that dwells in you? answer
(...) ^inly, yea, o^ nay.

2. ^ther are you not in any particular of your Faith, Doctrines, Pra^
Worships, in any degree degenerated, nor deviated from what the (...), ^ne,
Practice and Worship were, that the true Church was in, in (...)the Apostles?
And whether will you admit of trial in all things you p^ and practice, by the
Scriptures, the Writings of the Saints, yea, or ^y?

3. W^ther your Church of Rome does receive the pouring-down of the Spirit upon
Sons and Daughters immediately, and every Member receive the Holy ^st, and is
^^lled therewith, and baptized therewith, as in the true C^ Acts z. An^ whether
you have received the Holy Ghost, and Eve^ Comforter immediately, as did the
true Church, i^ the days of the Apost^ Answer me these things in the Truth of
your Hearts, that you may be own'^ (...) denied.

4. W^er the Faith you profess has perfectly purified your hearts from all
(...) and has given you Victory over the World, that now the body of sin is
(...); and you are free from sin, and do not commit sin? but are every Mem^
(...) you without Spot and Wrinkle, and cleansed from all Unrighteousness,
(...) (...) Servants of Righteousness, and not of Sin? and whether you believe
(...) Condition to be attainable in this life upon Earth, and to be enjoyed,
and ^d for, yea, or nay?

5. What is your ground of sprinkling Infants with Water? and whether he th^^
^st instituted it, had the Gift of the Eternal Spirit, and was led thereby? for
we know it was first ordained at Rome, in your Church; and all the Protestants
received it from you, who are not able to give us a sufficient Reason thereof;
but we are not satisfied therein; therefore tell us, Whether are people thereby
made Me^rs of the Body of Christ, and baptized into his true Church? and is it
a perfect Seal and Sign of the new Birth, and Regeneration, as is professed?
and does that give all Children, that are sprinkled, a Right to the Kingdom of
God, and to be Members of the Church of Christ? and satisfy us plainly, Is the
sprinkling of an Infant (never having heard the Gospel, but while unconverted
and ^^thanged in Nature) the true Baptism into the true Faith of Christ, as it
is professed? answer me plainly, yea, or nay.

6. Whether the Body and Blood of Christ, that is Meat indeed, and Drink
indeed, be carnal and visible things, to be seen, felt and known visibly and
carnally? and whether Bread and Wine (that is Mortal, and will corrupt) be the
very Body and the very Blood of Christ Jesus? and whether Christ has any other
Body and Blood, to be known in any other way or manner then what is professed
to be visibly and carnally known by you? and is that Bread, after Consecration,
the very Express Image of the Father, and was with the Father before the World
began? else it is not the Body of Christ: answer me plainly.

7. Again, We are not satisfied concerning your Burning, and Torturing, and
Imprisoning in cruel Inquisitions and Goals such as dissent from you, and
cannot believe in your Church, which ye call Heretics; whether is not this
done by your Church, or any Member thereof? and do you justify the doing of it
by the Authority of your Church? and we demand of you to give us Example for
such Practices in Scripture, ever Practiced by the Apostles, or true Church, or
any Member thereof, to Burn, or Kill, or Impris^^ such as would not own them,
or were Heretics? otherwise, we must co^ it, and judge you eternally for it:
And whether such Practices, done a^ (...), and in her Dominions, be not Murder,
and Cruelty, and Tyranny, (...) shedding of Innocent Blood, and of the Devil,
the Wicked One? (...) me plainly, and satisfy us herein, that we may know how
to deal with (...) (...) controversy.

8. Again, We are not satisfied concerning the abundance of (...) of the
Saints, set up, and bowed to amongst you; and your praying (...) them, and to
the Saints, and by Beads, and in Set-Forms; such the (...) practice; and also
your keeping and setting apart the Saints days, (...) (...) Holy Days, and
eating with respect to days, denying of Flesh such (...) (...) days, and
observing of Days, and Meats and Drinks, and Fasting (...) (...) own wills,
and your Nunneries, and keeping Men and Women one fr^^ ^ther in secret Houses;
whether are these things commanded and required (...) (...) Lord from you? and
we charge you to give us some Example, that (...) true Church practiced such
things; otherwise, if you do not, not ca^^^ (...) these your practices from the
Scriptures, and Example of the Apo^ (...) you, we must deny you, and condemn
your practi^es forever; and (...) ^lieve, that your Church is the true Church,
nor you lawful Successors (...) (...) ^ly Apostles.

9. What you believe concerning the Reign and Government of C^, and his coming?
is He, his Reign and Government visible, and of this World; or invisible, and
from Heaven? and whether Liars, Whoremongers, ^terers, Drunkards, Man-slayers,
and contentious Men, or any that (...) in any Sin or Transgression, in the
first Nature; be of the Kingd^^ (...) Government of Jesus, or have any part or
portion therein in time to (...) ^ever? and how may such ever have part
therein? and give us yo^ ^ge in these things: And also, what you hold and
profess concerning E^ (...) Reprobation, that we may know whether your
Knowledge and (...) (...) sound and perfect in these things, and to be
embraced, or condemned and (...).

10. What is the Man-child, that has been caught up to God? and (...) the
reason of his being caught up? and what is the Woman that fled into the
Wilderness? and what is the reason of her so fleeing? and when is the t^ (is it
come, or to come) that the Man-child has been caught up, a^^ (...) Woman fled,
and that the Man-child shall come down again, and the W^ again return? and what
is that Beast, the first and the second? and is ^s kingdom come, or yet to
come, who reigned over the Kings of the Earth, and caused all, both small and
great to worship him, and killed the Saints, and overcame them that would not
worship him, and made war against the L^, and persecuted the Woman's Seed? and
when is it that the World wondered ^^ter the Beast, is it come, or to come?
Answer these things in plainness, (...) ^^mand of you.

11. What, and who is that great Whore, that sits upon many waters with (...)
the Kings of the Earth commits Fornications, and who has made Nations d^ with
the Wine of her Fornications, and who has reigned over the (...) and Dominions
of the Earth? and is that Whore come, or yet to come? (...) whether is your
Church every whit free from the Fornications of that Wh^ and will you admit of
lawful trial by your fruits and works, and suffer (...) men accordingly? and
whether the whole Church of Rome, or any part of (...) Dominions be the
Multitudes, Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, the W^ on which the Whore sits?
and whether your Church be wholly free from (...) Woman which has drunk the
Blood of Saints, and of the Martyrs of I^ and show us plainly who that Whore
is, if you can; and what is her Flesh, and the Fire that must burnt it.

12. Whether are the false Prophets and Deceivers come, or to come, which (...)
said should come? if you say, they are come; when did they come? and (...)
(...) they? and how may they be known? and what was their first original? (...)
(...) of what does all false Prophets and false Prophecies come? is the Church
(...)clear of all the false Prophets? and whether is your Ministry in the very
(...) Power, Spirit and Authority, which the Apostles were in? is its Call and
^tion the very same? is its Maintenance and Practice the very same? and is i^^
Fruits, Effects and End the very same, or some other? let us know from you,
(...) (...) may ^ay you to the Line of true Judgment, for all People and
Nations ^.

^ome Friends, let us reason a little with you further; We are not satis^ (...)
(...) Bishop of R^e is true and lawful Successor of the Apostle Peter, (...)
(...) a Tripple Crown? and did Kings Bow and Kneel to him? and had
(...)^^^enues, and Money out of the Nations, as the Pope has? (...)Pardons for
Money (...) or did any buy Religion of him? and did (...)over men's Consciences?
and was Peter named Holiness? We (...)you to prove rightly and truly. That the
Pope does succeed Peter (...)Spirit, in the same Power, and in the same
Conversation; and that (...)^er-see the Church be justly the same as Peter's
was, and that he exe^ ^ctly as Peter did.

(...) ^wer us plainly, What is the Seed of the Woman? and what is the (...)
the Serpent? and is his Head bruised, yea, or nay? And what is the (...)what is
his beginning? and what is the kingdom that he is Ruler (...) and how is his
kingdom to be destroyed? And what is the Flesh of Christ, (...) (...) Blood,
which was before Abraham? and how is Christ made under the (...) answer me
these things.

(...) what is the Death that has reigned over all? and what is the power
(...)? and what is the fruits of that death? and when must that death be (...)?
and is it destroyed among you? and what was man in his Creation (...) (...)
(...) of the ground? and what was he that was the very Image of God (...) and
Female, before Ad^ was formed of the Dust of the Ground, or ^en out of him?
declare these things plainly, if you can; and what is (...) Transgression and
the Curse? and whether any can be made free from (...) Curse, upon the Earth,
yea or nay? and what is the Kingdom of Heaven (...) is like a little Leaven,
and that is like a Net cast into the Sea? and what (...) which must be
leavened? and what is that good Fish that must be gather^ into the Vessels, and
that bad that must be cast away? and how does the (...) of Heaven bring the bad
out of the Waters to the Shore? and why is (...), and wherefore, and what is
the reason, that none can enter the Kingdom (...) Go^, nor see it, but such as
are born again? and how is a man born again? (...) what is that Mothers womb,
that Job, and all mankind came out of (...), (...) (...) must return thither
again naked? and what are the Fig Leaves that ^vered in Transgression? and what
is the Covering of the Spirit? and (...) must be covered, and what not? and why
is it, and how comes it to pass, (...) one and the same thing is sin, and
wickedness acted by one and the same (...) good and just acted by another?
These things answer to us plainly, and (...) ^ve all your Practices and
Profession by plain Scripture, and give us Ex^ from Peter, and the true
Churches, that he and they practiced the same (...) which the Pope and you do,
if you would have any to own you; other^ (...) you do not, or cannot satisfy
all people in these particulars by the ^es; then forsake your Religion, and
renounce your Church, and (...) your selves to be Deceivers of the World, and
to be deceived; for (...) will tear your Garments, and mar your Beauty, and
stain your (...), and unco^^r your Nakedness, and subdue your Power, and s^ay
(...) Strength, and pull down your strong Hold, and the Dread of the Al^y will
come over you.

And come Friends, answer me, is the Light by which you walk ever^ ing? and is
the Day dawned, and the Sun risen, that never goes down? (...) have you seen
the signs of the coming of the Son of Man? and what are (...)signs of his
coming? and what is that Sun that must be turned into D^ and what is that Moon
that must be turned into Blood? and what are the (...) ers of the House that
must tremble? and do you own quaking and trembling at the Word of the Lord? and
did you ever quake and tremble, or is (...) such a thing in your Church? and
what is that Part in Man that must (...)is it not that Part in Man that the
Devil enters into? answer these (...)* and what is that Mother of Harlots? and
where is She that has been (...) with the Blood of the Saints? and what is the
Mystery of her, declare (...)you can? and what are her Garments? and who are
her Children? (...)what nature are they? and how may they be known? and come
Friends, answer us, have you seen God face to face, as did Jacob and Abraham?
and have you seen his shape perfectly? give us a Description of him if you
have; and do not all those that be of the seed of Abraham hear God's Voice, and
(...)shape? and are any of Abraham, but who are come out of the World, (...)
have denied it, and bear the daily Cross of Christ, which mortifies to the
World, and does your Wooden Crosses, and Stone Crosses in your T^ and
Highways, and in your Houses, and Crucifixes in your Breasts, (...) you to
the World, and mortify you? or are you not such as have (...)of a Cross of
Christ, but want the Power? and what is the difference (...)all your Images,
and the Images the Prophets declared against? and what life is there in the
Image of Christ or Mary, painted or graven in Wood or Stone^ are your souls
refreshed thereby? and is not that all the Unity you have with Christ* and is
that Unity and Fellowship you have with Chri^ (...) same that they had, that
had Unity, and Fellowship with the Father, (...) (...) the Son* and have you
Unity with the Son, and with the Father, (...)Church had? tell us plainly, and
what is Antichrist? and where ^ing at this day? and what is his Marks and
Signs? and what is the Marks of the Beast, that every one received in their
Foreheads and in their Hands, and (...) is his power by which he caused every
one to worship him? and is the Church of Rome wholly free from that, from
causing and compelling people to be of (...) Religion, and come to your
Worship, by your Fire and Fagots, and In^? make it us plain, that this is not
the Beasts power, for we have a jeal^ least, it is not the power of God that
was among the Apostles. And why do (...) Creatures? did Christ or the Apostles
kill Creatures that were not of their Religion? does not this show that you
want the Power and Spirit of God among you, and the spiritual Weapon that beats
down the strong Hold^* ^e cannot believe that you have the spiritual Weapons
which the Apostles had, except you make it appear to us; and can any be
converted to the true Church, but by the immediate Work and Spirit of God? and
they that have that ^^ed not be ashamed: but then, why are some of your
Ministers creeping up and down the Nations in Holes, and dare not be seen, but
lies many years together undiscovered, not daring to preach their Gospel, and
discover their minds? did ever the Apostles thus? and is not this a sign that
they have not the Power of God to carry them through, but runs into Holes and
Corners for fear of their lives? is this the way of the true Ministers of
Christ? and what is the Lamb's Wife? and what is her Adorning, and her Beauty?
and are you the Lamb's Wife, and are married to him for ever? has every Member
of your Church the Witness thereof? and answer us; does natural Learning (...)
Minister of Christ; or were the Apostles made Ministers thereby? and can* man
learn the Ministry, as he learns a Trade? and is the Preaching of the Gospel a
Trade? or is it not the Gift of God? and can i^ bought and sold? and what is
Eternal Life? and how is it received? and have any that hope, but them whose
Hearts are purified? And must not every ones Heart be purified before they see
God, who is Pure? And how comes man to be a Reprobate? and (...) comes man to
be a Son of God again? And what is the Way and M^ of Life Eternal? Is it
Carnal, and visible Things, and Ordinances? Is it the ^^ing and performing of
something by the Creature, or by the revelation (...) ^thing in the Creature?
And most not Christ be revealed in every partic* and is not that the true Bread
of Life? And is there any other Bread that is Eternal, but Christ, which the
mortal Eye cannot see? And we are very (...)that Bread and Wine, after
Consedration, is not the very Body and (...) of Christ* and except you can
prove to us by plain Scripture, and gi^ sound Reasons to demonstrate things, we
must judge you, and show your F^lly to the whole World. And why do you pray for
the Dead? is that av^ble? shall not they receive according to their works, that
they have done? G^ (...) Example that ever the Apostles did so, or else we will
say, You are b^, (...) ^n the Dark: And tell us plainly, what Error is, and
what Schism (...) (...) what is the Eye that the godd of the World has
blinded? And what is the (...) that sees God? is it Mortal, or Eternal? Answer
us these things (...)that we may know how to return in Controversy with you;
for the Lord God is risen, that will break i^ pieces and confound all the W^
(...)*

(...) Friends, give us your Answer; Are you of Abr^'s Seed, that (...)of God,
that had not a foot of Ground; but for s^^k his Place and (...)Are you of that
Birth, that has no Father upon Earth? And are you Heirs of God's Promise? And
have you made your Calling and Ele^? And is the Seed come out of Egypt's bonds?
And are all Egypt's bonds (...) (...)? And what is the ^ondage of Egypt? And
was not Transgression the Reason of it? And what is Pharoa^? out of what Root
did he spring? and (...)is he? and is not the hard heart of Pharaoh? Killers
and Murderers, (...)such of Pharaoh? And tell us plainly. Are you Redeemed from
P^? (...) are you such as oppress the Seed, as Pharaoh did? And tell us who was
the In^ of ^our Images, and who was the Former of all your graven Images? (...)
not they all invented, and come up since the Apostles days, which ye have
(...)and what is Purgatory? and from what had it its rise and original? (...)
what ground have you out of Scripture for such a doctrine? And what is the
(...) of Faith? and what is Faith? and what does it give victory over? and what
(...)it over come? and what is the ^ai^ that has bin spread over all Nations?
and (...) is the Mountain of the House of God? and what are those Mountains the
(...)shall seek to cover themselves under? and what are those Mountains that
people expect Salvation from in vain? and did not John come to throw down the
^ins? and what are the Mountains that he came to throw down? and what is the
Valley he came to raise up? answer us.

And what is the Sword of the Spirit? and whether have ye the Sword of the
spirit, and the Spiritual Armor? and what is you^ Church defended and up^d by,
Spiritual Weapons, or Carnal? are not your Goals, carnal Weapons, (...) your
Inquisitions, and your killing people above Religion, are not all these (...)
Weapons? and had ever the Church of Christ such Weapons? answer (...)plainly.

And do you not expect the Lord will suddenly plead with you? and are not (...)
them that put off the Day of the Lord, and cause the Seat of Violence to come
near? and are not ye them that have Eyes* but see not. Ear^* but hear (...)*
Hearts, and understand not? and is not your Eye blind, that should see God's
Presence; and your Ears stopped, that should hear his Voice? and have (...)
heard his Voice and seen his Shape? if you have, what is he like? answer (...)*

And what is his Word? and where does it dwell in your hearts? or is it without
you? and can any thing without you purify you, and take away sin (...) of your
Hearts? and must not Christ be within? and what are the Fruits, and Signs and
Marks of a Saint? and why do you go Pilgrims to visit (...) Bones? what is the
reason of it? and who was the first that ^^tuted it? (...) what is the meaning
of your holy Water? give us Scripture for all these (...)ces, or else the Power
of the Lord will tear you to pieces, and lay open (...) Foundation, and none
that love God can join unto you? And can any o^ (...)pardon Sin truly, that it
shall never more be remembered? and are not (...)sins remembered with the Light
in your Consciences sometimes? and is there (...) a Light in your Consciences,
that does convince you? tell me plainly.

And whether do you own, That Christ has lightened every one that co^ into the
World? and what is the Light? and do you know Christ, as (...) (...) before
Abraham? and have you seen his Day, as* Abraham did? and what (...)Day of
Christ? does the Carnal Eye see it? give us your Knowledge and (...) Judgment
in all these things, and lay down your Principles at full, and (...)by the
Scriptures what you hold and profess, if you would have any to (...)your
Religion; otherwise, renounce your Church, and come out of ^*

What is Babylon, and the Mother of Harlots? and what is spiritu^^ (...)and
S^dom, where Christ is crucified? and what is the Whore? and what (...)flesh,
that has stained the Earth? and what is the Fire that must consume her
(...)Many are jealous concerning you, that you are not the true Church;
(...)you have drunk of the Whore's Cup, who has made all Nations drunk*
(...)if that time be come, that she has made all Nations drunk, then how
(...)clear your selves, being Nations and Multitudes of People? To (...) these
(...)I expect your speedy Answer.

And what is the Death that has reigned over all? and how is Man rec^ out of
it, and when? and what are the Gates of Hell? and what is (...) (...) that they
cannot prevail against? and whether your Church may never (...) (...) veiled
against? and whether they be not your Inquisitions, Stakes and ^* and killing
people, that do principally defend your Church? and if y^^ (...)cease your
Inquisitions, and killing those you call Heretics, whether (...)not you be
prevailed against by many other Sects? Lay away yo^ per^ of People that you
call Heretics, and do not deaf with them after the (...)which you have done,
by Inquisitions, and such like; and only by sound (...)guments, and the Power
of the Spirit, defend your Religion.

And dare you suffer a certain number of us to come among you, and p^ch what we
hold; and a certain number of you shall freely come among us, (...) freely
preach what you hold, without Persecution, or any Violence, as we would expect
and have the same from you; engage man for man with us, and (...) no otherwise
deal with ours, then we deal with yours; and take the free liberty to deal with
our men, as we deal with your men, but no otherwise; and (...) each of the
Messengers preach and hold forth what they would have, and wh^^ they really
hold and believe; and convert the most either of them can to their own
Religion; and then let all the World see, which have the Power and Spirit of
God with them; and whether your Ministers or our Ministers do turn the more
people from you to us, or from us to you; and send your Answer, whether you
will agree to the Premises: and if you do, send your Messengers when you
plea^^; and we will engage in the Lord, their Persons shall not be harmed; but
if they were, then take Man for Man, Life for Life, of our Men sent to you: and
let that God be the true God, that appears in most Power and Authority; and
let him be worshipped forever, whose Power converts the most to the knowledge
of him, out of Wickedness; and let that Church be the t^ Church, which cannot
be overcome: And as you are willing to be made manifest, join issue with us in
this business, and propound your own time when the men shall return, and
whether the continuance of the Matter be for Days, Months, or Years, and let
each of the men return without harm of Person; and this will be a way truly to
try and make manifest all things to all the World, and whether you or we be in
the right Way, and of the right Church; and use (...) (...) Weapon against us,
but the foundest Arguments you can, by words, according to the Scriptures; and
the same Weapons we will use against you, (...)other, but the Authority of the
Spirit of God and Arguments thereby* (...) shall be according to the
Scriptures, the Apostles Writings, and the ^ony of the true Church.

And hereby in the sight of the whole World, let your Church, and Faith, (...)
Principles, and Practices, and Worships be tried; and (...) Church, ^*
Doctrines, and Worship^, and Practices; and whether they be (...)or ours, that
do overcome, or are overcome, let that, deside the ^ersie; and whether it be
you, or we, that are soonest overcome; (...)prevail the one against the other
in this Trial, and in these Pro^*

(...) that which is Overcome and Prevailed against, is not the True ^* against
which nothing can prevail, no, not the Gates of Hell* (...)your Church, or
ours, cannot be prevailed against by the other, (...) (...) be the true Church;
for that* which is prevailed against is not (...) (...) Church; and whether it
be you, or we that are elected, and of the (...)which cannot be deceived* if we
^e not elected, and you Deceivers, (...)possible you may deceive us; but if we
prove, that we be in the (...)then you cannot deceive us; and if we ^e in the
Truth, and of (...)Church, then it will be Happiness for you to be converted
and ^rned ^*

(...) to the Trial as soo^ as you will; and if you be in the Election* (...)
need not be afraid to be deceived by any; for the the Elect cannot ^ved,
whoever that be, whether your Church, or our Church be the (...) Church, and in
the Election.

And if your Ministers among us do preach the same things, and by the
(...)Spirit, and hold forth the very same Faith, Principles, Worship and ^ces,
which we do, and are of* and it be proved, they are of the same (...)and
Principles we are of, agreeing in all things; then we will own (...) to be
Christ's Ministers: And if our Ministers among you, do hold ^th that true
Faith, and Principle, and Practices, and Worship, and by the (...) Spirit as
Christ and his Apostles did, and prove what they say by the Scrip^, then shall
you receive them as the Ministers of Christ, and renounce all (...) you hold
and profess, contrary to what they hold and preach among (...)*

And hereby things may come to a fair Trials, and the naked Truth may (...)
made manifest, whether your Church, or our Church, be the true Church* (...)
Christ, truly descended from the Church of the Saints of old; and, ^er your
Ministers, or our Ministers, be the lawful Successors of the ^es.

And we would willingly come to deal with you upon these term^s, that it may be
manifest who they be that are of the true Seed, and who they be that are of the
Election, that cannot be deceived.

And we have many things more to write unto you, and to query of you, and to
demand, when we receive your answer; and if you give us ground to accuse you,
we will thresh you, and lay it to your charge, by the Authority and Spirit of
the Lord; and if you answer us plainly, we shall more perfectly know what to do.

To the POPE.
THou Mountain, hear the Word of the Lord God; thus says the God unto thee; I
will lay thee low; I will break thee down; I wi^ the glory of all Flesh; my
Sword shall enter into the Hearts of my E^ will slay the Wicked; and I will
cru^ the Head of the Ungodly; and (...)grind the hard hearts unto pieces; I
will come in a day unexpected; I (...)Door, behold me; and I will take
Vengeance without Pity upon all (...)mies; my Hand shall not spare, my Eye
shall no^ pity; but I will (...)rend, and give unto thee, and unto all
Mankind, the fruit of your (...)ings: Innocent Blood cries unto me, that has
been unjustly shed, (...)Righteous Soul groans under the Altar unto me; and now
I am risen, (...)begun to work in the Earth; and I will go through Nations, and
(...)down under my Power: I have raised a Seed which shall thr^sh the Mo^ and
my Word is gon^forth out of my Mouth, which shall beat them to (...)and my
Power shall knock at thy Gates, and break down thy strength, (...)shall prevail
against thee.

Oh thou Mountain I whose Seat is high, and whose Power is g^ who has been
able to make War with thee? Thou have swallowed up (...)and Needy; and thou
have eaten up the Innocent, as the Ox eats up (...)thou have continued for
Ages; and thou accountest thy self the most A^ and thou have been without fear
of any man; and thou have not reg^ Honor of my Name; but exalted thy self
altogether: But now says (...)the Dread of the Almighty shall come upon thee,
and the Majesty of (...)of Hosts shall appear terrible unto thee; and thou
shall know, there (...)that can do whatsoever he will; and he will wound the
mighty Men, (...)shall heal them; and he will vex all his Enemies in his
Displeasure; and (...)break them, and none shall bind them up: Thy glory, and
the glory (...) (...) whole Earth, is as Grass before the Mower, and as the
Flower of the Field, that (...) soon withered; and thy treasure, and the
treasure of all Nations, is of no respect unto him; the Strength of the whole
Earth is Weakness before him, and the Crowns of Princes he accounts as the
Dust; he treads over it all, and his Everlasting Arm reaches beyond it all;
and he is awakened, that will strike through Kingdoms, and that will stain the
glory of the whole Earth, and tho^ must know his Power; and the Cup of his
Wrath is full, of which all Nations shall drink, and none shall escape it:
Prepare thy self; for the Anger of the Lord is gone forth; and the Almighty is
grieved, because of the Abominations of the Earth; and he will cast into the
Fire, and purge, and purify, and new mold and correct Rulers, Kings and
Peoples; for he has long been grieved, and born the Iniquity of the Nations;
but his Long-suffering is well-nigh finished; for the Nations have provoked him
to Anger, and turned his Long-suffering into Fury, and he has put on the
Garment of Vengeance; and the time is at hand, that Sorrow shall take hold on
the Stout-hearted, when he appears, who has been pierced; and Anguish and Pain
shall come upon thee, and the World; and the Day of Trouble and great Distress
ye shall not escape; the Rod of his Wrath shall smite you: The Mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.

And although thou art exalted as a God, yet thou shall be a Man, and not a God
in his Hand, that shall slay thee: and although thy Seat has been high, yet it
shall be laid low as the Ground, and thy Honor shall be laid in the Dust; for
thou art Dust and Ashes before the Lord, and thou shall be no more admired,
when Destruction shall come upon thee: The Lord has viewed thy Way and Path,
and they have not been upright before him; he has entered into the Secrets of
thine Heart, and thy intent has not been hid from him, and that which has
been done in secret shall now be laid open, and all secret things shall now be
brought to Light; and all the Churches shall know, that he searches the Heart,
and tries the Reins, who is a God, Great and M^ty, and gives unto all
Creatures Life and Breath; and he will change at (...) (...)all the Children of
Men, and bring them to an Account before his (...)Seat: wherefore let all Flesh
tremble before him, and let all the earth (...)(...) his Presence, who
changes, and subdueth and over-turneth at his P^, and brings men to
destruction who have rebelled against him.

^fore thou Pope, chief Bishop at Rome, this is unto thee from the Mouth of ^;
Come down, come down, lay down thy Crown, subject thy self, (...)before the
Lord God of Vengeance, lest (...)come upon thee, and crush ^; and thou shall
know, that this has the Lord spoken, in the day, ^ry flaming Sword, which is
already drawn, enters into thy Bosom, (...)thy Honor and Renown. Behold I have
heard the Voice of Houl^er Lamentation; I have heard the Voice of War; and not
of Peace; I (...)I have seen the Strong become Weak, and the Mighty become
Miserab^^ ^ud and Honorable brought into Contempt, yea I have seen her the a
Queen, and has said, She never shall see Sorrow; I have seen the los^ ^n and
Widdowhood come upon her, even in one day; I have seen her B^ ^ed into
Bitterness; I have seen her Honor brought into Contempt; I (...)Whore, that
has made all Nations drunk with her Fornications, t^ the Golden Cup in her
hand; I have seen the Cup of Indignation p^ her to drink; I have seen her cast
upon the Bed of never-ceasing ^, I have seen the City, that was full of people,
that was the Glory of I ^, that made all Nation rich with her Traffic and
Merchandise; I (...)that City laid desolate, and dis-inhabited, and made the
Sorrow of the (...)Earth; and I have seen the smoke of her burning ascend
forever: and this is (...) must shortly come to pass; and if thou have an Ear
to hear, thou may (...)and these things are true and faithful, and they shall
not fail; but the W^ shall know the Majesty, Dread and Terror, the Vengeance
and Indig^ of the Almighty.

This is assented unto by many, and written and subscribed by one that has a
N^ not seen nor known of the World, but known among Men by the name of, Edward
Buroughs.
Return your Answer to me, or any of the People called Quakers, for me, in
London, from whence this is sent; being written the 24th of the 8th Mon. 1658.
A 1659
FAITHFUL TESTIMONY, Concerning the True Worship OF GOD: What it is in it
self, and who are the True WORSHIPPERS. In Opposition to all the False Worship
in this Nation, which is Idolatry, which is discovered in its Foundation, and
in its Manifestation, not to be ever commanded of God, or practiced by his
Apostles and Saints; but it is declared to consist chiefly of such things and
practices as had their first Beginning and Ordination in the Church of Rome;
whereby the Hypocrisy of this Generation does appear, in denying, and crying
against the Papists Idolatries, and yet are found in the practice of the same
thing in their Church, Ministry and Worship, which were first instituted by the
Pope's Authority.
FOrasmuch as there is in the World a great Controversy among people,
concerning the Worship of God; one crying, This is the right Worship; another,
That is the right Worship: And people in these Nations are divided about the
Worship of God, and diverse one from another in their Performances and Practices
of Worship; one sort worshipping after this manner, another after that; and
there is great strife through the whole Nation about this matter, and a great
dis-satisfaction among people, which is the right Worship, and who are the
right Worshippers; and Thousands are desiring after the right Worship of God,
and to become Worshippers of him as he requires: Therefore now it is upon me to
show unto all the World, what the true Worship of God is in it self, and who
are his true Worshippers.

First, The Worship of God in it self is this, It is a walking with God, and a
living with him in Converse and Fellowship, in Spirit and Truth; for he is only
worshipped therein; and to do the Truth, and speak the Truth: This is the True
Worship of God, where the Mind is guided with the Spirit of Truth, and the
Presence of the Lord felt at all times, and his Fear in the Hearts of people,
and his Council stood in, and his Covenant felt, which unites to the Lord in
Spirit; this is the True Worship of God; and it is without respect of times or
things.

And now none upon Earth can thus worship God, but who are changed and renewed
in heart and mind, and born of the Spirit, and led thereby, where the Body of
Sin and Death is put off, such as are redeemed out of the World, and out of all
its ways and nature; such only can worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth,
and such is the Father seeking to worship him now in this present Age: And
there is never a one upon Earth, that can worship God as he requires, who
remain unchanged, and are in the Transgression, unrenewed and unconverted, such
cannot worship the True and Living God; but that which they perform and
practice, as the Pretense of his Worship, is Idolatry and Abomination, and the
Lord has not required it at their hands; for none can walk with God, nor have
unity with him, but who are renewed and changed; nor none can do the Truth, and
speak the Truth in all things, but such who are led by the Spirit of Truth; and
such are in the Covenant of God, and true Worshippers of him; and all that is
contrary, is not the Worship of God, but Idolatry, as I have said.

And now as concerning this Worship practiced in England, in these
Steeple Houses, Churches (so called) it is not the Worship of the Living God,
but Superstition and Idolatry; for people have not learned it by the Teachings
of the Spirit, neither does the Spirit lead them therein; but it stands in
Form, without Power, and in the Inventions and Traditions of the Fathers; and
there is not in it the manifest Presence of God, neither do you Worshippers
meet with the Lord, nor enjoy his pure Life and Presence in your Practices; and
the substance of your Worship (as it is now practiced) is made up of
Inventions, some part of your own, and some part brought along from the church
of Rome.

And is it not great Hypocrisy in you, to profess a denial of the Church of
Rome, and yet be found practizing some of the same things as your Worship,
which the Church of Rome first instituted, and practiced as her Worship? Shall
we instance unto you some particular things? Was it not by the Authority of the
Church of Rome, that these Houses, in which you worship, which you call
Churches, were first set up, and made Worshipping-places for them? And is it
not a little while since that the Mass, and old Popish stuff, was therein
exercised with as great Zeal toward God (if not with as good Sincerity) as you
practice yours at this day? And are there not the very Signs and Symptoms of
the Romish Idolatry yet upon these Houses, being full of Images on the Walls,
and on the Pillars, and on the Glass-Windows, and Crosses about them, and many
other things, which were Popish Inventions; as also, the Names given unto them,
and consecrated Bells in them, and such like stuff? And was it not a little
while since there were the Altars, and the Rails, and the Font, and other such
like things, which lately were broken down? But however, though something there
may be altered, and changed, and converted to another use, and something taken
away, and other Inventions brought in instead thereof, yet still they are the
same Houses which you worship your Godd in; which Houses were set up by the
Authority of the Pope; and there remains yet the Pope's Sign and Symptom of
the Romish Church upon them; and these Houses you call your Churches; and
Thousand of Thousands of blind ignorant people, esteeming and respecting in
their minds of these Places, more then of any other, supposing them to be more
holy, and that other Places are not so good to worship in.

Alas! poor, blind, ignorant people, that deceive your own Souls in the
Traditions and Inventions of man, which you live in the practice of, supposing
it to be the very Worship of God, which is no other in it self but Idolatry,
and you Idolaters; for, do not all Unconverted People, and Unrighteous People,
such who are not taught of the Lord, nor led by his Spirit, but daily rush into
Iniquity, and into evil; are not such found Worshippers here in Steeple Houses,
conforming themselves to these things, and these practices? And can such
worship God? Or is God worshipped by such? I tell you nay; the Lord God is
pure, and they that worship him must be sanctified, and led by his Spirit,
which leads into all Truth.

But now, as concerning your present Practices, which your Worship consists
of; they are not such as ever the Lord instituted, but such as men have set up
in their own wills and wisdom, and not in the Lord's: As for your sprinkling of
Infants, which is a chief Practice of your Worship; was not this first ordained
at Rome? read the Records: And was it not a Popish Invention, which you are
thus zealously reforming, as if it were indeed required of the Lord? Can the
Unconverted and Unregenerated be truly baptized into the Faith of Christ? No:
But the Unconverted and Unregenerated are Partakers of your Baptism, into the
Faith which you profess. There was no such practice in the Christian Church,
before the Apostasy; but when the Apostasy came in, then came up these
Inventions and Immitations, which you practice as the Worship of God, when as
he never required it; neither did his Saints, and his Apostles, ever give you
Example for it; and by it, nor in it God is not worhsipped; neither is in it
self, nor as practiced by you, any part of the Worship of God; but stands in
the Inventions of man, and is after their Traditions, and not after the
Commandments of the Lord.

And as for your singing of David's Experiences in the form and manner as you
do, practizing it as another main part of your Worship; This is the same with
the former, neither ever commanded of the Lord; nor (in the course and manner
as you do it) was it ever practiced by the Saints of old; and is it any better
then a Popish Invention? For was the Nation in any better state then Popery,
when that practice was first instituted, and begun to be performed? you your
selves will confess, that it was in the time of Darkness, and through the
Ordination of the Bishops and Prelates, whom you your selves say, were little
better then Papists in their Worship and Practice; and yet this you practice at
this day, as a part of your Worship, which has no better beginning then as I
have said; and from them you have received it, to wit, From the Bishops and
Prelates: Yea, the chief part of your Worship consists of the performances of
such things as you have received Traditionally from them, and from Rome; for
all these things they instituted.

And as concerning your Ministry; Is it any other with that, then with these
particulars, as I have mentioned? Is it not the same Ministry in substance,
though in some particulars altered, as was in the days of Popery and Prelacy?
Have not your Ministers the same Call to their Ministry, Practice in their
Ministry, and Maintenance at this day, as was in Generations past, when this
Nation was under the cloud of darkness and Ignorance, as your selves will
confess? are not they made Ministers now by natural Learning, receiving
Ordination from man, through the seize of such Arts, and Sciences and
Degrees, through natural Learning and humane Policy, not having their Ministry
by the Gift of the Holy Ghost, no more then the Papists and Prelates had before
them, who were made Ministers by the same Power, and after the same manner, as
these are. And it was the Church of Rome, and by the Popish Authority, that
Colleges and Schools, to make Ministers by them, were first ordained and set
up; and as that Ministry was sent forth in the time of Popery, by the same way
and means (generally are as to substance) are your Ministers now sent forth,
though in some particulars differing in matters of Form, yet the same for
substance: But Christ's Ministers, in the time of the true Church, were not
thus sent forth, but had received Power from on High, and the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, whereby they were made able Ministers; and not by any other thing, nor
by any such means or way as your Ministers now are set up and established: and
this Ministry is differing from the true Ministry, which Christ sent forth, and
is not according, but contrary in all things; and it is not the Ministry of
God, neither brings people to God; for by this Ministry people are not
converted; but are such as they that the true Prophet cried against, saying,
They have run, says the Lord, and I have not sent them; therefore they shall
not profit the People at all.

And as for this Maintenance of the Ministry of the Church of England; is it
not the same as was in the days of Popery and Prelacy? was it not by the
Pope's Authority, that Tithes were first established, and set up to be the
Maintenance of his Ministry? And did not the Romish Church first ordain, that
the people should give the tenth to the use of Religion, and to maintain their
Ministry? if you search the Records, you will find it so.

And was it not the very practice of the Papists and Prelates Ministers, to
have Hire, and great sums of Money by the Year, and Stipends, and large
Benefits for preaching? and the same things are practiced by these Ministers,
which they have borrowed from the Papists and Prelates, which went before them;
for are not these Ministers maintained by Tithes, as the Pope's Ministers were?
And have they not Hire, and great sums of Money by the Year, or Quarterly, even
as the Papists and Prelates had? Wherefore it is plain, that the Maintenance of
your Ministers is the very same for substance, as theirs was that went before
you, which you your selves say were Idolaters; and if they were Idolaters, how
can your Ministers be free, which do practice the very same things, unto the
very fame end? And do not the Priests of this Generation far exceed the Papists
and Prelates. Was there ever, in Generations past, such casting people into
Prison, and spoiling peoples Goods, as is at this day, through the means of
these Priests, and all about their Maintenance, and for their Tithes, and Hire,
and yearly Stipends, and quarterly Gain? Did ever the Papists or Prelates worse
in this particular, with any people that denied them Wages, then these do that
denied them.

Oh! great Blindness and Ignorance is over your hearts, and great Hypocrisy
among your Ministers, who profess a Denial and Dissenting from the Church of
Rome, and cry against them, as Heretics, and that they are in Ignorance, and
yet practice the very same things: Their Call is the very same to their
Ministry, and their Maintenance the same, and Practice in many things the very
same as theirs was, which they seem to deny; and this is great Hypocrisy, to
cast out and kill their Persons, and yet to uphold in many things their
practice, relating to their Worship and their Ministry. Oh abominable Idolatry!
the Hand of the Lord is against it.

But this is not the way that Christ's Ministers were maintained; they had no
such Hire, nor great Sums of Money, nor yearly Tithes, as these Ministers have
through the Pope's Institution; But into whatsoever House they entered, that was
worthy, they might eat such things as were set before them; and the Apostles
might freely reap carnal things, where they had sown spiritual things; but this
was after another manner, and after another nature; for if they had not that,
yet did they not cast men into Prison, and spoil their Goods that would not
give it them, as this Generation of Teachers do: And the Lord God is risen to
confound this Worship, and this Ministry, which is Idolatry; and this Church,
which is but a feigned Immitation: and he will establish his true Worship, that
is in Spirit and in Truth; and his true Ministry, that is by the Gift of the
Holy Ghost; and his true Church; and this shall be brought to pass in his Day.

But again, There is another Practice which you have, which the Church of Rome
and the Prelates had (your Predecessors) If any come in the Name of the Lord to
declare against you, and against your Abomination, to cry against your Sin, and
cry Repentance among you, that you may be converted to God; this you account a
great Transgression, and persecute them that do it, by Imprisoning, and
Whipping, and Stocking, and by imposing great Fines upon them, and causing them
to suffer cruel things; and this did the Papists and Prelates, in like manner
as you do; if any were moved to cry against them, they indeed rewarded them,
even as you do at this day; the same thing you do against such as are moved of
the Lord to come among you; and herein you succeed them, and bring forth the
same Persecution in your Churches, as they did in their Churches; and this is
the defense of your Church, and of your Ministry, Carnal Weapons, Imprisonment,
and Whipping, and Stocking, and causing the Bodies of people to suffer through
Cruelty and Injustice; and by this means is your Church and Ministry defended
and preserved; or otherwise, it would presently fall, as not being able to
continue, nor resist, nor gainsay the Spirit and Power of God, which now is
risen to oppose them, if they had not carnal Laws, and earthly Powers, and
Goals, and Houses of Correction to defend themselves by: And is this the Church
of Christ? and is this Christ's Ministry, that has need of such Weapons as
these? The Apostles and true Churches never did thus, neither sent people to
Prison that opposed them, nor had such Cruelty to execute upon the Bodies of
people, though many did oppose them out of Wickedness; but the Spirit and
Authority of the Lord did defend them from all their Enemies.

But your church and ministry is manifest to be another then that was, and to
be defended by another means, even by the same means that the Papists and
Prelates of old were of a long time defended by; but when the measure of these
things are fulfilled, they will come to an end; as the measure of that
Generation's Iniquity was fulfilled, which went before you; so in the Lord's
season will your measure be fulfilled, and the Lord's People shall be free, and
all Bonds of Iniquity broken.

And thus it is manifest, that this Church and Ministry succeeds the Church of
Rome, and her Ministers, far more then the Church of Christ, and its true
Ministers; and to that it is not equal in any thing, but to the Church of Rome
it is comparable in many things: so that it is manifest, that this Church and
Ministry is not quite another then the Church and Ministry of Rome; but such as
have dissented from them, and are truly sprung out of that Root, and is the
same still in substance, though differing in some Practices, having cast out
some old Inventions, and brought in some new; but, as I have said, remain still
the same in nature and substance, though diffented in some particulars, yet
succeed in many particulars, as I may show more fully hereafter.

And though you bare the Name, and style your selves, The Reformed Churches;
you mean, reformed from the Church of Rome: But how are you reformed, but by
some visible Appearances, and not in the Ground, having put off but some of her
Garments, and remain the same Body for substance in nature and matter, though
differing only in Appearances? For, the Church, which is the True Church of
Christ, is not thus reformed, only changed in part, and altered in degrees; but
the true Church denies the church of Rome in her very Being and Ground, and
in all her Practices whatsoever; for, though many Sects have risen one from
another, yet all the same for substunce, only differing in particulars. But as
for you, to whom this Particular is written, that Worship God in
Steeple Houses; you are not so much differing from the church of Rome, as many
others are, which are not true Churches neither; but the Lord God is now
gathering his people: wherefore, come out of your Idol-Worship, and
Idol-Temples, for God dwells not in them, nor is not worshipped there, but he
dwells and walks in his Saints, and is worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and
his Day is dawned, and his Glory risen, and he will confound this church and
ministry, which bears the Mark of the Romish Whore, and have her Symptoms and
Characters remaining upon them unto this day, as it is manifest.

Object. And though some may object, and say, That God commanded a Temple to be
^^ilded for the worship of his Name, and Ordinances to be practiced in the time
of the old Covenant. To which I do say, yea, it was so, a Temple was builded by
Solomon for the Seed of the Jews to worship in, and to come to Sacrifice to the
Lord in, and there was an outward Worship, and Ordinances; but it is many
hundred years since this Temple was destroyed, and Worship and Ordinances
thrown down, which God once commanded, and his people once practiced; and
Christ the Life, the Power and Wisdom of God, was the Substance thereof, and
unto whom he was made manifest, and in whom he was revealed in the Spirit, they
utterly renounced and denied the Temple, and the worship therein, though once
God had commanded it; and the Saints after the manifesting of Christ to them in
Spirit, and after that the Holy Ghost was given, we do not find through all the
Churches of the Saints, that they worshipped in the Temple of the Jews; but
witnessed against it, and said, That God dwelt not in Temples made with hands,
neither was he worshipped in Temples made with hands; but in the Spirit and in
the Truth their Worship consisted, and therefore were persecuted; but they bare
Testimony against the Temple, and the Worship, and those Ordinances, which God
once had commanded, and which once his People practiced, though it was to the
peril of their lives. But as for these Temples, and these Ordinances, and this
Worship, which are now on foot; they were never brought forth by any Ordination
or Commandment of God; but the Foundation of them is the Inventions of Men, and
Men's Traditions taught them, and not the Spirit of the Lord; and therefore
against those things, those Temples, and those Ordinances and Worships, much
reason have we to cry against them all, as being neither Sign nor Substance of
good, but wholly Inventions of men.

The Jews Temple and Ordinances were Signs of good things to come, and when the
Substance was come the Saints denied the Shaddows and the Figures; but as for
these, they are denied wholly, as being Idolatry and Abomination, from the
beginning to the end of them; for, as I have shown, These things (which are the
matter of which your Worship and Ordinance does consist) had their rise and
beginning in the days of Darkness and Ignorance, since the Apostasy came in:
and so, in the Name and Authority of the Lord, we do declare against them, even
against your Temples and whole Worship, to the intent, to bring you to the true
Worship, that is in Spirit and in Truth, and that you might know your bodies
the Temples of God, and that he might dwell in you, and walk in you, according
as be has promised in the New Covenant.

Wherefore all people, awake, and come out of your Idolatry, and idolatrous
Worships; separate your selves, touch no more of it, that the Lord may receive
you, and that you may come into his Covenant, which is Life and Peace for your
souls; for in those Worships, and Temples, and all your Practices therein, you
have not true peace with the Lord, nor the Refreshments from his pure Presence;
but Sin and Death reigns amongst you, and great ignorance is over your hearts,
and Idolatry corrupts your minds, and the Lord has been forgotten by you days
without number: God is not well-pleased, neither has any delight in your
Worship; for your worship of him, and fear toward him, is but taught by the
Precepts of men, and by the Traditions of the Fathers, in the days of Popery;
and if ever he opens your Eyes, you will see it; for it is with the humble and
contrite in heart that the Lord dwells, him that trembles at the Word of the
Lord, whose heart is right in his sight, and has learned his Judgments and
Fear; and such as are changed and renewed, and born of the Seed of God, and
begotten by his powerful Word; such are the true Worshippers whom the Lord is
seeking, and such will he find to worship him.

And whereas there is a great cry amongst you, and among many people at this
day, about Deceivers, and being deceived; you say, and your Cry is one to
another, Take heed you be not deceived, by false Teachers, and false Doctrine:
This is the Cry of Parents to Children, and Children to Parents; and (...)
(...) sters to Servants, and of Servants to Masters; and chiefly it is the Cry
of (...) Priests to the people, Take heed yo^^ be not (...), etc.

Now to all this I do say, That there are many Deceivers, and many are
(...)ved, this is certainly true, and plainly manifest: But now, to show
(...)Deceiver is, and what it is to be deceived, and who they are that ar^
(...) ceived.

First, That is a Deceiver, that Person, that spirit, or that thing that
(...)eth or inticeth the Minds of people into something, to do, or practce,
(...) speak something which the Lord by his Spirit does not lead to.

I say, That which leads the Creature to take up a Joy, or a Delight,
(...)Happiness in something of this World, which is under the Sun, to place
(...)fidence or felicity in such a thing; that which thus leads or draws
the (...)whether it be person or spirit, it is a Deceiver, and deceives the
Soul; (...)or they, that do follow this, and give up themselves into the
obedience (...)to do, or speak something, that is contrary to God, or which his
Spirit (...)not lead unto, nor guide in; this person is deceived of the
Presence of the (...) and of the Comfort, and Joy, and Happiness that is in
him, and has ple^ and joy in something of the Creation, that is not of him,
but besides (...) and this Person is deceived, and in Deceit, who has placed a
Joy, and Happi^ and Confidence in some Creature, or thing, that is not
perfectly the Lord; (...)another spirit, besides the Spirit of the Lord, has
seated it self in the (...) and taken possession of the Mind, and the Mind and
Heart is thereby ca^ted by that way, in the works and pleasures of this World;
and this is a ^ved estate: and thus much of a Deceiver, and Deceiving in the
ground, in (...) declared.

But now, You that are crying one to another, Be not deceived, be not (...);
Are you not such as are deceived already, and lie wallowing in the Deceit, and
Vanity, and Evil of this World? For, while sin has power over you, and that
Spirit that is not of God does lead you, you are deceived; and thus it is with
you, being unchanged and unrenewed in Mind and Heart, are not you deceived? For
you want the feeling of the Presence, and of the Comfort of the Lord God, and
you are deceived of that, for that you have not; and another thing possesses
your minds, and the Joy and Pleasure of this World; and in your Exercise,
spiritual and temporal, the spirit that is of this World does lead you and
guide you, the spirit of Unrighteousness, that leads contrary to him; and can
you be otherwise deceived, or more deceived? For you are without God already,
and want his Peace, and the Inheritance of Life Eternal, that is in him, you
want the possession thereof; and you are following dead Idols and Vanities,
which steal away your minds, whereby it is manifest that you are deceived: For,
all people upon Earth, that are not led by the Spirit into all Truth; that have
not received the Promise of the Father, they are all deceived, and cannot be
more deceived then they are. And so is the Cry in general among people, if any
one forsake and deny their way of Worship, and Religion, and Profession, be it
of what manner or nature soever, presently there is a Cry, (chiefly by the
Priests, Take heed you be not deceived; and you are in Heresy, and Error, and
such like: Thus have the Papists cried against them that have dissented from
them, and the Prelates cried the same, and now yo^ cry the same to them that
dissent from you: But your Zeal is not so much against Heresy and Error,
simply so, as it is to have your own Sect and Worship upheld, and against them
that do dissent from you; and it has been Antichrists way, since the Apostasy,
since the days of the Apostles, to cry, Heresy, and Error, and you are
deceived, to all that did decline and dissent from him; for you may read in the
Scriptures, Power was given to the Beast, to compel all to worship him, and all
that would not, he made War against, and had power to kill them* and (...)have
the Papist^ done, (...)against (...)that denied their church; (...)the Pr^
(...) (...) (...) (...); your, cry (...), Heresy and Error, (...)deceived, who
do (...)church, and your ministry; and (...) (...) have you learned ^f your
(...) (...) (...) (...) church.

(...) ^se all sorts of people ^, That (...)(...), and that (...) ar^ is (...)
and see how your selves (...) (...) (...) the spirit of Unrighteo^sness ^ness,
and Ignorance; and a Cloud of Error is over you and (...) ^; and the Son of
God, who is ^ring now in Majesty and Reno^, to (...)Name over all the Earth;
and Antichrist's way you have been in, (...) (...) have all to how under his
power unto his worship: But no^ eyes of (...)are opened, and Life, and
Rig^ness, and Truth it self (...)^ung (...)^he Clouds of D^ness and (...).

(...) (...) (...) the Unknown God, and him you ignorantly worship af^ of men,
(...) not af^ (...) Com^s of God; (...) (...)of the Forefathers is seated in
you (...) (...) Witness, and ^, and quenches the Spirit; your old (...),
Traditi^ and (...)your Exercise therein, (...) tha^ part which i^ carnal, and
(...) (...)others; and your Worship, which is out of the Spirit of God,
(...)Spirit of God in others, to (...) any truly to the Living (...)

(...) will destroy your Worship, and confound it, and no more is t^
(...)^shipped i^ St^^ple-Houses, they are left desolate of God's Pre^ (...)
more in Days, and Ti^es, and Things; but they that worsh^ (...)(...) in the
Spirit, changed by it, and led by it into the Truth: So (...)does open your
Eyes, you will see the Worship of God to be (...)thing, then you suppose it;
you cannot be educated naturally in the Worship of God, nor learn it by
Traditions; for it stands only in the Spirit, and is taught by the Spirit unto
all them that are born of the Spirit; and who (...) (...) be born of that, are
the true Worshippers of God, in which the Father is well pleased.

And as for your Worship in Steeple Houses, God has no Delight in, he ^th it
not, but it is an Abomination to him; it is not pleasing to him, be^e you be
out of his Spirit, and worship after your own Traditions, (...)after his
Spirit: And this worship has stood all this long time of An^, while the Whore
and the Beast has ruled over Nations; and so one Tradition after another has
been brought in, and one false Worship has risen out of another; and what
people have had, it has been by Tradition, and not from the immediate Spirit
of God; and so the True God has not been wo^d in his Spirit: And now all the
World have been pleading for the^^ Traditions, and they be in respect above the
Commandments of God, among ye that worship in Steeple Houses; you are even mad
against them that (...)^inst the Steeple Houses, and plead the Antiquity of
your Worship, (...) (...) your Traditions and Ordinances; now they are ancient,
even as anci^ ^s since the false Prophets and Antichrist came in, and did put
on the She Clothing, but inwardly ravening Wolves; these killed the Life, and
slew the Prophets, and they set up Inventions of their own: and your Tradition
and Worships are as ancient as since power was given to the Beast over Kindreds
and Peoples; and the Lord God is bringing down your Worship, the Original of
which came up when Antichrist went out into the World, as you may read in
John's Epistle, and so you may plead Antiquity; yet not as ancient as the True
Church is; for when the tru^ Churches were apostatized, then came up your
Worship, and your many Traditions; and this has been while the Woman has been
fled into the Wilderness, and the Man-child caught up to God, which when the
Woman returns again, your worship and ordinance will be over-thrown, and the
True Worship again established, and Liberty; but first you must know the Spirit
to teach you, before you can worship in it; and the Spirit must purify your
Hearts, and make them (...) before you can offer to God an acceptable
Sacrifice; for your Sacrifices are not acceptable, but they are stained and
polluted in the fight of the Lord, who (...) has beheld what you are a doing;
and you are in that which his Soul has no Pleasure in; and in the Day of your
^ation, the Witness in your Consciences shall answer it: so you are to know God
by his Spirit, before you can worship him; the Word of the Lord must be (...)
in your H^^rt^ as a (...) as a Ham^, and (...) mu^^ be cr^ (...) (...) and have
(...)Spirit, ^ore ye can (...) (...).

So all you false Worshippers, you are called, that you may return, and may
come into the True Worship, which is in t^^ Commandment of God, and not the
Traditions of (...); and in that Law written in the Hear^, is God known^ who
works man's Salvation, (...) which leads in the true and perfect Worship of
the True and Living God, (...) (...) Lord (...)all in a^ Th^ef^ retu^; Why wi^
yo^ye a^^ perish (...) your (...)A (...)^n is ta^^n u^ ^, O^ why (...) you
^^rish ^ough (...)yo^^ (...) S^ ti^ C^ into the Sp^ (...) (...) the Truth, that
you may ^ship God, (...) (...) (...)of him, who is now appeared in Power and
great Glory to gather his People to Himself.

This is to go ab^ among all people, w^o ar^ worshipping in Temp^ made with
hands, and who are under this Ministry, and are of (...) Church aforementioned;
that they may come to consider, and see the Er^ of their Way, of the Worship,
and of their Mi^ And this is a Visitation from the Lord unto them all, by a
Friend (...) all your Souls, E. B.

Some False Principles And ERRORS DISCOVERED And REFUTED: (...)Answer to a
Catechism-Book, which is said to contain, The Principles of Religion; put forth
by a nameless Author: But is supposed to be the work of one Samuel Eaton, a
professed Minister of the Gospel, among the Sect of the Independants, in
Ch^shire. But upon true Examination, he is found to be teaching the Traditions
of Men, for the Commandments of Christ; and his Principles are proved to be not
according, but contrary to the SPIRIT of GOD and the Scriptures.
To the READER.
THE Reason and Cause of this being sent abroad, is for the better Information
of all; but more particularly for the good of that Assembly, to whom Samuel
Eaton is Minister and Pastor, that they may know the Truth from Error, and the
Way of Righteousness from all false Ways; and may turn fr^^ Idol-Shepherds,
that destroy the Vineyard, and tread it down; and may (...) to Christ, and
receive him, who is the chief Shepherd, to feed his Flock with the Bread of
Eternal Life.

And the Reason why these False Principles are charged upon Samuel Eaton, is
this, It being doubtful to some, who was the Author of that Catechism, wherein
these Principles and Doctrines were held forth; John Gredley and Anne Sheeld by
name, were with the said Samuel Eaton, and asked him, If he owned that Book
(the Catechism?) and he said, He would maintain all in it: That (...) (...)
Answer.

THE Ways of the Lord are Equal and Just, but the ways of the Sons of Adam
are altogether corrupted, and different and contrary to the Ways of Salvation:
And the Wisdom that is of this World is Foolishness with God, and its End is
Destruction to its self, and to all that walk therein. And what is Man, that he
shall prescribe a Way to his Maker^ and who is it that will be more wise then
God, to ^et him a Way how he must ^ch his People? Therefore in-vain have men
labored, and have reaped to ^selves nothing but Wind and Confusion; And in
va^^ have they sown (...) (...) to reap after them, whose Fruit has been
Emptiness, and not filled the Hand of the Gatherer. And in particular, this
Book, with which I am now ^ing, is the Fruit of an empty. Tree, which cannot
satisfy the hungry (...), nor comfort the weary Seeker; for, the Satisfaction
and Comfort of the ^ing hungry Soul depends only upon the Lord, and upon the
Bread of ^^fe, that comes down, from God; and the soul that ea^^ thereof is
^ed and comforted forever, and hungereth no more, nor thirsts any sl^; but
the Fountain is in him, and the Well springs up unto Eternal Life (...) goes
no more forth. And if so be that all herein were true and sou^ Do^, and were
learned, so as to express it over again in words, this might be, (...)the soul
still remaining in Anguish, and under Sin and Death, though (...) in the
Knowledge that is from below, and yet in a farther Ignorance of God; for the
wisdom of this World knows not God, neither can it teach not receive the
knowledge of the things that pertain unto Life Eternal; but to the S^e, and to
Fools, does the Lord teach and reveal the Knowledge of his Kingdom; and it is
not received from Books, nor the Teachings and Tradition of (...) (...)by the
Manifestation of the eternal Spirit, which does lead into all Truth, ^eveals
the Mysteries of Salvation.

The first thing that I take notice of, is this, thou say, God is a Spirit*
(...) he is one in Being, and is to be distinguished into three Persons; and
the Father, (...) (...) Holy Ghost are Personal Relations; and if one be a
Person, such are the other, etc.

Answ. The Father, Son, and Spirit is one; this we believe and know, according
to the Scriptures: but, as for thy word, Person, that is car^ (...) ^oo low a
word to denominate God by, who is Infinite; for God and the Spirit has no
Person, nor cannot truly be distinguished into Persons; for a person has
relation to Place Time and Change, and is not in all places at all ti^es at ^e;
and the Scriptures know no such distinction; for God is a Spirit, and has, no
relation to one Time, Place or Alteration more then another, but fills Heaven
and Earth, and his Presence is in all, and over all, who is ble^ forever, and
is infinite, and without Person, or confined Being; and the S^pture no where,
in true Translation, does denominate God, Christ and the Spirit by Persons, and
Personal Beeings, nor does distinguish them into ^ee Persons; for Persons are
related to carnal, as I have said; and Persons is ^oo low to denominate God,
and Christ, and the Spirit by. So thy Principles are unsound, and not agreeing
to the Spirit of God, and the Scriptures; and therefore not to be believed, nor
received.

Whereas thou say, That the one standing Rule, according to which God is to
b^ ^ht, worshipped and served, is the holy Scriptures; in which God has
revealed himself in all things, which he would have believed, and do^e, etc.

Answ. It is the Spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures, which Spirit
was, and is within the Saints, that leads into all Truth, and teaches to k^
all things; and that Spirit of God only is the standing Rule to walk in, and to
walk by, it was the Rule to Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and the rest of the ^ly
Fathers, that lived before any Scripture was written; and it was the Ru^ to the
Prophets, to Christ, and to the holy Apostles; they all followed the Spirit,
and walked in it; and spoke, and wrought, and acted as the Spirit of God within
them moved them, and led them; it was not the Scriptures, but the Spirit, that
gave forth the Scriptures, that was the standing, unchang^le, un-erring Rule of
worshipping, serving and obeying the Lord God* and that same Spirit is the
standing Rule to us also: For the Apostle commands, (...) (...) is the
Spirit; and that which we are to walk in is our Rule; And as many (...) the
Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God; and then the Spirit is their (...)
and that guides the Feet in the Way of Peace: And in the Spirit is God ^pped;
For they that worship him, must worship him in the Spirit and in the ^* and
such he seeks to worship him: For, it is in the Hearts of his People, (...)
within them, that God reveals himself by his Spirit: For it is the Spirit
(...)the thing ^f God; and none knows the things of God, saving by the (...)
of God* and that reveals God, and teaches to worship God? and to serve him*
And the Scriptures they declare of the Rule, and of the Revelati^ (...) God,
and are a Declaration, of all things which are to be believed and (...) by the
Children of the Lord: so that the Scriptures are not the (...) Rule, neither do
they teach to worship and serve God; but the Spi^ ^^ve forth the Scriptures,
that is the standing Rule, in, and through ^tions* and the Spirit does reveal
the Knowledge of God, and how (...)(...) worshipped and served.

And thou say. The Scriptures are the Word of God, given by immediate In^
(...) God; and that they are given to all men, to be read: And the Scrip^
^cient to make the Man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished; and (...)
(...)(...) unto Salvation: And the Scriptures are plain, and easy to be
(...)^y the simplest; and there is Milk in them for Babes, and strong Meat for
(...) grown up.

^* Christ is the Word of God, and his Name is called, The Word of (...) and
the Word of God was in the Beginning, and shall endure forever: and this Word
is not the Scriptures, and the Scriptures are not the Word; but the Scriptures
are words of God, given forth from the Word, (...) was in their Hearts; that
spoke forth the Scriptures; which were wrote (...) the Holy Men of, God were
moved by the Holy Ghost, and given by the Inspiration of the Spirit of God: And
the Scriptures are a Declaration and a ^tise of the WORD that was in the
Beginning, and shall endure for^; but the Scriptures are not the Word: And some
of them were gi^ to one sort of Men, and some of them to another, and some of
them ^* But as for the Threatenings and Judgments propounded, and the Reproof of
the Wicked, that part was not given to the Saints, nor spoken to ^em, and so
not given to all; and the Promises to the Children of the Lord, and the
Epistles to the Saints, and them that were sanctified, that part was not given
and spoken to the World, and to the Wicked, who are un^ted, and so not spoken
to all; though all may read them, yet none can understand them, but by the same
Spirit that gave them forth; and who have not the same Spirit, to guide them,
they cannot understand the Scriptures; for they were given forth by the Eternal
Spirit; and the carnal ^dom, that is from below, and sensual, cannot understand
nor receive the ^gs of the Kingdom of God, which are declared of in the
Scriptures: And so the Scriptures are not easy to be understood, but are
sealed from the World; ^^ither are the Scriptures without Faith (which thou
have left out) sufficient to make the Man of God perfect; but the Scriptures,
through Faith, are able to make the Man of God perfect, and thoroughly
furnished; this we know and ^re; and do set the Scriptures in their right
place, and give them their right H^our and Respect.

And as for thee and thy Generation, who are erred from the Spirit of Truth,
You know not the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; for Christ is the Bread of
Life, and the Water of Life; in him is the Milk for Babes, and (...) for strong
Men, and not in the Scriptures, who testify of Christ the Life; and in them
the Pharis^^s thought to have Eternal Life, but would not come (...) Christ,
the End of the Scriptures, that they might have Life; and this is the self same
state with yours of this, Age who think to have the perf^ of Salvation, and the
Milk for Babes, and the Meat for Strong Men in the Scriptures: but will not
receive Christ, who is the perfect Salvation, and (...) Bread and Water, of
Life, for all the Children of the Lord, who are (...)the Spirit: And so thy
Doctrines, and thy Principles of thy Religion, (...) not sound, nor agreeing
with the Scriptures; but contrary, and by a (...)spirit; and therefore we
cannot be of thy mind, but do truly (...)unlearned of the Father, and know
not the Way of Salvation, and so* (...) can not truly inform nor direct
others.

And thou say. Men are under a Necessity of multiplying Transg^ (...)3. 12.
Ephesians. 4. 17. 2. Pet. 4.

Answ. In this thou have erred, and spoken contrary to sound D^* (...) there is
no Necessity laid upon any to commit any sin, much less a Ne^ multiplying
Transgression; if there be a necessity, who lays it (...)* (...)and why is
that Necessity? Transgression is of the Wicked One, and (...)is of the Devil,
and there is no necessity for that upon any account (...)sin destroys the
Soul, and is a Ve^ation to the Lord God, and a C^ (...)lasting Misery; and for
to act that, there is no* Necessity, which has (...)fects: And thou have
perverted the Scriptures quoted by thee, to prove (...)Assertion; which I have
set down for the Reader to pe^se, that all ^, thou have perverted them; for
they prove no such Doctrines, as that* (...)a Necessity of multiplying
Transgression, which thou have affirmed, and (...)the Scriptures to prove it;
which is; first, false doctrine uttered by thee it (...) also a perverting of
the Scriptures to maintain it; and this two Evil^* (...) thou have committed in
one Work; and because thou have done Evil, (...)at thy Door, and there I will
leave it.

And thou say, To be justified is not to be really ^l^ansed from all Sin*
(...)take of real Righteousness and Holiness; but it is to be accounted and
reput^ Holy, and not to have Sin reckoned, etc.

Answ. There are none justified, but who are in Christ, and are chan^ and
renewed; and born again; and such are cleansed from sin; For he (...)of God
sins not: and it is he only that is justified, and not the Old Man, that is
unchanged, and commits sin; he is not justified: and who are born of God* and
are justified, are really cleansed, and do partake of Righteousness and
holiness, even of the Righteousness and Holiness of the Son of God* and in that
Righteousness he is accounted* Righteous, and in no other, nor (...) (...)
other way, then by receiving Christ and his Righteousness, and being made
Part^kers of it in their* Hearts; for the Apostle said, If Christ be not in
you, (...) are Reprebates; and such are not justifies, nor accounted just and
holy* who* have not Christ within them, and his Righteousness; but who have
Christ within, the Hope of Glory, and are accounted Just and Righteous in the
sight of God, the Body of Sin is put off; for if Christ be in you, the Body is
dead because* (...) Sin; and such are really cleansed; and if he be in you, you
are made Parta^* of real Righteousness and Holiness: and this is the Truth of
the Gospel of Christ, which confounds and condemns thy false doctrine; for no
man it accounted and imputed just and holy, but who are cleansed from Sin, and
are in Christ; for, who do commit Sin are Unholy, and so reputed of God, and
Sin is neckoned to them; and this all will find in the Day of the Lord, when
(...) comes to judge righteously, and to give every man according to his
Works* and nor according to what he may make a show of, and profess in words:
thou^^ all you false Daubers with Untempored Mortar, heal up the Hurt of the
Daughter of Si^n deceitfully, and cry, Peace, Peace, by a false applying the
Pro^ses and Words of Christ, when God speaks no Peace; and even you* and you*
false daube^ Wall, will the Whirlewind of the Lord beat down, and destroy*
utterly: And this I assert, contrary to thy false Doctrine and Principles. T^
none are justified, but who have Christ in them, and really partake of Holiness
and ^sness, and are really cleansed from all Sin, and are born of the Spirit of
God, (...)(...) of the Pr^ of Eternal Life.

(...) thou say* Iusti^ (...) not of any D^gree* (...) if a Person (...)from
any on^ Sin* he is justifies from all Sin* (...) well from Si^^ to be
committed, (...)are already co^ed* and who is (...) a (...) Person, is not
unjustified upon (...)etc.

Answ. Grace and Faith, and Truth, and Christ himself admits of De^* which
are one; and there are several Measures of Life, of (...)and Faith, of
Sanctification, and of Justification also; for, (...) as every man has
received Christ, so has he received Sanctification ^, and no otherwise; for,
Christ is made Wisdom* and Sancti^^cation, and Salvation; and every one feels
his Sanctification and his Justifica^* (...) to the Measure of the Gift of
Christ; so that there are seve^ of Justification* And also, a man may be
justified from one sin, ^, and not from all sin; for, according to every man's
Sanctificati^ Witness of his Justification to him, and no more; and if thou
(...)^^ing by Experience, thou know this: And no man is justified (...)which
he is to commit; for that says gives License to sin: if any, (...)sin, shall
believe, that that sin is long since forgiven, and he is justi^ (...) and if he
shall believe, that he is justified, though he commits sin, (...) ^fore he
commits his sin, this will be a cause to run into sin, and is a (...)by thee
unto all Unrighteousness* Why, if people can believe they (...)from the Sins
which they have yet to commit, what should restrain (...)running with pleasure
into all Unrighteousness? And if new Sins, (...)committed, do not make Persons
unjustified, then may the Sinners re^ their Sins, and take their pleasure in
Ungodliness. This Doctrine of (...) is pleasant to the Wicked, and it is the
Way and Principle of Liberty in ^* rather then the Principles to lead from sin;
and so thou have showed (...) Work thou ar^ doing, by strengthening the Wicked
in his Way, so that he cannot turn from sin, rather then drawing him from sin;
and this is the (...)work.

And thou say, Such as are justified are regenerated and sanctified: and a
little (...) thou say, To be justified is not to be cleansed, nor is it to
partake of real Right^* and Persons are justified from Sins which they have to
commit.

Answ. These are Contradictions, and proceed out of Darkness, and not
(...)Light; and thy Folly and Ignorance may be read by all men: For, who are
Regenerated and Sanctified are also cleansed, and partake of real ^ness.

And thou further say, That Sanctification is a real Change from sin, to the
parity of (...) ^ge of God.

Answ. And I say, None are Sanctified, but they are Justified; so none are
(...), but who are changed into the Image of God; this the Truth says* and
wherein thou have said contrary, thou have spoken contrary to the Truth; and
the Truth will judge thee.

(...), Thou say, Sanctification is not perfect in this life; and the New
Man, ^, or Law of the Mind, is that Grace, or imperfect Sanctification, etc.

Answ. Then Christ is not perfect in this life; for he is made of God unto us
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. ^0. But we say, Christ is perfect, and therefore
Sanctification is perfect; and the New Man is the Image of God, and is created
in R^sness and in true Holiness: But thou say, The New Man (...) imperfect*
(...)of thy Principles, when they are compared with the Scriptures, and see the
(...) and Wickedness of them. And the Spirit and Law in the mind ^s the Spirit
of God, and the Law of God, in which the Apostles served God; and (...) all the
Saints: but thou say, The Spirit and Law in the Mind is imperfect; (...) this
is Error in the highest degree, to say ^gni^, That the New Man, (...) Image of
God, tha^ is in Righteousness and true Holiness, and the Spirit of God, and the
Law of God, is imperfect Sanctification; and Grace is the Salvation, and is
God's Sufficiency, and that (thou say) is imperfect (...) (...) thus thy
Principles of thy Religion, which thou walk in thy self, (...)would teach
to others, are Abominable, corrupted Principles of E^ contrary to the Spirit of
Truth, and to the Scriptures also. And (...)that thy Name is concealed; for thy
work deserves no^ a good Man's (...)it.

Much more might be said, to lay open further thy ^olly, but this is su^ men of
Understanding; and contrary to thee I do a^^ert, That the New (...)Image of
God, the Spirit and L^f God in the Mind, is perf^ Peace, (...)Sanctification:
and thou have said the contrary: and now whether thy (...)ples of Religion, or
mine, be the most true, and whether false, let all (...)judge, with the Light
in their Consciences.

And thou say, The old Man, the Flesh, the Body of Sin, the Body of (...)the
Sin that remains in sanctified Persons.

Answ. Who are sanctified, are freed from the Body of Sin and D^ have put it
off, and the Law of the Spirit of Life has f^eed (...) from (...)and from the
old Man; for if the old Man, the Flesh, the Body of (...)Death, be in the
sanctified Persons, then there are none s^^cti^^ed at (...)what are they
sanctified, freed and cleansed from, if the old Man, (...)the Body of Sin and
Death, be yet remaining in them? Thou sp^ unlearned man, and one that knows not
the sanctified state; but art (...)thy mind and Judgment, and in thy words
also; for we have put (...)Man, and are crucified to the Flesh, and made free
from the Body of (...)Death, and this is our Sanctification; and who are
remaining (...)things, are not sanctified, but are in the Degeneration, and
have (...)yet in the Kingdom of God, nor in Christ Jesus; but are with the
World.

And thousayst, The Sanctification of the First Day, has put an end to
(...)fication of the Seventh, etc.

Answ. Here again thou have uttered that which thou know not (...)days are
alike unto God, and one sanctified as much as another, and (...)of days with
him, but all are holy, and pure, and good; and when (...)ctification of any
thing is put to an end (as thou say the sanctification (...)Seventh Day is)
then the thing is no more good nor holy, but beco^ and unclean, if it be no
more sanctified nor holy; and in this Princi^ have erred also.

As for the Seventh Day, it was commanded of God to the Jews, to be (...)and
observed holy to the Lord; and all manner of Labor to all Creatures
(...)forbidden; which thing was a Sign and a Shadow of a good Thing to co^ the
End of which Ordinance was Christ, the Substance of all things, and (...)End of
Days: and that there was any disanulling of that Command (...) Jews, and a
Command to keep and observe the First Day of the Week i^ of the other, by any
outward Command, this we read not in all the Scrip^ and what ground have thou
more then thy Imaginations, I know not, to a^ the changing of days, and to
teach the observation of the First Day, (...)Sabbath, instead of the Seventh
Day, seeing thou have nothing in the Scrip^ to raise such a Principle from; and
so would make exception of Days, and resp^ct of Times, which the Apostles did
not, after the Holy Spirit was co^ for Days and Times all are alike to God;
and who are come to Christ, (...)true Rest of the Immortal Soul, are in the end
of Days, and out of the (...)spect of Times, in the Substance, which endures
forever: And in the Gos^ Ministr^tion, there is no Command or Injunction by
Christ, or by his Apost^ given to (...) for the observing any one day more then
another.

And thou say, when it is s^^d, S^ not at all, The Meaning is, not Vainly
(...)Unnecessarily.

^: and it is a Seal and Sign, that (...)is of the Whore of Rome, and not of
the true Church of Christ, for (...)nor true Church of Christ never ordained
not practiced such a thing ^: and in the true Church, as sprinkling of Infants,
and calling it (...) in the Faith of Christ, and the Seal of the Covenant,
there was no such (...) and Doctrine amongst them, but it is come up since the
true Church (...)Wilderness, and since the (...) received power over Kindreds
and (...)it is an Institution of the great Whore, that has (...) upon the
(...)Generations; and she has made Nations drink her Cup of Fornications (...)
original of this Practice and Principle was received (...) of the Whore's (...)
and not by any Commandment of Christ, or Example of his Church and (...). And I
cannot but charge thee, That thou teach for Doctrine the Tru^, and holdst
forth for Principles of Religion, to be believed and (...), the (...)of the
great Whore, of whose Cup thou have dr^nk, and (...) also give (...)they may
drink it also: And to accomplish which Evil End, thou (...)the Scripture, Asts
2.39. for the Scripture has no such thing intende^ (...) the baptizing of
Infants, for which end thou have f^^sly cited it; for, (...) Promise is to as
many as the Lord our God shall call, yet what is this (...) ^prinkling of
Infants, which thou assertest as a Principle of Religion, and (...) seem to
enforce it, by virtue of the Scripture mentioned* But (...)Scripture, and
showed thy self to be disagreeing to the holy Ministers (...)of Christ, and to
be agreeing with the false church of Rome (...)sufficient to thee.

(...) thou say, The outward Covenant of God is conditional; and the
(...)entitles both such as make it, and their Infants unto it (to wit) the
Cove^^^^ (...). The Covenant of God is not outward, but spiritual, a^ I have
said, (...) also free, even the free Gift of God; and the Promise and Covenant
(...)^^nifested, without the perfoming any thing by the (...)God; for it stands
not upon condition, but upon free (...)make a Profession of Faith, which have
not right nor (...)Salvation, not to God's fore Covenant; neither can any upon
(...)infants, void of Understanding, have any assurance or Title in (...)of
Life eternal, but who are regenerated, and born of the (...) and degener^^^^ in
that state have no title nor right in the (...) Seed, which is Heir of the
Promise, which is born of God, and not (...)that is the Covenant; so thou have
spoken things thou know not, (...)

have manifested thy false Principles, which thou walk in, and would (...)
others to receive them also.

Then thou speak of Bread and Wine, Which (say ^^ou) are the (...) (...)
in the Lord's Supper, and are a Seal of the Cove^ als^, etc.

Answ. The Supper of the Lord is the Bread of eternal Life, the Body and (...)
of Christ, and who ^^ts thereof shall (...)dye, nor H^ger and Thirst any (...)
(...) as for Bread and Wine, visible and carnal, that is not the real Supper of
(...) (...), and even the purest institution and Practice thereof is but a
Representation of ^, and not the very thing; and the End and Substance being
come, the (...) may be neglected. But as for the manner and institution of that
Practice i^ (...) Church of England, and the Practice it self, we deny to be
either a Sign of (...) past or to come; but in an idolatrous way it is held
forth, and not in (...)Honor to God; for he is thereby dishonored: for the
false church has (...)the form of that Practice, as well as of many others
(which the true Church (...) practi^'d) without the Power, and now does
practice many things in mere I^ tion and vain Idolatry, and in Form and
Tradition, and without the Te^ the Spirit, which sometime the true Church, and
the Apostles practiced in the (...), and by the leading of the Spirit of God,
and what the Command of God was ^: So that though you may in some things
practice the very same which the (...)did; yet having not the same Spirit to
lead you, nor being guided thereby, as (...) Saints and the Apostles were, your
works are but Idolatry, and formal, (...) not accepted of the Lord, but stink
in his Nostrils: And your Covenant is (...) ward, and your Seals outward, your
Baptism and Supper outward and (...); and while you are with Zeal prosecuting
your outward Performances, and ^lowing them, you neglect the inward, and the
Substance, which is, Christ (...)you, the Hope of Glory; which if he be in you,
then the body of sin is put off, and the vail is done away, and the
Representations are done away, and the Substance and (...) is come; and if
Christ be not in you, you are Reprobates, notwithstanding all your Profession
and Practices of outward Duties unto God, without his Spirit.

And whereas thou have quoted, Col. 4. 10. Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. 23. to (...),
That the New Man, the Spirit or, Law of the Mind, is called, The imperfect
Sanctification.

Answ. Hereby openly thou have showed thy self to be a Perverter of the
Scriptures, and a Wrester of them to thy own Destruction; for let but reason^
^en peruse the Scriptures mentioned by thee, and see if there be such a thing
(...) them, as held forth by thee, That the New Man, the Spirit or Law of the
Mi^^, is called, Imperfect Sanctifiation: which thou have asserted, and cited
those Te^ to prove it, but as to the thing it self I have answered before; only
this is to (...) thy manner of perverting Scriptures, which is the work of the
evil spirit in thee, and not the Work of the Spirit of God.

And thus I have examined some part of thy Principles of Religion, which th^^
have put forth into the world for others to learn; and the Error and Falsness
of them is laid open, and how contrary to Scriptures they are; and in haste,
(...) (...) were, I have passed over it, not willing to rake into things which
gave no just occasion against Truth; but have only confuted a few of thy many
particulars; which had I narrowly sought into other things, much Unsoundness
would have been discovered: but what I have said is truly sufficient to
discover unto (...) persons the Error of thy Judgment, and of thy Principles
and Practices, and (...) thy whole Religion. And before ever thou be a true
Instructor of others in (...) Way, thou must first repent, and believe, and
learn the Way thy self, which yet thou art ignorant of; for thou have showed no
Knowledge, but what is sen^, and devilish, and from below, and merely carnal
and natural: and meeting wi^^ thy Book, and enquiring what the Author was, I
was engaged to say something to it by way of answer, and to lay it to the Line
of Judgment, according to the Scriptures; and it has proved very guilty of
Error, and perverting Scriptures

^

^

The 21th of the 3d M^^eth, 1659* By a Lover of thy Soul, and a S^eker of the
Good and Peace of all men* Edw. Buroughs*

A MESSAGE To all Kings and Rulers IN CHRISTENDOM, To all called Christian
Kings and Princes, and to all the Parliaments, and Rulers, and Governors of
every Degree throughout the whole Christian World. A CALL unto you all, by a
Servant of the LORD, in the Name of the Lord God, Dreadful and Mighty, and the
Highest Power over all the World; That ye take off Oppression, and relieve the
Oppressed, and cease to grind the Face of the Poor; and from drinking the
Whore's Cup, and from carrying of her; and from all Oppressions whatsoever,
lest the Lord God Almighty execute (...) fierce Indignation upon you, if ye
will not turn at his Reproof, (...) hearke^ (...) his Voice when he calls
unto you.
FOrasmuch as it has come to pass in the World, for many Ages, sm^^ the last
Glorious Appearance of Christ Jesus, and the Light of his Glorious Gospel,
through his Servants the holy Apostles, That Antichrist, that Man of Sin, the
Enemy of Christ and his Kingdom, has ruled in the Hearts of people, and
throughout and over the Christian World; and he has been exalted within and
without, ever since the falling away from the true Faith, which once was
delivered to the Apostles and true Churches; and he has showed himself to be
God, and has sitten in the Seat of God, and has exercised Lordship over the
Persons and Consciences of Men, throughout Generations, ever since the falling
away from the Faith: For the True Church, the Elected Spouse, the Lamb's Wife,
which once brought forth him that was to rule the Nations, and was clothed with
the Sun, and had once great Beauty and Excellency, has been fled into the
Wilderness, and has been desolate as without Husband and Issue; but has
remained in her place prepared her of God, where she has dwelt in Mourning,
and been fed with the Bread of Sorrow, being pursued thither by the Dragon, and
his Floods of Cruelty, who also waited to devour the Manchild, when he was
born; and the Martyrs Blood has been shed, and the holy Prophets, and
Apostles, and Saints have been made War against, and killed and persecuted for
Righteou^^ess sake; and the two Witnesses have long lain slain and rejoiced
over in the Streets of the great City, and the Blood of the ^cent has ^een
dr^k, and the Lamb and his Followers have been made Wa^ ^inst; and the Dragon,
the D^vil, and Satan, has deceived the World into the Name of Christians,
without the true Christian Life; and Righteousness and Truth has stood afar
off, and Justice and Mercy has been wanting, and the Fear of the Lord, and
true Obedience to him, has been in a great measure expelled out of Nations;
and even all that would not worship the (...), and his Images, and receive his
Mark, the Beast has had power to kill (...), and he has had power to execute
his Wrath against them that have followed the Lamb, even all this time of
Darkness and Apostasy, which has over^dowed the Christian-world, since the
Apostles days until this time; and all this has been since the falling away
from the Life, and Righteousness, and Spirit of Jesus, as I have said.

(...) the Beast has been great, that arose out of the Sea, and out of the
Ear^ (when the true Faith was lost) and his power mighty amongst men; for he
re^ed power from the Dragon, and made War against the true Church, and (...)
(...) devour the Man-child; and power ^^th been given him over Kind^, Tongues
and Nations; and all the World has wondered and followed after the Beast, and
have been admiring his power, and his great authority, and saying, Who is able
to make War with him? for he has had a Mouth given, that has spoken great
things; and it has been given him to war with the Saints, and to overcome them
by his unrighteous Laws and Decrees: and all that dwelt upon the Earth have
worshipped him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life; and he has
had many Heads (even diverse sorts and changes of Government) and many Horns,
with which he has pushed the Innocent, and ruled over the Earth, and kept all
under his power; and he has set up Images to worship, and Likenesses without
Life; and he has caused both Small and Great, Rich and Poor, Free and Bond, to
receive his Mark; and be (...) carried the Whore, and she has journeyed upon
him from Nation to Nation, through the Earth, in the Sheep's Clothing, and made
all Nations drink her Cup of Fornications.

And the Whore, the false church, she has fate as a Queen, in great State and
Authority, upon Nations, Tongues, Multitudes and Peoples; and thro^ the Beast's
authority, which has carried her, she has ruled in great authority over the
Consciences, Persons and Estates of People; and she has drunk the Saints
Blood, and the Martyrs Blood; and in her is found even (...) this Day, the
Blood of the Martyrs, and the Prophets, and of ^ust (...), and of all that have
been slain upon the Earth; and she has exercised Cruelty and Tyranny over the
Heritage of God; and she has had the Sheep's Clothing upon her, even part of
the Garment of the Lamb's Wife; and she ^^th appeared in much Beauty, with a
Golden Cup in her hand, in which the Wine of her Fornications, and the
Filthiness thereof has appeared, and which she has caused the Nations to
drink; and by her Sorceries and Witchcrafts she has deceived the World, and
with her false Miracles, and Shows, and Images, and false Ministers, which she
has set up, she has corrupted the Earth; and all this she has done by the
Beast's power, that has carried her, who received his Authority from the
Dragon, and from the Devil. And thus Antichrist, the Beast and the Whore, have
ruled in the World in great Authority for many Generations, and the World has
been as a Wilderness ^y them, and waste and barren of all good Fruit; and Truth
and Faith ^^th been departed from amongst men, and Love and Peace ^^th been far
away;

and Murders, Thefts, Wars, Strifes and all Injustice, and Wickedness has
abounded in Nations; and thus the whole Earth has been corrupted through the
Whore, and false church, who has deceived Kings, and Rulers, and Peoples, by
her Enchantments and Sorceries, which she has ca^^ed them to receive at her
hand, and out of her Golden Cup of Abominations; out of which they have drunk
false doctrines and practices, to the deceiving of their Souls and Bodies.

But now the Day of the Lord is come and coming, and the Lamb's Kingdom is to
be set up; and the kingdoms of this World must be changed, and (...) covered
again, and will become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and the
Marriage of the Lamb is come again, and the Day of Glad-tidings (...) to the
Poor, and to the Distressed; and the Lamb's Wife shall be adorned (...) her
Husband, she shall be clothed with the Sun,and shall be covered with her former
Beauty, and shall be led out of the Wilderness; and the Earth shall be
refreshed, and delivered from the Oppressions and Tyrannies of Antichrist and
the Whore; for the Hour of her Judgments are come: and the Darkness of the
Night of woeful Apostasy, which has clouded the World, is passing over and the
Light of the Lamb is risen, and the Day Star has appeared in the hearts of
people; and the Man of Sin, which has sat in the Temple, and shewe^ ^^mself
to be God, and falsely exercised the Bodies and Consciences of deceived people,
in false ways and worships, is discovering and destroying by the Spirit of
(...) Mouth, and by the Brightness of the coming of Jesus; and the Beast and
the false Prophet shall be taken alive and cast into the Lake of Fire, and the
(...) and false Prophet shall be tormented day and night forever; for the
Breath of Life from God is entered into the two Witnesses, and they shall again
Prophe^y, and the Light of the glorious Gospel, that that long been hid, must
again be preached to Kindreds, Tongues and Nations; and the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus (...)set up; and these things is the Lord God Almighty bringing to pass:
And he will confound and destroy Antichrist, and all that have worshipped him,
and (...) that have worshipped the Beast, a nd drunk the Cup of Fornication,
and committed ^^^latry with the great Whore, they shall be taken and cast into
the Bed of Torment, and shall Weep and Houl because of the great Destruction of
Babylon, that great City, who has been the Glory of kingdoms, and made rich
her Merchants (...) false Ministers) with Deceiveableness, whom God will
overthrow: That great (...) City of Confusion (the false church) that great
Whore, the Mother of (...) Abominations, the lord God is risen against her to
enquire for the Blood (...) Mart^rs and Prophets, and Righteous Men, that is
found in her, and she shall be rewarded according to her ways; and as she has
given others to drink (...) Cup of Fornication, so in like manner shall she
drink the Cup of fierce (...) of the Lord's Wrath from his Saints; and she
shall no more deceive the Nations by her Sorceries, but the Earth shall be
delivered from her, and the Kingdom of the Son of God shall be exalted over
all, and the Light of the Lamb (...) be the Light of all Nations, and all that
are saved shall walk in the Light of (...) and Truth shall reign, and the Fruit
of Righteousness shall abound, and all people shall glorify God, their Maker;
and the whole Earth shall be refreshed with the Mercy of him that made her.

Wherefore all ye Kings, Princes, Parliaments and Rulers, through the whole
Christendom, this is a Request unto you all of a Lover of your Immort^^ Souls,
That you will cease to commit Fornication with the great Whore, and that you
will not any longer drink her Cup of I^^^atries, neither that you will cause
Nations to drink it; neither that you will carry the great Whore any more, nor
receive her Sorc^ries (...) Enchantments to deceive your Souls and Bodies: And
this the Lord God Almighty (who ought to be the Fear and Dread of all Nations)
requires of you, and (...) is a Charge to you in the Presence of the Lord God,
That (...) do not any lo^g^^ defend the great City Babylon, and the false
Church with your Weapons (...)and Oppression, neither that you will ever any
more oppress the persons

and Consciences of people, on her part, and on her defense; but that
(...)(...) ^^st off the Whore, and not suffer her to sit upon you; and (...)
you will not be Servants to her, to execute her Cruelties upon the Bodies (...)
Consciences of People: For, these things have you done, and therefore (...)
Lord displeased with you, and therefore deliver your selves from the A^ of the
false Church, and receive not her Delusions, neither im^ (...) upon the people
under you; for now the Judgments of the great Whore ^, and the time that the
Lord will reward her according to her ways, (...)shall have the Fruit of her
doings: And if you will yet uphold her, (...) (...)Fornication with her, and
compel the Nations to drink of her (...) and cause all people to worship the
Beast, and to receive his Mark, as it (...) ^^en, Then the Lord shall execute
his Vengeance upon you, and you shall (...) (...) wise ^e delivered.

Wherefore I say again unto you, Arise out of Darkness, and come to the
Brightness of the Light of the Morning, even to the Son's Appearance, and
receive his Kingdom, and lay down your Crowns at his Feet; for the Lamb is
risen, whose Crown is Immortal, and ye, and all your Glory, and Greatness, and
(...) and Power, is but as Dust and Ashes before him; and he can break you
(...), and never build you up again: And come out of great Babylon, and (...)
your City; for the Day of the Lord will suddenly come upon you; for great
Babylon is come into remembrance before the Lord, to reward her with great
^^dignation.

Wherefore this is a Call unto you, Lay aside your Inquisitions, your Goals,
and Houses of Correction, and Prisons, and all your Torturing and persecuting
of the Persons and Consciences of People, about Worship, Church and Mini^^ry;
for in these things, and by these Weapons, you have defended the Whore; (...)
through the force of your violent Laws and cruel Impositions, unjustly laid
(...) people, has the Whore (the false church) been carried by you, and de^ded
by you: But lay aside all your cruel Weapons, and not persecute, nor (...), nor
shed the Blood of the Servants of the Lord by unjust Laws; nor limit not the
Spirit of God from crying against Babylon, and reproving her Iniquities; for
these things have you done in defense of the Whore: for you ^^ve been the
Carriers of her, the Defenders and Preservers of her by your ^ighteous Laws;
and through you has she sat as a Queen, thinking she (...) never see sorrow,
because ye have defended her, and taken part with her, and caused Nations to
drink her Cup; for you have been the Executors of her pleasure, to compel the
Nations to commit Idolatry, and to partake of (...) Fornications; and you give
her authority to drink the Blood of all that would not drink her Cup: and it is
now time for you to forsake these your ways, and to learn Wisdom from the
Lord, that you may rule in Righteous^ amongst men, as men, but not to be Rulers
in Christ's Throne, nor his Kingdom, by imposing such a Worship, and such a
Religion upon people's Consciences, and to destroy and kill all that will not
thus worship to your Image, and bow according to your Prescription; this you
ought not to do, (...) the Lord never entrusted you with this power, nor made
you Rulers in his Kingdom, nor to sit in his Throne of Conscience; for while
you have done (...), your Authority has been from the Dragon, and not from the
Lamb. And now this the Lord required of you, Let Conscience go free, and rule
not over the (...) Man; for while you do take that upon you, to force such a
Worship and such a Religion upon people, contrary to the Spirit of God, you are
but Ser^ to the great Whore.

Wherefore be warned, for this is an invitation of Love, Righteousness, Truth,
and just Judgment, Mercy and Peace unto you, that you may know what the Mind of
the Lord is unto you, and may do it, and rule for God, and not for man, upon
which depends the happiness and well-being of a Nati^^, and Nations, and
their Rulers; and on the contrary depends their overthrow and destruction,
and this will speedily be brought to pass; (...)fore come out of Babylon, and
deliver your selves from that bondage (...)with the false Church has bound
you; she has caused you to drink he (...)and you have been made drunk with
her false Faith, and Doctrines and Pr^ and ye have compelled Nations to Drink
the same Cup of Abominatio^ ye have executed cruelty and injustice upon all
that would not, and y^^ (...)been Servants to the great Whore; and being in
Bondage your sel^ (...)have brought all in bondage under you; but now the Lord
is (...) Times, and Things, and Powers, and happy are you if you d^liver your
(...)and let the Oppressed go free; in so doing, if ye fulfill this my R^ and do
the Will of the Lord herein, then Blessings and Peace Eternal (...)if ye be
disobedient, and take part continually with the Whore, y^ (...)partake of her
Judgments: And this has the Lord spoken to you, (...)the Day of Vengeance ye
shall confess that you are warned,

By a Friend to the whole Creation, that waits for the Redemption thereof,
Edward Buroughs.

AN ACCOUNT Of some Grounds and Reasons OF THE INNOCENT SUFFERINGS Of the
People of God, called, QUAKERS, And why they Testify against the Vain Customs
and Practices of the World: Presented to the PARLIAMENT in the Year, 1659. Also
concerning a Great Cry up and down the Nation, That the Quakers Meetings must
be Broken and Suppressed; and that this present Parliament intends to do it.
With a CRY of Great Judgment and Vengeance upon the Wicked, near to be
Executed; as it was received from the Lord into his Servant.
FRIENDS,
IT may seem strange unto you, as it does unto others, to hear, that so many of
our Friends should be cast into Prisons; there being few Goals, or Houses of
Correction in England, to which some of them have not been ^ommitted; and you
partly know how many of them are this day in Bonds; and it is no less strange
to us, that such frequent and heavy Sufferings, for mat^ers of Conscience,
should come upon us, and our Brethren; who, for the ^ost part, have been
Instruments with you and others, for casting off that Yoke (...) Oppression,
which, at the beginning of the late Wars, lay upon the Ho^est People of this
Land; which made many flee into strange Nations, and to ^eek Habitations in the
Deserts: but we wonder the more, that they should come from those we accounted
our Friends (that so much have pretended the Liberty of Conscience) and many of
themselves practiced the same things for which we now suffer.

May we not ask, What has been done by our Friends? What Laws are these which
they have broken? Whose Persons or Possessions have they wronged? What Force or
Violence have they used to any man? Have you found them in Plots, or guilty of
Sedition, or making Resistance against Authority? Have they not patiently born
the greatest Sufferings that any People of this Nation ever lay under, since
Queen Mary's days, without Murmurings and Discontents? And when have they
fought to revenge themselves, or troubled you, or others, to be repaired for
those many Injuries, and false Imprisonments, which they have endured? How have
they been counted as Sheep for the Slaughter, persecuted, and despised, beaten,
stoned, wounded, stocked, whipped, haled out of the Synagogues, and cast into
Dungeons and noysom Vaults, where many of them have dyed in Bonds, shut up from
their Friends, denied needful Sustenance for several days together, not
suffered to have Pen, Ink, or Paper; and when they have lain there many
Months, and some of them Years, denied a Legal Trial, continued from Sessions
to Assizes, and from one Assize to another, and no Equity to be found from
judge or Justice?

If it be answered to us, They are common Disturbers of Ministers; they will
not pay Tithes; they will not Swear; they will not put off their Hats; they
travel up and down from one Country to another without a Magistrate's Pass, and
on the First days to Meetings at great distance; they will not pay Fee when
they are brought ^^to C^ts, nor plead in the Forms there used, nor give
Security to keep the Peace, or to be of the Good Behavior when the Justices
require it: And we have Laws or Customs that require these things should be
done.

It is forgotten what was one of the great Causes of our late Wars, the
Sufferings that then were imposed, and lay upon many for matters of Conscience:
And was it not a chief Pretense of the fighting, That we might enjoy the
Freedom of Conscience, as well as outward Rights; not only in the inner-Man,
but the free Exercise in all Acts of Piety and Religion, of what the Lord
should make manifest unto us? But whether this was then intended, or is now
perverted, it is that which is our Right, which we must claim, and no man may
take it from us; for this we know, That Christ Jesus alone has right to rule
over the Consciences of men, unto whom every one must give an Account of
himself, according to the just, perfect and unchangeable Law of God, which is
revealed, with that alone of God, which is made manifest in man, which he has
showed unto him, by which every one shall be judged at the Last Day, when the
Book of Conscience shall be opened. And therefore all unequal, imperfect and
changeable Laws of men we do deny; and by them, and for their Transgression we
shall not be judged of the Lord: and all Laws made in their wills, by their
wisdoms in the things of God, which concern Religion, and the free Exercise of
a Good Conscience toward God and Man, against them all we do bear witness;
(...) knowing the Commandments of the Lord, and what he required of us, and
having tasted his tender Love to those that keep them, and felt his Terrors
against (...) Disobedience, we are made willing to bear the greatest
Sufferings, rather then (...) against God: And in this Ground we stand not
careful what man can do unto (...) or say of us, nor to give him an Answer in
this Matter; For whether it is better (...) obey God or Man, let him judge.

Yet here, to prevent Mistakes, we do with the like clearness, declare our free
and willing Subjection in the things of this World, to every Ordinance of (...)
that is just (according to the Righteous Law of God) and our Work is not to
weaken, but strengthen the hand of the Magistrate, by laboring to bring all to
own that of God, which should exercise their Consciences, To do in all (...) as
they would be done unto; in which is fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, which
takes away the occasion it self of the Law; and brings to live in Peace and
Love, wherein should be the Magistrates Joy and Glory.

And do but look on the Crimes charged against us, and all the Sufferings we
lie under, and you may clearly see, That not for any Evil done, or just Law
broken that concerns man, are we thus punished; but for things which concern
our God; and chiefly for bearing our Witness, as we are moved of the Lord,
against the false Prophets and Hirelings of these days, who by their Fruits
are made manifest, not only unto us, but to many Thousands besides; yea, the
greatest part of all the sober People of the Nation; their own Hearers will
confess it: And we see and know, that they, and all Ministers and Worships in
the World, set up and standing in the will of man, shall perish; and come to
nothing; and the Rice of these men, their Growth and End, we comprehend, and
see their Downfall hastens greatly, and all the Powers of the Earth shall not
be able to support them; and with them shall fall their Tithes, their Temples,
their Gleab lands and Offerings, their set days of Worship in their wiils, and
all Laws limitting the Holy One, made to uphold their Craft; and blessed are
they, who through the Day of Trial shall stand in their Witness faithful unto
God, not fearing what man can do unto them.

Do not you approve Christ Jesus his going into the Temple? And do not you own
the Apostles, who went into the Jews Synagogues every Sabbath Day, and into the
Marketplaces, to testify of Christ Jesus, and reason with the people? And do
not you commend Luther, and Calvin, John Wicklisf, and others, (is Famous, for
their Zeal, in publishing abroad what then was manifest unto them) and those
Persons which in Queen Mary's days went into the Popish Steeple Houses, to
bear witness against their Superstitions, which caused her to make a Law
against them, by which many of them then suffered; and by which the Priests of
England, till the last Parliament were guarded; and is it now become an Offense
to practice the same things? And is that a just Law, made by the late
Parliament, by which many have suffered? Are not the Priests sprung from the
old Root of Popery? and are they not forced to flee thither for their
vindication? and is not the spirit the same (which makes these Laws) to support
hem?

How shall the Kingdoms of the Earth; the Papists, Turks, Infidels, Heathens be
converted? Your Priests sit down in their Ease, and will not go; they call
themselves, Ministers of the Reformed Churches: And have not you taught other
Nations how to make Laws to restrain the Testimony of those whom the Lord
^ends, and is sending into all the Corners of the Earth?

Did the Command of God, which gave Tithes to the Jewish Priesthood, concern
the Gentiles? Was not the Command to the Jews themselves disannulled, when the
Priesthood was changed? Did ever any of the believing Jews pay Tithes to the
Apostles; or did any of the Gentiles pay Tithes either?

Did not the Papists bring in this Doctrine, and Oppression? Did not many of
the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days witness against Tithes? And was not that an
Article for which some of them suffered? And do not you own and commend those
Martyrs; or do you judge them for holding an Error? Have not all, or most of
those Countries, that turned from the Pope, and are called reformed, cast off
Tithes with the Pope, and were ashamed of them? And is it the Glory of ENGLAND,
who pretends to the highest Reformation, to keep up Tithes [the Popish
Priests Maintenance] and First Fruits, and Tenths (the Wages of the very Pope
himself) and to hale before Courts, cast into Prisons, and spoil the Goods of
all who for Conscience sa^e cannot pay them: Let that of God answer.

And how many have, and at this day do suffer because they cannot Swear, which
Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, above all things forbid? How are the Commands
of Christ made void by the Customs and Traditions of Men? Were it not easy, by
turning the Law against Liars and false Witnesses (which the Law of God is
against) to find out that which your Law against false Swearing never did or
could discover?

Do you own Christ Jesus, of whom the Jews, that put him to Death gave this
Witness, That he Respected no man's Person? Do you commend Mordecai, who could
not give the outward Honor, and bow to Hamon? And do you regard his words who
said, I know not how to give Flattering Titles to men; for my Maker would soon
take me away?

Has not God made of one Mould and one Blood all Nations to dwell upon the
Face of the Earth? And does not he that respects Persons commit sin, and is
convinced of the Law as a Transgressor?

And must it now be an Offense not to put off the Hat, and give Respect to the
Person of him that has a Gold Ring, and fine Apparel? Has not all the Earthly
Lordship, and Tyranny and Oppression sprung from this Ground, by which
Creatures have been exalted, and set up one above another, trampling under Foot
and despising the Poor? And is it not easy to see that Power and Authority,
without contempt, may be preserved, the Power Honored, and Obeyed, and
submitted unto, and the Person Respected?

Has not the great and heavy Oppressions of the Law been long felt and cried
out against, the long delays in Courts, and the great Fees of Officers, which
causes many to be excessively rich out of the Ruins of the Poor, which has
brought an Odium upon the Law it self? for to the Poor the Remedy is worse then
the Disease; and while people are free to feed this Deceit, there is little
hope to have it amended.

And how full of Lies, Deceit, Pretenses, and needless Circumstances are all
your Pleadings and Proceedings, to the burden of many men's Consciences, and
ruin of their Estates? And how vile and wicked are the greatest of Lawyers,
that will plead any thing for Money, and by their Subtilties do most commonly
hide and cover the Truth? And when do the Judges reprove it? And how
Treacherous and Deceitful are the Solicitors and Attorneys, that Truth or
Honesty can scarce be found amongst them? And how do those eat up the People,
as it were Bread; and grow Great and Rich by raising and increasing Suits,
Troubles, Strifes, and Debates amongst their Neigbours? And we seeing these
Oppressions are made to bear our Witness against them, and cannot uphold them;
and our Testimony shall not be in vain.

And how is the Power given to Justices and Judges, to bind to the Peace and
Good Behavior (being left to their Discretion) turned against the most
peaceable and best-behaved Persons amongst men, merely because they cannot bow
to their wills, and hold their Tongues when the Lord requires them to speak?

Do you commend Christ Jesus, his Apostles and Saints, who were sent to preach
the Gospel, and traveled from City to City, from Nation to Nation, from
Country to Country, that the ends of Earth might hear the Glad-tidings of
Salvation? And do you commend those they called Puritans, for going many Miles
to worship the Lord? and do you now condemn those that practice the same
things? Would not your Law against Vagabonds have taken hold on Christ and his
Ministers, and hindered their Work? by it have many honest and good People
suffered most shameful Whippings and Imprisonments, who were traveling in
their own Country, about their outward and lawful Occasions, that were of
considerable Estates, and could not be counted Vagabonds? And what use is made
of this Law throughout the Nation you cannot but hear.

Are not these things like the Sayings of those who said, Had they lived in the
days of the Prophets, they would not have persecuted and put them to death;
and yet they crucified Christ? and so the Cry is at this day against the Jews
for their Cruelty, when themselves are found exercising the same things against
his Saints and Members.

Long has the Beast reigned, who usurped power in these things; and the false
Prophets, who have overspread the Earth; and the great Whore, who have made
all Nations drunk with their Abominations, and the Wine of their Fornications,
with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Ad^ltery, whom Christ said
should come, and before the Apostles decease did come; who went out from the
Apostles, and put on their Clothing, but inwardly were Destroyers, Ravening
Wolves, which the whole World went after, who turned against the Saints who
kept to the Spirit (the Life which they went from) and made War with the Saints
till they overcame; and their Power reached over the whole Earth: But now is
the life risen, and is again made manifest, which they went from, which gives
to see before the Apostasy was.

Now is the Lamb risen, and rising to make War with the Dragon, the Beast and
false Prophets; and now shall the great Whore be taken, and her Flesh shall be
burnt with Fire, and the Saints shall have the Victory.

Therefore let all Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, he warned not to
take part with the Beast, nor to uphold (with their power) the false Prophets,
who have long deceived the Nations; but in their Place stand to keep the
outward Peace, that none may offer Violence, and destroy another, which has
been the way of the Beast and of the false Prophets (the Prop and Support of
their Kingdom) but leave Christ Jesus in his Saints to manage the War, whose
Warfare is not carnal, whose Weapons are not carnal, yet are they mighty
through God, to the pulling down of the Strong Holds of Satan, and overturning
the Foundation of Satan's kingdom; and they shall soon see what is Truth, and
what is Error; for great is the Truth, and will prevail; they shall not need to
cry out for want of Ministers, or that Christ Jesus is not able to send forth
Laborers; nor will those he sends forth trouble them for Maintenance: and here
is the Magistrates true Place, to keep Peace amongst all men, to punish him
that does Evil, and to encourage him that does well; to rule the Kingdoms of
the Earth in Righteousness, that Justice and Equity may be exalted, and that
way may be made for the Lord Jesus Christ, who is coming to reign, and to take
the Dominion to himself; and we are Witnesses in our Measures of his Coming,
and of the working of his Mighty Power, by which he is able to subdue all
things to himself. And this is the Testimony unto which we are called, and many
Thousands with us in the Unity of the same Spirit.

And Witnesses we stand against Priests, Tithes, Temples, Swearing, and all the
carnal ways of Worship, set up and upholden by outward Laws and Powers, which
would limit and restrain the Spirit of the Lord, which is grieved, and daily
cries out against these Abominations.

Witnesses we stand against Parliaments, Councels, Judges, Justices, who make
or execute Laws in their wills over the Consciences of men, or punish for
Conscience sake, and to such Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary usurped
Dominion, we cannot yield our Obedience.

Yet we do declare, as it is testified in all Counties, Cities, Goals and
Prisons, to Judges, Justices, and others, That as we preach Christ Jesus alone
in the things of God, to be our Lawgiver, so do we own him to be our King (and
own Magistacy in civil things) not resisting any; but following his Example,
who was made perfect through Suffering, and for his Salvation we wait, till he
alone shall plead our Cause; and therefore for Conscience sake we have joyfully
born, and do bear so many and great Sufferings, since the day we were convinced
of his Everlasting Truth.

These things we have declared, not to upbraid you with the Injustice of
others, nor to revile the Government it self; but that you may see the Ground,
and true Cause of all our Sufferings; and of the Suffering of the Saints in all
Ages and Generations, and in all Nations of the World at this day: And we leave
it to that of God in you all to weigh and consider, whether it be not time to
reform both Laws, Courts and Officers.

From your Friends, who are Lovers of Peace and Truth, who wait for the coming
of the Lord, to establish Justice and Righteousness in the Earth; whom he has
raised up, as Witnesses of his appearing, and of the dawning of the Mighty and
Dreadful Day of God, in Life, Light and Power; who are hated of Men, and
reproached under the Name of Quakers.

And whereas there is a Great Cry up and down the Nation, That the Quakers
Meetinge must be Broken and Suppressed; and that this present Parliament
intends to do it. And of this I have heard in diverse Parts of the Nation.
NOw to this I shall say, and answer; First, As I have observed the spirits of
People concerning this Cry, all the Rude and Ungodly People, as Drunkards, and
the prophanest of men, they glory apace at this News, and rejoice at this
mightily, as if some great Prize were befallen unto them; and it makes them
rude and violent enough, to the breaking of the Peace in the Nation; but thus
it is but with the worst sort of People in the Nation, who are rejoiced with
these Tidings, That the Quakers Meetings must be broken: But as for the Honest
People, such as be sober and sincere, Thousands that had a hand in choosing this
present Parliament, never intended to send them up to London for such a Work;
and the Cry is by many of the sober People, If they go about such a Work, they
will destroy themselves, undo themselves, and leave their Names a Reproach:
why, say the people (we have a Testimony before us) has it not been upon that
Rock of limiting tender Consciences, in former days, that has broken many
before these, which might be Examples to these, not to do the same things? And
many sober people are offended at such News, and it makes their hearts sad;
whose Consciences, and the Witness therein, does answer, That we are the Lord's
People, and it ought not thus to be done concerning us as the News reports: So
that by this News of the intended Purpose, to break the Lord's Peoples
Meetings, the Ungodly and Profane are gratified, and strengthened in their
Wickedness; and the Righteous are made sad.

And further, as for us, We have been trodden down, and made a Prey unto our
Enemies; and the Gates of Death and Hell have stroven against us already, but
have not prevailed unto this day; for the Lord is with us, and who is it that
shall prevail against us? and I may say. What is this that is reported to be
done? what shall Dust and Ashes do, and man whose Breath is in his Nostrils?
And who are they that shall break down that which the Lord has a purpose to
build? Who shall be able to prosper in going about it? or what success shall
God give to that Work? I tell you nay; it is the Lord that has raised us up,
and we have given our power to him, to stand by him, and to be protected,
defended and upheld by him alone; and we cannot give our Power to any Mortal
Men, to seek that from them which is not in their hands to give: The Power of
the Lord God is over you, he that is our Keeper and Preserver, in whose Hands
is your Breath, to destroy it utterly; if you do that which does offend him;
for you shall know, that we are the Lord's People, by whom we shall stand, and
grow in Dominion and Authority in his Life; and the Dread of the Lord shall be
upon our Enemies, though they one gratify another with Intentions of Evil
against us; yet the Lord stops the purpose of his En^^ies, and turns it
backwards upon their own heads.

And this I say from the Lord, If such a thing be in your Hearts, conceiving to
be brought forth by you, it is a Birth that will devour you er^ ever it spring
out of your Bowel^, it will be too heavy a Burden, and you shall never have
strength to deliver it: This is the Word of the Lord to you, It shall be a Rock
to overthrow you, and it will be a S^are to catch you; and if any such thing
proceeds from you, it will break you, and your own Wickedness will destroy you.

Alas! Do not you see evidently the Hand of the Lord fight for us? Yea, we have
evident Testimony of his Presence, that he is, and will be with us unto the
end: And if any will be blind, let them be blind; for these Tidings do not
trouble us, neither are we thereby moved, no not to beg of any man the
contrary; for we cannot give our Power unto you, nor come under the power of
this World, no not to beg of you contrary to a good Conscience, that you should
forbear the fulfilling your intents: But this it is in the Name and Power of
the Lord, though he requires nothing of you to exalt his Kingdom by your power,
nor to prescribe him a Way how he must be worshipped; yet he requires, That you
should do nothing against him, nor his People, by limiting he Spirit of the
Lord.

And I say, The Saints of the Most High cannot give their Power to you, to
stand or fall thereby, nor to go by the Authority thereof, to exalt the Kingdom
of God thereby; they can beg no such thing, nor desire it of you; for it is not
in your hands to give his Work of Salvation unto the Nations; you cannot give
nor lay one Stone in the building of his blessed Temple; but he alone will do
it, and not by the Arm of Flesh: Yet does he require, That you should do
nothing against him, nor abuse your power; but and if you do, he will reward
you according to your Deeds: and this you will find and feel in the Day of God,
when he brings Vengeance and Judgment upon you, and when he sets his Kingdom
over you all, and that comes to reign over the Nations which how is a Sufferer.

And when I first heard the News sent abroad in the Nation, of such Intentions,
to break the Quakers Meetings, many Considerations passed through me, Will
these go (said I) in the same way that many have been destroyed in before them?
Will these run upon the same Rock? Will these take in hand to limit God, and to
set him a Way? And shall all these Sufferings of the Lord's People, for these
many years, be finished by these, that all the Unjust Dealing^ and Oppressions
of the Saints may be upon them? Is there no Wise Man among them, nor none that
fears the Lord, that he may be preserved ^om ^estruction? And is this their
beginning in Parliament, to destroy God's Heritage? The Lord, nor the People of
this Nation, that fear God, have not entrusted them therein: But if it be so,
said I in my heart, if this Wickedness be intended, and if they do so greatly
abuse their power, they shall leave their Names as a Reproach to after Ages,
and their Memories shall Rot, and their Wickedness shall lie upon them for
evermore.

But I considered, that we having given our Power to the Lord, from him we have
found unto this day, and do always seek defense, and to be carried on, and by
him we stand, and to him we fall; and not to Mortal Men, who are as Clay in the
Hand of the Potter.

Wherefore let the Wise in Heart consider these things, and lay them to mind;
for if they shall proceed to that Wickedness, the Nations shall they never
settle in Peace, nor shall their Rulers receive a Blessing; but they shall be a
Curse unto themselves, and to all under their Authority. And this is a
Testimony to all sober People, showing unto them all, where our Confidence is,
and in what it remains.

And nevertheless, If the Heart of the Wicked be strengthened against us, and
their hands made strong to deal violently; yet shall the Righteous Rejoice, and
be exceeding Glad; For the Day of Redemption and Everlasting Peace is come unto
his People, that do and have waited for him; and all under him shall bow and
bend; and he will make his Peoples Cup overflow, and spread their Table even in
the sight of their Enemies, and they shall Fear, and the Terror of the Lord
shall lie upon them; and when they have executed their Violence, then shall the
Lord deal violently with them.

E. B.

A CRY of Great Judgment and Vengeance upon the Wicked, near to be Executed; as
it was received from the Lord into his Servant.
ON the eighteenth Day of the first Month, as I was traveling in
Warwickshire, my Meditations being upon the Lord, and upon the Cause of his
People in this Nation; and how Unjust and Unrighteous their woeful Sufferings
have been executed upon them, within these few years: even when IN was
pondering of these things, in the deep consideration thereof, it came upon me
from the Lord, and the Cry went through me, The Lord will be avenged, the Lord
will be avenged upon his Enemies, and he will avenge the Cause of his People.
And this Cry stuck close upon me for some Hours, That the Lord would surely
execute his Judgments upon the Oppressors of his Heritage, who have spoiled,
and trodden it down, and sought to destroy it.

And I considered, and took into full view in my spirit, how grievous, how sad,
and how unjust the Sufferings of God's People have been within these few years;
and my Heart was even broken therewith, and my Spirit even melted; and it came
upon me from the Lord, saying, Write unto the Rulers, and yet once more warn
them of that Recompense, and of that Indignation, which is at hand upon them,
even a just Recompense for all their Deeds; and as they have done, even so
shall it be done to them; as they have sought to destroy the Generation of the
Righteous, even so shall they be destroyed from off the Face of the Earth; and
as they have unjustly judged and condemned the Innocent, so shall they be
condemned, and justly judged of the Lord; and as they have cast the Bodies of
the poor Lambs of Christ into Prison, and been a Snare upon them; even so shall
they be ensnared, and into Captivity shall they go: And as they have caused the
Goods and Possessions of the Innocent to be spoiled and made a Prey; even so in
like manner shall the Curse of the Lord spoil their Substance: And as they have
done, so shall it be done unto them; and as they have mete to others, so shall
it be mete to them again. And I saw a great Misery and Desolation nigh at hand;
even the Sword of the Lord, and it should slay them; and I beheld it was made
ready for the slaughter: and in the sense of these things a sadness fell upon
my spirit, considering the Desolation, and the Judgment that is at hand, to be
executed upon the cruel Oppressors.

Wherefore all ye Rulers, and all ye that have trodden down the Heritage of God,
and ye that have disregarded these many Warnings that ye have had; I say unto
you all, in the Power of the Lord God, in his Dominion, and by his Spirit; this
is once more a Warning to you from the Lord, and that these things must surely
come to pass, and be fulfilled in their Season, and no man shall be able to
deliver his Brother; but every Man shall bear his own Burden, and drink his
own Cup prepared for him; and though it has been counted a light thing amongst
you, and you have despised the reproof, and gone on without fear; yet in as
much as the Lord has spared you, and not speedily executed Judgment upon you,
but rather waited for your return; yet the dealing of the Lord toward you in
sparing of you, you have not accepted; and therefore shall his Judgments be the
greater upon you. For if you do now come to the Witness in your own
Consciences; What evil have this People done? Whose Ox have they taken, or what
have they desired of you? or what have they sought from you? or wherein have
they been a burden to you, Saving that they have reproved you for your
Iniquities, and desired your Redemption? Would you but now at last come to
consider this, and confess the truth in your Consciences; will not that tell
you, that they have suffered patiently all things that you have cruelly imposed
upon them? and have not they walked peaceably toward you, and humbly, meekly
justly among their Neighbors? and have they not been meek and innocent even as
Lambs, and as the Sheep before the Shearers? and have they wrought offenses
toward any? have they sought the overthrow of the Government, or have they
sought vengeance against their Enemies? or what injury have they done to any
man's Person, or Estate, saving to Satan and his Kingdom? Have they not sought
to reform and reclaim the Ungodly from their Ways? and have they not pitied
and prayed for their Enemies? and have they not in all things walked in good
conscience toward the Lord, and toward all men? Yea, my Friends, in the day of
the Lord, when the Witness in your Consciences shall not be limited, but shall
speak plainly; and when the Impartial Judge shall appear upon his Throne, then
shall you acknowledge these things.

Wherefore I say unto you, receive the Judgment of the Lord to purify you,
otherwise the Judgment shall destroy you; and now come to be more wise, that
some of you may be as a Brand plucked out of the Fire, and be reserved from
being consumed; for the Visitation of the Lord is near an end, when his Loving
kindness will be shut from you, and his Long-suffering turned into fury; and he
will make you know that we are his People with whom you have thus dealt; yea,
you shall suddenly know it, the time is not long till he will crown his People
in the sight of his Enemies; he will crown them with Praise and with
Righteousness, with Honor and Majesty, and he will keep them in safety, even
when Sorrow compasses you about; his Mercy and Loving kindness shall extend
toward them; even when his Wrath and Judgments does smite you, and confound
you. O! what shall I say unto you; for the deep sense thereof remains upon my
heart; for when I consider how that in all Ages the Lord did avenge his Peoples
Cause; and when the time of their suffering was expired, he brake the Bonds of
Iniquty, and set them free: thus did he with his People Israel of old, and many
times it was his way with his People to bring them low by suffering, and then
to raise them up again in Glory; and he suffered their Enemies for a season to
glory over them, that he might bring them down; and thus he did in England in
the case between the Bishops and their crew of Persecuters, and the poor People
at that day called Puritans; Did not he confound that persecuting Crew, and
deliver his People? And is not he the same to effect the same Work at this very
day? Yea doubtless, and much more will he do, in as much as the manifestation
of Truth is more clear then it was in their days; and in as much as the Rulers
and People of this Nation have rejected a more clear Testimony, then either the
Papists in Queen Marys days, or the Bishops and Prelets in their days; even
so much the more will the Lord God execute his Vengeance with more Violence, in
a more manifest way; and all shall know, that it is he that does it, and he
will set his People free; for he has regarded their Sufferings, and he has
said it is enough; for he has tried them, and found them faithful; and all
this has been suffered to prove them, and not to destroy them: and like as he
has preserved them in patience and peace through it all, even so will he give
them Hearts to walk answerably to their deliverance; and as they have abounded
in Patience in their Sufferings, so shall they abound in Praises everlasting in
the day of their Freedom, and the Earth shall be glad, and shall yield the
increase and blessing; the Heaven and the Earth shall rejoice, and the Hearts
of the Righteous shall leap for joy, when the Lord has broken the Yoke of the
Oppressed, and set his People free, inwardly and outwardly, and then shall they
sing to the Lord over all their Enemies, who shall be tormented and vexed in
the Lord's sore displeasure; for their Reward comes, and their Recompense
shall be even as work, and he will give unto them Sorrow and Anguish, instead
of rejoicing.

But again, when I consider the long Suffering, and patience, and forbearance
of the Lord's innocent People under all their Sufferings; and when I looked at
their innocence, and at their Righteousness, and Spirit of Holiness with which
the Lord has blessed them, my Heart was made glad in the consideration of
this; and the more was my joy, the more I beheld their innocence, and the
guiltlesness of their Cause, whereby the unjustness of their suffering did the
more appear; and withal when I looked and beheld their increase under all their
sufferings, and how that the Lord had turned all these things to their good,
and to the overthrow of all their Enemies; how that, by that way, wherein their
Enemies intended to destroy them from being a People; even thereby did the Lord
most wonderfully increase them to be a great* People; for through all have they
grown in Life and Power, and in strength and in number, and through it all have
they been encouraged to follow the Lord with more zeal and boldness: and in the
consideration of this I did rejoice, with magnifying the Lord for ever, that he
had brought forth his Praise even through the wickedness of the Wicked, and he
had increased his People, and exalted them through the cruelty of all their
Enemies; and that through all Opposition they were attained unto a happy Rest,
and through all the Tempest of great Trials, they were arrived into the Harbor
of Renown and great Glory: And when I considered this, how that the Lord had
given them dominion, and brought their life to reign over all their Enemies,
these things were a joy unto me; and looking back into Ages, seeing there was
nothing, nor any People for Generations, that had grown, and risen through all
Opposition like unto these; wherefore is is a Sign and a Testimony that we are
the Lord's, and that these things are of him, and from him, and by him alone,
that he might be praised for ever.

Again, when I do consider, how that the Lord has raised this People, even out
of the Dust; and them that were not a People, are become a People; and the Lord
has provoked Nations by them that were not a People within these few years;
and the Lord has carried on this Work amongst his People, not by any thing of
Man, nor by the Arm of Flesh, but in pure innocence and simplicity has it been
accomplished; not by the Wisdom of this World, nor by men in places of Honor,
and of Power in the Nations; for all that has been wanting to them; and what
they are, it is through the opposition of all this; for they have had none of
the great men of the Earth on their side to defend them, and establish them,
but all have been against them; and even Oppression and Tyranny executed upon
them, rather then any approbation, or justification from men in outward
Authority: so that truly it may be said, that there has been nothing of man
in this Work, but all of the Lord, by his own Power, and in a contrary way to
all the false Sects, and false Churches, has the beginning and carrying on of
these things been; for we know that all the false Sects in this Nation have
risen and been established through the countenance of men in Place and Power,
and upon man, and the Wisdom of this World, and Authority of the Powers of the
Earth, has the rise and fall of all false Churches depended: and as the Powers
of the Earth have sided with them, so have they been set up; and at the
displeasure of Authority, have been cast down. But as for this People, they are
raised of the Lord, and established by him, even contrary to all men; and they
have given their Power only to God, and they cannot give their Power to any
mortal men, to stand or fall by any outward Authority, and to that they cannot
seek; but to the Lord alone, who hears their cry, and will avenge their cause.

Wherefore let all the Persecutors bow before the Lord, and let all the Saints
walk humbly in his sight, and let them continue in that innocent Life in which
they have begun; and let them never forget the Mercies of the Lord, and what he
has brought to pass, who has manifested great things, and will do more and
more to the confounding of all his Enemies, and to the praise of his elect
People. And all ye Saints upon the Earth, have ye the Lord in respect
continually, and turn you not unto Idols, but let the Lord be your joy for
evermore.

E. B.

TO THE RULERS And to such as are in AUTHORITY, A True and Faithful TESTIMONY
Concerning RELIGION, And the Establishment thereof; and how it may be
Established in PERSONS and NATIONS.
THere has been a great cry of late years among the Priests, and many others,
for the settlement of Religion, and this they have sought after from the Powers
of the Earth, and the cry has been to Parliaments and Rulers by the Priests
and Professors for many years, settle us Religion, settle us Religion.

Now to this I answer, all this cry, and this desire has been by these Priests
and Professors, to have Parliaments to make Laws, to establish one Sect, and
throw down and limit all others, that is the chief thing that has been eyed in
the request, and not simply to have true Religion established; if we come to
show what true Religion is in it self. But people of diverse Sects have been
requiring, and desiring every one to have their own Sect established and set
up, and all others thrown down, and not to have a place, nor to be tolerated;
so that their cry has not risen from the Ground of true love to true Religion,
but their desires have chiefly risen, and sprung from self love to their own
Sect, and from Malice and Envy against others that were not of their Way: and
this has been the end of their craving the settlement of Religion, and not
simply for true Religions sake. Now Religion in itself is this, The fulfilling
of the Law and the Prophets, loving God with all their hearts, and the
Neighbor as self, and doing to all men, as they would have men to do to them,
and not otherwise doing, or speaking toward any, then they would that others
should speak of, or do to them, and a walking toward God in all things, as
they have received of his Grace, answering to the Lord in all things as his
Spirit leads them and moves them; this is true Religion toward God and toward
man, and to have the Conscience always kept void of offense, and that no
offense lie upon it in the sight of God, nor in the sight of Man; and this is
true Religion in it self, in short declared, to wit, The leading of the Spirit
of God into all Truth, to do the Truth, and speak the Truth in all things, and
this Religion is accepted in the sight of God, and to be kept unspotted in the
World, from all its Pollutions. But now tell me, can this Religion be settled,
or any Nation or People, or any Person in it by any external Power, or outward
Authority of men? or can the Laws of Kings, or Parliaments settle such
Religion, or make people truly religious, or establish a Nation or People in
this Religion? I say no, nor any thing, saving the Teachings and Leadings of
the holy Spirit of God, being received from the Father, its that only that
makes men religious, and settles a People and Nation therein. Oh, ye Fools and
blind Priests and Professors, that are doting on settling Religion among
unconverted people by outward Laws, and earthly Powers of men; I say, no, this
must not be; for the Laws of men can but settle a Sect, or some Sects, and
limit other Sects; but true Religion can never be settled by that means; for
before any be settled in Religion, they must first be changed, and created a new
in Christ Jesus, and born again of the Seed Incorruptible, and they must first
be changed from Death to Life, and from Satan's Power to God; this must first
be Witnessed, before a Man or a Nation can be religious, and settled in true
Religion, he must put off the body of Sin, and be circumcised in heart; and he
must have a new Nature planted in him, and he planted into Christ a New and
Living Vine, before he can love God with all his heart, and his Neighbor as
himself, and before he can have his Conscience kept void of offense, and be
without stain toward God and toward man; and it is only the Word of God, and
his Power in the heart, that works this; it is only the operation of God's
Spirit in and upon a Creature, that works him unto this; it is not the Laws
made by man, that does it, nor external Powers of the Earth that can work it;
and therefore true Religion cannot be settled thereby, nor a Nation or a People
in it; but only that which changes him, and makes him religious, that is it
only that must settle Religion and Nations, and Peoples therein: and as every
one is turned to that of God in him, and thereby to feel the Power, and Word,
and Spirit, that does change him, and renew him, as I have said, by this means
comes a Man and Nations to be religious, and to be settled therein, and by no
other way nor means, and this is done through the preaching of the everlasting
Gospel, and through the Ministry of Christ, which turns the Minds of People
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God, whereby they are changed
and made religious, and also settled therein, and established thereby; and it is
not by outward Laws, and Powers, as I have said. But what are Peoples, and the
Nations yet to settle in Religion? And is Religion unsettled yet, that you are
craving Laws made by men to settle Religion? What have you preached for this
many years? What have your preaching been all in vain? And have you done no
good this many years by your preaching, that Religion is yet to settle? Oh!
blind and ignorant Men, this is a shame unto you; how many thousands of
thousand Pounds have the Priests had out of this Nation for teaching Religion,
and preaching to People, and yet the Nation remains unsettled in Religion, and
they are begging to the Powers of the Earth to constrain, and compel a
settlement of Religion? and this shames them, and shows that they are they that
Paul speaks of, and that the people of this Nation are them that are ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, though you have
been long learning, you are unsettled, and are not come to the knowledge of the
Truth: but had these Priests been such that were sent of the Lord, through
their Ministry would the Nations long since have been settled in Religion, for
they have been Teachers long enough, and put the Nation to charge great enough,
th^^ people might have known ere this day the holy Anointing to dwell in them,
and to teach them, and to settle them in Religion; but it is manifest that they
have ran, and not been sent, but left Peoples and Nations unsettled as the
Waters, notwithstanding all their preaching, and ministry for so many years,
yet it seems there wants still a settlement in Religion, and seeing their
preaching has had no effect to do it, but their Ministry has been all in
vain, and people are not learned in Religion, not yet established therein,
whereby their Ministry is proved not to be Christ's Ministry (for the Apostles
did settle people, and the Churches in Religion, which theirs have done no such
thing) and therefore it is that the Powers of the Earth are called to, that
they may force by Violence, and by violent Laws, that by that means a Worship
and Religion may be settled, as they say: and their Ministry has not drawn
people by Love, and therefore would they have people forced and compelled to be
of such, or such Religion; but this is not Christ's Way, nor the Way that his
Apostles and true Churches were in; for the Spirit of the Father led each one
of them to be religious, and that same Spirit settled and established them in
it; and not external Laws, nor Powers of the Earth, but that was Antichrist's
Way, and the Beast's and the false Prophets Way; for when they had killed the
Saints, and slain true Religion, then the Beast and false Prophets they
established a Religion or Worship by outward Laws; and its written, That he
caused and compelled all, both small and great, bond and free, to worship the
Beast and his Image; and here was a settled People in a Religion and Worship by
an outward compelling Power. And thus it was then, and is now the same, false
Churches and false Religions are settled by an outward Authority; and it was
Nebuchadnezar and his wicked Princes, that settled a Religion or Worship by an
outward Power, and by an earthly Authority, but that was not the Worship of
true Religion, but was the Worship of Antichrist, and so it has been for Ages;
that Worship that is settled, and that Religion which is established by an
outward external Power, and the Laws of men, is but the Worship of Antichrist,
and not the true Religion, nor the Worship of the Living God, which is in
Spirit and in Truth, but it must all be overthrown and brought to naught, both
that Religion and Worship that is out of the Spirit, and that Power that
upholds it: and now the Lord God is risen to confound the thoughts of men's
hearts, and he alone will settle and establish Religion by his own Power, and
by his own Law, and through his own Ministry: and as people come to that of God
in them, to feel the Spirit and Power of the Lord God to change them, hereby
will every one particularly be settled in Religion, and by no other way nor
means; and this I know from the Lord. But how should people be settled in
Religion? for Peoples and Nations have been, and are as Waters, which have been
driven with the Winds, this way, or the other way; and the great Whore sits
upon the Waters, and the Beast has carried her, and born her up, (false
Worships and Churches and an outward Power) and she has ruled and made all
Nations drunk with her Cup of Fornication, and the true Religion has been lost
for many Ages, and the Sects and false Churches have been set up and
established upon the Waters; and as for true Religion, it cannot be established
while Nations are Waters under the Whore's Dominion: and so the many Sects
which have been the many Horns upon the Beast, and one has risen after
another, and one diverse from another, and they have been striving one with
another, and persecuting one another, and one subduing another, and each one of
them has cried for help from the Beast, and from the Powers of the Earth, to
be defended from the Power and Malice one of another, least one should prevail
against another, and get the better one of another; and so that Sect that could
get Authority from the Powers of the Earrh, and have them of its side, that
Sect has thriven, and has been settled more then another which has not
gotten the Powers of the Earth to defend it; and so as the Powers of the Earth
have been changeable, so has Religion been changable; and what Sect the Rulers
have been on, that have they highest tolerated, and most defended against all
other: but all this has not been the true establishment of true Religion.

But now some may suppose, and query, whether I speak this, as if I would have
Religion not at all settled, and as if I were against the establishing of
Religion; and so thereby may be accused, as if I were an Enemy to all Religion,
and would not have Religion be established, etc.

To all this I answer, I am a Friend to true Religion, and seeks the
establishing of it in the right way, and by the Ministry of Righteousness, by
turning peoples minds to the Spirit, and to receive the Anointing that they may
be all taught of God, and true Worshippers of him in Spirit and Truth, and may
be settled in the true Religion; and this true Religion would I have
established in the World, and in the Nations, and would have all people therein
established by the Ministry of Righteousness thereunto ordained. But I am
against the establishing of Sects, and the settling of one Sect above another,
by the Powers of the Earth; and I would not have one set up, and an other
thrown down by the Laws of men; for that brings forth nothing but Tyranny, and
Oppression, and Strife and wickedness in a Nation, and amongst People; though
thus it has been for many Ages, false Sects and false Churches have been
established by the Earth, and external Laws, and that Sect which the King or
Queen, or Ruler has been of that has been set up, and tolerated above the
rest, and the rest despised, and persecuted, and set at naught; for when and
where a Prince, or a Ruler is of the Papists Religion, then that Religion is
the most established and settled in that Government; and if at any time a Ruler
change to be of the Protestant Sect, or one come to govern that is of that
Religion, then that Sect was the most established and upheld; thus it is
through Nations, and in England particularly within these late years, when King
Henry the eighth turned from the Papists to be a Protestant, then that Sect was
established, and all other thrown down and persecuted; and when Queen Mary rose
to govern, which was a Papist, then she established that Sect and false Church
by Laws, and the rest were limited and thrown down: then when the next Queen
arose being a Protestant, she established that Sect again by outward Laws, and
cast all others down: and thus it has been for many Ages throughout all
Nations, of what Sect and Religion the Governor and Ruler has been, that Sect
was only established, and all the rest persecuted, as I have said: and so the
saying is fulfilled, Nations have been Waters, and Peoples and Multitudes
Waters: And as a King and Governor has changed his Religion and of what Sect
as he has been, so has the Religion of the whole Nation or Country changed,
and such a Sect only established against all others: but this I cannot call
the settlement of true Religion, nor are the Nations and Peoples hereby
established in true Religion, but only false Sects and false Religions have
risen and been established by the Beast's Power, who has carried the Whore;
yea, and though many other Sects have risen, and many other Horns appeared
diverse one from another, out of the many Heads of the Beast; for his Heads have
been many, and his Horns divided, and diverse one from another; and each Head
exalting his self above another; and each Horn pushing one at anther; and each
Sect and Horn crying to the Beast for Power to be established, and to have
others thrown down and limited through the Powers of the Earth. And thus has
it been for Generations, and in this Nation in particular; and many Sects have
risen besides the Papists and the Protestants, and all these Sects have risen
one out of another, and appeared diverse one from the other^; and each one of
them have sought to the Powers of the Earth for settlement and defense; and
that the other that were contrary to them, and of another appearance might be
stopped and limited; and this has been done by these Teachers and Professors
under the account of establishment of Religion; and they have begged to
Parliaments and to Rulers for the establishment of Religion, and for the
stopping of Heresy, that is to say, for tollerating and defending of their own
Sect, which they call Religion, and for the stopping and subduing of all
others, which they call Heresy; but confusion has come upon all this, and
will upon the like for ever; and true Religion never gets established by it:
but as every new Sect has appeared, that only has sought establishment
against all the rest.

But yet I say, I am not against establishing of true Religion, though thus I
speak, but would have true Religion settled and established, but does not seek
to the Powers of the Earth, to have true Religion established by earthly Laws;
for that cannot establish true Religion, neither is it at all committed of the
Lord to the Powers of the Earth, or to outward Authorities to establish
Religion, or to make men religious; for that belongs to the Lord to rule over,
and in men's Consciences, and to exercise them in the true Religion: no Ruler by
any Law whatsoever ought to exercise Lordship over the Consciences of any
people, either to exalt or throw down any Sect, or Worship of Religion; for
they are with their Laws but to rule the outward man, to settle their Persons
and Estates in security, from the wrong and unrighteous dealing of wicked men,
and to limit all evil men, and evil doers from wronging and doing violence to
men's Persons and Estates; this is the work, and the place of Kings and Rulers
of the Earth, their Power is only committed to them of the Lord to extend over
the outward man, to defend and preserve that, and be a praise to all that do
well, and live Righteously, and to be a terror, and limit, and punishers of the
unrighteous evil and violent Doers, this is the Magistrates place, and the
length and breadth and height of his Authority, whether it reside in King,
Queen, or any other Person or Persons. But for the exercise of Conscience, that
is out of their Power, and over and beyond it; it is not committed of the Lord
to them to compel and cause people from, or to such a Worship and Religion, it
is not the Magistrates work, but the Ministers, that are sent of Christ to
teach Religion: but let all Sects have their course, and every Religion its
liberty in a Nation or Country (so that they do no Violence to one another
Persons and Estates) and if they do, then they fall under the Magistrates
Power; and then let them be punished: and let every Sect strive to exalt it
self, and to overthrow others, by what authority it has in Doctrine and
forceable Arguments; and let them use what Spiritual Weapons they have, and
defend themselves thereby, and let them that have the Spirit of God overcome,
and let them alone to be established, and let all the rest be subdued before
that, and let that alone to be settled only by the Power and Authority of the
Spirit of God, which overcomes all the contrary; and let all men, and all of
man's Power and Authority be silent and quiet, and have no hand in this matter;
and this is the way to establish Religion in a Nation, and a Xingdom: let the
Spirit of the Lord have its liberty; and let no man whatsoever limit it in them
in whom it dwells, but let it have its course and its operation, and its ^ull
authority by them in whom it dwells, in whomsoever it (...): and let all Sects
whatsoever have their liberty in their Arguments, and their Practices, and
their Worship, and then let it be manifest, who it is that overcomes, and who
it is that is overcome; and such as overcomes by the same Spirit and Power
that gives them Victory; by that alone let true Religion be established, and
the rest of all Sects bow under that true Religion that overcomes all others
by the Power and Authority of the Spirit of God, and is established thereby,
all other under that shall bow; and whilst this is in trial and debate, let the
Powers of the Earth, and the Rulers of the World be all quiet, and look on in
patience, and let their Authority herein be exercised; not to limit one, or
tolerate one more then another, only let them keep men's Persons and Estates
in peace and defense from the Injury and Malice and wrong dealing one of
another, as I have said; and here is the way, the true and perfect way, for the
establishing of Religion in a Nation among people; and if this were brought to
pass, and had been in Generations past, then would not the Papists have been
prevailed against by the Protestants, they being at the first dissenting from
the Church and Sect of the Papist, more sincere toward God, and more upright
to him, and in some things more true in Doctrine and Worship, then the other
which they dissented from, though still in the main but a false Sect, and of a
false Religion, though they hated the Whore in some things, and they would have
prevailed against her through that sincerity toward God, that was in them; but
they gave their Power to the Beast; and would not many other Sects have
prevailed against them, which have risen out of this, and dissented from her,
who was more in the Sincerity and Uprightness toward God, than she? for God
blessed that, and loved that, in what measure soever, and whatsoever it be; I
say, would not many Sects ere this day have prevailed one against another, had
not the Powers of the Earth stopped, and limited whom they would, and given
liberty to set up whom they would? But now the Light of the Day is arisen, and
has appeared; and the Lord is making a Way to establish his own Religion, by
his own Power; and he is gathering his Seed, who shall wax stronger and
stronger, and shall prevail through all Opposition, through all false Sects and
false Worships of the Earth, and they shall wax weaker and weaker, and shall
never be established in Righteousness; but they and the Power that upholds
them, shall be broken together; and this will the Lord bring to pass in his
Day: And thus I have showed you what true Religion is, and how it cannot be
established, and how it may be; and what the Authority of earthly Rulers is,
and how far it extends; and do show that true Religion cannot be settled
thereby, but by the Lord alone it must; and that it is the Work of Christ's
Ministry, and not of earthly Power by violent Laws to establish Religion.

And this is a testimony from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to ye Rulers,
and Parliaments, that make Laws, and minister Laws; meddle not with Religion,
to establish one Sect or Sects, and to limit and throw down others; but fear
the Lord God, and wait for his Wisdom, and remember that that has been a Rock
whereupon many before you have been split, and brought into confusion; even
when they have gone about to limit, or stop, or establish Religion, how have
they been confounded, and never had success from the Lord to such endeavors;
for the Lord has never showed countenance, for many Generations, to such as
have attempted to make men religious by outward Laws, and to settle Nations
therein by outward Laws.

Wherefore now be wise, ye Rulers, and kiss the Son; for the Wrath of the Lord
is already kindled, and he will break in pieces, and dash Babylon's Children
against the Stones, and confound the great Whore (the false Church) and all
false Sects, her Daughters who have been brought forth, and set up in Nations
ever since the Woman (the true Church) has been fled into the Wilderness, and
the Beast has carried the Whore, born her, and upheld her; and she has
journeyed through Nations upon the Beast; and the Beast has defended her; if
any man has an Ear let him hear: and this is a Visitation to ye Rulers, and to
all that make Laws, and minister Laws.

By a Friend to Righteous Men. E. B.

Satan's Design DEFEATED: In a Short Answer to a Manuscript sent by a Priest
out of Sussex, to a Member of this present Parliament, full of railing
Accusations, whereby he has secretly smitten the Innocent, by a secret
desiring the Persecution of the People of God. But herein his Folly and Madness
does appear, that while he has accused others falsely, himself is found guilty
of the same thing. With Invitations of Love to the present Authority, that they
may save themselves from being the Executioners of the Priests malice, least
the Lord destroy them.
A Certain Paper being come to my hand (which is said to be written by one
Priest Iackson, and sent to a Member of Parliament) containing diverse
Particulars charged as Errors upon the despised People called Quakers, wherein
he says he has set down some of their Tenants which they maintain; unto which
Manuscript I am moved to write something in answer, as to clear the Truth from
his foul Aspertions which he casts upon it; to the intent that the said Member
of Parliament, and the whole House may be better satisfied and resolved,
wherein they doubt of every Particular, that the Truth may appear, when as the
foul Vail of the Darkness and Slanders is removed.

That the Holy Scriptures are not the Word of God, nor the Saints Rule of Faith
His first Particular.
and Life, neither is it the duty of every one to search them.

Answ. The Holy Scriptures that were given forth by the Spirit of the Lord, as
holy men of God were moved, they are the Words of God, and a Declaration and a
Treatise Luke 1. 1. and that which the Saints had handled and tasted of the
Word of Life, that they declared forth in Words and Writings, Acts 1. 1. and
the Scriptures as they were given forth by the Spirit of God, are a true
Declaration of what is to be believed and practiced in relation to eternal
Salvation; It is a true Testimony concerning God, and his mighty Works, and of
Truth and Righteousness; and it is a Testimony also of the Devil, and what he
is, and of his Deceits, and Errors, and U^righteousness: so the Scriptures are
Words given forth by the Spirit; but Christ is the Word that was before the
Scriptures were; for in the beginning was the Word of God, and the World was
made by it, and the Word shall endure for ever; and Christ's Name is called the
Word of God: And though the Scriptures are profitable, and were given forth to
be read, and to be fulfilled, yet they are not the Rule and Guide of Faith and
Life unto the Saints, but the Spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures,
that is the Rule, and Guide, the Teacher and Leader into all Truth; and them
that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God; and if you walk in the
Spirit says the Apostle, you shall live, and as many as walk acording to this
(to wit, of the Spirit) Peace is upon them; and so the Spirit of God is the
Rule of the Saints Faith and Life; and the Spirit leads them to walk in the
fulfilling of the Scriptures, and according to them.

And as for all the Priests in England, who do profess the Scriptures to be
their Rule, out of their own Mouths will God judge them, who are found walking
contrary to the Scriptures in Life, and Doctrine, and Practices, while they cry
it up for their Rule; and condemn all that will not say as they ^ay. And the
last part of this Proposition is utterly false; for we never do assert that it
is not the duty of every one to search them; but we bid every one search the
Scriptures, and every one ought to search them; but yet we say, that none
understands them, but who have the Spirit that gave them forth, nor none can
profit thereby, but by the Spirit that gave them forth, which works the same
Truth in the Heart, which the Scriptures without declare of; and this I do
affirm, they are the Words of God, and the Spirit of God is the Rule of Faith
and Life to the Saints; and all men ought to search the Scriptures, and to
believe what is therein written, and to receive and enjoy Christ, who is the
Substance and the End of all Things, the first and last, the beginning and
ending; and in him the Scriptures are fulfilled, and finished.

They do deny the Doctrine of the Trinity, and that Christ is God and Man in
one His second Particular.
Person.

Answ. As for the word Trinity, it is invented, and he has learnt it out of
the Mass Book, or Common Prayer Book, but we own the Doctrine of the Gospel of
Christ, that Christ is God, and the Spirit is God; and there are three that
bear record, the Father, Son, and Spirit, and these are one, but God and the
Spirit are not Persons, but Infinite Beeings; and the Scripture no where, in
true Translations, expresses God under the Name Person; for Person is too
Carnal to express God, and Christ, and the Spirit by: but God was in Christ
reconciling the World, and this we believe and acknowledge according to the
Scriptures; but for this word, Doctrine of the Trinity, the Scriptures know no
such word, but the Truth we own, and the Gospel and the Scriptures too.

They hold that Jesus Christ died only signally, or examplarily, and that we
are justified His third Particular.
by the Suffering of Christ in us, and to be healed by his Stripes, is to be
stripped off, or from Sin.

Answ. Jesus Christ died, and rose again, and ascended according to the
Scriptures, this we do believe: And Christ was and is the Substance, the end of
all Signs and Examples, yet was he an Example to the Saints; and the Apostle
exhorted to walk as they had Christ for an example; and while he was in the
World he did and spoke and acted many things as Parables, Signs and Examples,
the substance of which is to be received in the Saints, and known by them
through the Spirit; and we believe Saints are justified by Christ, and through
Faith in him, which was, and is, and is to come, who is blessed for ever; and
none are justified by his Death and Suffering and Blood without them, but who
witness Christ within them; for all are Reprobates, and to be condemned and
cannot be justified that have not Christ in them, as thou may read, (Except
Christ be in you, you are Reprobates) and all that believe in Christ and
receive him, they are healed through his Sufferings and Stripes; for he
sanctifies them, and gives them Remission of Sin, and justifies them, and in
him the Saints are complete, and the New-man (the Regenerate) is justified, and
the old man is in the Degeneration, and knows not Christ in him, and has not
received him, but only heard of him without him, and believes the Relation:
but this faith does not justify; for all the false Christians upon Earth have
this faith: but that Faith alone justifies which gives to receive Christ, and
him to live in us, and to dwell in us by that Faith.

They utterly renounce the Doctrine of Justification by the imputation of the
Righteousness His fourth particular.
of Christ, or by the obedience he performed, or Sufferings he sustained or
underwent in his own Person without us.

Answ. This is partly true, and partly a Lie; we do indeed renounce the
profession of Justification by the Imputation of Christ or his Righteousness
performed without men, by men while they are in the degenerated estate, and
unconverted, and unreconciled, and unborn again; for by such profession of
Justification many deceive their Souls: but yet we say, that Righteousness is
imputed to us, and reckoned unto us who believe in Christ, and have received
him, even the Obedience and Sufferings that he performed without us, is ours,
who have received him within us, and witnesses Christ in us, and therefore we
are not Reprobates; yet we do acknowledge he wrought perfect Righteousness by
Obedience and Sufferings without us, and that Righteousness is ours by Faith,
which Faith has received Christ to dwell in us, and he and his Righteousness,
his Obedience and Sufferings we enjoy in us in Spirit; if any can receive it
let them: for that he wrought Righteousness this is acknowledged; but who have
a part in this Righteousness, that is disputable.

They wholly renounce the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, and it is one
of His fifth particular.
the great Reasons for which they decry the Ministers because they assert it;
they say Jacob and Esau are in a man, and the good Seed is Jacob which God
electeth, and the bad Seed is Esau which he reprobates.

Answ. The Doctrine of Election and Reprobation we do own according to the
Scriptures, and therefore have thou belied us, and slandered us, and art found
reproveable, and would incense men's minds against us for advantage to thy self;
but to some in that House we are better known then thou can report of us; and
yet thou say we say, that Jacob and Esau are in a man, and the good Seed God
electet^, and the bad he reprobates, and thou may here see thy confusion and
thy ignorance uttered in the self same Lines; for thou say we renounce the
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, and yet say we say, the good Seed God
electet^, and the bad Seed he reprobateth: and this shows what spirit thou art
of, and how that the spirit of unrighteousness does possess thee, and leads
thee to speak without understanding; and we further say, man being degenerated,
became reprobated and cast out, and all by nature are Children of Wrath, and
the Children of Wrath are all in the reprobate State, and none are elected but
who are elected in Christ the Seed of David; and so in the first Adam all are
reprobated, and all that are in the second Adam are elected; and the Election
and Reprobation stands not in the Persons, but in the Seeds, and yet the
Persons are blessed or cursed, in the love, or in the displeasure of God,
according as the Seed of God, or the seed of the Serpent lives and dwells and
bears rule in the Persons; and we do indeed decry and deny you the professed
Ministers, upon many accounts more then one; and we have already, and may in
time to come show sufficient Reasons against you, both in Doctrine and Practice
and other ways, that you are not the Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of
Satan generally.

That Jesus Christ as he is the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of Abraham is in
every one, and that a measure or part of the Substance that was conceived in
the Womb His sixth particular.
of the Virgin Mary, is in every one.

Answ. Jesus Christ he is the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of Abrah^
according to the Flesh, and after the Spirit the Son of the Living God; and
this Christ that was, and is, and is to come, who was dead, but is alive, and
lives for evermore, the alone Savior of the World, he has given a measure of
Light and Life unto every man, and there is a Light from him that shines in the
heart, of all men, shining in Darkness; the Light shines, but the Darkness
comprehends it not; and this was John's Testimony, and is our Testimony, That
Christ enlightneth every man, or all Mankind that comes into the World; for
in him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, as the Scripture says; and
the Apostle preached the Light that shined in peoples hearts, and it was that
Light that gave them the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God: but thou
have discovered thy self to be a Stumbler at the stumbling-stone, and has
taken offense at the Light, like the Pharisees who professed the Scriptures as
the Priests of England do, but were ignorant of the Life, the end of the words,
and knew not Christ the Substance: but the Stone at which you stumble, will
break you to pieces, and grind you to powder, even Christ the Light of the
World, that lights every man that comes into the World.

That the Soul is a part or measure of God (as they speak) and not a part of
man, but uncreated; and so is that Light which is in every one. His seventh
particular.


Answ. The Soul is immortal, and God is immortal; for God breathed into man the
Breath of Life, and he became a Living Soul (as says the Scripture) and the
Soul is related to God; for what a man works against God, it is against his own
Soul; for all Sin is against God, and against a man's own Soul: And God who
has all Souls in his hand, who is the Creator, and gave Life into the Soul
that is immortal, and can never die, though Death has passed over it, and has
reigned over all from Adam till Moses; and Christ is the Light of the World
that gives Life unto the Soul; and he raises up the Soul out of Death and
Misery, and brings the Soul to rejoice in God its Savior; and Christ is the
Souls Bishop, its Pastor, and Feeder, and who knows Christ, knows him that was
before the World was made, and sees to the beginning, and to the ending, and
his Soul rests in God that is over all.

That the Light in the Heathen, who never heard that Jesus Christ died at
Jerusalem His eighth particular.
is the same for the quality of it, with that which is in the most godly
Person; only there is a difference in the quantity; And men are reconciled to
God by following of it; This Light they say is the sure Word of Prophecy, and
that it is sufficient to lead out of all Sin unto God.

Answ. The Testimony of John is, that Christ is the Light that lights every
m^n that comes into the World; and if every man, then the Heathen, who has
not the relation of Christ's Life, and his Death at Jerusalem, yea and it is
the same Light that is in the Heathen, the same in nature and kind, as it is in
the Saints; for the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth is one in it self and the
same, though it comfort the Saints, and reproves the World, and the Wicked
for their sins: And men are reconciled to God by Christ; for he was in God
reconciling to himself, and none are reconciled but who walk in the Light, and
follows it; for who walks in the Light, the Blood of Christ cleanses them
(...) all Si^, and they are reconciled, and none else: And the Word of God is
in the Heart, as the Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 10. and that is the Word
of Prophecy, and that Word is sufficient to lead out of all Sin unto God, if
men believe in Jesus and receives him: and the Spirit of Truth leads into
all Truth, all that follow it.

That Christ as man is not in Heaven, yea, that he has ceased to be man, and
conseq^ly to be Mediator; and when I told them he should come in the Clouds in
like His ninth particular.
(...) as he ascended, and that at his coming the Elements melts; one of
their (...) told me, that the Clouds were scattered, and the Elements melted in
him.

Answ. Christ Jesus is ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of the
Father, yea he is ascended far above all Heavens, as says the Scripture: But
that is utterly false, whereas thou say, we say he ceased to be man, that is
^y Lie, and so I pass it: And we believe according to the Scriptures, that
(...) shall come in like manner as he ascended, and at his coming the Elements
shall melt: And it is not error for a man to say the Clouds are scattered, and
^^e Elements melted in him; for Clouds are Darkness, and covers the face of the
Sun many times, as thou may behold in the Firmament: But Darkness is yet
over thy Heart, and the Elements are not melted away; and therefore thou art in
thy Imaginations, putting Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, and
calling Evil Good, and Good Evil.

That the Bodies of Men shall never rise again after death; and that the day of
Judgment is come already; and that now the Saints do judge the World. His
tenth Particular.


Answ. We do believe the Resurrection according to the Scriptures; For if only
in this Life we have Hope, we were of all men most miserable: And we believe
that the Dead shall arise again after death, and every one shall receive
according to the Deeds done in the Body; they that have done Evil shall arise
to Eternal Condemnation, and they that have done Good to Eternal Salvation* in
the day of Judgment: And the Lord comes with, and in ten thousand of his
Saints to judge the World, and the Saints upon Earth do receive the Spirit of
Judgment, and do judge the World, even all things; for the spiritual Man
judges all things, even in this present Age; if thou can receive it thou
may.

They are utterly against Water Baptism, and administering of the Lord's Supper
His eleventh Particular.
with Bread and Wine, because they say, they have the Substance of all within.

Answ. As for Baptism and the Supper of the Lord we do own it, and it is
practiced of us in the Life and Power of God; but as for your Baptism, that is
to say, sprinkling of Infants, calling it the Baptism into the Faith, and that
they are made Members of the Church thereby; and that it is a Seal of
Regeneration, as you say in your Common Prayer Book and Directory, that we do
utterly deny, and do say it is no Ordinance of God, neither was it ever
commanded by him, or practiced by his Saints, but is an Institution of the
Whore of Rome, and England received it by a Popish Institution, and your
practice of it is Idolatry, and not any part of the true Worship of God: And as
for your breaking Bread, and drinking Wine, in that manner and form as it is
practiced in the Church of England among the Unconverted and Unregenerated,
that we utterly deny also to be of God, or to be ever commanded of him or
practiced by his Saints; and this is neither Heresy nor Error in us, but true
bearing witness against your Idolatrous Ways, and Practices, with which the
Nations are deceived, whom the Whore causes to drink her Cup; even all people
have drunk her Cup, and she has drunk the Blood of them that would not; and
she has long sat upon Nations, Peoples, and Multitudes, but now she is made
bare and discovered, and all you her false Ministers: And whereas the Author
does say, These are some of the strange and horrid Opinions which they have
audaciously invented, etc.

Answ. It is no strange thing that Truth be called Heresy and Error; and that
it be branded with a Name of strange and horrid Opinions, and such like; but we
do acknowledge, that in that Way which is called Heresy do we worship the True
and Living God, and woe will be unto them that put Light for Darkness and
Darkness for Light: But when these particular Things, and their Answers are
tru^ly read and weighed, then let spiritual Men judge; for this Author must not
be Judge in his own Cause, whose judgment is corrupted, and his ways
Abomination: And it has been the Work of that Generation (of those called
Ministers I mean) for these seven years to cry out to the Magistrates, and to
send one Paper after another of this nature to them; but what has it
advantaged them? for has not the Lord turned their Wisdom backward? and even
the Way which they have thought to destroy the Heritage of the Lord, the Lord
hereby has made his Heritage more glorious; and so the^ have striven against
the Lord, and altogether in vain, and their doings shall they eat the fruit of,
and receive the reward of their own Work. And whereas the Author further says,
Such as have saving work in their Souls, and that k^^w God and Christ, etc.
cannot but bless God for keeping them from the great Black^^ss and Darkness,
that has invaded the Souls of these deluded Wretches.

Answ. They that know the saving Work in their souls, and that know God and
Christ in Truth and Righteousness, and that call upon him with an upright
Heart, we are all one with them, and they with us: And they alone that walk in
the Light that Christ has enlightened them withal, are kept from the Darkness
that does invade the Deluded: and as for thy envious reflection, (...) y^^r
deluded Wretches, and such like; these words are to thy self, for they have no
entrance into our Dwellings, the Lord has saved us by his right Hand, and we
bear them as his Reproaches for Righteousness sake. And whereas thou say, It
is very sad that after so much preaching of the Gospel, so many should take
those things for new Lights, which are but antiquated Errors, etc.

Answ. It is very sad indeed, that the Ministers of this Nation should have so
fair a Profession upon them, and should put the Nation to so much charge, by
giving them Tyth^s, and Stipends, and Money, and have spoiled peoples Goods,
and cast their Bodies into Prisons, even of many hundreds that would not pay
them: And yet the Nation should be left in Darkness, and like an untilled
Wilderness, notwithstanding all the Profession of preaching the Gospel; for the
Nation has been like an untilled Field, and like People, like Pri^^^, like
Shepherd, like Sheep, as it is, especially amongst them where Shephe^^s and the
Sheep are risen in Rebellion against the Nation, and have joined with (...) old
Caveliers: But this shows, that your preaching has been for En^^ to your
selves, and for Money, and that you have been Ministers of the Letter, and not
of the Spirit, nor of the Power of God; for had you been in the Life, and
Preachers of the true Gospel, the Nations had been as a Garden at this day, and
not like an unploughed Field, as we see they are; people abounding in
Ungodliness, and in all Pride, and Vanity, which is a shame to Christianity;
Now People and Ministers, have made a show of the Gospel, but have been without
the Power, in the Form of godliness; and have had the Form, but resisted the
Power: And indeed the Ignorance of the People, will lie upon their Ministers,
who have been crying Peace to them, that have walked after the Imaginations of
their own Hearts; and have not turned the Wicked from his wicked Way; and the
Scriptures are fulfilled upon them, They have run, but God has not sent them,
therefore the People have not at all been profited by them: But the Light of
the Glorious Gospel is risen in men's Hearts, and your Folly and Vanity is
discovered, and that makes you rage and swell as a foaming Sea; now when your
shame is seen, you are casting out Slanders and Reproaches, thinking thereby to
sedu^e the Minds of people, thinking always to keep the Magistrates on your
side, and to ride upon them; and that they will establish you in Freedom, and
destroy them that are against you: but the Lord is opening their Eyes to behold
your Deceit and Madness, and you will be left unto your selves, and fall into
the Pit that you have dug for others.

And whereas this Author does further compare this poor People, which he in
scorn calls Quakers, with several pestilent Heretics, as he calls them, that
have disturbed the Church; and says he, They agree with the Adamites, and
Pharisees, and Sadduces, and with the Mann^chies, with the Jews, Turks,
Servebus, and with the Soscinians, and many more which he names, and says, we
agree with them; and (...) is to render us odious, and as abominable as he c^^,
to m^n in Authority.

To all which I do answer, What we do profess, and practice for Religion, we
have not been learnt by Man, nor been taught it by Men; not our Gospel, no^
Religion; but we have received it from the Lord, and of him are we taught, and
by the Spirit led into all Truth: and though thou have done as the Pharisees
did, they reckoned Christ with Transgressors, and crucified him betwixt two
Thieves; so though thou have compared us with such and such, whom thou call
Heretics, and it is possible many of them might be so: And so thou have showed
the spirit of the Pharisees, and of the Murderers, that denied Christ; and we
are known unto the Lord what we are, though not unto mortal Man's wisdom, that
perishes: And to whom shall we more truly compare the Ministers of England?
Are they not like those which Isaiah cried against, That sought, for their Gain
from their Quarter, that were Greedy Dumb Dogs? and like them that Jeremiah
cried against, that said, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord had never spoken
to them, nor sent them? and are not you all like them that Micah cried against,
chap. 3. That preached for Hire, and divined for Money, and that prepared War
against those that would not put into their Mouths, as you do at this day? and
are not you like them that Ezekiel cried against, that made a Prey upon the
Flock, and made Merchandise of Souls, and fed themselves with the Fat, and did
not feed the Flock; but ruled over them with Force and Cruelty? and are not you
like those that Christ cried woe against, That were called of men Master, that
went in long Robes, and loved Greeting in the Markets, and uppermost R^oms at
Feasts; for you act those things that Christ cried Woe against the Pharisees,
who did the same things? and are not you like them that Paul spoke of, That
were heady, and high-minded men, and covetous, and Proud, and went in the way
of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards, and that through Covetousness, with feigned
words, made Merchandise of Souls? And are not you like them that John saw were
coming in, in his days, That went out from them, and that went into the world,
that were of the world, and spoke of the world, and the world heard them, and
which the World went after? and are not you of them that have deceived the
whole World, that has been of the Whore, that has caused all Nations to drink
her Cup, and of them that have made War against the Saints, and against the
Lamb, of that stock of the false Prophets, that wrought Miracles in the sight
of the Beast? and the World wonders after the Beast, and the Beast has carried
the Whore, and he has compelled and caused all to worship him; and the Whore
caused all to drink of the Cup of her Fornication: Are not these things so? may
not the Witness of God in all men's Consciences truly answer hereunto, and
condemn you to be such as were the false Prophets, and the Hirelings and the
Deceivers, against whom the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles gave witness?
Yea, it is manifest that you are in the same way, and of the same Generation,
and that you follow the same spirit, because you show forth the same works: And
are not you like the Papists and the Jesuits? was it not by the Authority of
the Pope of Rome that your very way of making Ministers was ordained at Schools
and Colleges? and was it not the Papists, and in their days, that the general
part of your Church Discipline and Government, the Call of your Ministers, and
Practice of them, and Maintenance of them; was it not first set up by the
Papists? Was not this way of Tithes first established by the Church of Rome?
and do not you follow the Papists herein, in receiving Tithes, and Gleab-lands,
and Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues, which you hold up, and would destroy
them that will not give you such things? and therefore are not you like the
Papists and Jesuits? yea; we know that the Church of England is but newly come
out of the Womb of Popery, and has the Symptoms thereof upon her at this very
day in many things; yea, the Testimony of God in all people may witness
hereunto: And so it is the very trick of the Whore, to cry out against others,
and to charge others with that which she is guilty of her self; but now it will
not cover them, to slander others that themselves may seem clear; for the Lord
is opening peoples Hearts, and giving them a Spirit to discern all things.

And whereas the Author speaks against the Quakers, for crying against Cuffs,
Caps, and for using Thee and Thou; and for crying against Pulpits, and
Hour-Glasses, and for such things; and for owning Revelation, and for holding
the free Grace of God to be given unto all, and because of Trembling and
Quaking, and saying, Our Writings are given forth by the same infallible Spirit
that the Scriptures were given out by, and for crying down the Ministers
Maintenance, and for calling some of them Vipers and Serpents.

To all this I answer, It is your Generation that makes a great noise about
thee and thou, and Cuffs, and Caps; for we in plainness and simplicity do speak
the proper Language, thee, and thou to a single Person, and it is the proud and
exalted Minds of Men that are offended hereat, which Pride and Arrogance has
eaten out the very Sincerity, and the property of Speech also, and you are
offended at us because of it, and for crying against your Cuffs, and
Boot-hose-tops, and Ribbands, and Points; we cry against all these things as
not becoming the Ministers of Christ, but as being of the World, in the Pride,
and Vanity, and Superfluity, abusing the Creation, which the Lord will judge
among you: And as for having an Hourglass, and preaching thereby, and as for
your carnal Bells which you call people by, we do disown these things, and say,
They are old popish inventions; for the Ministers of Christ never limited
their spirits to an Hourglass, neither had they a carnal Bell to call people
to their Worship; and as for Revelation, we do own that the Spirit of God does
reveal Truth to us, and God has revealed Christ in us, and none ever shall
know God but by Revelation; For none knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him: And as for Free Grace, we say, The Grace of God
has appeared to all men; and it teaches the Saints to deny Ungodliness, but
the Wicked turns it into wantonness, and does dispite unto the Spirit of Grace;
and we also say, That who now speaks, or are moved to write forth by the Spirit
of God, they speak and write by the same Spirit that is infallible, that the
Scriptures were given forth by: And as for your Maintenance, it is altogether
Abominable and Oppression to the Nation, and the Lord is against it, your
taking Peoples Goods, and casting them into Prison, that will not pay you
Wages, and give you Tithes against their Consciences: And be not offended at
being called Vipers, and Serpents; for these are the Works of venomous Vipers,
and stinging Serpents, which persecute the Servants of God, and cries to the
Magistrates for help against a poor People, that uses no Weapons at all
against you, saving that of the Spirit of God; and though we do thus to you, to
the false Ministers, to cry against them, and give our witness against them in
the Name of the Lord, yet we do not deny the true Ministers of Christ, nor
speak any thing against them which are the true Ministers, that have received
the Ministry of Righteousness by the Gift of the holy Spirit, which all that
are true Ministers, do receive their Ministry thereby.

And whereas thou say, we are bitter Enemies to the Doctrine of
Justification, and agree with the Cavelierish Party, and would silence godly
Ministers, and are I^suitical, and such like things thou falsely charge upon
us; and that we have a not able faculty to delude ignorant unstable Souls, etc.

Answ. These are but the Author's Reproaches, and his Slanders, he has filled
his Mouth with, against the Innocent; and he has set his Tongue on the Fire of
Hell, to slander the ^ust, and the Innocent: and all these things we bear in
patience, counting Reproaches for Christ our chiefest Riches; and thus to the
substance of this Paper, I have given an answer, whereby all that love the
Lord, and desire to be informed in the Truth, may receive satisfaction; for it
is seen that that Generation of Priests are joined with the prelatical
Cavelierish Party, and this is known at large in the Nation, in the North
especially: and so as I said, they would fain slander others, that themselves
might seem clear; but the Lord will rebuke him, and his lying Tongue, and the
Innocent shall be delivered from his devouring Lips: And as for any other thing
in his Paper, it is not worth answering to, nor worth minding; but his
wickedness will turn upon his own head, and he shall bear the burden of his
own words, only he queries, whether this be not the Pestilence that walks in
Darkness? And the Floods that the Dragon has cast out of his Mouth to drown
the Woman? Is not this the mark of the Beast, who opened his Mouth in
Blasphemy? And are not these the Unclean Spirits, that came out of the Mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the false Prophet?

Answ. Now the Pestilence that walks in Darkness, is the Plague (that is out of
the Light) Sin, and Death, and Misery, which smites the Ungodly, and he sees it
not: And the Floods which the Dragon cast out, is the Floods of Persecution and
Cruelty (viz.) The imprisoning until death, and spoiling peoples Goods, for
Tithes and Money, as the Priests have done: And the Dragon gave power to the
Beast that compelled all to worship, and that carried the Whore, the false
church; and the true Church has bin fled into the Wilderness for many
Generations; and the false church (the Whore) has sat as a Queen, and given
her cup to drink: the false church of Rome, and the false church of the
Protestants, all which are of the Whore, these have all been carried by the
Beast which the Dragon gave his power to; and they have all persecuted the
Woman, the true Church, and the Mark of the Beast he compelled people to
receive, and compelled them to worship; and they open their mouths in
Blasphemy that deny Christ, and deny the Light, and that say they are Jews, and
are not; this is Error and Blasphemy which the Beast opens his mouth in,
against the Saints, and against them that dwell in Heaven: and the unclean
spirits are the spirits of Devils, that are out of the Truth, and these the
Dragon casts our in Slanders; and Reproaches and Lies, such as this Author has
done, and of that Generation is he. Christ said, False Prophets should come;
and John saw in his days, they were come, and he saw the world gone after
them; and of that Generation are you: and now the Lord is gathering people from
you again, and Babylon must fall, and all her Merchants howl and weep: and
these things have been which the Scripture speaks of, and the Woman is now
coming out of the Wilderness again, and the Whore must be rewarded, and sorrow
is coming upon her, and as she has done unto the Saints, so shall the Saints do
unto her.

And in the Conclusion he says, Worthy Sir (to this Member of Parliament) it
will be your Honor to stand in the Gap, to stop the violence of this Hellish
Torrent, that is so high, that it sounds from Dan to Beersheba, and threatens
Judgment to our Israel, etc.

Answ. Here is the Conclusion of thy matter, which is the sum of it, a running
to the Powers of the Earth for help; what, have you Ministers lost the Lord to
be your strength, that you must flee for help to men to defend you from the
Spirit of God in his People? Must they make Laws to establish you, and set you
up? Is not this the Whore that road upon the Beast, and that the Beast carries?
Is not here a Description of her out of the mouth of this Author? Is he crying
to you, to persecute the Innocent? It is true, the Seed of God is risen, the
Elect Seed, that is able to make War against the Beast, and against the false
Prophets, even with the Word of the Lord; and is he offended that Truth is
risen so high? and would he have some Fire and Faggot again in Smithfield, and
some Persecution and Banishment acted upon the People of God? Is this the
standing in the Gap, and stopping Violence, or would he have it done this way?
Yea, Judgments indeed are threatened to your Generation; for, if God will not
destroy you soon enough, you will destroy your selves; and your own Iniquity
will be upon you, and the wickedness of the Wicked shall slay him. But my
Counsel is not only to that particular Member, but to the whole Body of them,
That they be wise, and take heed what they do; for the Eye of the Lord is over
you, and his Hand can dash you in pieces; and if you be Oppressors of the
People of God, and will not relieve the Oppressed, the Innocent, and break the
Bonds of Oppression, the Lord will break you in pieces; for this is the Rock
that has broken all before you, Persecuting people for Conscience sake; and if
you go in this way, your Destruction shall be the most lamentable of any that
was ever yet before you: Do you not yet see the Wickedness of this Generation?
will you yet contend for them? Surely you might learn Wisdom, even by their
Folly; and if you do not shut your eyes, there needs no more discovery then
their own present ways and works.

Wherefore consider, the Day of God's Visitation is upon you, make good use of
your time, lest the Lord breaks you down, and never build you up; and let the
Spirit of the Lord have its Liberty, and limit it not; for if you do, you shall
never prosper, nor never be made a Blessing unto the people under your Charge.

Remember you are warned by a Lover of your Souls,

ANd Friends, Great Things has the Lord done in these Nations in your days,
and that by the Face of your Authority; and there has a Spirit stirred in some
of you, and in the Army, which the Lord has appeared with, and yet the Work of
the Lord is not finished; but greater things then these has the Lord to
accomplish amongst us, and in this Nation; and these things that have come to
pass, have been but as the preparing of the way for the bringing about of
greater things: It is true, many Mountains have been removed, and some
Oppressions taken off, and excellent things have bin promised, and doubtless
(by some of you) really intended; but alas! the Work has long remained
unfinished, and many of your best Friends are almost weary with waiting to
receive the end of their Hopes and Desires; and many are even fainting
concerning the Good Old Cause, though of late it has seemed to be revived by
you, yet it goes but easily forwards. and even so little is its growth since
your late Meeting, that many are thinking themselves to be in a deceived
condition by you: Why? They see that wicked Clergy's Interest more prospering
then the just Freedom of the People. And this I say unto you in the Name of the
Lord, That while that Interest (of this false Priesthood I mean) is so much
favored and defended, you can never prosper, nor the Nations be ever happy
under you; for it is one of the greatest Oppressions this day in the Nation,
the maintaining and upholding of this Ministry by Tithes, and other unrighteous
Wages; and the very Land groans under the Oppression of this Church and
Ministry, which lies as a heavy Burden upon both Persons, and Estates and
Consciences of many good People, even of your dearest Friends; and though the
Lord does manifestly (even from Heaven) show signal Tokens of his Displeasure
against them, and the Servants of the Lord, they also cease not to warn you
concerning them, and their own doings are sufficient Testimony of the Malice of
their hearts against you, and all good men in the Nation; yet nevertheless some
of you seem to shut your eyes, as if you would see no Evil in them, but are
crying up your godly Ministers; and some of you utterly despising the man (as
not worthy to live) that does but speak against them; and thus are you blinded,
and perceive not where the Cause lie^ of your Interruption, to bring forth
Righteousness: I say, It is the favoring of that interest which stops the
issue of Good Things; and while you oppress peoples Persons, and Estates, and
Consciences, to uphold this Ministry and Priesthood aforesaid, the Lord shall
never prosper you, nor make the Nations ^^ppy under your Charge; and this you
shall witness eternally. Wherefore I do say unto you, it is high time for you
to lay aside the interest of this oppressing Clergy, so much leavened and
tasted of the Whore of Rome; your selves do know that the spirit of the Romish
Clergy was in the late Bishops, which you cast out for their Wickedness; and
the very spirit of those Bishops is entered into these Priests, and bears rule
in their hearts; and thus by succession has the Whore of R^^e leavened the
Clergy of England, from one Generation to another, with her taste and savor,
and there is the remainer of her Murders and Cruelties in those men's Breasts,
and at every opportunity it breaks forth, as of late in this Rebellion you have
full Testimony; and if you do not curb it speedlly, it will grow over you, to
your undoing. Therefore clear your selves, do not any longer drink the Whore's
Cup, neither be ye Carriers of her, to execute her Wickedness upon the Bodies
and Consciences of people; for it is written, The Beast has carried the Whore;
and we see it has been thus, as John saw it was to come to pass; and so clear
your selves from her Tyrannies and Oppressions, and leave this false Church and
Ministry to themselves; and if God will not uphold them by his Power, why
should you do it? If these Priests have not yet planted Vineyards that will
yield them Fruit, and if their Flock will not yield them Milk freely, why
should you unjustly impose upon peoples Consciences, and compel Tithes and
Money from them, for the maintenance of these men? Ye ought not to do it; for
while ye Compel and Force People by Violence, contrary to good Consciences, to
Maintain and Uphold this Ministry, and Church, and Worship, you do but cause
people to drink the Whore's Cup, and you are but them which carry the Whore,
viz. the false Church; and this is Plain-dealing, to tell you the Truth,
whether you will reject it, or receive it: wherefore cast them off, and let
them not lurk under your Wings; for, one day they will rebel against you, and
another day flatter with you; and for a season they will show forth much Love
and Kindness in Hypocrisy, even while they are hatching Mischief against you,
and to bring the Nation into Blood; and they will cry out Heresy and Error of
others, that themselves may seem clear, while as the same lodges in their own
Hearts: wherefore I say, do not make a false Peace with them, nor do not
flatter with treacherous minds; for you had better have them your open Enemies,
then deceitful and flattering Friends; you had better be in a just Opposition
against them, then in an unjust Peace with them: I know it appears to many of
you, a thing very hard to be born; What! to forsake our Godly Ministers, think
ye? to hear tell of laying them aside is an amazement to some of your minds:
was it not the same concerning the King and Bishops? was it not as much
terrible to him, and his Lords and Council, to think of the overthrow of the
then called Godly Fathers and Bishops? but better had he cast them off, and
saved himself, then to have perished with them: and so I say unto you, better
were it for you to lay these men aside, and their Flatteries and feigned
Prayers, and to save your selves from their Flattery, then to perish with them;
and the one of these will come to pass: For its decreed of the Lord, If you
uphold them, and oppress People's Persons, Estates and Consciences on their
behalf, and in their evil Cause, for Tithes and Wages to them, ye shall fall
with them, and none shall be able to deliver neither you nor them: For I tell
you again, That the very spirit of the old Idolatrous Bishops (long since cast
out) is entered into the hearts of these men; and there is as great a measure of
Tyranny, and Injustice and Abomination lying upon these, as once was upon the
Bishops; and these are no less free from any Abomination, then they were, and
these are nigh as ripe for Vengeance, and Overthrow, as the others were; and it
will as surely come upon these, as it did upon them: wherefore take heed unto
your selves, and be wise, and learn, and do us Justice, or else God will do us
Justice upon you; if ye will not take off our Burdens, and ease our
Oppressions, the Lord God will ease us of you, and the Earth shall not be
oppressed with you; and if ye will uphold this Priesthood against Equity and
Good Conscience, the Lord will free Good Consciences both from you and them:
And this is the Word of the Lord God to you.

The open Enemy has not prevailed against you; but the secret Hand of the Lord
will not miss you. By a Friend to Righteousness, E. B.

A Visitation and Warning PROCLAIMED, And an ALARM Sounded in the Pope's
Borders In the Name and Authority of the Lord Almighty, and the LAMB. Being the
Account of a Journey to Dunkirk, and the Proceedings there among the Jesuits,
and Friars, and Papists; with some particular Queries, and also some
Propositions sent unto them. Which may be Satisfaction to many, who may behold
the Difference in part between the Papists and the People of God, and between
the Idolaters and the True Worshippers. The Particulars, and the Heads laid
down.
1. The Account of the Journey. 2. A Letter to the Deputy Governor, and the
Officers of the English Army. 3. Queries to the Friars. 4. Propositions, as a
Charge against the Romish Church; with a Letter to the chief Jesuit, Rector in
Dunkirk. 5. A Warning to the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army. 6.
Some Propositions to the English Priests in Dunkirk; with some other things.

ACcording to the Will of the Lord, and being moved of him in Spirit, and as it
lay upon me many days, I passed to Dunkirk: And that which I found upon me
chiefly, was to visit and warn the Papists, the Jesuits, and Friars, and that
Company of Idolaters; and to sound the Mighty Day of the Lord among them, and
to proclaim it in the Pope's Borders, and to warn them of the Day that is at
hand upon them by the Word of the Lord; and to sound forth among them the
Everlasting Gospel of Truth; and against all their Idolatrous Ways, Worships
and Practices, which I have often felt the weight and burden of before ever I
saw outwardly what their Ways or Practices are; which when I saw their
Idolatrous Practices and Worships, and heard their Doctrines, and what they
profess, I found it to be according to what I had seen and felt in the Light
that tries all things. And about the sixth day of the third Month, 1659. I
(with Samuel Fisher, who was moved to go with me) shipped from Dover, and came
into Dunkirk the next day; and being Strangers upon Earth, as the Generation of
the Righteous Seed ever was, we waited in the Will of the Lord, to be guided by
his Wisdom what to do, and how to be guided to act and speak to his Glory: So
the next Morning the Town Mayor came to us in the Street, and required an
account of our coming, and our Names, and from whence we came; to which we gave
him sober Answers, and a reasonable Account. And that day it much spread over
the Town of our being come thither, which wrought no small Cogitations in the
Hearts of many, as what our Business was, and wherefore we were come; so that
the Deputy Governor, Colonel Alsop, with the Council of Officers, sent for us
that Night (the chief Governor not being in Town) so we went to them, who did
kindly entreat us, and examine us concerning our coming thither, and what our
Business was there, and such like; to which we gave them Answers, and staid
with them in Discourse some Hours: and the Deputy Governor much pleaded to us
the Danger of our staying in the Town, and feared the Division that might grow
amongst them through us; and withal, much desired us to depart the Town,
supposing, as he said, the great Danger that might incur unto the Garrison
through our stay: But our Answer was in much plainness, If he desired us, we
could not receive any such Desire; and if he commanded us, we could not obey
his Command in that case; neither could we depart the Town, but in the Will of
God, according to which Will we came thither: and having many words, and much
reasoning with them that Night, we parted from them.

And the next Morning I was moved to write this Letter following, and to give
them all a sober Account of our coming, and what our Work is in this World,
wheresoever we come: which Letter was delivered to them, and read by many of
them; but to it we received no Answer, according as the latter part did
require, as may be seen.

Dunkirk, the eleaventh of the third month, English account, 1659.
To the Deputy Governor, and the Officers of the English Army in Dunkirk these.
FRiends, we the Servants of the Lord, are Lovers of all your Souls, and
wishes well unto you in the Lord, that Truth and Peace, and Righteousness may
be among you, and in your Hearts; and we are Travelers in the Labor of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus for the Elect Seed ^ake, having received the glad
Tidings of Life, and Eternal Salvation into our Hearts, through the Revelation
of Christ in us, who is our Hope of Glory; and the Lord has manifested greatly
his Power amongst us, and revealed the Riches of his Grace in our Souls, to our
own everlasting satisfaction and peace with God: and also he has made us
Ministers of his Grace, and of his Word to many others, to the turning of many
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God; and of him we are
called, and ordained by his Spirit into this his Work, to preach the
everlasting Gospel to the Nations, and to war against Antichrist, the Whore and
false Prophets, who came up since the days of the Apostles, and have reigned
over all the World for many Generations: and this is our work in the World, to
fight the Lamb's Battle with his Spiritual Weapons and Armor, and to follow
him whithersoever he goes, and to give up our ^elves in his Service, to do or
suffer for him whatsoever he calls us unto; and in this hitherto has the
Power and mighty Presence of the Lord God been with us, and is with us unto
this day, and great is his Name amongst us his People, and to be praised for
evermore: And of this has God given us the sure Witness in our selves, even
the Testimony of his good Spirit, which bears us witness in our own
Consciences, that these things are true, whether men believe, or reject our
Testimony; for we are not Ministers of Man, nor by man's will, neither do we
stand to man's Judgment, to be approved, or disapproved thereby; but to the
Witness and Testimony of God's Spirit in every Conscience we do commend our
selves, where ever any of us do come, in the simplicity of Truth, in the
demonstration of the Spirit; and not by words of Man's Wisdom: and in the Day
of the Lord shall we be justified herein by him, and by his Witness in all men's
Consciences; and in the mean time we do suffer all things patiently, and in the
meek and quiet Spirit of the Lord: And as for us two in particular, who are now
come into the Town of Dunkirk as we have in some part declared unto you
already; and so here I again say unto you, not being ashamed nor unwilling to
give you an account of our coming; for we came to be made manifest, openly in
the sight of all men, in our Doctrines, Principles, and Practices, which are of
and from the Lord, and fully agreeing in all things with the Scriptures of
Truth, which were given forth by the Spirit of Truth, as the holy Men of God
were moved; and as we have said to you, we still testify, we were moved of
God, and by his Spirit to come unto this Place in love to the Souls of People;
and it is the Lord God that has sent us, and not Man; and whether you believe
us herein, or do reject us, the Testimony of God is sure; and remains with us;
and for the Truth hereof, we are not afraid to do and suffer, but can do, and
suffer in the strength of Christ whatsoever is put upon us; though chiefly our
coming was (so far as the Lord showed us) in relation to these Popish
Idolaters, to discourse with their Jesuits, Friars, and Priests, and to
discover to them the Errors of their Ways, and the falsness of their Worships,
and to testify unto them, in the Fear and Power of the Lord concerning their
Church, that it is not a true Church of Christ, but a false Church, come up in
the Apostasy; and these things we have to argue with them, if the Heads of them
will admit dispute, otherwise to charge these things upon them from the Lord,
and by his Authority; and if they do any of them receive our Testimony, and
turn from their Idols, and be converted unto the Truth, they may be happy; but
if they shall reject our Testimony, and not believe the Truth; then shall they
the more be fitted for Destruction, and the Day of their Destruction the sooner
approaches, and the Lord shall be clear of their Blood, and our Reward shall
be with us from God; for our Testimony shall not return to us in vain, but
shall accomplish its end wherefore it is sent, and the Word of the Lord by us
shall either convert to God, and to the Truth that they may be saved, or shall
through rejecting of it, harden the Heart against God, and against the Truth,
that they may the more justly be condemned, and the Lord and his Servants be
the more clear: and no other thing saving this do we promise to our selves as
the success of our endeavors, and not so much in relation to the men of our
English Nation are we come, though the Gospel of Salvation is freely come to
them also, that they may be freed from the Captivity of Sin and Death; and we
may not work, nor cause any disturbance or grief to any of them, further then
what they may take at us for the Truth's sake, or for declaring it in the fear
of God, and without any just cause given by us to any of you, or them; though
we dare not promise to you, nor our selves, what we will do, or what we will
not do; only this we say, if the transgression of any just Law can be charged
upon us, we refuse not to suffer what shall be imposed; and this we do believe,
that the Lord will so keep us, and order us by his Spirit of Truth, and carry
us in Meekness, and Righteousness toward you, while we stay amongst you, be it
weeks, or months, that you will have no just occasion against us, by any
Offense justly ministered by us; and if you do take occasion against us without
any just cause given, be it upon your selves, to your own Shame, and
Condemnation in the sight of God and men; for we are clear, only this we do
give unto the Lord, and cannot unto Men, the exercise of our Consciences, and
to be obedient unto the Teachings of his Spirit in all things, as he shall
guide and lead us; and if he commands to do, or not to do any thing, and you
the contrary, we must obey him, though we disobey you; for its better to obey
God then Man: and when he bids speak, in what Place or Season soever, we may
not be silent; for to keep our Consciences clear in the sight of God, in all
things, by Obedience to him, is our care, and study, and that which we are
given up to do; and if you set your selves to gainsay this, it will turn to
your own destruction; for no other promise then this can we make for our
selves, but to do, and speak amongst you, as the Lord our God shall move us,
and lead us: and this Testimony we do bear for the Lord, he does not move us,
nor lead us to any thing, saving to what is Just, Good, and Holy, which may
tend to the Happiness, and Peace, and Welfare of your Souls, and Bodies also;
and in the Father's will we stand, and as we came in his Will, so we cannot
submit to stay, or go at any Man's will, save the Lord's alone: And as
concerning our coming, and staying, and Work here, this is a sober account to
you, which may satisfy you, and any sober and reasonable men: And as
concerning our being with you yesternight, many things passed from some of you,
and your Ministers chiefly, to which I had a great desire to have answered, and
to have cleared the things objected against us; but time and his patience
afforded not the opertunity: therefore now this I do propound about the Call to
the Ministry, which was the thing in dispute; to which I then could freely have
spoken, whether he will give me and us a fair meeting, in some public Place,
that is convenient for your selves to hear, and be judge between us, to
discourse this Matter (viz) what the true Call to the Ministry is, which is
truly according to the Scripture, and that to be laid down first, and then to
compare his Call to his Ministry, and also his Call to Dunkirk with what the
true Call is, which is allowed of, and approved in the Scriptures; and also to
compare our Call to the Ministry, and even our call to Dunkirk, with what the
true Call of Christ s Ministers was, as declared in the Scriptures; that it may
be seen whether his Call, or our Call, is the most different from, or agreeable
to the Scriptures; and even the Light in your own Consciences shall be Judge
between us in this Cause; and upon such an Issue, upon a just Determination
would we gladly join trial; and such a Meeting, upon such Grounds and
Proceedings, may tend to satisfy your selves, and many more; and such a
Meeting I do fully desire with your consent, and concurrence, who may preserve
the people in Peace and Soberness, that all may be ^dified in the things of so
great moment, as this is: For if he can prove his Call to the Ministry to be
such as was the Apostles, and Ministers in the true Christian Churches, before
the Apostasy, then shall we own him, and not deny him; but if he cannot do
this, and if we can do it on our own behalf, in the Power and Spirit of the
Lord, then may you and all men judge who are the true Ministers of Christ, and
who are the Deceivers. And this manner of proceedings would deside all Doubts
in you about us; and we shall be clear in manifesting the Truth concerning the
true Ministry and the false, and the difference between them in their Call, in
their Practice, and in their Maintenance. And this is sent to you to read and
consider of, in the Fear of God, as the Testimony of our Love to you and the
Truth, that you may take heed to your ways: and we would receive first your
Answer, whether you do consent, and will allow such a Meeting; and secondly,
his Answer, whether he will undertake such a Dispute: and we further are ready
to clear all Doubts that may remain in you about us, who are your Friends, and
desire your Prosperity, and Faithfulness in what the Lord calls you unto.

By Edward Buroughs, Samuel Fisher.


And the same day we went to the Capuchine Friars, and had some Discourse with
the chiefest of them in their Garden, concerning the Light of Christ that every
man is lighted withal: and we did declare to them of the Mighty Day of the
Lord, that was at hand upon them; and the Lord was come to search them, and try
them, and would hew down their Idolatrous ways, and worships, and works, etc.
And in order to a fair proceeding with them, the next day I was moved to write
this following Paper to them, by way of Queries, as to lay some ground of
Opposition; hoping to have received their Answer, that I might have joined
trial with them: for, it was in my heart, to search and oppose their Ways and
Practices, and their whole Religion. And these Queries were delivered to them
in Latin, though from them I have received no Answer to this day; but the
Queries stand upon them, and my Charge they lie under, charged upon them in the
Name of the Lord.

To all ye that profess your selves Devoted to the Service of God, and
Separation from the World, and Mortification in your lives, who are called by
the the name of Friars and Nunns, in, and about Dunkirk.
THe Mighty Day of the Lord God is come, and coming upon you, and all the
World; Awake, awake ye that sleep in the Earth; for the Dreadful God is arising
to plead with you, and to give unto all the World the Cup of his fierce
Indignation, because of your Idolatries, and Hypocrisies, and Abominations,
which have corrupted the Earth, and are come up before him, and have provoked
him; and the Cry of the Just, who has been smitten and laid slain, is entered
into the Ears of the Most High; and his Sword, which is the word of his Mouth,
is awakened to wound and slay all his Enemies: And the Day of your Visitation
is now come, wherein the Lord is searching you, and trying you, that he may
recompense you; and this is the Word of the Lord to you.

Wherefore I am moved of the Lord to propound some few Queries to you, for the
trial of your spirits and ways; to which I demand your Answer, that all things
may be brought to Light, and true Judgment, and that you may be judged justly,
and by the Spirit of the Lord cleared, or condemned accorto your Deeds?

1. Whether there were such order of Men and Women in the true Church of Christ
in the Apostles days? and where did Christ give Institution for such Worships,
Practices, and manner of Life, slouthful idleness, and unprofitableness to God
and Men, as ye hold forth? And whether any are bound to believe you, and follow
your Religion and Practices, except you can prove by the Scriptures, the Words
of Christ, or Example of his Saints and Apostles, your Religion, and Lives, and
Practices, and Worships? and whether you do admit of trial in all your whole
Religion by, and according to the Scriptures and Writings of the Apostles, yea
or nay?

2. Whether the World in your Hearts, and the World's nature, even the root of
Lust, the root of Pride, Covetousness, and the love of this World, and its
Vanities, and the root of Idolatry is subdued in you? to the Light in your
Consciences I do speak: and what is the root of all these things? and what is
it that subdues it? Is it an outward abstinence by the force of Locks and
Doors, and Bolts, or self-separation, and secret Places, that subdues the
World's nature in Men, and Women? and is it by such means that Christ gives
Victory over Sin, and overcomes it in his People? or is it not by the Power of
God in the Heart only? and whether is it not damnable Hypocrisy in you, to
appear outwardly Holy, and free from these things, while yet the Nature and
Root of all these things are alive in you, and boiling up in the motions of
them? and is any outward thing the Cross of Christ, and Christ crucified, which
mortifies to the World, which the Apostles preached and rejoiced in?

3. Whether is it a true denial of the World in you, to deny it in one manner
and place, and to run into it, and embrace it in another way and place? it does
not appear to me, that you have denied the World, as the Apostles did: For
answer me, where had they any such Seats in the finest and fattest Places of
the Cities and Towns as ye have; such great fine Houses and Gardens, and such
Revenues by the year as ye have, staying all their days in a great House, and
spending their time in sloth and idleness as ye do? they went up and down the
World preaching the Gospel, and had no certain dwelling Place, but followed the
Lamb of God in the Spirit; and did not settle themselves in fat Places of the
Earth, continuing all their days as ye do: therefore we judge that you are out
of the Life, and not in the spirit as the Apostles were in, but are in the Form
of Righteousness and Holiness without the Power: So I demand an Answer to clear
your selves, if you can, and to prove that you are of the true Church, and that
your Ways and Practices are in, and by the Spirit of God, and according to the
Scriptures.

4. What is that Death that has passed over all, and reigned from Adam to
Moses? and whether it does not reign yet in and over you? and what is Moses's
Ministration? and whether ever through it you yet truly came? and whether that
part be subdued in you, which the Law of God was added upon? and whether are
you come to Christ, and know him as he was before Abraham, and before Mary? and
how was he David's Lord? and how his Son? and is Christ within you born, and
revealed to you, by whom the World was made? and do you expect to be perfectly
freed from Sin, that ye shall not commit Sin in this Life upon Earth, yea, or
nay?

5. What is the Soul, and what was its state and condition before
Transgression? and what is its state and condition in Transgression? and
whether may man come to be restored by the second Adam into the same estate,
while upon Earth, as he lost in the first Adam, yea or nay?

Friends, I demand of you in the Name and Power of the Lord God, to answer me
these things in writing some of you, and to subscribe your names, that I may
return you an Answer, and query further of you; for we are sent of God to visit
you, and to try you; and if you be in the perfect Truth, and would convert
others to your Religion, be plain with us, and use your best Spiritual Weapons
in your Zeal toward us, and defend your Cause, and appear for your God; and if
you doubt of your own Ways and Practices, and be not able to defend your
Religion, then let your Mouths be stopped, then turn from Idolatry; for now is
the Lord God risen that will judge ye and all the Earth righteously.

I am a lover of Souls, but a Witness against all false Idolatrous Ways of
Antichrist, and the Whore, that has reigned in the World, and I am the Lord's
Servant. E. B. By the Scorners of the World called a Quaker.


These queries were sent to the Friars in Latin.

ANd we were with them again at other times in discourse with the chief of all
the Friars of the Company called Recolects also, and did in the Power of the
Lord declare Truth unto them, and against their Idolatry, until such time as
some of them were so offended with us, not having much wherewith to an swer in
Truth to defend themselves; they of the Company called Capuchins grew light and
scornful, and very wicked, and did in a manner deny us the liberty any more to
come unto them: And we were with each Company of Friars two several times; and
as for the Jesuits, we had much upon us to visit them in their Colleges, but
we perceived that the chief Rector of the College of Iesui^^s, had heard of
our being in the Town; he did refuse to discourse with us, and we went once
into the College, and could not be admitted to speak with him: And about a
Week after we came into the Town, the chief Governor Lockhart coming home, he
sent, as he said, to the Jesuits College, that they should admit us to come
to speak with them; and as we found it from the Lord upon us, at a convenient
season, we went again to the College, and were for some hours in discourse
with the chief Rector of the College who appeared at the first very high, and
subtle, and crafty, and did in his heart reject us, and the simplicity of the
Gospel; but Truth and the Word of the Lord had dominion over him, and before
the Truth he and they all are as weak as Water: many things were disputed upon,
which the particulars now cannot be related; but in about three hours time he
grew weary, pretending other business, and would stay no longer with us, and so
we parted, demanding of him whether he would admit some more discourse at some
other time, which he did refuse; so we were not admitted to come to him any
more: whereupon these following Propositions I was moved to give forth, and
send among them as a Charge upon them, in the Name and Power of the Lord, and
they were given and delivered in Latin up and down among the Jesuits and
Friars in the Town, unto which to this day I never could receive an Answer:
therefore my charge lies upon them to this day as a Testimony from the mouth of
the Lord against them, of which they can never clear themselves. And we were
moved to visit the Nunns, and went to their Place, and before many words were
spoken to them through a Grate (for we might not see them, and to speak to them
both at once) they asked If we were of the order of those called Quakers; and
they perceiving we were such, said, They might not hear us, because we were
such, and presently passed away, and refused to suffer us to speak to them; and
therefore we had very small time with them, only gave our Witness against
them, and passed away.

To all ye Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, and to all you in general of the
Romish Church, in and about Dunkirk.
FRiends, in dear love to all your Immortal Souls, I am moved to lay these
things before you, that you may read and consider them in the Fear of the Lord
God; for as much as for some days I have been in this Town according to the
Will of God, and having rightly observed your Religion, in its Original, and in
its present standing, and in its practices; and having truly examined some
part of your Faith and Doctrines, and the manner of your Worships, and your
Ordinances, and the Orders, and Discipline, and Government of your whole
Church; and in the Spirit of the Lord, having laid all things to the Line of
true Judgment, and equally measured them; hereupon I do from the Lord, and by
his Spirit, propound and assert these things unto you.

First, That your Church is not the true Church of Christ, the Lamb's Wife, and
Elected Spouse, but is degenerated in her Faith, and in her Doctrines, and in
her Worships and Ordinances, in her Orders, Discipline and Government, from
what the true Church of Christ was, in the Apostles days, before the Apostasy.

2. That the Constitution of your Church, and the chief part of your Worship
and Ordinances, and the way and manner of your Discipline and Government are of
Man, and set up and stands by the will of Man, and are not after God, nor
according to him, but are after the Traditions of Man, learned and practiced
therein, which is Idolatry, and are not in the Commandments of Christ, nor in
the Example of his Apostles, non according to the Scriptures, but without the
Spirit of God, being set up since the days of the Apostles, and since the
Apostasy came in, which has overshadowed the whole World.

3. That there has been over the World for Generations, and many Ages since
the days of the Apostles and true Churches, a general declination and falling
away from the true Faith and Doctrines, and from the Worship and Ordinances,
and from the Discipline and Government, that was amongst the Apostles, and
practiced in the true Churches of Christ in their days, and your Church is in
that declination, and falling away.

4. That Antichrist, the Beast, and the Whore, and false Prophets, have reigned
over the World for Generations; the Antichrist that has opposed Christ, and
been exalted in the Temple of God, and been worshipped as God; the Beast that
has killed the Saints, and warred against them, and had power over Kindreds
and Tongues, and the World has wondered after him; the Whore whom the Beast
has carried, she has sat upon Peoples, Multitudes, and Nations, and drunk
the Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs, and she has corrupted the Earth,
and caused all to drink her Cup of Fornications: And the false Prophets have
overspred the Nations, and deceived them; and you and your Church are the
Peoples, the Multitudes, and the Kindreds that the Beast has received Power
over, and the Whore has sat upon, and the false Prophets deceived.

5. That the true Church of Christ, the Lamb's Wife, the elected Spouse, and
the beloved City, who brought forth him that was to rule the Nations, has been
fled into the Wilderness, and been fled into the Place of Mourning and
Desolation, for a thousand two hundred and sixty days; and the Gentiles Feet
have trodden down the holy City, the Lamb's Wife, and had power over her for
forty and two months; and though she has not been prevailed against, nor
overcome, so as to be extinguished from having a Being, yet her Being has been
in the Wilderness, in Mourning and Desolation; and she has not appeared in the
Glory and Excellency which once she had, but has lost her Garments and her
Attire, and her Heir and Husband separated from her, and caught up to God, and
to his Throne: and in this time of the Desolation, and treading down of the
holy City, the Lamb's Wife, and the reigning of the Beast and the Whore, has
your Church been extant in her glory and power, which has been of the false
Woman, and not of the Elect Spouse, that is married to the Lamb.

6. That forcing and compelling of Persons by any outward Law and Authority to
be of such or such a Religion, and to conform to such a Way of Worship, is the
Worship of the Beast, and of the Whore, and not the Worship of God; and to kill
and persecute Persons for the exercise of Conscience, and because they will not
be of such a Religion, and cannot conform to such Worship, is of the Devil and
the Dragon, and not of God, nor according to him; and that your Church herein
is not Successor of the Apostles, and the true Church of Christ; but is of the
Beast and the Whore, which John saw was to come in his time, and which we see
are come in our days, and have ruled for Generations; and I affirm, that
Persons so made conformable, by force and violent Laws, to such a Religion and
Worship are but twofold more the Children of the Devil, and are not at all
converted to God thereby, but becomes Idolaters, whom God will judge.

7. That none upon Earth are true Members of the true Church of Christ, having
a portion in the Inheritance of Eternal Life, but such who are gathered out of
the World by the preaching of the Gospel, and are changed and renewed by the
Power of the Lord God in the Heart, and are led by his Spirit within them into
all Truth, and are joined unto Christ the Head, and gathered into the Eternal
Unity of the Infinite Body, by the same Spirit and A^ointing dwelling in them;
and of such only does the true Church of Christ consist now in this present
time, as it did in the Apostles days: but of such Members does not your Church
consist in this present Age, neither is it in the Order and Government of the
Spirit of Truth, but in the Form without the Power, therein was its beginning,
and its standing at this day.

8. That the time is at hand, and the Day of the Lord draws near, and the
ful^ess of time is approaching, wherein great Babylon shall be thrown down, and
fall to the Ground, and the Lord will be avenged on her, and will render
Judg^ents unto her; and the Beast, and Whore, and false Prophets, unto whom the
Kingdoms of the World have been subject, shall be taken, and cast alive into
the Lake, and the Devil and Satan shall deceive the Nations no more; but the
Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ, whose Kingdom shall be revealed in Power and great Glory, in
the hearts of his Chosen: And the Church of Rome, and all the false Sects and
Churches upon the Earth, will the Lord God overthrow, and his true Church shall
be gathered out of the Wilderness; and the Beauty of new Jerusalem, of the holy
Church, the Lamb's Wife, shall be as Glorious, a^ before she fled thither, and
before she was trodden down of the Gentiles; and the Lord God Almighty shall be
known, and his Tabernacle shall be with men.

These things I assert to you in the Name of the Lord, and the truth thereof is
certain, and should be ready to argue and dispute these things with any sober
Person amongst you, upon equal terms, and to prove the Infalibility hereof, by
the Spirit of the Lord, and according to the Scriptures; wherefore consider of
them in Patience and Meekness, and believe in the Light of Christ, which is in
your Consciences, which Christ has lightened every man that comes into the
World withal, that you may come to the knowledge of the Truth, and out of all
false Ways: and if any of you will return an Answer hereunto, in behalf of
your whole Body, and can be able to clear your selves in Writing from what is
charged upon you, it shall be gladly received by me, and a Reply i^ Meekness
returned to you for the further m^nifestation of Truth, that Truth and
Righteousness may clearly appear, and be embraced, and all Deceit and and false
ways of Antichrist may be confounded, and denied; and who are in the Truth
shall be confirmed, and who are in the Error may have Warning now in the Day of
the World's Visitation. The Lord is coming to Judgment, who will judge the
Secrets of all Hearts, and the whole World in Equity.

Dunkirk, the 20th of the 3d Month, 1659. By a Friend unto Righteousness, and
a Lover of all Souls, E. B.


These Propositions were sent to them in Latin.

This was sent to the chief Rector of the Jesuits College in Dunkirk, in
Latin.

FRiend, thy wisdom and thy knowledge is earthly and sensual, and thereby can
thou not know the Things of the Kingdom of God; thou can neither learn them
thy self, nor teach them to others; for thou art but a blind Leader of the
Blind: And thus says the Lord God unto thee, The Fruitless Tree is standing in
thee, that brings forth no Fruit unto God; and the Head of the Serpent is not
broken in thee, that deceives the Soul; nor the Body of Sin put off, that
burdens the Just: and the Sword shall cut thee to pieces, even the Sword of the
Lord, it shall slay thee. And Friend, The time is at hand that the Lord will
make thee know, that thou art, and have been in thy Life time, a Dishonor to
him; and that thou have not served him, but thy self, and the Devil; and thy
Heart is not right in his sight, but is corrupt and deceitful; for thou art
tried and measured, and thou art found wanting in all things: and God will
judge thee, and the Witness in thy Conscience shall answer his Judgments; and
all thy Idolatrous Practices, and Profession of Religion, and Church, and
Ministry, thy many Prayers, and thy Works of Righteousness, all this shall not
hide thee from the Wrath of the Lamb; though now thou art hardened, and utterly
unsensible, yet the Stone shall fall upon thee, that will grind thee to Powder,
and thou shall not escape, but the burden of thy own Iniquities shall weigh
thee down into Perdition, except thou speedily repentest: Therefore fear and
tremble before the Lord God, and remember thou art warned by one that seeks the
Peace of Souls; but makes War by the Sword of the Spirit against the Kingdom of
the Devil and Antichrist, in whomsoever it stands.

And Friend, answer me this one Query; What is that Whore that has sat upon
Multitudes and Peoples? and what is that Golden Cup in her Hand? and what are
the Abominations and Fornication, of which her Cup is full, which she has
caused the Kings and People to drink, and with which she has deceived the
World? Answer me this, and subscribe thy Name.

E. B.


ANd now this I have to say concerning the Church of Rome, to them, and to all
the World, as having been in a measure an eye and an ear Witness of their
Idolatrous and false Ways, Practices, and Doctrines; never having in all my
days, till this time, and at this opertunity of going to Dunkirk, not having
any knowledge outwardly what their Ways and Practices were; not having any
knowledge I say by my sight, and particular hearing concerning them, without
me, otherwise then what the Spirit of the Lord within me did make manifest:
Though from a Child the Spirit of the Lord in me, has abhorred Popery, and all
that which savours of it: But now having been an eye and ear Witness in a
little measure of their Practices and Doctrines, this I have to say to them,
and all men; Blindness and Ignorance covers them as with a Mantle, and they are
wrapped up in the body of Darkness, and gross Darkness they do dwell in; and
all their Ways, and Worships, are but the Works of Darkness, which they are
led on in by the false feigned spirit of Imagination, from one Generation to
another, being exercised therein: And the sense of the Spirit of Life they have
not, but have wholly lost it; and they know nothing at all of the Leading of
it, nor of its Teaching: This they hiss at as a thing of naught when it is
spoken of to them. They have even sold themselves into the Land of Ignorance
and Blindness, and they hate to be reformed; they are settled upon a false
Foundation, even the Traditions of men, which the Lord will break down, and
their whole Building will fall. And when I consider how thousands, and ten
thousands lie in the Captivity of Blindness and Darkness under them, my Heart
is rent for them, upon the consideration how they are led in Darkness and
Blindness, and how they rest in a false confidence, which will destroy their
Souls, and the Blood of many rests upon the heads of them that leads them;
for they that lead them, cause them to err: and the Blood of Souls will be
required at their hands: And as for the Poor and common Sort of them, there is
a pit^y in me for them; because they are led by the Blind, and are out of the
Way: but as for the Priests and Jesuits, and Clergy men, they are to be cut
off with the edge of the Sword of the Lord God, and the Woe is unto them, and no
Pity; because they cause the People to err, and keep the People in Ignorance
and Blindness, under their false and unrighteous Ways and Worships. And this I
know, The Word of the Lord is gone forth against the whole Body of the
Romish-Church, from the Head to the Tail of them, will God plead with them; the
time is at hand, and his Eye shall not pity, neither shall his Hand spare to
punish them: The Decree of the Lord is sealed, and he will take Vengeance upon
their Unrighteous Laws, which binds the Consciences of People, and limits the
Spirit of the holy One; their Unrighteous Ecclesiastical Laws I mean, under
which is defended all manner of Idolatry, and they compel people to be
Idolaters by a Law, and whereby they drink the Blood of the Saints, and of the
Martyrs: But the Lord will take Vengeance upon them, and disanul their
Covenants and Decrees; and his Spirit shall not be limited, but shall rend
them to pieces, even their Laws and Cruelties, and Inquisitions, by which they
are defended, and their Religion upheld in the World, and whereby they kill the
Just, and murder the Innocent, that are better then they; for the fullness of
time is come, and all these shall be tumbled down; for their unjust Laws, and
Inquisitions, are the main strength and Pillars of their Church, whereby their
Church and Worship does stand: and if they had not these cruel Laws and
Inquisitions to defend themselves by in their Religion, they would be soon
prevailed against; for they have nothing of the Spirit and Authority of God, to
stand in, nor to fight with, against such as do oppose them; but their Weapons
are Carnal, and Devilish, and by Murders, Oppressions, and Tyrannies they do
defend themselves; and when these things are broken down, then their Church
cannot stand long. And as sure as the Lord lives, so shall it come to pass, a
Generation shall accomplish it, and in the Generation of the Righteous Seed it
shall be finished; their Laws shall be broken down, and Murders avenged, and
their weakness shall then appear, and their Whoredoms and Idolatries, and all
their Abominations shall be made naked, and uncovered, and judged by the Lamb,
and them that follow him, whom he will gather to fight his Battle. And if the
People were but sensible hereof, as in measure I am, through the Zeal of the
Lord, it would raise up the Spirit of zeal in them all, to seek vengeance, and
the overthrow of all their unrighteous Laws, and Inquisitions, and Murders,
which keeps people in Darkness and Ignorance, and kills the Just, that the
Creatures may be saved, and Tyranny condemned: And when once the Lord does but
reach forth his Arm, then shall People be awakened to mind what I now say. Who
would spare their own lives for the accomplishing of such a Work, that the
Spirit of the Lord may have liberty, and that which limits it may be dashed to
pieces; and that the Earth may be set at liberty, and all Europe made free from
the Cruelties and Tyrannies of Antichrist and of the Whore? And to all you
Papists I say, and to all the Body of the Church of Rome, prepare prepare; for
the Lord God is coming up against you in his dreadful Power, his Word of
eternal Judgemnt is gone forth, and his Vials are full of Wrath to be poured
forth; and he will be avenged upon your Tyrannies and Murders, and unequal
Laws, and subdue them before him: And his Dread shall fall upon your
Consciences; ye that are Idolaters, Hypocrites, Ignorant wretches, wilful
Persons and Bondslaves of Satan, the Plagues of God, and the Wrath of the Lamb
shall reach unto your high Throne; Repent, repent, for the Lord's Wrath is
kindled against you; and if there be any among you, that fears the Lord, let
him deliver his own Soul, by turning from your Abominations, least the Lord
come upon you and destroy you altogether: Give up your Inquisitions, give up
your unjust Laws, and cease to murder the Innocent, and torment the Righteous.
I demand this of you on the Lord's behalf, Vex not the Lord any longer; for his
Patience is turned into Anger against you, and his Long-suffering will become
Fury to devour you.

And no little service we had in Dunkirk among our English Army; diverse
Meetings we had in the Town, and declared the Message of Salvation: And I must
commend the spirit of our English men for moderation, more then the men of any
other Nation, and I did many times clear my Conscience among them, both as they
were men, Sons of Adam, and in relation to an eternal State did direct them to
the Way of Happiness, out of Sin and Wickedness, that they might come to God,
preaching the everlasting Gospel; that as they were Sons of Adam in
Transgression, they might come to be healed, and come into Christ the Power and
Wisdom of God, and might be saved. Again, as they were Soldiers, and as they
were an Army, I was moved to speak much unto them, that they might know what
their service was there in that state; sometime saying unto them, It was
possible the Lord might have some good work to do by them, if they were
faithful and not seek themselves, but the Glory of the Lord.

And at one time being sent for by Governor Lockhart, where there were many
Officers with him, and we had much discourse with them; and this lay upon me to
declare in the Name of the Lord unto them; that if they did enterprise any
business, as they were an Army, in a spirit in opposition unto us, and in that
spirit that did reject us, and deny us, and gainsay us; then should they never
prosper in any enterprise whatsoever: but if they went on in any degree in the
Fear of the Lord, and in that Spirit that was among us, then should they
overcome their Enemies, and none should have power over them, nor overcome
them. And after I was parted from them, this following Paper was upon me to
write unto the whole Army in general, both to Officers and Soldiers.

To the English Army, to Officers and Soldiers.
Friends,
I Am moved to clear my Conscience unto you, in the sight of the Lord, to warn
you, that you may all learn Wisdom, and the Fear of the Lord God, and may stand
in his Counsel always; for that will be a defense unto you at all times, and
therein will you prosper in the Lord's Work, and chiefly unto you, the small
remnant of our English Army in and about Dunkirk; I say unto you Officers and
Soldiers, Fear the Lord God, and walk in his Wisdom; and every particular
Person amongst you, inquire of the Lord, that he requires of you; inquire of
the Lord I say, and know his Will, and be obedient unto it in all things, and
so shall you prosper in standing in God's Counsel, and in performing his Will:
and so shall you be exalted, and have victory over your Enemies, even as you
seek the Honor of the Lord, and his Glory; for if you honor him, and do that
which is acceptable to him, he will honor you, and set you atop of all your
Enemies, and he will make way through the Mountains, even by you, for the
further appearance of his Glory; and he will honor you as his Workmen, if you
be faithful to him, and walk in his Counsel and Wisdom, till he has prepared
his own way by you; for assuredly it is not in vain, but the Lord had some end
in it, to himself, in bringing you to that Place; and what do you know but he
may have some good Work for you to do: It is possible there is more in his
Heart, and in his Purpose concerning you then yet may be discovered to you:
wherefore it is good for you, that you wait upon the Lord, to know his Will
fully concerning you, that you may do it, and fulfill it; and therein shall be
your Crown, but on the contrary depends your misery and destruction. And this
I do know, That the Lord has owned and honored our English Army, and done
good things for them and by them in these Nations in our Age; and the Lord once
armed them with the spirit of courage and zeal against many Abominations, and
he was with them in many things he called them to, and gave them Victory and
Dominion over much Injustice and Oppression, and cruel Laws* and he was with
them, till that a spirit of vain Glory and Ambition, and Self seeing, and the
Honor of this World entered into some and defiled the whole Body, and made it
deformed, and void of its former beauty, and of its valor and nobleness also,
at which the Anger of the Lord was kindled, and against you also was his Hand
turned, with the loss of his Presence, because the sincerity and the faithful
Principle was almost choked, and the Good eaten out from amongst you, by the
false spirit of Self-seeking and Vain Glory, which was entered into the Hearts
of many; but this is to the Army in general, and to say no more of it to you,
only that you might search your own hearts, and may be purged, and may again
return to the old spirit of Righteousness, which will reach after the liberty
of the people, and the freedom of the Nations, and that all Oppression may be
broken down to the dust before you, and be subdued by you as your Prey: and
that there be no more a looking back by you for rest and ease in the flesh, in
great Houses of residence, till you have visited Rome, and inquired after, and
sought out the Innocent Blood that is buried therein, and avenge the Blood of
the Guiltless through all the Dominions of the Pope; the Blood of the Just it
cries through Italy and Spain, and the time is come, that the Lord will search
it, and seek it out, and repay it; and it would be your honor to be made use
of by the Lord, in any degree in order to this matter, whether the Lord will
revenge the grievous blood-guiltiness that lies upon them, by himself without
an Instrument, or whether by you or others as an Instrument; whether this way
or another that God will do it, this I determine not; but this I do know, The
time is not long, that he will one way or another avenge, and revenge, the
Blood of the Just upon the murderous Head: and this I also believe, that the
Lord will do it, or make way hereunto even by you, the men of our English
Nation, if you be faithful to him, and do what he requires of you; for what are
these few poor Islands, that you have run through, and laid many Mountains low;
they are but little in comparison of the great part of Christendom in which
Idolatry, and grievous Oppressions do abound, which the Hand of the Lord is
against, and which he will take Vengeance upon: Oh did you but see and
perfectly know, the Cruelties, the Oppressions, the Idolatries, the Murders,
and all whatsoever that is Evil, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical State, that
is brought forth, and rules in full Power in all the Pope's Dominions; I do
say, Were you but fully acquainted with all these things, and also of the
purpose of the Lord, which is speedily to visit them with his Rod, it would
awaken you, and stir you up; and it would set your spirits on fire of a great
Zeal, with Desires of no greater Honor, then to be Instruments in any degree
toward the executing of so good^ a Work; even toward the relieving of the
Oppressed, and breaking the B^nds of Cruelty, that the Nations may come to
Rest, and may no more be captivated with the Chains of Antichrist; I do say, it
would be your greatest Honor to be Instruments in such a Work: and do you know
what the Lord's Purpose is concerning you? only this I do know, The Lord has
a love to the men of our Nation, and there is a spirit in them most fitting for
such a work; even the Zeal of the Lord has appeared, and is beginning to
appear against Babylon, and against Rome, the Seat of the Whore; and the
Kingdom of Antichrist shall be thrown down, and the Righteous People shall go
free, and Nations shall worship the Lord; but there are many Mountains in the
way; wherefore hew down the Tops, strike at the Branches, make way, that the Ax
may be laid to the Root of the Tree, that your Sword, and the Sword of the
Lord, may neither leave Root nor Branch of Idolatry, Oppressions and Tyranny,
which the Nations are held in slavery under, and oppressed withal, to the
grieving of the Righteous Soul, and vexing of the Spirit of the Lord. Oh, how
great is their Idolatries! you see a little part thereof amongst you; oh, what
false, feigned, deceitful and hypocritical Services do they practice; their
Images, their Pictures, and their praying before them, which is Idolatry; their
Candles burning, and their Organs, and Instruments of Music, and feigned
singing; all this is Idolatry and Superstition, and a vexation to the Lord; and
that Law which imposes them upon people contrary to a good Conscience, and
that Law which condemns others as Heretics that will not worship thus, and
that Power that kills and destroys those that act against those Worships,
Laws, and Powers, ought ye to make war against, and to claim a disanulling of
all such Laws and Authorities by which this Idolatry is imposed upon Peoples
Consciences, and established in the Nations, and by which many are destroyed
and condemned, who cannot bow to their Idolatries, such Laws are not to stand
before you; for these be the Briars and Thorns which cover the great Mountains,
whom the Whore sits upon, which the Lord will judge; did you but know all
their Unrighteous Laws, Murders, and all Cruelties which are abounding among
them, and they have a despensation to commit Unrighteousness; those Laws ought
to be judged and destroyed, and your Sword is to be lifted up against them: It
is the Lord's Work, I know, to make men truly religious; but yet the Lord may
work by you, to break down the Briars and Thorns, and Rocks and Hills, that
have set themselves against the Lord, and which keep People under the Chains of
Idolatry, so that they commit Idolatry, and are compelled to it, and defended
in it, even by a Law: but the Lord will confound all this, either by means, or
without means; for such is their Oppression in their Ecclesiastical State, and
their Unjust Laws whereby their Church is established and defended, that it
causes the very Earth to mourn, and the Spirits of the Righteous to faint, and
their Hearts to fail because of Oppression; to Murder, and Steal, and Rob, and
to commit Adultery, these are counted little Sins amongst them, they are even
tolerated, and pardoned by the Pope, for a little Money; and if they slay a
Man, and wilfully murder him, they can run to their Altar, there they can have
a Dispensation of a wicked Pardon; and here is a Law that tolerates Murder, and
the greatest Sins; wherewhereby it is hard for any that fears God for to be
amongst them; and Blood, blood lies upon their whole Dominions, and the Guilty
go free, and uncondemned, and the Innocent suffer unjustly; for if any diminish
from about their Mass-houses to the value of a Penny, that is death by their
Law; while Murder is tolerated; and here is naught but Tyranny and Oppression
abounding, even great Mountains, which must be thrown down, and for which the
Sword of the Lord must come upon them; and God will make their Riches, and
their falsely consecrated Vessels and Treasures, even a spoil, and a prey unto
you, if you be faithful unto the Lord; wherefore all you Officers, fear the
Lord God, and be not ambitious, nor vainglorious, nor seek not your selves to
gain unto your selves Kingdoms, to exalt your own Horn; for if you go in this
way, and if this be your end; then your end shall be frustrated, and you shall
not prosper; for the Lord will lay you aside with shame unto you: but let it be
your work and your aim to require and demand the dis^nulling of their
Inquisitions and cruel Laws, both in their Church and civil State; and that
Christ alone may exercise the Peoples Consciences, neither be ye as Lords nor
Tyrants over your poor Soldiers, but be ye loving and meek toward them; I say
unto you Officers, and to all you that bear rule in the Army, Be loving and
kind, and gentle unto all under your Authority, and be not as Tyrants nor
Oppressors over your poor Soldiers, but be Examples of all goodness unto them,
and give them no evil Example in your lives and conversations; but lead them in
the Fear of the Lord, and know a measure of his Wisdom in you, whereby you may
walk before them, and they may possess their freedoms in their Conditions; and
may not be as Slaves to you, but as Servants to the Lord in their places: and
herein shall you be blessed, as you fulfill that which the Lord requires. And
likewise unto all the Soldiers I say, That ye may be sober and moderate, and
faithful to the Lord, and not go in the Excess and Superfluity of this
Creation; but may be all kept low in your Hearts, and tender toward God: and
obey them that have power over you in all things which are just, and be not
deboist nor given to Vanity; but all of you both Officers and Soldiers, live in
that which keeps your Consciences void of offense, and that you may be clear
and free in your own spirits from the Abominations of the Nations, and then you
will be a Terror to the Evil in all People wheresoever you come; and being
clear and free in the sight of the Lord, having no sin lying upon your
Consciences, then shall you face your Enemies with courage, and not fear death;
but shall be ready to lay down your lives for a Testimony of Jesus in a good
Cause, and upon good Engagements: and if the Lord be your Fear, then no man can
make you afraid, but you will be in that which overcomes the Unrighteous Power
within you, and without you also; and here is the true honor, and in this it
does consist, in victory over all that which is contrary to God; and here is
the true Way to Happiness and Prosperity in this Life, and in the Life to come,
by seeking his Glory, and not your own: and all of you come to the Light of
Christ, that Christ has lighted you withal, and that will teach you all
things what you ought to do, and what you ought not to do; for that Light of
Christ within you, ought to be the Guide of all the Children of Men, in every
State, Place, and Condition; and upon this you are to wait for Counsel to
receive it from the Lord, by that of him made manifest within you: and as for
all your outward Teachers, that have used their Tongues amongst you, and said,
The Lord says it, when God has not spoken to them, nor sent them; and that
preach for Hire and Sums of Money, and these are them that cannot profit the
People, nor ever bring you to the Knowledge of God, nor give you Counsel from
the Lord; and if you seek to uphold them, and defend them against the Power of
the Lord, and his Word which is gone forth against them, then shall you not
prosper, but fall with them; and if you do enterprise any work in that spirit
that does oppose the Spirit of Christ Jesus in his people, you can never have
good success, but the Lord will confound you before your Enemies.

And so now that you may all come into the New Covenant, to be taught of the
Lord, and to be far from all Oppression, this is the thing that you are all to
wait for; and to know the Power of the Lord, and to go on in that against
Unrighteous Men, and Unrighteous Laws, which are set up in the Nations, that
they may be destroyed, and brought under; and yet though such a Victory would
be honorable unto you, yet there is a Victory more Honorable, to wit, The
Victory over Sin, and Death, and the Devil in your selves, and that you are to
mind; and there is a Kingdom which is not of this World, which cannot be
obtained by an Outward Sword, and this Kingdom are you to wait for, that you
may know it, and feel it in your own particulars: and this is the Doctrine of
the Gospel of Peace unto you, and the Glad-tidings held forth unto all of you;
come into the Power of the Lord, and mind it, that you may be lead by it, and
then may you be fit Instruments for the Lord to work by: And take heed how you
oppose those whom the Lord has sent, and is sending abroad in the Nations, to
proclaim the Mighty Day of the Lord; they are no Enemies to you, nor to any
man's Person, and therefore be tender over them; for they go about the Lord's
Work; of this I warn you all in the Presence of the Lord. And so you dwelling
in the Power of the Lord, there is nothing shall destroy you, nor confound you,
but you shall have Victory over all your Enemies within you, and without you,
and the Lord will make you a Dread and a Fear to the Nations. And so this is a
Warning unto you all, both Officers and Soldiers, that you may mind what the
Work of the Lord God is in the Nations: Your Work has been, and may be
honorable in its Day and Season; but he has a Work more honorable to work
after you; that is, To destroy the Kingdom of the Devil, and the ground of
Wars: And your Victory has been of the Lord; but there is a more honorable
Victory to be waited for, even the Victory over Sin: and so we are the Friends
of the Creation, that do preach this Victory, and this Kingdom, and Peace,
which is Endless and Everlasting, and which many are come into, And as for the
many and diverse sorts of Worship, which are come up since the days of the
Apostles, and are of the Whore, and not of the true Church; they are all to be
thrown down, and the Worship that is in Spirit and Truth to be set up by the
Lord, and he is gathering people into that Worship; but if you be out of the
Fear of God, in the Rudeness and Wickedness of the World, and seek your selves,
and not the Freedom of the Nations only; then the Lord will lay you aside as a
broken Pot-sheard, and raise up unto himself a People, that shall fulfill his
work, and do it; for he has much Work to do in the Nations; for he is
gathering his Elect Seed, and changing the Kingdoms of the World, and making
them become the Kingdoms of Christ: and so be low in your own eyes, and do not
seek your selves, but seek one another Good, and seek the Glory of the Lord,
and the Freedom of the Oppressed; and in that you will be blessed, and prosper,
till you have set up your Standard at the Gates of Rome.

I am a Lover of all your souls, and a Sufferer in Patience under the Cruelties
of men, E. B.

And some small Discourse we had with our English Priests, that supply the
Place of Chaplins to the Army; and in particular one of them, which had spoken
something behind our backs against us; and we proffered to have some discourse
with him, but he refused it (only to evade the matter at that present) he bid
us state some of our Principles in writing, and he would answer them in dispute
in some public place: and being he was not willing to engage to dispute
otherwise, we were free to write this following Paper; but we had no answer in
agreement to dispute with us, but shifted the thing from himself, by telling
us, The Governor was (...) willing. But this was not the same Priest before
mentioned, that we had discourse with at our first coming into the Town.

Friend,
FOr the manifestation of Truth, and that the perfect difference between thee,
and us, may be known; and who are in the Truth, and who in the Error; and that
Truth from Error may be clearly discerned: therefore according to thy own
Proposals, and expressed Desires thereof before many, we do here assert some
Particulars of that Truth which we have rece^^ed from God, and do hold forth
and maintain in the World, in opposition to thee, or any other, that shall
gainsay them, viz.

1. That Christ has lightened all men with a Light, sufficient in it self to
bring them to Salvation, if they follow it. 2. That God has given Christ to be
the Savior of all men. 3. That none are justified by Christ and his
Righteousness without them, but as they have received Christ and his
Righteousness, and witness them revealed in themselves. 4. That the Saints of
God may be perfectly freed from Sin in this life, so as no more to commit it.
5. That the National Ministers and Churches, not only of Papists, but of the
Protest^^ts also (as they now stand) are not the true Ministers and Churches of
Christ. 6. That the Scriptures are a true Declaration, given forth from the
Spirit of God, by holy Men of God, moved by it to write them; and are
profitable; but are not the Foundation, nor the most perfect Rule of Faith and
Life to the Saints.
These things we are freely willing and desirous to discourse upon, with thy
self, and any others, that shall join with thee, in the presence of sober and
wise men, who may judge between us, in any public Place, that may be procured
by thee, according to thy Engagements in this Particular; provided it may be in
the Spirit of Meekness and Moderation, and that all fair and sober Dealing may
be amongst us, and the Fear of God. And to this we expect thy speedy Answer;
concerning Time and Place.

Edward Buroughs, Samuel Fisher.



The Propositions were writ as short as could be, for to stop all Advantages
against us, that right be taken by our Adversary, in case he had met us, and
agreed to dispute; but upon enlargement in Discourse we might have laid open
the truth of every on of these Particulars at large, to the satisfaction of
sober Minds, that might have been doubtful hereof, and s^ewed by the Scriptures
the truth of all of them.

AN Epistle to Friends IN LONDON.
Dearly beloved Friends and Brethren,
WHom the Lord has called with his Heavenly Call, and made you Eyewitnesses,
and Feeling-Witnesses of his Power, and of his Truth, my dear Love in the Lord
falutes you all, for the Lord's sake, without respect of Persons; and I Greet
you with a holy Kiss.

Dearly Beloved, I bare you witness, That some of you have loved the Lord above
all things, and for his Truth the Glory of this World, with its Vanities, have
been denied by you; and now I wish in the Lord, the abounding and enlarging of
the Love and Life of God in you, and amongst you all.

And my Dear Friends, In that the Lord has blessed you in the Knowledge of the
Truth, and of his Ways, and called you to serve him, and to live unto him, and
not unto your selves; now this remains unto you all to be done by you, even
that you be Faithful and Careful in the Great Work of the Lord, which he is
doing amongst you, and in the World at this day: And first of all, See that
every one of you stand in God's Counsel, and that ye do his Will in all things,
as the Lord makes it manifest to you; and watch over your own Hearts, and keep
your selves clear from the Evil of this World. I am moved of the Lord to write
to you in particular, and to warn you in his Name, who has begotten you to
himself, That you be mighty careful and circumspect in all your ways, and that
you walk as Patterns and Examples to all the tender Babes of God in the Flock;
and that by your wise Conversation, and Faithfulness in the Truth, the Weak may
be strengthened, and the Hungry may be filled, and they that are of the World,
who thirst for the Lord, may be won into the Truth. My God knows, and ye know
also, the Care and Burdens which I have had in that Place; and seeing I am thus
ordered of the Lord at this present, I do beseech you all, for the Truth's
sake, That you, unto whom God has given Grace, and Strength, and Wisdom, and
Knowledge, that you take the Care upon you to watch with the Flock, and over
them that are Weak.

And I say again, You must be mighty careful in the Lord, that you may walk in
all things to his Glory; so as there be no turnings back from the Truth by any,
nor no occasion given to the Heathen to Reproach Truth; therefore not any
Service of your own must you equal with the Lord's Service: But at all times be
armed with the Lords Armor, to do and to suffer for the Truth.

And this seems Good unto me in the Fear of the Lord, That you in particular do
keep a Meeting among your selves, once in Three Weeks, or a Months time, as ye
see meet; that in the Counsel of God you may consider of all things in relation
to the Truth; and that you may advise one with another in the Fear of the Lord,
of things amongst you; that in good Order all things may be kept: And if any
Disorderly Persons, who profess the Truth, be known to any of you, let it be
presented to all; and Two or Three of you, as you are moved, may in the Fear of
the Lord, and in his Wisdom, reprove such Persons and Things, by which in the
least Truth is Dishonored; and if such resist Reproof, then account them as
out of the Body, and the Life can have no Fellowship with such; but first
reprove Offenses and Failings in Secret, and in much Wisdom also, lest you
destroy the Righteous with the Wicked. And I lay it upon you, that you judge
nothing but what is for Judgment; and when any thing comes before you, to be
tried, or judged of, be tender of the Simplicity; and take heed of Rash
Judgment, and Forward Words; be mighty considerate in the Fear of God, that
nothing be judged wholly, in which there is any thing of God; but dwell in that
which does discern, and distinguish, and separate the Precious from the Vile,
that you may divide Judgment a right in all Causes; and the Pure may be
Strengthened, and the Deceit Confounded: For such a thing may be, and come to
pass, which cannot wholly be Justified, nor altogether Condemned; and in such
things, in Friends, you had need be mighty careful, that the Right Way may be
spared, and the Wicked cut off.

And if any of you be moved to Minister among the Flock, let it be done in the
Fear of God, and in his Wisdom, to the refreshing of the Weak, and to the
building up the Body; and if you do it in the Power of God, then you will be
answered by the Witness of his Spirit in every one; and you, and they will feel
an Increase from God.

And if any Minister amongst you, with which the Spirit of the Lord has not.
Fellowship, but is an Offense to the Just, bare such in Patience for a season,
and show them in Meekness and Love their Fault, that they may be restoed,
rather then cast out. And if any amongst you be over-taken with a Fault, and
found faulty in the sight of the Lord in any Particular; reprove, and convert,
and instruct such privately in Meekness; and if they rebel and resist, then
reprove them, and let them be judged openly: And charge all, that in all things
they keep to their own Measures of Christ, and that they act nothing, nor speak
nothing without the Leading of his Spirit; and that will bind under deceitful
spirits. And as for those Rebellious, and Treacherous, and Deceitful Lying
spirits amongst you, which may trouble you, as they have formerly done, to the
great Dishonor of the Lord; I wish they were cut off, as for the Truth's sake,
yet I exhort you to bear them with Patience, and not to heed them, nor be
troubled at them; but account of them as Disorderly, and out of the Body: and
fre^ not in your selves, because of the Wicked; such things be but for a time,
but Truth is forever, and they that walk therein, their Fruits shall never
wither.

And let Friends keep their private Meetings on the First-days with Diligence,
and none to run abroad without Foar, but as they are moved of the Lord, and
then there will be a Service in it for the Lord: and as any of you are moved,
be faithful to exhort Friends hereunto; and with a single Eye be watchful, that
all things in good Order may be kept amongst you, that the Name of the Lord may
be a Renown, and his Truth kept without Blemish, and your Authority in the
Truth may be known a Terror upon the Wicked.

My dear Friends, whom I judge to be Honest and Faithful, this was I moved to
write to you, as the dear Remembrance of my dear Love; and I do from the Lord
commit it to you, to fulfill the will of God in these things; and the Lord bless
you all with Wisdom and Counsel, and with Power and Strength; and the Lord give
you Authority, that you may reign with all them that come amongst you in the
Name of the Lord, and over all them that come in their own name: The Lord bless
you with a perfect Understanding in these things; and my Spirit, even the
Spirit of the Father, be upon you all, to teach you perfectly in all things: My
Love and Life is amongst you; who desires nothing more then the Prosperity of
the Lord's Truth amongst you. The Grace of God be with you all, Amen.

This is to be read amongst you, when you are met together whom the Lord has
set to order things in his Wisdom, and this is to all the Faithful amongst you.
Kingstone, 1659. E. B.

To the Churches in New England, Barbados, and other Islands.
TO the Seed of God, and to all that are called of him, and unto all you that
are hungering and thirsting after the Lord in Truth and Righteousness, in
New England, Barbados, Mevis, and the rest of the Islands, where the Lord has
a People to gather; the Father's Love through me does slaute you all, whose
Faces are set toward Sion; abundantly desiring for you, in the Spirit of the
Father, that Grace, Mercy and Truth from God may richly abound amongst you, and
in all your Hearts, that at his coming, who has given to every one of you a
Measure of his Treasure, he may receive his own from you with increase, that
you also may enter into the Reward, which is Eternal Life unto all that are
called, and are found faithful.

Wherefore arise, and awake, all ye that have been scattered and strayed from
the Lord; and come forth thou oppressed Seed of Israel, out of the Darkness,
and Bondage and Oppression, with which thou have been loaded for many Ages,
whilst a long Night of Darkness and Blindness has been over thee: I say,
Awake, and come forth; for now thy Light is risen, and the Glory of the Father
shall rest upon thee, and thy Bonds shall be broken, and thy Oppression shall
cease; for thy King shall Reign in Righteousness over all his Enemies, and they
shall become his Footstool, and his Dominion shall be enlarged to the utmost
parts of the Earth.

Dearly Beloved, be assured of this, That the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is
doing great things; his Dayspring from on High has visited us, and his Light
has shined into our Tabernacle; and his Arm has taken hold of Strength, to
Redeem the Oppressed People; and he has reached forth to us from his holy
Habitation, out of his Everlasting Loving Kindness, and has caused us to reach
forth to others from his own Life revealed in us, that they may know what God
has done for his People, and may also receive of the same Salvation, and may
taste, handle and feel of the Life which is manifest, of which we are
Witnesses; and the Lord has spoken, who can but declare? and he has lifted up
his Standard to gather the Nations, that he may search and seek out his Sheep;
and this I declare unto you, and withal, am willing to discover and make
manifest, the Way and Means whereby, the Lord does bring ^^^vation to his
People; and love constrains me knowing the Lord has a Seed amongst you, unto
which my Testimony will be acceptable: wherefore all people turn ye, turn ye;
for the Lord calls unto you, harken unto his Testimony which speaks in you,
even the Light of Christ Jesus, with which every one of (...) are enlightened;
and search your Hearts, and feel what the Lord witnesses unto you, and what
his Testimony in you gives evidence of; for who walks in Pride, in Wickedness,
in Vanity, and in the Pleasures of the World, and acts against God's Witness
in their Consciences, such are in a State to be condemned of the Lord; because
they act that, and speak that which is reproved with the Light, showing that
they are in a State unreconciled to God, their Works showing them to be evil
Trees that cumber the Ground, who are to be hewn down, and cast into the Fire:
and therefore be not deceived in your selves, neither let any man deceive you
with a Profession, or Conceit of a Justification by Christ, while yet Iniquity
and Transgression, and the Evil of the World are lived in, and not wholly
denied; for to the Wicked there is no Peace from God: but the Wicked are
condemned by him, and the Light in their own Consciences is witness against
them.

Therefore all come to the Light, which Christ has lightened you withal, which
will manifest unto you your own Condition, and whether it be justified, or
condemned of God; and believe not against the Light, nor hope not against God's
Witness; for they that do so, their Faith and Hope is vain; but what the Light
testifies in you, that believe. And all you that may find your selves sinners,
laden with Iniquity, and that are the Servants of Sin, and have no power over
Temptations, believe in that Light which gives you to see this, and wait till
the Power of God be made manifest in you to cleanse your Hearts, and to judge
out all Unrighteousness; for Christ has not taken away your Sins, while you
daily bring them forth into the World by Action: but whose sins he has taken
away, them he has washed and cleansed from their sins, and given them power to
resist and overcome all Temptations: wherefore wait upon the Lord all ye that
are afflicted because of your sins, the Day of a great Deliverance is
approaching; and mind the Light which lets you see Sin, that is the Gift of
God's Love unto you, which will draw you from the love of the World, and
crucify your Affections and Desires which go after it; and if you mind the
Light of Christ in you, it will judge and condemn every Motion that arises in
the Heart toward Evil, and the Temptation being judged, you will not fall into
Sin, but will be preserved from Sin; and that which does preserve you from the
committing of that Sin, unto which you are tempted, does blot out and forgive
all the Sins that ever you have acted; and that will witness, Reconciliation and
Peace with God unto you, as you come to be changed and renewed in your Hearts
and Minds, to be created in the second Adam, his Image to bear, and to follow
his Spirit: And Friends, search your Hearts, and let the Lord search you, and
judge you; for him must you know to sit as a Refiners Fire, to purify your
Hearts, that you may be fit Temples for him to dwell with, who dwells with
Holiness, and the Unclean are cast out from his Presence; and he is come
amongst you, to search you, and try you, and to discover his Foundation, and
the Wise in their own eyes shall stumble and fall, and be broken; and its the
Poor in spirit, and Upright in heart, whom the Lord has chosen, and with such
will he dwell: and now all must come to feel that which breaks down the high
nature, which ruled above the Seed of God; the Ax must be laid to the Root of
the cursed Tree, which has brought forth no Fruit to God, but cumbered the
Ground; and that Tr^e must be cut up in every one of you, and cast into the
Fire, that the Plant of God's Renown may spring forth, and bring forth Fruit:
Now every one must come to know the two Seeds, in which the Election and
Reprobation stands, the one with all its Fruit must be ^ast out, and Judgment
from the Lord must pass upon it; for that Seed has long been fruitful in the
World, and flourished in the Earth, its Fr^^^ has been according to the Flesh,
which the Lord is now risen to blast with a Curse; and all your earthly glory
must wither, and all your joy and peace that stands in this Creation must pass
away, and all your own wisdom must be confounded; for that receives not the
Things of God, but to it they are foolish, ness, it is only the Simple and Poor
in Spirit that are taught of God, and it is with the Meek and Humble that he
dwells; but who are high in their Minds, and exalted above the Fear of God, who
follow their own ways and thoughts, such have no part in him, but are cast out
into Darkness, and Darkness covers them from the Light and Knowledge of the
Lord God; they know not him to dwell in them, nor to lead them, nor to guide
them, neither does his Spirit lead such into all Truth: but they rebel against
the Motions of the Spirit of God, which checks them, and reproves them for
their evil Deeds; but they hate the Light, and love Darkness, and bring forth
the Fruits of Darkness, which the Light reproves for: but because they are
disobedient to it, they cannot receive Power over their sins, but Sin has
power over them; and in this State there is no Peace, nor Justification to
them, but Trouble and Condemnation from God.

Wherefore all ye People that fear God, and love his Ways, be obedient to the
Light, which Christ has lightened you withal, which calls you out of
Transgression, and reproves you when you act against it; and this is the
Measure of the Spirit of God, which is sent into the World to gather people to
God, from whence it comes; this leads to Christ, and will bring you to receive
him to dwell in you, and to cleanse you from all Unrighteousness; and as you
come to be made clean by the Word of God, which is Quick and Powerful, in all
that believe, which Word you must feel to cleanse and purify you in your
selves, and to make you clean from all that which offends the Life of God; and
then you will receive the Testimony of Justification, as you come to be
quickened by God, by the quickening Spirit, by which every one must be
quickened from Death (which has reigned over all) to Life, that it may reign
in you; and till this be known, all Profession of the Scriptares avails nothing
toward Life Eternal: therefore feel in your selves Christ Jesus, the
Quickening Spirits, that you may be made alive to God again. And all you that
are convinced with the Light, be faithful therein through all Trials and
Sufferings which are to come upon you inwardly or outwardly; for great Trials
and Sufferings without will come, and great Judgments, and Afflictions within
will approach; but through all these things be faithful, and in them all be
patient to the End, that you may obtain Life Eternal, which is the Reward of
all the Faithful.

And dwell in the daily Cross of Christ, in which the Power of God will be
witnessed amongst you, which will throw down that which has ruled above the
Seed of God, that the Seed of God may come forth, in which the Election stands,
which receives the Promise of God: but Friends, there must be a long and
patient waiting under the Hand of the Lord, and of the Operation of his Spirit,
before you come to witness the Election; you must be faithful to that which
calls you, and take up the Cross to your own Wills, Lusts, and Desires, and
Affections which arise out of the earthly Part; for that which is of the Flesh
must be crucified, as that which is of the Spirit comes to live; for it is that
which is born of the Spirit in you, which is Heir of God's Kingdom, and which
must Inherit Eternal Life: And so wait upon the Lord, every one of you, that
his Fear may be in your Hearts, and his Spirit in your inward Parts, to lead
you, and to guide you in all his Ways: And meet together to hear what the Lord
says in you, Hearken to his Voice, that your Souls may live; It is the Voice
of God heard in the Creature, which raises the Soul from Death: And though you
^ear no word from Man, yet his Voice may be heard in you, if your Ear be turned
to the Light, with it your Hearts will be searched, and your Ways tried, and
all your Words and Works approved, or reproved and ^ere is your Teacher, or
your Condemner: and this was I moved in tender (...) to the Seed of God, to
write unto you; Grace and Peace from God be ^^ongst you all, that fear him,
Amen.

A Friend to the Seed of God in you, E. B.

To all Friends in LONDON, etc.
TO all the Flock of God in London, even to all you that are of a clean Heart,
whose Minds are stayed upon God, even to all that are Faithful and Sincere in
the Sight of the Lord; with my very Heart I wish Grace, and Peace, and Mercy
from the God and Father of our Life, unto you all th^^ are such, without
respect of Persons; and such, that are so, I love with a perfect Love, and am
united to you in the Bonds of the Gospel, and perfectly present with you in
Spirit; and who are such among you, that truly fear the Lord, and walk in his
Way, I cannot forget, nor be separated from, ^^^^her can I be of such
forgotten; for are we not written in one another hearts, yea, I daily read
such in the Book of Life, and of such may I daily be read, who know and have
felt my Labors, and Care, and Travels amongst you, which have been more then a
little, my God knows, and ye are my Witness^^; for many times the Lord has
made me as a Wall of Defense betwixt you and many Enemies; and I have not
spared my own Life to serve you, but have given out plentifully of the Lord's
Treasure, that you might be made rich; and I have given out from my Life of the
Lord's Substance, that you might be fed and nourished; and I have kept nothing
back of the whole Counsel of God, which was needful for you to know; and for
all this, the Lord is unto me at this day a sufficient Reward: and of you I
desire nothing to my self, but do sincerely desire of the Father for you all,
That Love, and Faith, and Purity, and all the Works of the Spirit may
plentifully abound in you all, that (...) Father may be glorified through your
bringing forth much Fruit. Wherefore my dear and beloved Friends, Look unto the
Lord, who has begotten you to himself; let his Fear be before your Eyes, and
his Judgments in your Hearts; Oh! keep near the Lord at all times; for its he
that preserves his People, its he that leads them and goes before them, its he
that feeds them, and refreshes them at all times; for its be alone, and there
is not another, that gives you Peace and Strength, Wisdom and Knowledge, and
all good things; he is ^ot streightened to any of his, that sincerely wait upon
him; he is the Portion of his People, and the Inhaeritance of their Souls: and
he causes all them (...) trust in him to lie down in Safety, and none can make
them afraid. Therefore, oh my Friends! I say again and again, Love the Lord,
and his Way; and be Faithful in the Truth unto the End; love not your Life, nor
^^y other thing, for his Service sake; but give up all things of this World,
that you may receive all in the Lord: be watchful against all your Enemies,
that you be not overcome of the Devil, but resist him in all his Ap^, that you
may not be defiled, nor lose your Peace with the Lord, (...) is to me, and I
hope to you of greater price then all other things whatsoever: and this I have
said among you in Faithfulness, and at this present do charge yo^ all, To dwell
in Love and Unity one with another, and to ^ear one with another, and to walk
in Wisdom one toward another, and to be Examples of Righteousness one before
another, that it may be known that God is amongst you of a Truth; and he is my
Witness, nothing without me can more add to my Joy, then to know of your
Welfare in the Lord, and of your Stedfastness in the Faith of Christ Jesus; and
for this my Heart wishes, as much as for any other thing besides: And though I
be outwardly separated from you, according to my Father's Will, who gave his
Enemies power over my outward man, to cast it into Bonds for a moment, yet am I
present in Spirit amongst you, and my Love and Life salutes you all in the Fear
of the Lord; and though the outward man may suffer, yet am I in perfect
freedom, and in perfect Peace, and in every respect perfectly well in the Lord,
who is my Strength, my Armor and my Crown; and in his Authority I yet once
more beseech you all, even for the Lord's sake, That ye take heed to the true
Light, Christ Jesus, who lights every one of you, which Light leads to
Christ, who saves and redeemeth from Sin and Death, and from all the Ways and
Works thereof; and this ye know, who are God's Witnesses of his Love and tender
Mercies, and of the Faithfulness of his Servant.

Moreover, my dear Friends, All disorderly Spirits, who are out of the pure
Fear and Wisdom of God, my Life does judge, and with the Power such I do deny,
who are not Simply in the Power of God; and them that seek themselves in any
thing amongst you, my God shall judge; and who are rash in Judgment, and
forward to utter words, and bring forth Fruit, and not in due season, such are
a Burden to the Lord's Soul: Therefore take heed, I charge you all, to the
guiding and moving of the pure Spirit of God alone; for that will stand, and
its Fruits will never wither; and whatsoever is otherwise brought forth among
you, the Lord will confound, and it shall not profit the people.

This is to be read amongst you, in the Fear of the Lord. E. B.

To Friends in Barbados, Virginia, and New England, etc.
TO the Seed of God, and to all that are begotten of him by the Immortal Word,
in Barbados, Virginia, New England, and that ways, even to all that have felt
and tasted of the Word of Life; Grace, Mercy and Truth be multiplied amongst
you.

Dear Friends, dwell in the Truth, and walk in it, that ye may be a sweet
Savor unto God, and may have Unity with him, and one with another, in his Life
and Spirit; and wait, that you may have Victory over the World, and the Spirit
of it in you, which has captivated your minds in the Lu^ts of this Creation,
and which has led you in By-pathes of Iniquity, while you were Strangers unto
God, and without his Knowledge: But now having received Grace and Mercy from
God, and his Word has entered into your hearts, whereby you are begotten into
the Hope of Eternal Life, and are changed, now the Lord requires of you, to be
Faithful in his Work, and Valiant for his Truth, that you may obtain the
Promise, and be made free from Sin, and become the Servants of Righteousness;
and feel the Word and Power of God in your Hearts, which will crucify you
daily to the World, and make you alive unto God, that he may live in you, and
walk in you, and work all your Works for you; and this is the Everlasting
Covenant, where God works in the Creature both to will and to do, and man lives
not, but Christ lives in him, and speaks in him; and this you must wait for, to
be Witnesses of in your own Consciences: For what is the Profession of God with
the Lips, and the Profession of the Scriptures, while men do not walk by the
Spirit a^ gave forth the Scriptures, and enjoy God in their Hearts? so you must
all wait to be Possessors of the Substance, Christ, the First and the Last, the
Beginning and Ending, him must you feel in you to destroy the Devil, and his
works, and to change you into the divine Nature, which is like unto God; and
this is Salvation, God with us, destroying the Enmity, and reconciling man unto
himself, by overcoming Sin and Transgression; and your hearts must be cleansed
by the Word of God, and that which is contrary purged out; and this is the New
Covenant, where the Heart is circumcised, and the Body of sin put off, and the
Creature freed from the burden of Iniquity; and then there is clearness and
freeness, where sin is remitted and washed away, and no burden lying upon the
Conscience, but the Heir of God born, the Redeemer, which makes free from the
Devil and Sin; and they are the Sons of God, who are thus made free, whose Sins
are remitted and Iniquity covered, and the Life rules, and reigns, and has
overcome Death, and Death is swallowed up of Life; and this is the Promise of
God, which must be fulfilled in you that ye may possess the Treasure of God in
your Hearts, and be Feeling-Witnesses of Immortality; your Hands must handle
the Word, and you must taste, and feel and see the Word of Life within you; and
you must find the Pearl: and your own Lamps must have Oil in them; for people
have long been running without, after men, Lo here, and Lo there, and have
been applying the Promises in the wrong nature; but now people must turn to the
Light of Christ within them; for Christ is the true Light, that lights every
man that comes into the World; and this Light must men follow, and then they
shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; and men must walk
in the Light, and then the Blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; and men must
believe in the Light, and then they shall be the Children of the Light, and
then Light shall shine out of Darkness; and the Light that shines in their
hearts, shall give them the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. So Friends, love the Light, and walk in the Light; for it
is the Light within that lets men see whether their Deeds are wrought in God,
or contrary to him; the Light within will let you see of what nature your Works
are, whether of the corrupt nature, or of the Divine Nature; for all men's Works
are of the one of these: and all the Works that spring from the corrupt nature,
are but Abomination unto God, though they appear never so Righteous; and that
Righteousness which is of Man, cannot be justified before the Lord, but man
must be a Partaker of God's Righteousness, of an uncreated Righteousness, and
that will cover all his Infirmities, and in that only can man be presented
Righteous unto God: So Friends, Wait to be Witnesses of this Righteousness,
that you may be clothed with it, and may be stripped off all your own, which
is but as filthy Rags, and will not hide man's Nakedness; but his Righteousness
and his Sin must be condemned together, and God must be known to work to will,
and to do in the Creature; and this is God's Righteousness, for which you must
all wait, that you may be Heirs of it, and Possessors of it unto your Eternal
Peace: and live in the Fear of the Lord, and be not immoderate nor excessive in
any thing, nor let your hearts be drawn away with the Creatures; for then you
commit Idolatry, and are overcome of this World, and you want the Authority of
God, and are in Bondage unto the Creatures, and they defile you, and burden you
in that state, while your Minds are captivated with them. So Friends, Mind
God's Wisdom amongst you, that it may lead you in all things: and live in Love
and Unity one with another, and let no Strife be amongst you, nor Contention,
for that will destroy you, and eat out true Love, and your Hearts will be
hardened; but bear one with another, and be in Patience and Long-suffering one
toward another, and then the Presence of the Lord will fill your Hearts with
Satisfaction, and you will be comforted in God, and one in another, if Love and
Unity be amongst you in the Spirit: And meet together in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, and mind the Lord's Presence amongst you; mind not words, but mind
the Presence of the Lord, and feel his Power in your hearts, and the words that
come from the Power will refresh the Seed of God; but if any speak words out of
the Power, the Seed of God will be burdened, and will judge such words: So
every one feed upon the Bread of Life, that comes from God, and feel the Water
of Life springing up in your Hearts, that you may grow unto God as Plants of
Righteousness, and may make your Calling and Election sure: So dwell in the
Light, and take up the daily Cross of Christ, and walk not in the Flesh, but in
the Spirit, and so shall the Blessings of the Lord be upon you.

My dear Love, even the same Love wherewith I am loved of my Father, does
salute you all; and the Seed of God in you, that I know, and to that am I
known, who am a Brother and Companion unto all the Faithful and Upright,

Edw. Buroughs.
Let this be coppied over, and sent abroad, and read in all your Meetings.



Good Counsel AND ADVICE Rejected by Disobedient Men: And the Days of Oliver
Cromwell's Visitation passed over; And also, Of Richard Cromwell, his Son; late
Protectors of these Nations: And the many Precious Warnings neglected by them,
and set (...) naught, which from time to time were given unto them, as declared
in these following Letters; whereby all may see the Kindness of the Lord
toward them, by his Faithful Invitations to them, and their own Apostasy and
Carelessness; who rejected Warning till the Time and Day of their Visitation is
shut up with the Vail of Darkness and Reproach, which lies over them, and their
precious Day of Love is spent, and cannot be re-called.
To the READER.
FRiend, Out of the same Love from whence these were written, do I put them to
public view; and it was not without much Doubtings and Questioning in my own
spirit; (...) at last; having found perfect Freedom and Strength from the Lord,
kn^ that I am (...) and fr^^ altogether of other Ends, saving then for the
Hono^^ of the Truth; and that all may see, that the D^^nfalls of these ^en were
not before sufficient Warnings, which makes the Lord free, (...) his Servant
free, from what is co^^ to pass upon them; and even their Fall lies upon their
own heads, that despised the Lords Warnings, and would none of his Counsel; but
suffered the Innocent to be oppressed under their Power, and relieved not the
Heritage of the Lord from her Cruel Enemies, though they had Power to do it;
but (...) their own glory, and how to be established in greatness in the Earth,
till that ^he Lord (...) cast them ^ut, and made them as a Reproach: And these
things that have come to pass (...) them, may be as Warnings to all other
Rulers that do succeed them; and they may (...) that the Lord is (...), and his
Judgments Righteous; and whosoever shall follow their (...) (...) be Oppress^^s
of the Lord's Heritage, as they were, the Lord shall extend his Judgments (...)
them also, and their Destruction shall come, even like as upon th^se before
them. Therefore let all the Earth be warned.

I am a Lover of Sion.
For the hands of the Protector.
FRIEND,
MAny W^rnings have thou had from the Mouth of the Lord; his Love has been
toward thee, and the glorious Day of his Visitation has shined over thy head,
wherein he has called unto thee to hear and obey his Voice, and would have
instructed thee in the Way that thou should walk, that thy Soul might live
forever in Peace and Rest, when this World is passed away; and that in this
present World he might have made thee a Blessing to thy self, and Posterity,
and People, and a Praise in thy Dominions, and unto Ages after t^ee, if thou
had hearkened and obeyed his Voice, and chosen his Way and Counsel, and not
thine own; and then would ^e have made thine Enemies to have bowed under thee,
and the Force of their Policy and Arm should never have prevailed against thee;
and thou shall be delivered from the Will of all that hate thee, if thou yet
wilt hearken unto him, and receive his Instruction, and set the heart to seek
his Honor ^ore then thi^e own, and wilt let his Counsel be thy Guide and
Ruler, and not v^in man, which must be brought to naught; even now, before the
Day of thy Visitation be spent, never more to be re-called, and the time come
when God will cease to strive with thee, and will not call unto thee, but will
leave thee to thy own heart's false Judgment, and the Counsels of Treacherous
Men.

And Friend, I, as one that has obtained Mercy from the Lord, unto w^om his
Word is committed, being moved of him, do hereby in his Presence yet once more
warn thee, That thou fear before him, and diligently hearken to him, and seek
him with all thy heart, that thou may know his Will and C^^^sel concerning
thee, and may do it, and ^^nd Favor in his Sight, and live; and now is the
Day that his Hand is stretched forth unto thee, to make thee a Blessing, or to
leave thee a Curse forever: and the Days of thy Visitation are near an end,
when God will no more call unto thee, nor hear thee, (...) (...) the the Day of
thy Trouble thou callst to him, neither will answer theeby Vision, nor Dream,
nor Prophets; but will leave thee to the counsels of Tr^us men, who will seek
after thy Life, and wait for thy Overthrow, and (...) for Evil against thee,
that they may glory in thy Desolation; and such th^^^ are, of whom thou have
need to beware: and if thou rejectest the Counsel of the Lord and followest the
Desires of thine own Heart, and the Wills of men, and wilt not have the Light
of the World, Christ Jesus, only to rule thee, and to teach thee, which
condemns all Evil; then shall Evil surely fall upon thee, if thou love not
the Light in thee, which condemns it; and the Judg^^^ts of God, nor the Day of
his last Visitation with Vengeance thou may not escape. Therefore consider,
and mark my words, and let this Counsel be acceptable unto thee, th^^ thy days
may be many, and Blessed upon Earth; and ^^^st consider, and let it move upon
thee to Meekness, to Humbleness, and to fear before the Lord; assuredly
knowing, that it is he that changes times and things; and that brings down
and sets up whomsoever he will; and how that thou wast raised from a low
estate, and set over all thine Enemies; and thy (...) was exalted above them
all, and he gave thee the Necks of Princes to (...) (...), and more Honorable,
and their Dominions to in^^rit; and thou wast (...) a Ruler in much Dominion,
and had Favor in his Sight, and in the ^ight of many people, who wished well
to thee for a Blessing: many Victories honor^^^^ and remarkable were given unto
thee, over them who had exalted themselves against God; and this thou know,
That not by Might, nor by Multitude, (...) by the Arm of the Lord were they
subdued and made a P^ey unto thee, and their Treasures a Spoil unto thy Hands;
and so it was that thou might have glorified him forever, and exalted him in
the great Congregation, and gone on in Faithfulness unto the End: and in that
day, when thou wast raised up, when the Fear of the Lord was before thy face,
and thy Heart was toward him, and thou wast but little in thy own eyes, then
was it well with thee, and the Lord blessed thee, and made thee honorable, and
his People had love toward thee, and desire for thee, that thou might have
been as a Helper to the Poor, and a Father to the Faithful, and a Preserver of
the Upright from Unreasonable Men, and an Easer of the Oppressed, and a Taker
away of every Oppressive Bond: and it was not once thought concerning thee,
that the hands of the Ungodly would have been strengthened against the
Righteous under thee; or that such grievous and cruel Burdens and Oppressions
would ever have been laid upon the Just, and acted against them in thy Name,
and under thy Dominion, as unrighteously have come to pass in these three
years, as a large Testimony might be given; and this thy suffering of such
things is thy Transgression, and thou have not requited the Lord well for his
Goodness unto thee; nor fulfilled his Will in suffering that to be done under
thee, and in thy Name, which the Lord raised thee against to break down, had
thou been faithful to the end.

Again consider, and let it move on thy Heart not to exalt thy self, nor to be
high minded, but to fear continually; knowing that thou stand not by thy
self, but by another, and that he is able to abase thee, and give thee into the
will of thy Enemies, whenever he will; and how the Lord has preserved thee
sometimes wonderfully, and does unto this day, from the murderous Plots, and
crafty Policy of evil Men, who seek thy evil, and would rejoice in thy fall,
and in the Desolation of thy Family and Countries, how have they, and do they
lay Snares for thy Feet, that thou may be cut off from amongst men, and dye
unhappily, and be accounted Accursed; and yet to this day he has preserved
thee and been near thee to keep thee, though thou have hardly known it; and the
Lord's end is love to thee in all these things, and yet a little longer to try
thee, and that thou might give him the Glory; O that thy Heart were opened to
see his Hand, that thou may live unto him, and dye in him in Peace: and
beware lest Hardness of Heart possess thee, if thou slight his Love, and so be
shut up in Darkness, and given to the Desires of thine Enemies, and left to the
Counsels of treacherous Men, who may seek to exalt thee by flattery, that they
might the better cast thee down, and destroy thee, and blot out thy Name in
reproach, and make thy Posterity a People miserable; but now O consider, and
let it enter into thy Heart, for thou have not answered the Lord, but been
wanting to him for all this; and have chosen thy own way and glory, rather then
his, and not fulfilled his Counsel in raising thee; for the Bonds of Cruelty
are not loosed by thee, and the Oppressed are not altogether set free; neither
is Oppression taken off from the Back of the Poor; nor the Laws regulated, nor
the liberty of pure Consciences altogether allowed: but these Dominions are
filled with cruel Oppressions, and the Poor groan everywhere under their heavy
Hand of Injustice; the Needy are trodden down under Foot, and the Oppressed cry
for Deliverance, and are ready to faint for true Justice and Judgment; the
Proud exalts himself against the Poor; and the High-minded and Rebellious
contemns the Meek of the Earth; the Horn of the Ungodly is exalted over the
Lord's Heritage, and they that are departed from Iniquity are become a Prey to
Oppressors; and the Cr^^^ hearted deal cruelly with the Innocent in these
Nations; and such whom the Lord has freed in their Consciences from false
Worships and Teachers, and from the Ways of Sin and Death, are made Slaves,
and greedily preyed upon by unjust men through casting into Prisons, and
Dungeons, and unjust Fines, and Illegal Proceedings, and Beatings and Abusings,
and Woundings and Bruisings, hard to be expressed, and large to be declared;
even the Hands of the People over whom thou art set to rule, are full of Blood,
Merciless and Cruel, and neither fe^t God, nor are subject to the just Rule and
Government of Men: and the Mouths of many of thy subservant Rulers, and
Governors, that have their Power from thee, are as the Teeth of young Lions,
and the Upright and H^rmless are devoured, and made a Spoil of by them, through
Policy and Oppression, both in their Persons, and Estates; if I perish I must
speak the Truth; my life is not dear to me for the Truth's sake; many who
should have judged in true Justice and Righteousness the Cause of the Poor,
have been as Briars and Thorns to ensnare and pierce the just Man; and have
perverted Judgment, and ^u^n^d it backward, and Equity has hardly had place
to enter; most of the Prisons this day, in all thy Jurisdictions, have and does
testify the unjust Judgment, and the great Oppressions and Cruelties of some
in Authority, who have used, or rather abused thy Name, and made it a Cloak for
their Hard-heartedness: O my Heart is troubled, and my Bowels pained at the
remembrance of this; how does the Poor cry under the heavy Hand of Oppression,
and the Needy lament for want of true Judgment, and the Oppressed groan for
want of Deliverance? And these things are thought upon by the Lord, though not
considered by thee as they ought to be: and because of this will he arise to
plead the Cause of the Innocent, against him that is too strong for him, and
will dash to pieces his Enemies, and break the Jaws of the Devourers, and the
Righteous shall not always be a Prey to the Teeth of the Ungodly.

O Friend, when will thou consider the Oppression of the Poor, and hearken to
the cry of the Oppressed within thee, and without thee, when shall it enter
into thy Heart, this cause of the unjust Sufferings of the Lord's People, from
which thou can not altogether be excused? for it is acted in thy Name, though
not by thee. O let thy Ear be opened unto the Cries of the Oppressed in the
Prisons, and let the Cause of the Innocent come before thee, and let thy heart
be pierced at the Consideration of these things, which are come to pass in thy
day, contrary to the expectations of many; and see if it be not contrary to thy
own Promises sometimes vowed by thee, let the Light of Christ in thy own
Conscience answer: and some of the multitude of the grievous Oppressions of
which the Land is full, have been laid at thy Door and brought unto thee, but
scarcely found an encrance upon thee; and this aggravates the Crime of of thy
Transgression, in that thou know of these things; and wonderful is it to
consider, that even thou with whom the Power of the Lord has sometimes been,
should now suffer that people, with whom the Power of the Lord is, to be
persecuted, and thy name to be a cloak for it; how many in all parts of this
Nation have been, and are at this day grievous sufferers under cruel bondage
concerning Tithes, that great Abomination and Idol, and cause of heavy
groanings? the bodies of many just men violently surprised, and cast into Goals
and Prisons unjustly, and some illegally; their cruelly suffering the loss of
their Liberties, and the enjoyments of their Families, and honest Assemblies;
and others have their Goods spoiled, and made havoc upon, almost to the ruin
of Families by unreasonable men, through unjust Judgment and cruel dealings of
some in Authority for so much unjustly challenged by the Priest, or
Impropriator, it may be they distress five times so much, to the great shame of
the Government of a Christian Nation; as may appear in a Book called, The Cry
of the Oppressed; and how many are ready even to faint under the hard
Oppression of maintaining Hireling Teachers, and Idol-Temples? many for that
cause being unjust Sufferers in Bodies and Estates, by cruel imprisoment, and
spoiling of Goods: the very cry of this Oppression reaches unto Heaven against
thee, who suffers it, and against the Idol-Shepherds, who are the ground of it,
who make a prey upon Gods Heritage; and the Lord God will be avenged upon them,
and they and their Staff shall utterly perish: woe unto them, and to the
Idol-Worships of which the Land is full, which they uphold, which causes the
hearts of the Righteous to mourn, because of the Seed of God which is in
Captivity under them; again, many are unjust and woeful Sufferers, because they
cannot swear on this or that occasion, though in all causes they speak the
truth, and do obey Christ's Commands, even such are trodden upon by unjust
Fines charged upon them, and imposed Oppressions, the Example of which never
went before, many parts of this Land is witness of this; and this is by the
corruptness of some that bear rule under thee, who rule not for God as they
ought, but turns the Sword of Justice, and does unjustly thereby, and grieves
the Lord, and dishonours thee; Again, some suffer long and tedious
imprisonments, and others cruel Stripes and Abuses, and danger of life many
times from wicked men, for reproving Sin and crying against the Abomination of
the Ti^^^, which the Scriptures also testify against, in Streets, or Temples,
or (...) Places; some having been sent to Prison, taken on the Highway, and no
(...) charged against them; and others committed, being taken out of Peaceable
Meetings, and whipped and sent to Prison without transgression of any Law,
(...) or unjust, wholly through the Rage and Envy of the Devil, and such who
have perverted Judgment and Justice; and some in Prisons have suffered
superaboundantly from the Hands of the cruel Goalers, and their Servants, by
Beatings and Threatenings, and putting Irons on them, and not suffering any of
their Friends to visit them with Necessaries; and some have dyed in the
Prisons, whose Lives were not dear to them, whose Blood will be reckoned on
account against thee, one day; and many more other ways have suffered grievous
things, as Banishments out of Towns, and Whipping, and Stocking, and grievous
unjust Abuses, and none of these for Evil-doing, but for Good, even because
they cannot bow to the Devil, but are redeemed out of the World, and therefore
the World hates them; and some have suffered hard Cruelties, because they could
not respect Persons, and bow with Hat, or Knee; and from these Cruelties can
thou not altogether be excused in the sight of God, being brought forth in thy
Name, and under thy Power; consider Friend, and be awakened to true Judgment,
let the Lord search thy Heart, and lay these things to mind, that thou may be
an Instrument to remove every Burden, and may at last fulfill the Will of
God; are they nothing to thee, that such things should be brought forth under
thee? O, be awakned, be awakened, and now seek the Lord's Glory, and not thine
own, least thou perish before the Lord and Men; nay, if Men would give thee
This was meant, that he should deny to be made King; that was in agitation when
this Letter was written.
Honor, and high Titles, and princely Thrones, take it not; for that which
would exalt and honor thee in the World, would betray thee to the World, and
cast thee down in the sight of the World; and this is God's Word to thee: what!
shall the whole Nation be perjured Men, and thou the cause of it? and will thou
transgress by building again that which thou have destroyed? Then shall the
Lord, and his Light, in every Conscience, bear witness against thee; let it not
be, but deny thy self, and thou will find the Lord honoring thee. Give heed
unto my Words, and understand my Speech, Be not exalted by Man, lest Man betray
thee; the Lord give thee an Understanding in this, and guide thee in his
Counsel; and the rather above all things, let thy Heart be stirred up in thee
for the Lord: For now is he setting up the Dominion of his Son, which never
shall have an End, and thy Dominion must bow under it, and all the Dominions of
the Earth, or else be confounded and broken to Pieces: the Glory of the Lord is
revealing, and thine shall be veiled before it; and the Glory of all Flesh
shall fall: Therefore strive not openly nor secretly against his Way; for it
shall prosper, there is no Enchantment against us, nor any formed Weapon that
can prosper; know thou not that the King of Righteousness might command
thousands of his Saints to avenge him of his Adversaries, and to plead his
Cause against the Rebellious? All Power is in his Hand, yea, and the Authority
and Dominion shall be in the Hands of his Saints, and every one that exalts
himself against them, shall be brought down; not by an outward Sowrd, or might
of Man, but by his outstretched Arm; and all Crowns that are Mortal shall be
trodden down by him whose Crown is Immortal, and never fades away: Therefore be
wise and learned, this is thy day; as thou dealest, or suffer to be done
with the Lord's People, so to thee it shall be done in that day, when their
Government shall out-reach thine, and be set atop of it; as thou hopest for
Mercy from the Lord, when his Kingdom conqueres thee and thine, now deal
favorably and relieve the Oppressed; boast not thy self though the Lord has
used thee in his Hand; but know that when he will he can cast thee, a Rod, out
of his Hand into the Fire; for in his Hand thou art, if thou will honor him,
he will honor thee, otherwise he can, yea and will confound thee and break
thee, and make thee weak as Water before him; his Love through my Heart breaths
unto thee; he would thy happiness, if thou wilfully contemn it not by exalting
thy self, and seeking thine own glory, and hardening thy Heart against the Cry
of the Poor; and this I was moved in bowels of pittiy to lay before thee, who
am thy Friend, not in Flattery, but in an upright Heart, who wishes well unto
thee in the Lord.

A Friend to the Kingdom of Christ, and not of this World, but an Heir of
Immortality with the Son of God, called.

E. B.


The Original of this was given to the Hands of Oliver Cromwell then Protector,
in the third month of the Year, 1657.

For the Hands of Oliver Cromwell called Protector.
FRIEND,
I am moved to write to thee, from the occasion of being with thee yesterday,
and I take liberty from the true love and pity stirred up in my Heart toward
thee, who am thy Friend, and wishes well unto thee in the Lord; even that
Salvation thou may receive, and that thy way may be blessed upon Earth, and
the Fruits of the Knowledge of God might more abound in thee, and the Fruits of
Ignorance less, which does appear, which I wish might be cut off before they
wholly over-grow thee, and remove the Blessing far from thee in this life, and
in the life to come, and bring upon thee Destruction; for the Fruits of all
Unrighteousness brings Death, Sorrow, and Misery, and the Light of Christ in
thee shall answer in all things to the justness of the Judgments of the Lord.
Thou say in effect, that thou would not, or thou desire not our
Persecution, or that we should be persecuted by Cruelty, or unjust
Imprisonment; now consider what the cause is, that what thou desire not to be
done, yet is done, thou having power in thy hand only to prevent what thou
would not have done; is it not thine own unfaithfulness to the Principle of
God in thee, which bears witness against the Persecution of the Innocent? Or
is it that thou may please men, and therefore rather suffer Wickedness to
abound, Injustice and Oppression to be acted against the Poor, making it appear
thou art willing to do the false Teachers of this Nation, and wicked men a
pleasure, then to own the People of God in relieving them, and ^^sing them of
their cruel Burdens and Oppressions laid upon them by unjust men; for a word
of thy mouth, or the show of thy Countenance in dislike of these cruel and
unjust Persecutions, would bind the Hands of many blood-thirsty. Men, and stop
the Mouths of many Devourers: and therefore because of thine own
unfaithfulness does that come to pass which thou desire not. And so I must
needs say, This appears to be evil in thee, to say, In effect thou approvest
not, or thou desire not out Persecution, and yet it is done; when the Power
is in thy Hand to remove it: and this in much love and great pity I declare
unto thee in the Fear and Counsel of God.

Further thou say, Th^n art not guilty of these Persecutions acted unjustly
upon us.

Again consider, I say, Thou can not be cleared in the Sight of the Lord God
from them, being acted under thee, and in thy Name; in the Day of the Lord the
Light in thy Conscience shall answer this; for there seems to be rather a
favoring of them in thee, and by for bearance of the Actors of Cruelty, by
which their hands are strengthened, then any dislike showed by thee in bearing
thy Witness, as thou ought to do, against them: For thou know of some
(...) this City and elsewhere, whom we know to be just Men, who suffer
Impri^^^^^nt and the loss of their Liberties, because for Conscience sake they
can^^^ Swear; and many others in this Nation suffering cruel things upon the
like, or same ground, even for Well-doing, and not for Evil; which Oppression
might be removed, and their unjust Sufferings taken off by thee, by a word from
thy Mouth or Pen; and this makes thee that thou can not be clear in the sight
of God in these things, because not helped by thee, who has the Power to help
it: and this in true Love I give thee to understand, in the Day of Recompense
shall thou know the Lord will not clear thee, except thou repentest, and ^^sest
the Oppressed. Other things thou speak about the Light of Christ, which
lighteneth every man that comes into the World with the Light of Life, or with
the Light of Condemnation, and about the Ministry of this Nation, wi^^ some
other things, which I had a desire to have answered, if time had been
seasonable, and thou willing to have heard; but thou should not have appeared
in such lightness, especially when speaking of the Things of God, which did
grieve the Spirit of the Lord, and vex the Righteous Soul; which Behavior,
with some words which thou utteredst, by the Light of Christ is to be
condemned, and which I do judge with the Life of God, and yet does tender and
preserve the measure of Justness and Honesty which is in thee; but thou art
high above the Principle of God, and cannot receive the Teachings of the Father
into that mind which is light and unstable; for the Counsel of God is manifest
to the Meek and the Lowly, but there is much in thee to be judged, when thou
come to the Witness of God in thee. And as concerning the Light of Christ, at
which thou stumblest, by which every man that comes into the World is
enlightened; in short, this I say, The Light to thee is given of God, and it
must thou own to be thy only Teacher, to receive by it from the Father, and to
be guided by it in all things, if ever thou inheritest God's Kingdom of
Righteousness and Peace; and this is the Word of the Lord to thee. And as
concerning the Ministry of England, for which in part thou seem to plead,
thus I say in Plainness, Generally it is not of God, but of Antichrist, and the
Lord is against it; for it is the Ground of the greatest Oppression of the Poor
in its Maintenance, as any one particular Abomination which this day is in the
Nation, and this is the Truth from the Lord; and if thou set thy self to
uphold them, by any Law made, or to make against such whom God has raised to
bear Witness against them, their Ways, and Idolatries, thou ^^alt fall with
them into Perdition, and be overthrown amongst them in the Just and Righteous
Judgments; and this is the Word of the Lord to thee: For God is risen of a
Truth to make War against the Beast which long has reigned, and against the
False Prophets which have long deceived the World; and I warn thee, withold
thy hand from helping them, if thou meanest to be preserved or blessed in thy
Person, in thy Family, and in thy Armies; for, as I said to thee, The Kingdom
of Christ is setting up by his own Power, and all must ^ow and become subject
thereunto; he needs none of thy Policy, nor the strength of thy Arm to
advance him; yet would he have thee not to prove thy self an open Enemy
thereof, by doing or suffering to be done Cruelty and Injustice against them
whom the Lord is redeeming out of this World into subjection unto that Kingdom,
lest thou be such a one, as wilt not enter thy self, nor suffer others to
enter, and so Destruction come upon thee. Wherefore arise as out of Sleep, and
Slumber not in this World's Glory and Honor; come away, and appear for the
Lord, rather then against him; be not overcome by the Pleasures of this World,
nor the Fattering Titles of Men; win^ not at the Cruelty and Oppression acted
by some, who shelter under thee, and make thy Name a Cloak for Mischief against
the Upright, but let the Testimony of God in thee answer for his People, this
Law is not just by which many suffer, because they cannot swear, and because
they cannot cease to declare against Sin and Iniquity, let that of God in thee
bear Witness, and thou and thy name being chief in the Execution of this Law,
what will thy account be to the Lord in his Day? Consider, I say, consider, and
be thou changed in thy mind and heart, lest thou having forgotten God, and his
many Deliverances, be shut up, and numbered for Destruction: and I say, and
desire, the Lord give thee a more perfect Understanding of his Ways and
Judgments, and that the Crown Immortal thou may strive for, by Meekness and
Righteousness, through relieving the Oppressed, and showing Mercy to the Poor,
and removing every Burden which lies upon the Innocent; and this is the Desire
of him who is thy Friend, and would not have thee crowned with Dishonor,
through suffering the People of God to be oppressed in thy Name, which will be
thy Overthrow absolutely, if thou removest it not by turning and easing the
Oppressed,

Edw. Buroughs.


This was delivered to his hands about the beginning of the Fourth Month, 1657.

For the hands of the Protector.
FRIEND,
THou ought to stand in the Counsel of God in all things, and not to follow
the Counsel of thy own heart, nor to act things in thine own will; neither
should thou suffer others to act under thee, and in thy name, that which is
Unjust and Unrighteous: Much Unrighteousness and great Oppression is acted in
thy name, by which the good name (PROTECTOR) is abused and subverted; and
instead of Protection by it, great Unjustice is acted under it, and covered
with it: and this one thing I am moved to lay before thee, which has been
acted by thee, or under thee, not without thy knowledge, in which thou have;
done Evil in the Sight of the Lord, and one day thou will know it; Several in
these Nations, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, who have been in
trust under thee, when they have owned the People of God in scorn called
Quakers, have been cast out of their Places, though they have not denied to
serve thee and the Commonwealth, neither has Unfaithfulness to their Trust
been proved against them; and also, several Soldiers now of late in Scotland,
and elsewhere, have been turned out of their Places because of the same thing
(viz.) For owning the People of God; and these things are not right in the
Sight of the Lord, that such who have been for many years Faithful in the
Service, and in their Trust, and hazarded Life and Liberty for Conscience sake,
to enjoy Liberty of Conscience, which they cannot now possess because of thee,
but are cast out for the Exercise of their pure Consciences; this Thing the
Lord is grieved with, and with thee because of it. For thou did not obtain
this Victory of Peace and Freedom by thy own Sword, then why should it be thus
improved to thy own Ends? Consider of it, for this makes the Nations more
unhappy and less blessed, when such who delight in true Justice and Judgment
are cast out of their Places, and so deprived of giving their Judgment among
men; and absolutely this will make thy Army less prosperous, and more
unblessed, when such who fear the Lord, and against whom thou can not justly
charge Evil, are cast out, and despised; and this in time thou may see to thy
Sorrow: And as thy Friend I ^ay this before thee, and do in plainness tell
thee, If thou thus utterly denyst the People of God in the day of thy
Prosperity, and thus wholly cast them out of thy service, they cannot stand by
thee, nor own thee in the day of thy Trouble; and such as thou cleavest unto
may be a broken Staff in thy time of need. Ah Friend! these things do show that
thy heart is not right in the sight of the Lord, and that Justice and true
Judgment, Righteousness and Truth is even despised in this Land, and not
sincerely owned by thee; when as such who fear the Lord are thus cast out of
Judicatories in thy Government, and out of Defense in thy Armies: What! is this
the end of that long travel in Wars, and of so many fair Promises of Liberty of
Conscience, that just Men should thus be dealt withal? The Heathen Kingdoms may
Mock at this, that while some have pretended Liberty of Conscience, are become
Persecutors of such whose Consciences are justly exercised: and as I have
sometime said to thee, much Injustice, and great Oppressions, and cruel
Persecutions continue daily to be acted in thy name, which is numbered up
against thee upon account, because of hiding thy Face from the Cry of the Poor,
as one without Bowels of Compassion unto such who have truly served with thee
in a faithful Service for the Commonwealth, who many of them now are grievous
Sufferers under thee.

Consider of these things, and search what will be the End of them; the Lord
open thy Understanding, that more of the Wisdom of God may guide thee, and less
of the policy and wisdom of Man, which will betray thee of God's Kingdom, and
may in the end cast thee down in this World also.

E. B.


The Original of this was delivered to his Hands in the Fifth Month, 1657.

FRIEND,
IT is upon me, and also I am pressed in spirit thereunto, to give thee, even
unto thee Oliver Protector, the perfect measure of thy Dominions, and how they
stand in relation to thee, as concerning the Affections of the people toward
thee, whereby thou may understand thy own Condition, and the state of thy
Government, as I have viewed it in true Judgment, and marked it upon serious
consideration; and what I write is in perfect Love unto thee, however thou
may judge of it, and of these things, it will be well f^^ thee to consider,
now while it is time, ere it be too late.

Many Enemies thou have, which watch over thee for Evil, and not for Good, who
would Rejoice in thy Overthrow: And first, There are a People scattered through
all these Nations, who are full of Wrath and ravening Envy toward thee, in
whose hearts to this day there is continual Hatred, and evil Surmi^^ng lodges
against thee and all thy Offspring; and I believe (without any further
knowledge) that daily Advantage they seek against thee, by subtle Conspiracies
and secret Plottings of Maliciousness in their Hearts, seeking by all means, if
it be possible, how to be revenged, and not slipping any Advantage how to
revenge themselves, and promote their Cause; and of these scattered under thy
Government are not a few, but rather the greater number, who thus stand in
Affections to thee, with no better purpose of good toward thee, then to
destroy thee by any means, if it were in their power, and to take away thy name
in Reproach; such is the Cruelty and Desperateness of some of them, their own
lives are not dear unto them, to take away thine; I have felt the strength of
their Rage against thee, which carries them above sense, or fear to fore-go any
Danger, that they might see their desired End of thee: Their Malice toward
thee is so seated in their wrathful Hearts, that it cannot easily be quenched;
I know the Lord has blasted them and their endeavors to this day, and thou
have had Dominion and Power given thee of God to bruise, and to break them to
pieces; for because of the Wickedness of that Generation, which was grown to
the full, did the Lord raise thee up as a Plague upon them, because of their
Unrighteousness, Oppression and Tyranny, and they were made as Slaves and
Bondmen under thy Power; and without the Lord can they not at any time do any
thing against thee: but what and if for thy Wickedness in the Sight of God, he
should make them Instruments in his hand to accomplish his Wrath upon thee,
even like as he made thee once his Instrument to overthrow them; and such has
been the Lord's Doings, even to overthrow his Enemies one by the other, and to
use the Wicked as a Rod in his hand, to break them one against another like
Potsherds: and by that which comes to pass in these Nations, thou seem no
less then to tread in their steps, and in a measure already go on in their
way, in Oppressing (through Tyranny, or suffering it) the People of God, whose
Cause the Lord will assuredly plead against thee one day, who now suffer under
thee in Patience: and who can tell the Purpose of the Lord, or what he may
bring to pass concerning this thing, in raising up the Wicked to be a Plague to
Wickedness, and in suffering the Oppressors to overthrow Oppressions? This is
by me in Love to thee in sincerity declared, and by thee with Soberness and in
the Fear of God it is to be considered.

Again, there is another People scattered through all these Dominions, who are
not thy Friends, nor Wishers well unto thee or thy Government, who secretly
murmer against thee, and envy thee, and even seek God against thee and thy
Government, which they judge to be not according to God; and bow not to it in
Love, though they are forced to submit for a time, hoping continually, if not
hatching, other ways of Rule and Government, to the overthrow of thee and
thine; and these are more Honest, and Upright, and Just in the Sight of the
Lord then the former; and indeed they are not, nor their Purposes accursed of
the Lord; for many of them have been Sufferers, and faithfully served their
Nation with perfect purpose of Freedom to the Lord's People, and they have at
this day this perfect Zeal for God, and for his Ways, though not altogether
according to Knowledge, yet some of them are not far from the Kingdom of God;
though they seek it not wholly in the right Way, nor look only with a single
Eye; yet does not the Lord hate them altogether because of their Integrity
toward him, and Zeal for him; who some of them have suffered Imprisonment for
Truth and Righteousness sake, as they have wholly thought, and their Sufferings
have not been altogether slighted by the Lord, and these are they known by Name
of the Fifth Monarchy, of whom there are more then a few with them, that wish
well unto them, who will rise up for them, rather then for thee, many of whom
propound well in their minds, though they have not power to effect it; because
their intent is not altogether according to the Lord, yet are many of them free
from that whereof thy self is guilty, and some of them are cast out, and wholly
rejected without any just Cause, as they suppose; and these things have grieved
their spirits, and not only kindled their Rage and Envy, but moved their
Sincerity and Honesty against thee; wherefore they are not thy Friends, but
rather thy Enemies; and would not stand by thee, or with thee in thy need, but
rather (I suppose) would arm themselves against thee and thy Power; who highly
charge thee (as they suppose, justly too) with Unfaithfulness, and such like;
for they see, that is not accomplished which has been promised by thee, but
the contrary, even one Finger is become as heavy as was once the Loins; and
their spirits are grieved against thee for such Causes: and who knows but
that the Lord may take the occasion to try thee and prove thee by them? for
their Hearts are high against thee and thy Government, and that upon good
Ground, as they sincerely think.

Again, There is through thy Dominions a People gathered, and gathering daily
by Multitudes, who are called and chosen of him, and faithful to him, who have
owned him above all things, and whom he has owned, and will own in the sight
of the whole World, and will increase them to a Numberless Number, according to
his Promise; and even those the Lord is making many, who are redeeming out of
the World, into the Government and Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and these thou
know are great and grievous Sufferers, by many hard and cruel Oppressions,
from those who are in Authority in thy Government, even unjust Imprisonment,
and Fines, and burdensome Taxations, in many things hard to be expressed; and
they undergo grievous Persecutions under thy Government, and wholly Unjustly in
the sight of God; and also, are cast out of all Power and Place in it, and
almost out of all Subjects-Priviledge too; many of them being counted as vile
amongst men, though they are not so in the Sight of the Lord; Justice, and
Righteousness, and true Judgment they cannot have in all these Nations, not
from thy self, nor Sub-servant Judges, of whom hardly can their Cause be heard;
but are deprived of their proper Right, and of Subjects-Freedom in
Judicatories, and exposed to all Wrong that may be by Unjust Men, through
Unjust Judgment; and these things are not unknown to thee, and therefore art
thou inexcusable in the Sight of the Lord, and guilty of their Sufferings in
his Presence, who has Power to prevent it, but does it not; and these thus
suffering in thy Government, and under it, how can they stand for thee and thy
Government, or out of pure Love be subject thereunto; though, be it known to
thee, that we (the People of God) do not envy thy Person or Government in the
least, neither have Purpose of seeking Advantage against thee, or it, to hurt
or betray you, by secret Plotting, or turbulent Arising, as others may; yet
Friend, the want of our Prayers to God for thee, is worse to thee then the
secret Plotting of all Wicked Men.

And how can we mention thee in our Prayers to God, except it be to be
delivered from thee, who are daily cruel and unjust Sufferers by thee, or
because of thee, as I have said? Or how can we be Friends to that Government,
or subject to obey that Power under which we daily suffer such hard and cruel
things, as the loss of our Liberty and Estates, and danger of Life also? Let
that Light in thy own Conscience judge; though for all these things, we do
rather pity thee, and desire thy Repentance, then Conspire against thee, or
wish thy Destruction; yet ought thou to consider of these things with a
humble Heart, and what a Condition thou art in, who art hated of the Wicked
with a deadly Hatred, and not loved of the Saints, because thou love not the
Lord: Also it might make thy Heart to tremble, to consider how that thy
Dominions are thus divided, and the Affections of the People thus dis-united,
and few of them thy real Friends; some having real Offense given by thee,
wherefore they are forced to loath that Government which is unjust; and others
verily supposing of great Wrong sustained from thee, wherefore they are turned
against thee.

Moreover, and besides all this, greatly it may be suspected, that even they in
whom thou do repose confidence, who seem to cleave unto thee, may not be
altogether true unto thee, though in appearance subject, yet may have secret
Hypocrisy, and hatching of evil in their minds, if it were possible to uncover
thy Nakedness; and some others also there may be, who may make use of Places
under thee, which may have no more Affection to thee, nor Service for thee,
then while their own Ends of great Advantage are served under thee, by their
subjection to thy Government: And now Friend, these things being justly
considered, and viewed by thee in Righteousness, how are thy Dominions as a
broken Vessel that cannot easily be bound up, and as a bruised Reed not to be
confided in by thee? and these several sorts of people being subtracted out of
the whole, how few is it that thou will find that are thy Real and Faithful
Friends, who may stand by thee in a needful time? Some out of Envy cannot be
subject to thee, and others for the Fear of the Lord's sake, cannot own thee in
such a Government, whereby he Just suffer, even all men are ready to stand a
far off from thee; and because thou have denied the People of God, therefore
cannot he be thy Trust: and verily thy state, and the state of thy Dominions,
are truly to be lamented; thou have so much sought thy self, that thou have
lost almost all people, and their Affections; every one judging themselves to
be the greatest Sufferers under thee. Ah consider! for thou art but the Head of
a Disjoynted Body, which may not easily be bound up to thee; and thou art lost
for lack of true Knowledge; for the Lord has done many thing for thee, though
thou have not known it altogether, much less then know thou of those things
which are Eternal; which belong to thy Peace; it shows thou ownest not the
Lord, who cannot own his People, but rather countest them thy Enemies, and
suffer all Evil to be inflicted upon them; and this is the greatest of thy
Misery, in that the Lord has been so good unto thee, and thy Promises so large
toward him for the Feeedom of his People, and yet all forgot, and the Lord's
Goodness not answered, and his People made as Slaves and Bondmen under thee,
suffering the loss of Liberty, and even their, Birthright-Priviledge in many
parts of these Nations: wherefore be awakened, O man, and sleep not totally in
Carelessness, but remember thy self, either to perform the Good, or at least to
escape the Evil, which may suddenly come upon thee.

And this I have written to thee out of perfect Love, in the Fear of God,
without the Fear of any man, or without any secret or open envying of thee;
could thou but own the Lord, he would be thy strength to forgive all thy
Iniquities; and blot out thy Sin, and to defend thee from all thy Enemies; and
above all things, Love Judgment, Mercy and Truth, and fear before the Lord, and
let not his People be thy Bondslaves, who are more dear unto the Lord then all
Earthly glory is unto thee; and if thou could own them, they would own thee
in the Face of all thine Enemies: many times have thou been warned, and that
from the Lord, and thou shall confess it when the Lord's hand is upon thee, and
thou delivered into the Will of thy Enemies. Remember that I have told thee
what the Lord has showed me; happy art thou if thou can receive it, that
Peace may be unto thee, and not War, Salvation, and not Condemnation, Renown,
and not Dishonor, which waits for thee, except thou turnst to the Lord.

Edw. Buroughs.


The Original of this was delivered to him in the Seventh Month, 1657.

To the Protector and Council.
A Servant of the Lord, and to you a Friend, wishes Grace and Wisdom, the
Spirit of sound Judgment, and the Knowledge of God unto you; that in all thing;
True Justice and Righteous Judgment may be brought forth and abound unto all
people, that you may be more Honorable, and may be made a Blessing to your
selves and this Nation, and to Generations after you: But alas, my Friends! how
long shall Justice and true Judgment be neglected, and the Innocent deeply
groan for want thereof? How long shall it be ere the distres^^d Cry of the
unjustly Afflicted enters into your hearts? I say, when shall your Ear be bowed
down to hearken to, and consider of the guiltless cause of many of the faithful
Subjects, who lie deeply afflicted through this Nation, some under one cruel
Bond of Oppression, and some under another, being most unjustly and wickedly
imposed upon them by Cruel Men, who pervert Justice, and turn true Judgment
backwards; and neither Fear God, nor Regard Men; but contrary to Justice and
the good Laws of this Land, as men without Reason and Natural Affections to
Mankind, do act most illegally, to the grievous Oppression of many approved and
faithful Subjects, and the true Knowledge and Consideration hereof is enough to
pierce the hardest Heart, and to vex the most patient Mind; and undoubtedly the
^ce Anger of the Lord is greatly kindled because of these things, and even
against your Forbearance, who seem to take little notice of such Cruelties and
injustice when they are laid before you; for you do not relieve the Oppressed,
neither (...) remove Oppressors, as you ought to do, and as the Lord requires
of you: What, has the abundance of this World's glory, and its treasure,
quite overcome and stolen away your hearts wholly from all sense and feeling of
the unjust Sufferings of your Brethren, who have in times past, as faithfully
as your selves, served their Nation with their Lives and Estates, to the
purchasing of this Peace and Freedom out of the hands of. Opposers; and such
may now justly claim the benefit of this Peace and Freedom, and to have a part
with you therein, even by Birthright and by Purchase, and also by Promise from
some of your selves: But alas! while they have waited for it, and thought
peaceably to enjoy the same under you, are many of them entrapped into as great
Bondage as ever, if not more woeful and unjust; and they are unjustly
imprisoned, and unreasonably fined, and every way oppressively dealt withal,
and are even spoiled in their Persons and Estates, and their lives often in
danger, being through great Injustice become a Prey to their very Enemies, who
now take occasion to revenge their former Cause, because of their Faithfulness
for the Commonwealth against them; and all this is done while you look on, and
no way showing your dislike to these things, which strengthens greatly the
hands of Evildoers, to add to the Bonds of the Afflicted, yet are you without
excuse; for you are not wholly ignorant of these things, for the knowledge of
them has often bin laid at your doors; yea, and the very Cry of these
Oppressions and Cruelties reach through the whole Land, to the wounding deeply
of all people that fear God, to know so great Injustice and Oppression brought
forth upon the ^^nocent and faithful People, by some so far entrusted as having
the Law com^itted to them, which they pervert, and turn Judgment backwards; and
the greater is the Wound, because you, who have power to stop and prevent these
things, should have no more regard to set at liberty the unjust Sufferers, and
to ^^der Judgment upon those as thus pervert true Justice, by whom the Land is
filled with Violence, whereby the Name of the Lord is greatly dishonored, and
the Government greatly reproached in many parts of the World; why? because the
faithful Subjects cannot enjoy their Birth-right-Priviledge as they ought,
according to the Law of God and man; for their Equals, yea, their Inferiors
have exalted themselves above, and are become Oppressors of the Freeborn
People: and diverse ways do these heinous Oppressions and Cruelties abound upon
the Innocent, and not for Evil-doing, but for the exercise of their pure
Consciences toward God; for many have been taken traveling on the Highway,
and some out of peaceable Meetings, and out of their Inns and Friends Houses,
and by some wicked men in Authority, without showing just Cause therefore, have
just Men been whipped, or stocked, or imprisoned, or other Cruelties done unto
them, and yet the transgression of no just Law truly charged against them,
neither have been convicted of any Evil-doing; but they have suffered wholly
Innoc^^tly, only through the Malice, and Will, and Pleasure of their Enemies,
who have taken occasion, wihhout any just Offense at all, to stock, and whip
and imprison many of the true and faithful Subjects; and this has not been
done in secret, but openly, in many parts of this Nation; and you have had
Information of these things that you should have bin awakened to true Justice
and Iudg^^^^; and this the Lord requires of you, though the guiltless Sufferers
have born all these things without complaining, yet ought you to have judged
justly, according to their deeds, such as caused such Cruelty and unjust
Sufferings, that for time to come the like might not have been brought forth;
but the free Subjects might live in Peace, and Rejoice under the Government,
and all Perver^ers of Judgment and Justice might stand in awe, and be afraid;
so should you be a Pra^se to Ages after you: And likewise many, who are at this
present remaining in Prisons in diverse parts of this Land, some upon one false
Accusation and evil Surmising, and some upon another, for a good Conscience
sake; the Cause of whom has often been laid before you, which seemed for the
present to have some entrance upon you, yet little is brought forth by you, as
ought to be in that cause; for though none of any such do complain unto you,
who have and do unjustly suffer, yet the Lord does require you to set the
Oppressed and Falsly-Imprisoned at Liberty, and to bring true Judgment forth
upon their Persecutors.

Also, There is another Suffering great and grievous, growing upon many, if it
be not prevented; Many faithful and approved Men are dispossessed of their
Freedom, which truly belongs to them by the Law of God and man, in diverse
Cities and Corporations, because for Conscience sake they cannot Swear, by
kissing the Book, and laying the hand upon it, according to the vain Tradition
in such Causes formerly used; though to deal justly toward God and man in
their Craft and Science they are bound by the Law of God; yet because they will
not Swear, and so break Christ's Commands, are they threatened, and their
Windows shut up, and dispriviledged of their Trading, whereby they should
maintain themselves and Families in the Creation; and this one thing tends to
the Destruction of many, as in this World, and no little hurt will thereby grow
to the whole Nation in a Generation of time; and it is required of you by the
Lord to prevent these Sufferings, though many can fore-go their own Freedom in
this World, and their Lives also, rather then break the least Command of
Christ: and thus are many faithful People made a very Prey to their Enemies,
and in diverse manners it is brought forth upon them. For many also suffer
deeply in the House of Correction for reproving Sin, and others are grievously
spoiled in their Estates, because for Conscience sake they cannot pay to
maintain a professed Minister, or uphold a Steeple-house; for it is a common
thing, for a Priest to take (or have it done) Four or Five times so much by
Distress, as any way he can prove a pretended Due. And many other Sufferings
there are, which are only for Conscience sake, as because some cannot put off a
Hat to a Magistrate, or the like; which give an ill savor to the Government in
which they are acted without Reproof.

Ah my Friends! Be awakened to Justice and true Judgment, to relieve such
unjust Sufferers, and to throw down all such heinous Oppressions and
Oppressors, that the Lord may yet make you and your Government blessed, after
his Long-suffering to you, which has been great; for Justice and true Judgment
in a Government is the Happiness thereof, and the Foundation for a long
continuance; and on the contrary, Cruelty, and Injustice, and Oppression being
brought forth, the more is the Government unhappy and accursed, and the sooner
will the Lord overthrow it, and bring it to a desolate End: And therefore my
Friends, let this great Enemy to your Persons, Government, and whole Nation, to
wit, Persecution for Conscience sake, be speedily removed, lest the Anger of
the Lord break forth against you, and repentance be too late; for this know, In
all Ages the Lord stretched forth his Hand, and in his time he quickly avenged
himself for his People's sake, after their Innocent Sufferings, born by them
for a season; and he is the same, and changes not, and the same will he bring
to pass. Therefore I say again, Be awakened, and let that deadly Enemy be
removed out of the Land, as you tender your own Safety and Honor, and the
Glory of the Name of the Lord, and his People's Peace, even this very Enemy, to
wit, Persecution for Conscience sake; for it does and will obstruct all your
good Purposes at Home and Abroad, it eats away the Affections of all good
People from you, and it eats out your Strength and Valor, and it consumes the
Weakness of all your Enemies; verily, it is an Enemy that will work your
Destruction speedily, both in this World and in the World to come; that of God
in you all shall witness me in the Day of the Lord.

I am your Friend, and these things do I write as a Friend unto you, as to warn
you of that secret enemy, so much reigning and rebelling in this Nation, which
indeed may work a greater Destruction upon you then any foreign Invader, and
this in time you may witness to your Grief and Sorrow, If something by you be
not done to suppress it; all health and peace I wish unto you in the Lord; and
thus far am I clear from the blood of you, and all men, come life or death.

E B.


The several Coppies of this were delivered to Oliver and his Counsel, in the
12th. Month, in the year 1657.

To the Protector.
Friend,
THe Salutation of my life wishes well unto thee in the Lord, and most
especially that thy precious Soul may be redeemed out of death, to God, and
live, that thou may have a Rest and Habitation in him, when this World is no
more.

Now whereas it is a general outcry among the Teachers and People of this
Nation, and also is doubted, and has been sometimes objected by thy self, That
the People called Quakers are Deluded and Deceived, and in Error, and such
like: And now (if it be possible) that thy self and others may be resolved
concernus; put therefore all thy Objections and Doubting into plain Positions,
or let the wisest of thy Teachers do it for thee; and whatsoever thy self, or
any for thee can object against us; or what thou doubtest of, or stumblest at,
either in respect of our Doctrines or Practice, let the matter be stated in
plain words, in Positions or Queries, and if God permit, a sufficient answer
thou may receive, to remove all conscientious Scruples, and to confound all
subtle Alledgments and Evasions, whereby hereafter forever thou may be
altogether inexcusable of all doubting or speaking against us, or suffering
evil to be done or spoken against us upon that account: And this am I moved to
give forth, and send to thee, that thou may be satisfied, and all things
tried and made manifest in the sight of all men, and that all rash judgment,
and false supposition, which lodges in the hearts of many, may be confounded
and brought to naught; and let it be left off to cry out Deceivers, and
Heresy, etc. and causing any to suffer upon suspicion thereupon, but bring all
things to light, and true Judgment, that what is proved to be the Truth may be
owned, and not persecuted any more, for we are willing to be made manifest to
all men; and if any thing be objected against us, which may not be sufficiently
answered and resolved to sober men, then our Enemies are more free, and has
whereof to glory in against us: but and if all occasion of stumbling be removed
by Answers according to the Scriptures, and our Principles, Practices and
Doctrines thereby vindicated, then let all the Teachers, and all our
Adversaries shut their Mouths from biting at us, and railing against us, and
accusing of us to thee; and let thy Ear be shut from believing Lies against the
Innocent; and let none suffer in thy Dominion under the cruelty of men, upon
such a ground; And hereof I shall be glad to receive an answer, and to join
issue in this Cause; and in the mean time, and always, am a Lover of thy Soul,
but a witness against all Oppression.

E. B.


This was delivered to his hands at Hampton- Court, in the 4th Month, 1658.

For the Protector.
Friends,
Know that there is a God that does whatsoever he will, all power is in his
hand, and he brings to pass the Counsel of his own heart, and he rules in the
kingdoms of men, and brings down and sets up; he kills and makes alive,
and he changes times and seasons and Governments, and brings to naught the
counsels of men, for all power in Earth and in Heaven is in him; and all his
doings are right, and his ways are equal; and thou and all Mankind are as Clay
in the hand of the Potter, he can honor and exalt as he pleases, and he can
mar and break to pieces and dishonor whenever he will, wherefore be humble
and low in heart before him, for he is the highest power that subdueth all
things under his feet; if he wound who can heal? and if he kill there is none
can make alive; and know thou it is the Lord God Almighty that does this; in
whose hands are the Issues of life and death, and he it is who can break thee
down, and build thee up, who can wound thee and restore thee, and bring thee to
destruction, and say unto thee return; and to know him that does this, belongs
to thy eternal peace.

Wherefore hearken thou to the Word of the Lord, that thy soul may come out of
death, and live; and fear the Lord God, before whom thy heart is naked and
bare; who can mould thee and change thee, and fulfill his pleasure upon thee,
even according to his own will, and who shall say what does he? and now come to
consideration, and let thy heart be more upright before him, and choose his way
and counsel, that he may bless thee, and seek his face to behold his
countenance, that thy soul may be satisfied by his Word, and the Milk of the
Word may nourish thee unto life Immortal; and mind his pure presence which is
life, even God with thee, Christ the Emmanuel to dwell with and walk in thee,
which is the promise of the Father; and first come to the Principle of God, and
feel the Word of God in thy heart, that will beat down the nature into which
Temptations enter; and the Word will bring thee to war against and overcome all
thy Enemies, which would defile thee, or betray thee; and it will bring thee to
know a Birth Immortal born in thee, and a Crown Immortal received from God,
that dies not, nor fades not away; and then he that rules over Heaven and Earth
will be thy Shepherd, to feed thee, and thy Teacher, to guide thee, and thy
Counselor, to direct thee in all things; and thy immortal Soul will be
satisfied with the Bread that comes down from Heaven, which the Father gives;
and the Covenant of God, and the Mercies of David, that are sure, will be
revealed, and his Promise fulfilled in thee, and Life and Immortality brought
to Light through the Gospel, which is the Power of God, which destroys and
puts off, and confounds the first man and his knowledge; and wisdom, and his
sin and righteousness, all which is in Transgression against the Life of God;
and the Gospel the Power of God being received, it will raise up the Seed of
God in thee, and bring thee to know the second Adam, the Image of the Father
which the Devil has nothing in, but he overcomes the Devil who has been the
Lamb Slain by Transgression, since the Foundation of the World; and he it is
that comes out of death that must take away thy sin and destroy it, and cover
thy nakedness, and create thee anew, and give thee acceptance in the Father
whereby thy soul in him may be refreshed, and a habitation in him thou may
have when this World is no more, and for this thou ought to wait above all
things.

And Friend, thou have need of the Wisdom of God, which is from Heaven to guide
thee in all thy affairs, that by it thou may be preserved from the will of
thine Enemies, and from all that hate thee; that their Eye may be blinded that
watch for Evil, and their Wisdom and Policy confounded and brought to naught
that hatch Mischief against thee. So feel a Measure of the Wisdom of God in
thee, to guide thee in Dread and Authority, and thy Enemies will be afraid;
for, to walk in the Fear of the Lord, and in his Wisdom and Authority, in
Justice, Truth and Righteousness, that will make thee a greater Terror unto thy
Enemies then all Worldly Policy and Craft; the Nations will overreach thee, if
thy strength be there; and if Judgment, Justice and Righteousness be neglected
by thee, how should the Lord Honor thee, and Defend thee? Nay, he will bring
Dishonor, and give thee into the Will of thy Enemies: For want of Truth and
just Judgment causes the Land to Mourn, and her People to sit as a Widow
comfortless; wherefore love Judgment, Truth and Righteousness, and walk
therein, and thou will leave a Praise behind thee, and a Witness to other Ages,
that thou have served the Lord in thy Generation, and then thy Memorial shall
never dye, nor thy Name come into Reproach among the Heathen. Wherefore let all
Oppression be removed, and let the Just go free, and let Judgment and
Righteousness run down, and be thou a Praise and a Blessing to all that do
Well, and a Terror and a Dread to all the contrary. Arise, and stand up for the
Lord, and he will give thee Strength and Victory, and will make thy Horn as
Iron, and thy Hoof as Brass, to push down and tread under the high places of
Idolatry, in all the apostatized Churches, both Papist, and others, out of the
Life of the Apostles; and as thou come into the Life the Apostles were in,
then thou will see and fathom over all this Profession of Christ, and all these
Churches, that are without the Life of Christ, which are come up in the
Apostasy; and as the Life of God arises in thee, thou will see who the false
Prophets are, and Deceivers, which Christ Prophesied of should come, and John
saw were come in his days, which have overspread the Nations; and these are
they which have the Sheep's Clothing upon them, but inwardly they are Ravening
Wolves; and such are they, that will Flatter thee for great Benefices, and
Places, and large Maintenances; they have Christ's words, and the Apostles
words, the Sheep's Clothing, but they that put not into their mouths, they
will prepare War against them, and Raven upon them, and cast their Bodies into
Prison, or spoil their Goods: And will thou bring thy Name into dishonor to
all the Saints upon Earth, by defending of these in their Evil ways? thou
ought not to do it, nor to suffer the Innocent to be trodden down, and
destroyed, for denying such, and witnessing against them that are out of the
Life of Christ; and a great Overthrow will the Lord make among those Teachers,
and such a Ministry, that needs to be defended by carnal Weapons, and by
Stocks, and Prisons, for such Teachers and Ministry are not of Christ, as is
manifest; and as People have been scattered after them for Ages, so they shall
again be gathered from them by the Spirit, to follow the Lamb whither soever he
goes.

And take heed these Teachers come not too near thee, neither put Confidence in
them; for their hearts are not right before the Lord: and they will flatter
thee, while they hatch Mischief against thee; but stand over them in the
Dominion of God: And if they sow Spiritual Things, let them reap Carnal by a
Free Gift; and if they have Flocks, let them eat of the Milk-Freely given them;
and if they have planted any thing, let them eat the Fruit, as it comes Freely;
and be not thou cumbered about maintaining Ministers, but free thy self of that
Burden; neither suffer innocent Men to be trodden down, and destroyed in their
Persons and Estates, about the maintaining of such Teachers, which is become
the grievousest Oppression in the Nation.

And as concerning thy Family; Thou have need of God's Wisdom to guide thee,
that thou may Rule in God's Authority over all light, loose, proud, wanton,
ungodly and deceitful Persons; take heed of such spirits, for they will be a
Temptation to thee, to draw thee into Evil, and into the World, out from God:
let no such be thy Companions, nor remain in thy House, lest they betray thee
with Flatteries and Honor, which perish; and such may profess much Love and
great Duty in words, yet they being out of the Fear of the Lord, cannot be
blessed unto thee in their Service.

Wherefore Love such men, and let them be thy Companions, that Fear the Lord,
and that are Solid, and Sober, and Upright, such as may be good Examples before
thee, which will quench Evil, and not increase it in thee: and though such
appear not in Flatteries toward thee, nor with a double mind; yet they will be
Faithful to thee; and such will the Lord bless unto thee.

And let no Drunkards, nor Covetous Evil-minded Persons, that seek themselves,
and not the Lord, have place with thee; for they will be a Dishonor to thee,
and bring the Curse into thy Family.

And love such as make Conscience of their Words and Ways, and be not an
Oppressor of the Tender Consciences of any; but let the Lord be Ruler there,
both in thy self, and in all thy Family: And be of a Pitiful Tender Mind and
Spirit toward Strangers, and all People; and be Kind and Longsuffering toward
all, yet let Justice reach to all Transgressors; and be an Example to all in
Authority under thee: And let not Evil and Cruel-hearted Men bear any Place;
for such render thee and thy Government Dishonorable, and by such the Land is
filled with Violence, and the Just Mourn, whereby the Blessing is kept ^^r
away, and the Curse near, ready to d^vour.

Now Friends if thou come to be guided by the Spirit, and with the Wisdom of
the Father, then thou will bring the Nations into good Order, whereby the
Inhabitants may live in Peace and perfect Freedom, from all Oppressions and
Vexations, that now are a Bondage upon the Just and Upright; for there is great
Corruption entered into all places, and all forts of men; and when the Lord
touches thy Heart, and makes thee rightly sensible of all things, as they now
stand, then thou will see the Ministry (as now it stands) to be quite
degenerated from what the Ministry of Christ was in the days of the Apostles,
before the Apostasy; and as it now stands, there is much of it which is to be
thrown down to the Ground, and crushed to pieces; for it is corrupted
altogether, even in the way of its setting up, and in its Call, and in the way
of its Maintenance, and Practice; in all these things it is corrupted and
degenerated from what the Ministry of Christ was before the Apostasy: and this
may be proved by the Scriptures; and so it is not to be upholden by thee, but
to be corrected, and thrown down the rather.

And likewise in Magistracy, thou will see great Corruption entered, and
abundance to be purged out; for it is much degenerated from the state as it
was ordained of God; and in the Laws there is much to regulate and correct;
when thou come to the Principle of God in thee, if ever that arise i^ thee,
it will bring thee to thresh down, and trample down all unjust men, that handle
the Law; and all such, that judge for Gifts and Rewards; and all such Lawyers,
that devour the Innocent for Gifts, that will not plead the Cause of the Poor
without great Fees; and all the Priests, that preach for Hire; and the
Teachers, that teach for filthy Lucre, and to get Gain; all such men will be
counted as Briars and Thorns by thee, to be plucked up by the Roots, and to be
cut up as Evil Trees, which cumber the Ground; for such do corrupt the Land,
and cumber it; and if ever the Lord does arise in thee, he will reward them by
thee according to their ways, whose ways are corrupt before the Lord.

Be thou faithful in what the Lord calls thee to, and thou shall have thy
Reward; and seek his Honor, and he will Honor thee; and let thy mind ^e to
the Lord in all things, and feel his Word, and Power, and Presence in thee, to
quench all that which is contrary, and then thou will be blessed in this life,
and in the Life to come; but if thou continuest (...) thy Oppression, the Lord
will suddenly smite thee.

By a Friend unto thee in the Lord, E B.


This was given to Oliver Cromwell his hands at Hampton- Court, in the Sixth
Month, 1658. about a Month before his Death.

This is for the Protector's Kindred, his Wife and Children; to be read
soberly by them in the Fear of the Lord.
FRIENDS,
^Emember, that by the Lord you were raised from a low state, and when he will,
he can abase you, and bring you down; he gave you the Palace of ^ces, and threw
out them before you.

(...) Remember this every one of you, and come to the Witness of God in (...),
and be humble, and meek, and lowly, and let the Lord's Fear be in your (...),
and be of a tender Spirit, having your minds exercised in Purity, in Holi^^^^
and in Righteousness; and exalt not your selves, nor be lifted up in ^our
(...), in the Pride, and Vain-glories, and Honors of this World, lest the Lord
(...) you down, and make your Name and Posterity a Reproach, as he has done
^any before you; and if you walk in the same steps, and do the same things, and
(...) guilty of the same Abominations, and suffer the Children and Servants of
the Lord to be persecuted (as ^^ny are at this day, some until Death) shall the
Lord spare you? nay, he will cause you to feel his Hand of Judgment, and bring
you down with Sorrow, and he will vex you in his Wrath, and smi^e you with his
Rod more and more, till you learn his Fear, and depart from all your (...); and
the Lord will deface your Glory, and pull down your Crown; and (...) will make
you know, that he i^ Lord, that does whatsoever he will.

Wherefor^ humble your selves under the Hand of God, and search your own
hearts, and cast out the Abomination^ that vex the Spirit of the Lord; and
suf^^^ not the People of the Lord's precious Flock to be devoured, and made a
Prey (...) the Wicked; for because of this, the Rod of Affliction comes upon
you, and ^^y suddenly break you to pieces: but mind the Seed of God in you,
which is oppressed, and wait to know the. Power of the Lord, which will redeem
you out of Sin and Death, and reconcile you to God, and bring you into
Fellowship wi^^ himself, to enjoy Peace and Rest for your Souls, that you may
be made Heirs of the ^^heritance of an Endless Life; and this would make you
truly Honorable, (...) ^^ll be more Satisfaction to you, and Joy, and Content,
and true Rejoicing, (...) all Worldly Crowns and Worldly Glories, which will
waste, and consume away, and leave you miserable: And remember that you are now
warned from the (...) God, by who^ I am ^^ved to write this unto you, in dea^
and tender Love to you all; and one day you shall witness it.

And as concerning the Quakers (so called) who are accounted as vile in the
Sight of men, and are ^ast out of all Power and Place in the Nation, being
despised of all, and also are reproached, persecuted and imprisoned, and all
manner of Evil and Injustice unrighteously done and spoken against them (by
wick^^ and corrupt men in Authority) yet are they the Children and Servants of
the Living God, and greatly beloved of him, and are as dear to him as the Apple
of his Eye, and his Power and Presence is with them; and the time is at hand,
that the Lord will make their Persecutors fall, and their Enemies bow and
tremble, though now they suffer unjustly, and are trodden down, as not
deserving a Place on the Earth; yet it is for Righteousness sake; and because
they show forth the Image of the Father, and not for Evil-doing; and will not
their Sufferings lie upon you? for many Hundred have suffered cruel and great
things, and some the loss of Life (though not by, yet in the name of the
Protector) and about a Hundred, at this present day, lie in Holes, and
Dungeons, and Prisons, up and down the Nation; and some at this time are Sick,
nigh unto Death, whose Sufferings ^^y for Vengeance, and the Lord hears the
Cry: Wherefore save your selves, and let the Innocent be delivered, and the
cruel Bonds of Oppression broken, and the Exercise of a pure Conscience go
free, without Persecution; and then the Lord will (...) away his Anger, and
cease to smite you with his Rod; which bath been upon you, and he will give you
Peace, and make you blessed, if you come to be lea by his Spirit into all
Truth. And though these Innocent Lambs of Christ suffer thus under this present
Power, yet are they not Enemies to you, but are Friends to your Persons and
Families, (...) pity you, and love you, and desire well for you in the Lord,
that you may ^^pent, and be healed, and even that your Hearts may be opened to
receive Refreshments to your Souls; and that you may be established in
Righteousuess and Tr^ over all your Enemies, and may not be confounded, nor
your Posterity brought (...) reproach, which is hastening upon you; and though
our Love be despised, and (...) accounted hateful in your sight, and looked
upon with Derision, yet we (...) (...) things in Patience, truly desiring your
Returning and Repentance, and (...) yo^^ Destruction: But if these doleful
Suffering of the Lord's poor Lambs be continued by this present Power, it will
destroy you, and undo you, and break you, and confound (...); (...) the Lord
will not cease to smite you with his Rod of sharp Rebukes; and he will (...)
(...) know, his People's Cause shall not be unpunished. Oh Did you ^ut know*
ho^ H^^dreds have and do suffer! how the Bodies of some have been tortured by
Stocks and cruel Whippings! and how some lie Sick in stinking Holes and (...),
on the Ground, or a little Straw at best; Ten, or often more in a Prison
together, and sometimes their own Friends n^ suffered to come to visit th^^
(...) Necessaries! Oh, Did but your Eyes behold, or your Hearts perceive the
greatness of the Cruelty, which some of the Lord's dear Servants, and your
faithful Friends, undergo; it would make your hearts ache, and your spirits to
tremble! and all this is done in the Name, and under the Authority of
(Protector) therefore how should the Lord but lay it to your charge, and
afflict him and h^^ Family? He will make you know, there t^^t a God, t^^t can
do whatsoever he will, and that Life and Death are in his Hands, and all
Creatures are as Clay in the Hand of the P^tter; and be rules in the Kingdoms
of Men, and pulls down one, and sets up another, according to his
Pleasure: but if the Love of God be withheld from you, it is because of
Disobedience to him, and your Transgression. Wherefore be obedient to him, and
love his Ways and Judgments, that he may make you more happy with a Crown
Immortal, that never fades away. And remember once more the Lord has warned
you, by a Friend unto you in the Lord,

Written the 1st day of the 7th Month, called September, 1658. Edward
Buroughs.


Copies of this were delivered to diverse of his Children and Kindred the day
before he Dyed.

To thee Richard Cromwell (called) Protector of these Nations, is this moved of
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to be written, for thy Instruction, from Him.
THere is a Great, and Mighty, and Innumerable People come and coming up out of
Egypts Land, traveling toward the Land of Rest, promised of the Lord (...)
them, to be obtained and enjoyed by them; and they do, and have sojou^ned
Strangers in these Nations (over whom thou are called to Rule, and appointed
^^ief Governor) this seven years; and greatly are and have they been afflicted
and oppressed, and even trodden down through unjust Judgment and unrigh^
Dealing, by the Rulers and Inhabitants of the Land; and all the days of thy
Father, the late Protector, they were held in great Captivity and Bondage, and
unrighteous men made them a Prey, and laid heavy Yoaks of cruel S^^^^rings upon
them, and daily increased their Task; and something thy Father did for them in
their Journey of great Distress, yet but a little of what the Lord required of
him, and what the Lord looked for that he might have done; for P^^er was in his
hands, given him of the Lord, but he was not fully obedi^^^; and therefore was
the Lord's Hand stretched out somewhat against him, (...) his Family, and he
was smitten of the Lord, and suddenly taken away in Judgment; for he hearkened
not to the Counsel of the Lord concerning that People, neither did fully
relieve them from Oppression; but slighted many War^^^^^ from the Lord, and the
Day of his Visitation passed over, and Death took (...) away in Disobedience,
while this People were yet under great Oppressions; for he left above a hundred
of them in Prisons, unjustly suffering for right eousness sake, and not for
Evil-doing; and in this he fulfilled not the Will of God, but left his Name and
Glory somewhat stained because of these things; and though the Lord chose him,
and showed Love unto him, and gave him Power over his Enemies, and made him an
Instrument in his Hand to break down great Oppressions; yet he was not obedient
to the end, to do my Will, says the Lord; but left something ^^^one, which he
was truly called unto. Now this innumerable People, that is come and coming up,
as aforesaid, are them called Quakers, and this Egypts Land, is that great
Darkness, Ignorance, and Wickedness, and false Ways and worships in the
Apostasy, and fleshly bondage to sin and death, which all the World, and
Kindreds, and Multitudes that are unconverted to God live and walk in; and that
Land of Rest promised, to which they travel, is, the peaceable and quiet
dwelling with the Lord, free from the heavy oppression of Sin and Iniquity and
cruelties of men, and free in the exercise of their pure Consciences by the
Spirit of the Lord, as it shall move and lead them into all Truth; and their
sojourning as Strangers, is, their denying and despising the World, and all its
glories, and walking in the daily Cross of Christ, whereby they are crucified
to the love, and respect, and renown, and honors of the world, and are come
^^t of Kindreds, Tongues and People, counting the reproach for Christ great
Riches; not respecting men, but the Lord altogether in all things, and also
their suffering unrighteously false imprisonment, and spoiling of their goods
for Righteousness sake; this is their sojourning as Strangers: And that
something that thy Father did for them, is, he released many of them diverse
times out of Prifons, where they were unjustly cast, and he signified sometimes
his displeasure against them that made them suffer, and showed love to them in
hearing their Innocent Cause, with some respect thereunto; and that which he
did not, which he might have done, is, He took not away Tithes, that Cause of
great Oppression to many; nor the Unrighteous Laws wholly, as he ought to have
done, and as the Lord required of him,

And know thou from the Lord, That this same People are the People of the Lord,
and beloved of him, and as dear to him as the Apple of his Eye, and his
Presence is with them, and he leads them as a Flock by his Spirit into all
Truth; and who shall Bless them, shall be Blessed; but he that acts against
them shall not prosper, but be smitten of the Lord; for their Cause will the
Lord plead in his Judgments, and avenge them of their Enemies, and the Dread of
the Lord God shall fall heavy upon the heads of their Persecutors; and though
they are hated of all men, and under great Afflictions, yet are they a Just
People, and Innocent, seeking the Good of all men, and are Peaceable toward
all, and receiving all manner of Wrongs, and Evil, and Speakings against them
by Ungodly Men, but they render to no man Evil for Evil, but bless them that
curse, and do good to their Enemies, and bear all things from all men in
Long-suffering and Patience; for they are learned in the Practices (in doing
and suffering) of the Holy Apostles and Prophets, and are of the Seed of
Abraham, who was the Friend of God; and they were thy Father's Friends, and are
not Enemies to thee, nor to righteous Government, but wish well unto thee in
the Lord, and that thou may not be destroyed in Wickedness, but be
established in Righteousness and Peace in thy Government, to rule in God's
Authority over all Wicked Men, that may seek thy hurt: And we desire for thee,
that the Lord may give thee Wisdom, and a perfect Understanding, and the Spirit
of just and sound Judgment, to judge Righteously in all things, and to settle
the Government in true Judgment, that the Principle of God in every man may
answer to it, in defending and preserving, and protecting all that walk in
Truth and Righteousness, and being a Terror to all Evildoer; for, for that end
is Rule and Government ordained of God amongst men, to be a Praise to all that
do Well, and a Terror to all that do Evil. And now the Lord having suffered it
to be brought to pass, that thou art set up in thy Father's stead, to be chief
Ruler amongst men, this the Lord God Almighty requires of thee, as thou hopest
to prosper, and be blessed in this Life, and to enjoy Life Eternal when this
World is passed away; and this is the Word of the Lord God unto thee, Be
Humble, Meek, and Lowly in Heart, and exalt not thy own Horn, nor seek not this
World's Honor, but seek the Lord with thy whole Heart; and let Justice, and
true Judgment, and Righteous Government (which is according to the Law of God)
be set up, and exalted in the Nations; and come to know in thy self the
Dominion and Authority of the Lord God over Sin and Transgression, and to keep
down and condemn all that which is contrary to God in thy own Heart, and that
will make thee a Dread and a Terror to Men and Nations; and then the Lord will
be thy Crown, and his People will rejoice in thee, and lift up their Hearts to
God for thee: If thou throwest down and abolishest all Unrighteous Laws and
Decrees, which have been set up in the days of Ignorance, and yet stand,
whereby the Lord's dear Children are afflicted and oppressed at this day; and
establishest such a Government, which is justly according to God, in which
Righteousness and Truth, Justice and true Judgment may run down; and all the
contrary may be stopped, and chained, and limited, and confounded; and then
that which thy Father le^t undone the Lord will fulfill through thee: And doing
these things, the Lord would make thee truly Honorable; and Happy and Blessed
in this life, and in the Life to come; but in doing the contrary, the Lord will
make thee a Curse, and take thee away in his Judgments, and thy Name shall be
left a Reproach to Ages forever: And if thou Rulest in Oppression and Cruelty,
and suffer the Innocent to be Destroyed for want of True Judgment, then
shall thy Days be Fewer then thy Father's; if thou be Disobedient to him, the
Lord shall cut thee off, and thy Memorial shall Ro^; and this is the Word of
the Lord God to thee.

And as for this Afflicted and Sojourning People, They desire nothing to thee,
but Truth, and Peace, and Righteousness; and no more of thee, but Justice and
true Judgment, and that they and their little Ones, which to them are brought
forth, may sojourn in Peace, and quietly pass through the Nations, till they
come to the Land of Promise; and they may not carry of the Glory nor Riches of
this World with them, nor seek great Places of Honor from thee; nor be hurtful
to thee, nor the People, nor to Mankind in their sojourning; only what the Lord
Commands them, that they must do; and what he forbids, that they must not do:
For they have chosen the Lord to be their Leader, and to give him their
Obedience in all things; and thy Government, so far as it is according to God,
they will not destroy, nor rebel against, but are true Friends thereunto, and
subject in all things: And if thou walk with the Lord, and chusest him for
thy Councellor, and abasest thy self, and altogether exalt him and preserve his
People, that fear him, then shall thou prosper, and thy Name shall be greater
then was thy Father's, and the Numberless Number of this (now) distressed
People will be unto thee a Strength, and stand by thee in thy Day of Trouble,
and defend thee and thy just Government, and their hearts shall cleave to thee,
and thou shall prosper for their sakes, and none of thy Enemies shall have
power over th^e, to Destroy thee, though many may seek for thy life.

Wherefore, my Friend, Awake, awake, and now consider, The Day of thy
Visitation is present, and thy Father's is past; and now thou have a time to
gain unto thy self Everlasting Honor and Renown, or otherwise to leave thy
Name a Curse and a Reproach for evermore: Do thou hearken to the Voice of the
Lord, and fear his Dreadful Name, and bow before our God, that made Heaven and
Earth, who rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and pulls down one, and sets up
another at his Pleasure, and as he will; and he will make thee know, that he
lives and reigns over all, and does whatsoever he will; and if he smites thee,
none shall heal thee; and if he wounds thee, none shall comfort thee: Therefore
take him for thy Councellor, and beware of the wicked Counsels of men; for thou
have may Enemies, and they would rejoice to see thy Fall; and if the Lord be
not on thy side, thou can not long stand; but if thou be obedient to him, and
preservest his People, and breakest down all Oppression, then thy Enemies shall
fall, and thy Foot shall tread them down, and the Terror of the Lord shall be
upon all that hate thee; but thus shall it be done unto thee, if thou be
disobedient to him, and rejectest his Counsel by his Servant.

I am thy Friend, and a Lover of thy Soul, and seek thy Happiness in this
World, and in the World to come; known to many by the name of, Edward Buroughs.


The Original of this was delivered to him a few days after he was proclaimed
Protector.

To thee Richard Cromwell, chosen to be Protector, and chief Magistrate
Governor of these Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland; a faithful
Presentation and Salutation, by a Servant of the Church.
WE are rightly and truly sensible in all things of the Mighty Hand of the Lord
God, who brings all things to pass by his own Power, and according to his Will;
and in Heaven and Earth, and over the Kingdoms of men he rules and reigns;
he builds up, and breaks down; he planteth, and plucketh up; and he pulls
down one, and sets up another: and who may say, What do thou? or, Why do
thou it? for he is a Great God, and Mighty, and his Majesty is terrible: and
all things in Heaven and Earth, and all the Sons of Men, are at his disposure,
whose Dominion is from Everlasting to Everlasting; and he may be feared, and
had in Reverence by all Creatures that have Life and Breath.

And in particular, we are sensible of his Great and Mighty Power, who has of
late Years, in these Nations, once and again overturned, and overthrowed, and
changed at his Pleasure Times, and Powers, and Authorities, and Dominions; and
he has brought down the Mighty from their Seats, and stained the Crowns and
Glories of the Honorable, and broken the Stout-hearted, and the Oppressors of
their Governments as Potsherd, one against another, and made the Highest of Men
of no respect before him; for he has pulled down and set up whom he would,
according to his Will; and in all these things has his Hand been the very Doer
and Accomplisher thereof, that he might be known and feared amongst all people
through the whole Earth, who is the Dread and Terror of Men and Nations.

And as for thy Father, the late Protector, Great things and Honorable did the
Lord do for him, in raising him up, and casting out his Enemies before him, and
giving him Victory, and Power, and Renown through Nations; and we know the Lord
showed Favor to him, and gave him Strength, Wisdom and Valor, and a right
Spirit: and he was called of God into that great Work, to subdue the grievous
Cruelty, once ruling over tender Consciences; and to break down the great
Oppressions, which for Ages had caused the Just to groan; and the Lord was with
him in Victory, and went before him, and was his Defense, and preserved him
from great Dangers, and from the Wills of all his Enemies, and made him
prosperous against them all: but yet we know (to say no more of him) He did not
wholly fulfill the Will of the Lord, nor the Work which he begun; but became
Disobedient, and abused his great Deliverances and Authority; and did not set
free the Oppressed altogether, but left Mountains of Oppression, and grievous
Yoaks of Bondage unbroken down, and unsubdued; and the Lord smote him, and took
him away in Judgment because thereof.

And as for thee, who art now set up in his stead, We certainly believe, that
the Hand of the Lord is in this matter, if but to try thee, and it is he that
has brought it to pass, not expected by any, nor much sought after by thy
self, but its (...) to pass, a thing out of and contrary to the Thoughts and
Exp^^^ations of the whole Nations, art thou attained to this Place of ^nment;
and therefore we must acknowledge something of the great Hand of God in it,
being come to pass as out of due season, yet may the Lord make it sea^^nable,
and we patiently wait to receive what the Lord brings to pass thereby, knowing
that thou art in the Hand of the Lord, to do whatsoever he will with thee, and
conce^^ing thee: And if thou fear him, and walk with him, and chusest him
for thy Councellor, and art obedient to him, and seek his Glory alone, and
not thy own Honor and Greatness, then the Lord will do great things for thee,
and by thee; and accomplish his own Work through thee, whi^^ fell in thy
father's hands, and thou will be blessed, and renowned, and honored forever,
and thy Name shall be had in respect in Generations to come, and hereby the
present thoughts of many shall be confounded: but if thou do harden thy ^eart
against God; and live cruelly, and neglect his Cause, and despise his Name
(...) Honor, and seek thy own renown, and oppress the Just in thee and without
thee, and suffer the Poor to groan under the Cruelty and Burden of Oppressing
Men and Laws in thy Government, without relief from thee, and go on (...)
Authority, as some evil men before thee, then shall thou not pros^, but the
Lord shall bring thee down, and lay his Hand of Judgment upon thee; and thy
Name shall be a Reproach to the Saints forever, and the heavy (...) of
Vengeance shall be upon thee, and pursue thee more then any before thee; and
the Lord will deliver his People by another way: and this is not in Flattery
and Feignedness to thee; but as the Lord lives, our God shall (...) to pass in
his day, and thou shall be the Witness.

Wherefore O man, seek the Face of the Lord, and enquire diligently of him, and
hear his Word, that thy Soul may live; and feel a measure of his Spirit in
thee, to lead thee into all Truth, and set his Presence before thy Eyes
always, to direct thy steps, that he may bless thee with Power, Wis^^^,
Authority and Dominion, to perform the Duty of thy Place faithful^^ toward the
Lord and all Men, as he requires of thee: And if thou (...) ^^^kest the
Kingdom of God, and its Righteousness, and the Reconciliation between the Lord
and thee, and com^st to feel the Elect Seed of God raised up over all the
contrary in thee, and Transgression, and thy own Will and Affections, and that
which is of the Flesh in thee, judged and condemned by the Word in the Heart,
which makes the immortal Soul to live, and ^e refr^^^ed in God, and the Heir
of the Promise of God born in (...); and hereby shall thou have an Assurance
and Hope of Life Eternal, to rest in perfect Peace with God when this World is
no more, but passed away ^ith thee; and also, in this present time, Wisdom, and
Valor, and true Nobility shall be added to thee; and the Spirit of Power and
Dominion, to ^^ke Men and Nations be afraid, and fear; and all Evil Men, and
such (...) (...) the hurt of thee and thy Government, ^^^ll be blasted, and
confound^^; and all Good Men be encouraged, and made strong, and the whole
Na^^^^^ kept in Peace and Unity; and the Truth and Peace of God shall here^^
^^ourish amongst us, to the Honor of the Eternal God, and to thy Re^, if thou
rulest and governest for him, and by his Spirit, and Authority.

And we are truly sensible of the great Charge of this Place, and also of the
multitude of Perplexities and Dangers to thy self, occurring and happening
thereby; Dangers from open Enemies, by their Malice and cruel Plots; and
Dangers from thy pretended Friends, and they of thy own House, by secret
Surm^^^ngs; Dangers in Martial and Civil Affairs in this Nation, and abroad: so
that we certainly believe, Nothing, save only the Wisdom of God and his Power,
can preserve thee, and carry thee to go through, and faithfully fulfill so great
a Place, and to discharge it truly in the Sight of God, and Just Men; neither
may thou be defended and preserved by any other Means, from the wills and
plots and envy of evil men, who may watch for evil against thee, to destroy
the^^ and blot out thy Name, and thy Father's Posterity out of the Land.

Wherefore take hee^ to thy self, and fear God, that he may bless thee; for
this is a subtle and crafty Generation, and the Nations are politic, and the
Inhabitants thereof are wise and deceitful, over whom thou art set, and with
whom thou have to deal: Therefore beware of men; for many may seek after thy
hurt, and some may flatter thee, and show seeming great respect unto thee, and
profess great Service of Love to thee in the Nations, and in thy Family, for a
season, till their own Ends of Advantage be accomplished, and may in the very
time hatch Evil against, and secretly invent to uncover thy Nakedness, and
betray thee; for many men are Treacherous: but thou receiving a Measure of the
Wisdom of God, it will guide thee over all such, and thou will see into the
hearts and spirits of men; and to discern between Love Unfeigned, which will
seek thy good, and not self, and that Love which is feigned,, which will
flatter thee, and blind thy Judgment, and lead thee into Snares; and such as
will the least flatter thee, will be the most true to thee: So beware, and let
not vain Flatteries, and Proud Ambitious and ungodly Self-seeking Men, nor
Drunkards, nor Covetous, nor Politic and Deceitful men and spirits have any
place in thy Heart, nor in thy House, nor in Places of Authority and Trust in
thy Government; for such men will be a Snare unto thee, and a Dishonor to
thee, and the cause of God's Wrath and Curse against thy Person, Family, and
whole Nations; for such men God will not bless, nor thee nor the Government for
their sakes; and this thou will find tr^^ one day. Therefore choose unto thee
such men as fear God, who are Just, and Humble, and Upright-hearted, who are
Sincere and Faithful to the Lord, who have the Wisdom of God, and true nobility
of Spirit, in Righteousness and Simplicity, free from the Profaneness of this
evil World; let such be thy Companions, to wait upon thy Person, and to Govern
and Rule in thy Family and Nations; and let such be put in Trust, who will not
be Treacherous; for such are Blessed, and will be a Blessing to thee and the
whole Government: And we know, that the Lord gives respect and regard to the
Upright, that fear his Name, and such he will accomplish his Work by, to thy
Renown, and the Peace and Happiness of the Nations; more then to Craft and
Policy, and the Wisdom and Subtilty of this World; for thereby the Lord will
never fulfill his Work, nor prosper a Ruler, nor his People; and if thy Strength
and Defense be there, and not in the Lord, and his pure Wisdom only, thou can
not prosper; but the Nations and Men will overreach thee, and beguile thee,
and thou can not be Happy, nor thy Government be kept in Peace: but a little
measure of the Fear, and Power, and Wisdom of the Lord God from Heaven in thy
Heart, and amongst such as are thy Councello^^ to guide you and govern you,
will be of more value and worth unto thee, (...) thy Place and Condition, then
all Worldly Policy, and Wisdom, and Craft, which with God is not regarded, nor
of him ever blessed. And if thou deny* est the Lord, and Righteous Men; and
chusest thy own way, and this World's Wisdom, that is from below, then thy Trust
and Strength shall pierce thee, and make thee feeble, and of all others thy
state will be the most miserable, if tho^ be given into the policy and deceits
of treacherous men; so be wise, and seek the Lord, that he may be thy trust,
and put not confidence in vain man, whose heart is deceitful, and desperately
wicked.

And as concerning the condition of these Nations, they are in a broken state,
much divided, and diverse in Judgments, and far out of good Order; for there is
much Corruption and Abuse in all Orders and Places of men, and much to be
purged out and judged, both in Magistracy and Ministry, before Righteousness,
Peace and Truth, Union, Joy and Faithfulness can embrace one another, amongst
the Inhabitants of the Nations; for both are in a Diversion and Degeneration
from what they were at the first ordained of God, and this I could clearly
manifest unto thee; for the Nations are but newly come out of Popery, having
put off but part of the Dress of that polluted Whore, and the Garments of
Professions in Religion yet smell thereof, as not being thoroughly purged from
her abominable Idolatries and Superstitions, as thou may see when the Lord
opens thy eye to view the present state of all things.

As for Magistracy, It was ordained of God to be a Dread, and Terror and Limit
to all Evildoers, and to be a Defense and Praise to all that do well; to
condemn the Guilty, and to justify the Guiltless; but the Exercise thereof at
this day in these Nations is degenerated, and some that are in Authority are
greatly corrupted, and regard not the Just and Pure Law of God, to judge only
thereby; but oppress the Poor by Injustice, and subvert the good Laws of God
and Men to a wrong End and Use, abusing Authority, and turning the Sword
against the Just, whereby true Judgment is turned backward, and the Innocent
made unjustly to suffer for Righteousness sake, through the Corruption of men
in Authority; and did thou but know what we know in this particular, it would
pierce thy heart; Why? It is frequent amongst some of the Judges and
Magistrates, To commit a Man to Prison, and impose some great Fine upon him,
^^d to cast him into a Dungeon, or Hole, among Thieves and Murderers, for a
long season, for no other Offense, or Breach of any Law, but because he cannot
put off his Hat (...) th^^, and respect their Persons, by bowing the H^^ or
Knee: And many others, that fear God, and for Conscience sake cannot Swear upon
a Book, by kissing it, and laying hand upon it, because Christ says, Swear not
at all; though they deny not to speak and do the Truth in all things, as in the
Presence of God and all men: and many others, that because they are moved to
cry against Sin, and declare against the Iniquities of the Times in Teachers,
Rulers and People, that highly abound, perhaps in a Market, or Steeple-house,
or Highway, or other Places, as they are moved of God: and many others,
because for Conscience sake they cannot pay Tithes, nor give Money and Wages to
maintain a Priest, or false Teacher, that they receive no profit by; or to
maintain a Steeple-house, where the world worships in vain Traditions, and not
in the Spirit and Power of God: and many have been taken out of peaceable
Meetings, where they were waiting upon the Lord, and so^e out of their Inns and
Friends Houses; and many have been taken on the way, traveling about their
lawful Occasions; and some from their Callings and Labors; and for these
causes, through the envy of wicked men, and without any just Conviction of the
Breach of any Law, or any lawful Trial, or Examination, have Hundreds of just
men being wholly Innocent, been sent to Prison, and laid many Months, and some
for Years, or whipped, or put in the Stocks, and grievously abused by cruel
Executioners of wicked men's envy and injustice; and upon such grounds only, and
for such causes mentioned, and without the transgression of any just Law, have
and do at this day many Hundreds of faithful Subjects suffer hard and cruel
things, long and sort ^^prisonment, and cruel and sharp Whipping, and Stocking,
and unjust Banishment out of Towns and Cities; yea, Friend, its hard to be
expressed, and large to be declared, how many of the Lord's Servants do, and
have suffered great Injustice in these Nations, through the abuse of good
Government, and Degeneration of Magistracy, from its perfect state and place,
whereunto it was Ordained of God in the Beginning. And moreover, Great have
been the Abuses, by Striking, and Beating, and Haling, and Kickings, and
Revilings, and Reproaching, whereby many have suffered Unrighteously, and not
relieved nor defended by such in Authority as ought to have done it, neither
the Evildoers at all corrected and punished as they ought to have been, though
known to men in Power; and thus it is happened to us in our Age, Well-Doers are
punished as Transgressors, and Evildoers go free; and thus its manifest,
Magistracy and Governors, Rulers and Laws, are greatly degenerated and
subverted from what they ought to be according as the Lord ordained them; for
all this may be proved particularly; so that the Nations are out of good Order,
and the state of government and rule degenerated, and men in Authority and
Places of Trust corrupted, not being in their own hearts ruled by the Spirit of
the Lord, and therefore they cannot rule for him among men justly and
righteously, as he requires: And also, so great has been the Degeneration of
Government in these Nations of late years, That many faithful and just Men that
have been in great Places of Trust, both in Martial and Civil Affairs, through
the Envy and Evil-surmising of others, have been turned out of all Place and
Power, and not suffered to give their Judgment amongst men; but been cast off,
as unprofitable, though no Evil could be charged against them; whereby the Lord
has been offended* But all things and places, of men must be new molded, and
corrected, and purged, and regenerated, that true Judgment may flourish, and
Righteousness and Truth prosper, as in the Beginning; and this will the Lord
suddenly bring to pass by his own Power; and if thou opposest it, thou shall
not prosper, but be cut off, and taken out of the way: For the Spirit of the
Lord has been provoked to Wrath, because of these things, and his Anger is
kindled against the Nations; and he has overthrown, and yet will once more
overthrow, till he comes, whose Right it is to Rule, whose shall be the
Government and Kingdom, and all his Enemies shall be slain.

And as for the public Ministry, as now it is in its present estate, we
certainly know, and testify from the Lord unto thee, and to the whole Nations,
that it is not the same Ministry of Christ which the Apostles had, nor by the
same Power and Spirit; but is wholly degenerated in Call, in Practice, and in
Maintenance, and in all things, from what the Ministry of Christ was in the
days of the true Churches, before the Apostasy: and it is, as now it stands,
in degeneration, not of God, nor in the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, nor
has it the same End and Effects as the Ministry of Christ once had; but its
tasted and tainted with the Spirit of Antichist, which long has ruled in the
World, and its become a grievous Oppression in the Nations; and people are not
converted, nor turned to God from their evil ways, but remain unprofited: and
to say no more of it, though much I might say, what I affirm of it I may prove
by the Scriptures against the wisest of them before thee, if thou please,
viz. That as now the Ministry stands, it is not perfectly the same Ministry the
Apostles had, but is degenerated from what the Ministry of Christ was in the
days of the Apostles and true Churches, before the Apostasy; and if ever God
touches thy heart, thou will see it so; when the Spirit of Christ is chief
Judge in thee, thou will witness this to be true; and then may not thy Power
uphold any thing which is contrary to God, when Government is purged, and made
pure from all its present Degeneration.

Again, There are many and diverse sort of Sects, and Gatherings of People, and
Professions in Reliigion of several contrary Judgments, and Opinions and
Worships in these Nations; and these People, over whom thou art set to rule,
are diverse, and divided in their Ways, and Minds, and Professions of Religion;
some looking for, and seeking after Christ, in such a manner; and others after
another manner; all crying, Lo here is Christ, and thus he will come; and lo
he is there, and so will he appear; and some are inventing and supposing such a
Government to be best, and others contrary to that; and many are (as)
distracted in their thoughts, not knowing what to seek, or what to look after;
some are for such a Government and Religion, and others for another; and
peradventure each one of these may seek to thee for Protection against such as
oppose them, commending and justifying their own Way, and Sect, and Form, and
Religion against all others, and craving Laws to maintain themselves, and their
Sect; and to stop and limit all other Ways, as Heresy, because differing from
them; and they will each of them turn and rest the Scriptures from the mind of
the Spirit that gave them forth, to prove their own Opinions and Professions to
be right, against all others; but now thou may know, that the Scriptures were
given forth by the one Spirit of God, and is the Testimony of one Truth, of one
Savior, of one true Worship, and one only true Religion, and not many and
diverse Ways, and them that are of diverse Judgments, and Worships and
Religions, and yet all plead Proof from the Scriptures for what they profess
and practice: all such pervert the Scriptures, and wrest them, who are thus
divided and unsettled in Religion; and they show, that none of them have the
Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, which Spirit leads into all Truth, and
in it is the true Worship of God, and the true Profession and Practice of true
Religion, and that Spirit only understands its own words in Scripture; but all
these diverse Sects, and Heaps of People that are divided in Worship, and about
Religion, have not the Spirit of God, that gave forth Scriptures, to lead them
into all Truth, and guide them in the perfect Way, and pure Religion, which the
Apostles and Churches of Christ were in, in their days; but all these many
Sects, that are thus divided, are risen up since the days of the Apostles, and
are of another spirit, and of a false Religion. And as for such called
Ministers, they will be hurrying about thee, and flattering thee with fair and
crafty words, and smooth Petitions and Requests, for Protection and
Establishment from thee, and for large Maintenance, and Stipends and Tithes;
and possibly they may complain to thee against such as cannot give them H^re
and Tithes, but may reprove their Evil, and Covetousness, and Wickedness;
begging for Laws against such, and crying out against Error and Herisie,
because some may be moved to cry against their Deceits and Oppressions; and for
the like causes they will run about thee, and seek their own Advantage; and
this we know, their nature and spirit is such, and has been for many Ages.

But now Friend, Do thou stand in God's Authority; out of, and over all such
Teachers and Sects, and come not under any of them that have the Form of
Godliness, but want the Power, who are in the Apostasy, from the Life and pure
Religion, that the Apostles were in; nor believe them not that shall say, Lo
Christ is ^^rt, or, Lo he is there; or, Who shall ascend to fetch him from
without? or, When shall be come from far to save his People? Go not thou after
any of these, but he arken to the Word of God in thy heart, and know that
Christ is within thee, else thou art reprobate; neither do thou take in hand to
exalt any one of these Sects, or some of them above others; neither defend and
maintain any of them against others of them, nor tolerate not one of them
above another; for if thou do, it will betray thee, and the Nations Peace,
and set all spirits on Fire about thee; and while one is pleased, and may pray
for thee, others will be vexed against thee, and curse thee: wherefore be not
troubled about these things, nor cumber not thy self about Religion, how to
establish it; for it is God's Hand only to establish his Worship and Religion,
it belongs to him, as he will, and not as man by his Policy and Wisdom; but
stand free from them all, and neither establish any, nor pers^^ute any Sect
whatsoever, but let them all have their course and season,; they will fall and
perish of themselves, and the Good Old Way, and Truth, and the pure Religion,
only will remain; and let them cry one against another, and rebuke one another,
and meddle not thou with that, but only let thy Laws and Authority preserve
men's Persons and Estates from the Wrong one of another, that all men may live
peaceably under thee, and no man wrong his Neighbor's Person or Estate; and
that is only thy Place, to rule in outward Affairs, but not to Rule over any
man's Conscience, to compel him to such a Worship, or to limit from such a
Worship in Religion, that belongs not to thee, but to the Lord, who alone will
be the Ruler, and Guide, and Exerciser of his People's Consciences; and if thou
do meddle therein, thou shall not prosper, nor be blessed in thy Deed: So
leave the establishing of Religion to the Lord, and let all these Sects
manifest, if any of them have the Spirit and Power of God in them, and with
them, and let them show their Weapons of the Spirit; for only such as have the
Power and Spirit of God in them will overcome, and such will be increased and
grow; and thou nor none can hinder: and such that want the Power and Spirit of
God in and with them, may flourish in their Form for a while, but they will be
blasted and wither, and its in vain for thee, or any, to uphold such, or
endeavor to establish them; but if thou meddlest on these accounts it will
undo thee, and confound thee; therefore be wise, and know what the Lord
requires of thee perfectly; for if thou leavest that undone which God requires,
then shall thou be condemned; and if thou do that which he requires not, then
shall thou not be free. And this is written in Love to thee, to inform thy
mind, how to walk toward the Lord, and the People over whom he has set thee.

And as for the maintaining of Ministers, Let that alone also, and be not
troubled about it; for it was ever the false Prophets and Deceivers that
preached for Hire, and went after Gifts and Rewards, and sought Money and Gifts
of people; and they that do the same now, were never sent of God, nor are they
such as shall convert people to God; for who are true Ministers of Christ, will
not seek to thee, nor to men for Wages, nor Tithes, nor Money, but live of the
Gospel, and not compel great sums of Money from people, to maintain them in
their Families in Pride, in Fullness, and Idleness; such things are great
Oppressions in this Nation, and a horrible filthy thing in the Sight of God,
and because thereof will the Lord's Judgments come upon the Land: If thou were
but rightly sensible what casting into Goals, and what suing at Law of poor
People, and what spoiling Peoples Goods by Restraint, and all for and about
Tithes, and Priests Wages; it would make thee admire the Wickedness of that
Generation; but do thou let them alone, for they do shame themselves, and undo
themselves, and lose the Hearts of all good People by their own doings; and
stand over them all in God's Authority, and know a measure of the Spirit of God
in thy own heart, and thereby thou will discern, and try and judge of the
spirits of all men, and their Religion; and the Spirit will lead thee in the
pure Religion, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth; So let not thy mind be
cumbred at all about establishing Religion, nor about maintaining the
Ministers; but be faithful to what the Lord requires of thee, and learn his
Will, and do it, and then thou will be Blessed and Honored in this world, and
in the World to come.

And Friend, Know thou that the Lord is doing of a great Work in these Nations,
he is raising up a Seed to serve him and to worship him aright, and the God of
Heaven is setting up a Kingdom over all the kingdoms of the World, and he has
a Controversy with all sorts of people, in as much as Corruption and
Degeneration is entered amongst all, and all must be purged of all Orders of
men, and the Evil cast out; the Work of the Lord is Great and Mighty, and he
requires no help of thee, nor any man whatsoever; for his own Arm will bring it
to pass; yet he would not have thee to gainsay his Work, and strive against
it, and seek to quench what the Lord is bringing forth, if thou do it, then
shall thou be condemned, and the Lord will speedily execute his Judgments, and
Remove thee, and overthrow thy Power and Authority into Destruction; wherefore
be passive in this matter, and look thou at the Lord, and protect and defend
men's Persons and Estates from Wrong; but meddle not with their opinions and
professions in Religions, to exalt any of them, nor yet to persecute them.

And thus Friend, according as it lay upon me from the Lord, I have written
this unto thee in dear and pure Love, God is Witness, and I have cleared my
Conscience to thee thus far; and if thou fall by thy own Transgression, it will
lie upon thy self; I have warned thee, and I am clear; and if thy Fall comes,
remember thou wast advised.

Who am a Lover of Justice and True Judgment, and a Friend to this
Commonwealth, and to thee wishes well in the Lord, E. B.
London, the 18th of the 8th Month, 1658.

This was delivered to him in the Eighth Month, 1658.

To the Protector and his Council.
THE Lord God will shortly make you know, that we are his People, though we be
accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter; yet our King of Righteousness will break
you to pieces, if you harden your Hearts, and Repent not: And seeing that Love
will not draw thee, neither the Gentle Leadings of our God have any place in
you; yet Judgment shall awaken you, and his heavy Hand of Indignation shall lie
upon your Cousciences, and you will be scatterred and distracted to pieces.

E B.
This was written in White Hall, in the Tenth Month, 1658. to Richard and his
Council.
For the Parliament.
YE that sit in Counsel, that are assembled for the Nations Good, hear ye the
Word of the Lord God, which is toward you all; Rememember the Cause of God,
and of his People; remember the Groanings of the Poor, and give ear to the Cry
of the Oppressed, and relieve the Guiltless Sufferers, and break the Bonds of
Iniquity, and let the Oppressed go free; do this, lest you perish: And remember
the Old Good Cause, that is decayed, and has long been laid waste; let it be
once more revived in the Nations, that God may bless you; Remember the first
Engagement, which was for Freedom, and suffer not the Exercise of pure
Conscience to be trodden down by Oppressors; but seek ye, seek ye the Glory of
the Lord, and the Safety of his People, and the Freedom of such as are
oppressed; and be not ye Oppressors; nor Adders to the Sufferings of the
Innocent; make no Laws to limit the Lord, nor his Spirit, nor his People, but
make such of no effect, lest ye be confounded like as with a Whirlwind, by
the Breath of the Almighty: I am the Lord, and my Name is dreadful to all
Flesh; mine Arm is stretched forth over the Nations, and I will scatter them at
my Pleasure; I kill, and I make alive; I break down, and I build up; fear ye
me, and tremble at my Presence; bow before me, and have my Name in Reverence,
and my People in Safety, and let them be free from all Oppressions and Tyranny,
lest I correct you with the Rod of my Judgments, says the Lord: For I will
rule Nations with an Iron Rod, and the Governments shall be mine through the
Kingdoms of the World, and my People shall inheri^ the Possessions; I will beat
the Mountains to Powder, and strike Terror in the Hearts of the Mighty; and I
will Judge among the Judges, and Rule amongst the Rulers of the Earth, who are
but Dust and Ashes before me; therefore do ye the thing that pleases me, and
have my Cause and my People's Cause in respect amongst you; and be ye low and
humble in my Sight, lest I wound you, and you never be healed, lest I scatter
you, and you never be gathered, I am the Lord that does whatsoever he will,
Dreadful and Mighty is my Name in the Earth, and my People are my Inheritance,
wherein I delight; spare them, and afflict them not, that I may spare you, and
not destroy you; and take you Counsel at my Spirit, and at my Servants, that
you may prosper; and hurt not the Innocent, nor touch my Anointed Ones, lest I
come suddenly upon you, says the Lord, and break you to pieces; for I will
make you know, that my People are mine, and beloved of me, and that I care for
them, and will Fight for them, and revenge their Cause, and deliver them from
the hands of their Enemies speedily; this ye shall know when my Vengeance is
extended forth to all my Enemies, and upon all such as do oppress my People,
and are Spoilers of my pleasant Heritage; and now am I arisen, says the Lord.

Edw. Buroughs,


This was written to the Parliament, which began to sit in the Eleaventh
Month, 1658. which Richard Cromwell Dissolved in the Second Month, 1659.

To Richard Cromwell and to Henry Cromwell.
FRIENDS,
YET once more has the Lord given me somewhat to say unto you, in Love to your
immortal Souls; You had a glorious Day of Visitation, and many precious
Warnings from the Mouth of the Lord, by his Servants, but you rejected the
Counsel of the Lord against your own Souls, and made no account of the Servants
of the Lord, which were sent unto you; but caused them and suffered them to be
persecuted by your Power, and they were made a Spoil and a Prey to their
Enemies all your days; and you sought your selves, and your own Honor, and
you were exalted in Pride and Vainglory, and forgot God, who raised you up
from a low Estate, and you had no respect to the Cause of his People, and
therefore is this justly come to pass upon you from the Hand of the Lord; not
that I rejoice in it, and glory over you because of it, only I tell you what is
justly happened unto you, that ye may learn the Lora's just Judgments in these
things, like as formerly I warned you of it; for it could not otherwise be, but
that the Lord would avenge the Cause of his People upon their Persecutors, and
the Injustice done unto them upon you, in whose Name and Power it was acted;
for, in every Generation he has had respect unto his People's Cause, and did
avenge their Cause in his season: And this I well remember, I was once moved to
speak in the Name of the Lord unto your Father, That these things that came to
pass in his days, that Cruelty and Oppression of the Lord's People, would be
recompensed, and repented of in his Children's days: For I saw, that the
Cruelty and Injustice that was done in his Name upon the People of God, could
not escape un punished in a Generation; and it is now come to pass in a
measure, and will be more and more, even for his Transgressions and your own:
for all of you had a Day and a Time, wherein you might have done something for
the Lord, and for his People; and you had a Price put into your hands, that you
might have improved to the Lord's Glory, and to your own Renown, to have been a
Blessing unto your selves, and to the People of God in these Nations; but your
Day is over, and Night is come upon it, and your Price is taken from you, and
given to others, and you cannot now work nor act on the Lords behalf, as once
you might have done; and you have sought honor to your selves, and you reap
Reproach; and because you have despised the Counsel of the Lord, therefore the
snare has caught you, which was laid for others: These things I say unto you
in pity for you, rather then in boasting over you; neither do I commend that
spirit which acts in too much severity toward you, which upraids you, rather
then seeks to amend you, that is not my way: For your Father served the Lord in
his Generation, and was once the Instrument in his Hand, to the accomplishing
of good things, till that an ambitious spirit got power over him, and betrayed
him, and the Work was lost which God called him unto. And as for these that are
now in Power, if they shall tread in your steps, and shall not relieve the
Oppressed, much more then any before them shall they be overthrown, and brought
into Contempt. And as for you, Come into the Fear of the Lord God that your
Iniquities may be pardoned; and seek Peace with God, and Reconciliation, and
seek after the Kingdom that e^dures forever; and while ye have time, seek after
a Crown Immortal, and wait to know that which will make you Heirs of that
Inheritance which never fades away: the Light in your own Consciences, which
Christ has enlightened you with, which lets you see Sin, and convinces you of
your Evil Deeds; that Light in you must you own to be your Teacher, and must
become subject unto it in all things, or else you have no part in the Kingdom
of God; and cease from your lying Prophets, who have flattered you in your
Iniquities, and deceived your Souls, and cried Peace unto you and Safety; and
said, You should Prosper, and they have hardened your Hearts, and been a Snare
to you, till the Lord's Anger is broken forth against you, and they found
Liars. So now consider, and do not always reject Love; but and if you do, I am
clear, and your Iniquities will be upon your own Heads; and though rejected by
you, yet a Friend to your Souls, whom the Lord has made often to warn you; and
happy had you been, if you had or can now prize the Day of your Visitation.

Edward Buroughs.


This was delivered to them in the Fifth Month, 1659.

TO THE PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, The present Authority of
these Nations, Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
A Presentation, by a faithful Friend to the Nations, in the Name, and by the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, King of Righteonsness and Peace; That you may take off
Oppression, and free the People from all their Cruel Bonds, that have been
imposed upon their Bodies, Estates and Consciences, in the days of the Reign
of Antichrist; that Truth, Justice and Righteousness may come nigh unto us, and
the Kingdom of the Son of God set up among us; that you and we may at last be
free Subjects of Christs' Kingdom, where Righteousness, Truth and Peace may run
down, and be established in the Earth for evermore.

FRIEND,
IT is acknowledged, that the Lord God (who rules over all in the Kingdoms of
Men) has done Great and Honorable Things by you, and with the Face of your
Authority in your days; and since your first appearing on the Throne, Mighty
Things have been brought to pass, in our Nations, by the Hand of the Lord;
insomuch that many Mountains have been abased, and many sturdy Oaks have been
cut down, and many cruel Laws have been made void; and even the Way of the
Lord, and the Way of the coming of his Kingdom, has seemed to be prepared: For
the kingdom of Antichrist, and the Beast, and the Whore (the false Church) has
in many things received a mortal Wound in this Nation; and there has been
diverse times the fair Blossoms of the Glorious Appearance of Truth,
Righteousness and Peace; and there have been many fair Promises and Pretenses,
made by many of you, like as if the Kingdom of Jesus had been at our Door,
ready to have entered our Nations, whereby many good Hopes we have had, to have
been made a perfect free People ere this day, from the Chains of Antichrist and
the Whore (the' false Church) and from every Branch thereof; and that we might
have sitten together in Peace and Unity, and in Freedom from all the Opressions
of our Enemies.

But Alas, alas, This Glorious Work of Reformation has bin interrupted before
our eye, and the precious Buds and good Appearance of Glorious Fruits have been
withered and blasted in our sight; so that our good Hopes have perished, and
our Freedom has been intercepted through the Evil-dealing of many unfaithful
men; so that Antichrist's kingdom has not been utterly rooted out, nor the
oppressive Laws of the Whore (the false Church) wholly broken down, but the
rather have seemed to be revived again; and the Kingdom of the Son of God has
been warred against, and Truth, Righteousness and just Judgment has been kept
out of the Throne, and the Lamb, and his Army, and Followers have been opposed
by open and secret Rebellion; so that though there has been appearances of
good Things now and then, yet ever and anon Clouds and Darkness have
overshaddowed the Nations again, and the good Hopes of Faithful People have
been driven backwards, and Reformation stopped, and your own Vows, Promises,
and Pretenses have remained unfulfilled, and we are yet an Oppressed People:
and the Cause of this has been from some unfaithful men, that have neglected
the good Work of the Lord, once entrusted with them; and have sought
themselves, and their own Honors and Interests, and have sitten down at Ease
and Rest in the Flesh, glorying in the Spoil of their Enemies, and thereby have
they become unfaithful and unprofitable in carrying on the Lord's Work: for
some have been of a sincere Mind for a season, and made a good Progress toward
the attaining a Kingdom of Righteousness, and the removing of all Oppressions;
yet when they have begun to seek themselves in this World, and to take unto
themselves the Honors, and Titles, and possessions of their Enemies (whom the
Lord cast out before them) and so have become guilty of their Enemies Sins,
then they have been choked, and the good Work of the Lord by them could not
prosper, but it has fallen in their hands even because of their Apostasy, whom
the Lord has removed in his Wrath, which to you all may be Examples, that ye
follow not their steps: For, for these Causes, I tell you, has the True
Reformation been turned backward, and the Work of the Lord remained unfinished,
insomuch that Oppression, Injustice and Tyranny yet remains upon the People;
and Ten Thousand lie groaning under the Yoke and Bondage of Antichrist, and of
the Whore (the false Church) in Persons, Estates and Consciences; and are ready
to depart out of all good Hope and Confidence, That they shall never see,
through you, the finishing of that long since begun good Work of Perfect
Reformation, and Freedom from all Oppressions. And amongst the many Great
Oppressions and Cruel Burdens, yet remaining in our Nation, there is at this
day one particular Oppression abounding, under which Thousands of the free
People of the Lord, and of these Nations, lie unjustly suffering in their
Bodies, Estates and Consci^nces (to wit) This way of forced Maintenance of the
Ministry, by Tithes, and Money, and Yearly Stipends; which many are violently
forced to pay, through Oppression, and contrary to Equity; and because hereof
is God not well-pleased with you, but his Wrath is kindled already; for the Cry
of the Unjustly Afflicted under this one Oppression has entered into his Ear,
and he will be avenged speedily, even because of the Oppression of his People
in this very particular, who cannot out of a Good Conscience pay Tithes, or
Money, or any other thing, contrary to Equity, to the maintaining of this
Ministry, and these Ministers, which they receive no benefit by, neither are
under their Ministry.

And forasmuch as this way of maintaining Ministers and Ministry by Force is
wholly Antichristian, and of the Whore (the false Church) and never was in the
true Churches of Christ, in the Apostles days; neither did ever Christ, or his
Apostles, give Institution or Example for such way of Maintenance to Christ's
Ministers: but being that this way of forced Maintenance, by Tithes, and Money,
and Yearly-Stipends, is come up long since the Apostles days; and is the very
Institution of the false Church of Rome, and was first practiced by her
Authority in our Nation; and by the same Spirit, at this day, this Oppression
remains amongst us: and likewise it is wholly unreasonable, That one sort of
people should be compelled to maintain another Ministers, whom they do not
hear, nor receive their Ministry: And also, this way of maintenance is one of
the greatest Oppressions in our Nation, and many Hundreds of my Brethren have
suffered great Oppression thereby, some the loss of Estates, and many the loss
of their Liberties, and some the loss of their Lives also; insomuch that this
Oppression is fully ripe to be cut down, and removed out of our Land.

Wherefore it lies upon me from the Lord, to request it of you, and to lay it
upon you, as being the present Authority, that have Power to do it; That you
speedily order the removing of this Oppression of forced Maintenance to
Ministers out of the Nation, and that no man henceforth be compelled or forced
to maintain Ministers and Ministry, by Tithes, or Money, or otherwise; but that
every man be left free, to give what, and how much, as he pleases, to what
Minister as he will; only if any do hire a Minister, and promise so much, then
it is Equity, that he that is hired have the benefit of the Law, to receive
what he is promised, by force, if he cannot freely: But let not any people be
forced by your Law to hire Ministers, neither one sort to maintain another
peoples Minister; but let every sort of people live under what Ministry, and
hear whom they please, and also maintain their own Ministers, that labor for
them: and this is reasonable, and would content all the Faithful People; for it
is wholly unequal, that any people should be forced and compelled to mantain
another peoples Minister, which does no work for them; and it is also wholly
inconsistent with the good Government of a Commonwealth, and absolute contrary
to Christian-Liberty, and is a very Chain of Antichrist upon the good People;
and the main Cause of Heart-burnings, and Strifes, and Envyings among Subjects;
and one of the chief Props of Deceivers and false Ministers, that covet to run
after great Benefices, and care not for Souls; and also, the God of Heaven is
vexed with this Abomination; and it is certain, that you and these Nations
shall never be established in true and perfect Peace and Unity, while this
Oppression remains, nor till that in all things Conscience be let free to the
Exercise of the Spirit of God.

Wherefore I am come to your door on the behalf of the Lord, and all his
People, and I cry, and ten thousand with me (in Spirit) of the free People of
your Nation, Let this Unreasonable Oppressive and Antichristian Practice, of
forcing Maintenance to Ministers, be speedily removed out of our Land, and let
the Persons, Estates and Conscionces of your faithful Friends be freed from
this cruel Burden, that they have long born by your and their very Enemies: And
also I lay it upon you, that you clear and free your selves in all things from
the false Church, and be not Servants to her; drink not her Cup of
Fornications, neither in any thing carry the Whore: and hereby should that long
born and heavy Yoke of Antichrist be removed, that has laid upon the good
People's Persons, Estates and Consciences; and false Ministers, that run for
Hire, and not to win Souls (who are Oppressors) should hereby be limited; and
the Faithful Ministers of Christ, who are sent of him, would be the more
encouraged to minister freely, who have received freely; and this would be the
way to bring Blessings and Peace amongst us, and to rejoice the Hearts of the
Righteous, and to stop the spirit of Oppression; and hereby you would be made
Honorable, and the Lord himself glorified, and his People a free People: So
that for these Causes it is upon me to demand it of you, that you remove the
Oppression aforesaid, of forcing Maintenance for Ministers and leave every sort
of people free, to maintain their own Ministers, as the Lord shall lead them.

For this was the Way in the true Churches, The Ministers' of Christ did eat of
the Milk of the Flock which they kept, and of the Fruit of the Vineyard which
they (...) planted, Freely given them; and they reaped carnal things where they
sowed Spiritual, yet as a Free Gift unto them, and not by Force, nor as a Debt:
for this way of forcing Maintenance was never in being among the true
Churches; but is of the false Church, both in its Original, and in its standing
to this day, and out of her Cup (who has made Nations drunk) has our Nation
drunk this Abomin^tion and Oppression; and it is the remainder, and one of the
strongest parts of the Whore of Rome, yet left in England, and it is full time
to be removed clean away from us, and if you do it, then shall we have cause to
believe, that you intend well to the Nations, and our long decayed Hopes
concerning you will be again revived, and our Faith will be increased, that you
will yet suffer Righteousness and Mercy to flourish, if you take off every
Oppression, and make the People free; but if you do it not, but will be the
Imposers of Unrighteous things upon the People under you, and will carry the
Whore, and yet drink her Cup, and compel others to drink it, Then the Lord will
break you to pieces, and bring Freedom to this Nation some other way; and you,
and they, and the Beast, and the Whore, and your Oppressious, shall all fall
together, and sink as a Stone into the Sea, and your Remembrance shall be
blotted out, and perpetually perish: and these are the Words of the Lord God
unto you, wherefore that you may live in true Honor, and not Perish in
perpetual Shame; and that the Lord may bless you, and not make you a Curse, and
that the Lord's People may pray for you, and not against you.

I say, consider in the Fear of God, and with a willing Mind grant this my
Desire; and in so doing, you fulfill the Will of the Lord, and thereby be
established over all your Enemies.

Many things more on the Lord's behalf I have to demand of you, but this for
present; from a Lover of Righteousness, and a Friend to this Nation,

London, the 12th of the 7th Month, 1659. Edward Buroughs.

A MESSAGE TO THE Present Rulers OF ENGLAND, Whether Committy of Safety (so
called) Council of Officers, or Others whatsoever. Delivered unto them by an
Ambassador from the only right Heir of the Government, whose Right alone it is
to Rule: And by special Authority and Commission from him, this is sent unto
them, that they may hear, and fear, and learn Wisdom, and may deliver up the
proper Right of the only King unto him, that they may be blessed; but on the
contrary depends their DESTRUCTION.
THese things were upon me to deliver, even by Speech and word of Mouth, to the
present Men in Power; that they might be warned, lest they Perish: But no way
being made for me so to do, I have written what was upon me, even as short as
possibly I could, and in as little compass as might be; having hinted at things
which might more largely been spoken to. And I order this to be Printed, and
given to their particular hands with speed.

FRIENDS,
MY Master is a High, and Mighty, and Powerful Prince, and very Honorable; and
Fear, Reverence, Respect and Subjection belongs to him alone, from you and all
Mankind; he is Wise, and Understanding, and of great Strength; and his Dominion
is from Everlasting to Everlasting; and he can do whatsoever he will in Heaven
and Earth; for he rules with his Iron Rod over the world; and whatsoever he
says, it is done; for his Word is an Everlasting Command; If he says to a
man, Live, it is so; if he says to a man, Dye, it comes to pass; and if he
give Peace to a Man or a Nation, none can make War; and if he make War with a
Person, or in a Nation, no man is able to make Peace: For why? he has all
Power in his Hand, and to him all Judgment and Authority is given; he is the
Son of the Living God, the Everlasting Creator; he was, and is, and is to come;
his Eye beholds all things, and his Arm compasses Heaven and Earth; and what
his Purpo^^ is, he has always, and will ever bring it to pass: if he set up
Rulers, they must Rule; and if he pull them down, none can hinder: whom he
will, he Honors; and if it be his Pleasure, he brings men to Shame: if he
break a Nation down, none can build it up; and if he confound Powers and
Authorities in the Kingdoms of men, they all fall, as withered Grass before
him: ^ehold ye men! He is so Great and Mighty, and of so great Authority, that
whatsoever he says, it is done; and whatsoever he wills, it comes to pass;
and none is able to resist him, and overcome his Power, when his Pleasure is to
accomplish a Work: by him all things are that be, and all things live that have
Life, and through him all things move, and of his Fullness every Creature in
Heaven and Earth receive. And this, my Master, is altogether Honorable in
Birth, and otherwise; and altogether Mighty in all his Works; he is Just and
Merciful, full of Goodness, Righteousness and Truth; all Virtue dwells in him;
and his Judgment and Mercy, his Authority and Meekness, and his Wrath and his
Love, they are Companions: And what are ye before him? or, How shall ye be able
to resist him, or to turn backward what his Purpose is concerning you, and this
Nation? for ye have no Being nor Breath without him. Behold ye men! ye are
verily as the Dust before the Wind, so are ye to him, soon blown away, and your
Place not found; as the Grass before the Mower, so are ye before him, soon cut
down, and withered, and your Beauty utterly extinguished; as a Potters Vessel
under an Iron Rod, even so are you to him, he can immediately break you, never
to be bound up; as a Drop to the Fountain, so are you to him, soon dried up,
and made nothing: Wherefore ye Men, ye Mortal Creatures, ye Ignorant Persons,
Sons of a Transgressor, ye Dust and Ashes; for thus you are in comparison of
him, this Mighty Prince; hearken to his Message, which comes to you from him;
Hear and Fear, and be not Stouthearted against the Lord God, that is about to
speak unto you.

As for this little Island of England, wherein your present Place and Being
is; It is an Island which the Lord has showed great Favor unto, in Ages past,
and in this present Time; and I must tell you, he has a Purpose of Love
toward it, and to Honor it in the view of the World, though through great
Tribulations; and he has an intent of great Good unto it: For he has a Seed,
a precious Seed in it, scattered abroad, and he has a People that fear his
Name, and have walked in his Ways, and he has made them, and elected them,
and what they are, it is by him; that he may dwell among them, and have the
whole Government over them all; yea he has a speedy Purpose verily concerning
this Nation, and he will purify it in Judgment, and refine its Inhabitants
through the Fire of Tribulations, that it may be pleasant to him, and fit to do
his Will: He has a purpose to work some great thing in it, I must tell you, as
he has said unto me so to do; He will have his Name exalted and reverenced in
this Island, and his Terror shall be sent out of it through the World, and his
Branch from it shall spread over the Earth; he does purpose in his season to
take it into his own hand, and to sway the Government thereof with his own
Scepter, and to set up Righteousness alone, and to overthrow all Oppressions
and Oppressors; and the Kingdoms of this World must become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ.

True it is, Such has been the coming to pass of Time, and of Things, for many
Ages by past, that my Master has been as it were banished from the Nation, and
has not been suffered to enjoy his Right; but has been expelled, even as it
were by the force of Satan and Antichrist, who has long usurped Authority over
the Inhabirants of this Nation: and in my Master's absence, Lamentable
Injustice, Cruelty, Unmercifulness, Tyranny and Oppression, has been exercised
upon the Inhabitants; and the poor Creatures have been held in great Slavery by
their Rulers, that have ruled by the Dragon's power, and been kept in great
Blindness and Ignorance, and under great Oppression, both in Body and Spirit,
by Antichristian Teachers, for this many Years, even while the great King has
been absent, and as it were gone into a far Country; even all this time has
Antichrist and the Devil ruled and reigned, and has made and executed
Oppressing and Tyrannical Laws and Decrees, both in Church and State; and all
the Nation has been out of right Order, and laid waste and barren of good
Fruit, and it has been as a Wilderness by reason hereof: and men that have
ruled for many years, have not ruled singly by my Master's Authority, but by
another power, though not without the knowledge of my Lord, neither as though
he had not Power to have done otherwise; but for his own Pleasure he has
suffered it thus to be, and let men go on to rule and govern in their own
Wills, and after their own Lusts; and people have walked wickedly toward him,
and toward one another; and all this he has suffered, not as if he gave
Toleration for it; for his Messengers now and then, and his Witness in peoples
Consciences, have been reproving their Ungodly ways, and he has often showed
his dislike, by diverse Ways and Tokens, and many Judgments, and strange
Overturning, to the way and proceeding of both Rulers, Prophets and Teachers of
this Nation; but yet they have gone on against his Mind, and contrary to his
Will, notwithstanding his Reproofs and Judgments, not that he had not Power to
have executed his Pleasure in Wrath upon them, and to have destroyed them
altogether, and have made the Nation a Heap, and as nothing long before this
day; for Power was in his Hand to have done it: But he has been
Long-suffering, and of great Patience, and born all things, and taken the
Injustice, and Cruelty, and Wickedness, and Idolatry, and all Unrighteousness,
that has abounded in the Nation, upon himself, and suffered under it, and born
it for its season, while woeful and lamentable Oppressions have been practiced
in Civil State even Hellish Laws, and Devilish Executors of them; Merciless
Tyrants have born the Scepter, and reigned for many years over the Inhabitants,
and in Church and State has bin Heinous Idolatry and Superstitious Vanities
committed in a high nature and measure, and even all Men, and States of Men,
and Orders of Men of every degree have been abominably corrupted in the Sight
of my Lord, even from the Prince to the Beggar, even Rulers and Subjects,
Teachers and People, Judges and Prophets; they have been corrupted both in
heart and hand, and they have dealt falsely and wickedly toward him, and
toward one another, even to the great Displeasure and Vexation of him and his
blessed Spirit, and to the high Provocation of him to their own Destruction, if
his Long-Suffering had not prevailed; and all this while he has laid as it
were asleep, and at rest in himself: and he has left men to try them, what
they will do, and he has gives them a Day; many Kings and Rulers he has let
them have a little time, to see how they would use it, but they have abused it,
and not ruled for him, nor accomplished his Work, nor fulfilled his Will; but
acted even in defiance of him, and of his Power, and to his great Dishonor.

Alack! I must be plain with you; My Lord has been utterly exiled, and greatly
dishonored, and highly provoked and vexed by reason of such proceedings, as
have been in this Nation for this many years, through the Corruption of all
sorts of Men in Place and Power, who have not ruled for him, but for the Devil,
to their own corrupted Ends; only he has suffered men to go on^in their*
course for a season; some as it were, appearing on the Stage for a time, and
suddenly cast down again for their Iniquities sake; and his Hand has been in
all these things, though very privately and secertly, not known and discerned
by the Sons of Men, yet has he ruled over the Kingdoms of Men, and pulled down
one, and set up another. And to for bear the several Actings and Proceedings,
of many by-passed Ages, and to come to this Generation, and to speak of things
that have happened within these few years, and of the changing and overturning
that has happened in this Nation; such was the Cruelty, Tyranny, Oppression
and Idolatry, both in Church and Civil State, that the people of this Nation
were held under, in the days of Papal-Power; such, I say, was the exceeding
height of Cruelty and Tyranny of that time, that not any that Feared or
Reverenced my Lord, in any measure, could scarce live, or have a Being in the
Nation; even against every man, that did but in^line toward him, and desire
the Knowledge of his Ways, Hell's Mouth was opened against them, and they were
swallowed up, and many of their Lives taken from the Earth, by the hellish
power that had in that day usurped Authority in this Island; and when thus it
was, then he looked down from Heaven, and his bowels of compassion were opened,
for the sake of the oppressed People that desired after him, in so much that he
broke, and threw down the power of their Oppressors in some measure, as it
stood in Papal Authority, and when the iniquity of that power was filled up,
he took vengeance upon it; and I must tell you, it was he that brought it
about, even the destroying of that Power in this Nation, and freeing the Nation
from it, though the men that were instruments in the cause were not his
Servants, otherwise then as Nebuchadnezzar served him, for he has a secret way
to have a service from the wicked, and such is his Power, that he can turn the
wickedness of the wicked to his glory, and he can make a Rod to whipp his
Adversaries, and burn it when he has done, and he ^ath often destroyed one
wickedness by another.

Well, But to leave that, though he did in some measure free the Nation from
much Tyranny and Cruelty, in the casting out Popish Authority; yet a lack! the
Nation in a few years was near as much violated by Injustice and Cruelty, under
the succeeding Power, as ever it was once under the Papal-Power; though before
there had been some small Reformation, and Change in outward Appearance, though
little in ground and Nature; yet Oppression, and Idolatry, and Superstition ^in
Church and State, and all Profaneness and Wickedness among people, was grown
so high, like as it had been under the Papal Power before; and all that desired
after the Lord, and were weary of Iniquity, and of the then present Oppressions
and Idolatries, were Persecuted, and Slain, and destroyed, and Injustice and
Cruelty exercised upon them, even almos^ to to the rooting out of
Righteousness, and to the grieving of the Lord's Spirit: Well then, because of
the cry of the People, and the Oppression of the Nation under that Authority,
my Lord looked down again, and even for his Name's sake, and for his Seed's
sake, he had compassion on this Nation, to set it free, and to break off its
Oppressions; and in a great measure he did deliver the people of this Nation in
many things, and there was a part of Reformation wrought, and much pretended
and looked for; and all this came to pass through him, and my Lord did
accomplish it, however the Instruments by which he wrought proved deceitful,
and became Oppressors, as others before them; and though there was in this
Nation a day of great Troubles, and Wars, and Contention, and great Strife, and
the wasting of much Blood, and earthly Treasure; and none of these things, I
must tell you, fell without the ordering of my Master's Hand; yet so it was,
and came to pass, that after this Nation was restored to Peace, though much
Unrighteousness and Injustice was removed, yet there was much also left behind;
and men that he had used as Instrument in his Hand, in a good Work, and to whom
he had given Wisdom and Understanding, and appeared in much Mercy and in great
Deliverance; yet they even turned to seek themselves, and became corrupted in
the Spoils of their Enemies, and when Peace and Plenty abounded the Lord was
forgotten again, and then the Land fell under Oppressors, and began again to
cry out for Freedom, even when other Horns of the first Beast sprang up, and
went on each of them after his Fellow; and though one Horn has striven to
break another, yet after one has been cast down, another has risen, and made
an Image to the first, and ruled and reigned by the same spirit and authority,
derived from the Dragon's power, in Cruelty and Oppression, and made Laws, and
executed them to the Dishonor of the Lord, and to the great Oppression of his
People, and to the filling of this Island with Injustice and Cruelty, even from
one Generation to another, until this day: and thus up and down have Times and
Seasons been altered, Powers and Authority changed and altered, Statutes, Laws
and Decrees changeable and alterable; for as the Iniquity of one Power was
filled up* that was cast down, and another had its Day, till the measure of the
first was also filled up, that he might partake of the same Judgments. And in
all these Overturnings, breakings-down and Overthrowings, the very Hand of my
Lord has been, though secretly, and not discerned, yet his Power has brought
about, and suffered all these things to come to pass; and who shall charge him
with Injustice? or, who shall say, What have thou done? or, Why have thou done
it? For, as I have said, He is a High and Mighty Prince, and can do whatsoever
he will; and he is the Supreme Power and Authority, which rules and reigns in
and over all the Kingdoms of Men. And what though he has used wicked men, as
an Instrument, to accomplish his Work, and made the Wicked his Rod, and even
brought it to pass, that one Wickedness should destroy another, and one
Oppressor break down another, and the Kingdom of Antichrist confound it self;
yet what of all these things? All Flesh must be silent before him, and all
People, and the whole Earth must be subject unto him; for the Government and
Dominion over Heaven and Earth is his, and all Power and Dominion belongs to
him alone, and all Judgment is in his Hand, to bring to pass whatsoever he
will, and by whomsoever, as he pleases.

But now, my Friends, Though I would not he tedious to you, yet must I tell you
the Truth, and faithfully deliver the Lord's Message unto you; and as
concerning this last Overturning, there was something of the Hand of my Lord in
it; and he can, and will bring forth his own Work and Praise by it, and it
shall be for the Good of all his People, that wait upon him, though there was
much Ambition and corrupted Ends in the Instruments, and neither part were
perfectly single to the Lord in their proceedings; but their work was tasted
with the False Idolatrous spirit of Self-seeking: Yet notwithstanding, the Lord
may bring forth his Government, and his pleasant Plant, through and beyond all
this, even out of another Root, which yet appears not among either of them; and
Righteousness may arise in the Nation, contrary to both of them, out of another
Stem, and he will set up his Kingdom; and in the mean time, leave one Potsherd
of the Earth to break another.

And as for you, that now sit on the Throne, and bear Rule, whether Committy Is
meant here, chiefly, the new Committee of Safety (so called.)
of Safety (so called) chiefly, though it is not without my Master; for he has
the knowledge of it, at least; yet you are not the only men of his choice,
truly called of him to the Place of Government, neither is your Government the
Government of the Lamb, neither must it be forever established by him; its
Foundation is not Blessed, nor can its Building be prosperous: For why? Alas,
it is but another Horn of that fourth Beast, that has been made to rule over
the World, and upon the Earth for many Generations, and it is but hitherto a
very little refined from the last, and is of the last, even as the Eighth was
of the Seventh, spoken of by that Servant, Rev. 17. 11. and it may also make
War with the Lamb and his Followers for a little season, and it may have a
small measure of Injustice and Persecution to bring forth in the Land, even
till the Words of God be fulfilled, and his Kingdom be fully come; the way of
which is but yet preparing by all these Overturnings: and this your present
Government originally is leavened with the spirit of the old Dragon, that has
killed the Saints, and drunk their Blood, and how should the Lord establish it?
Nay, your Kingd^^ may prove but small and little, and full of Uproars and
Troubles, and little (...) and Satisfaction and Establishment in it to your
selves, nor the People under you; (...) Confusion will attend it, and Fears
will compass it about: Though this I must tell you, as you are men, You have
your Day of Trial, what you will do, as many ^^^ers have had before you; and
something you may and ought to do, if but to make the Whore (the false Church)
more naked, and to scourge her, more then some others have done; and indeed my
Lord requires something more of you (as such) to do, then others before you
could do; and you have a Price (...) into your hands, which you may improve to
the Lord's Honor, and to the Nations Good, and to your own Happiness; which if
you be faithful to the Lord, to do what he requires of you, and if you become
meek and humble men, and ^^^r his Name, and deny your selves, and not seek your
own Honors, nor ^^y ^^rthly Advantage to your selves; if you do thus, then my
Lord will show Mercy to you, and you shall not suddenly fall before your
Enemies, though many may (...) up against you; but your days shall be
leng^hened, and the Purpose of (...) ^^^d may be turned to your longer
continuance, and not to your sudd^n D^ion; and if you walk in this Way, and
Rule only for the Lord, then (...) (...) be hoaoured as men, if not as an
Authority, and you and the Nation (...) in Peace, and the force of the wick^d
shall be turned backward, and (...) shall not suddenly fall And the late sundry
Overturnings in this Nation ^^y be Examples to you, that you follow ^^t the
steps of those that God has (...) (...), lest you come to the same end of
Confusion and Misery: For, as con^^^^ing that Assembly of Men, that last sat
on the Throne, something was do^^ by them in their day and time, and in both
their Assemblings, in some things they served my Lord, and they were a Rod in
his Hand to smite his Enemies; yet they were not faithful to the End; till all
his Enemies were destroyed* but rather joined themselves to fight against the
Lord and his People, and were ^ing on toward the way of Oppression and
Persecution; and it was time for the Lord to remove them, and to lay them
aside, as an empty Vessel, sometime useful; and to break them as a Rod, some
time of service to be a Scourge upon his Enemies* and when the Day of their*
Trial was over, which God g^^e unto them, being any longer (for present) unfit
Instruments for his Hand, then he cast them into the Fire; and this his Purpose
came to pass upon them: so that they and the whole Nation may be contented, and
yield themselves subject to what he has done concerning them; for they being
entering into the very same s^^rit of Wickedness, of Oppression and Persecution,
which the Lord had once reproved ^^^ough them, and cast out by them; then was a
R^d raised up against them, even as they had been against others, and they were
dealt withal as they had done to ^^^ers; and this was in the Justice of my
Lord's Hand; And what has Mortal M^^ to question his Proceedings? And though
some of you (present Rulers) be looked upon as great Traitors and Tyrants in
your dealing toward them; and doubtless the men of that part will seek
Vengeance against you, even by pre^c^ing and (...), and they will curse you in
the Name of their God, and seek continually yo^^ destruction, as such as have
taken away part of their strength, and cast down their (...); but alas! all
this is nothing; for the Lord does not account as men: For these things must
needs thus come to pass, for the furtherance of the Kingdom and Government of
Jesus Christ, that it may arise through all; and if you were but faithful to
what the Lord requires of you, in your proceedings, what you have done ^^to
them should not be reckoned on account against you, neither by God, nor good
Men. But and if you of the Army be always Treacherous and Diso^edient toward
him, and abuse your Power, and dis-regard your Price, that God has given you,
and trifle away your Hour about Places of Honor, and such self-seeking
matters, and the Cause of God be neglected by you, and his People continued
Oppressed Sufferers under you, as they have long been; Even then shall you be
cast aside with shameful Disgrace, and the heavy Hand of the Lord shall be upon
you in Judgment, and you shall be smitten more then any before y^^; your
Estates shall not be spared from the Spoiler, nor your Souls from the Pit, nor
y^ Persons from the Violence of Men, no, nor your Necks from the Axe: for if
you be unfaithful, and continually Treacherous to the Cause of God, then shall
you be left to the Will of your Enemies, and they shall charge Treachery and
Treason upon you, and your Persons and Estates shall be given for a Prey to
your Enemies; and you shall (...) deliver your selves, neither will the Lord
deliver you from the Execution of Merciless Men; for my Lord shall leave the
Cruel-hearted to plead with you.

Wherefore that you may be warned, I advise you to be faithful, let not the
Cause of God fall, nor the Cause of his Enemies prosper before you; for there
is no other way whereby you can be preserved, nor no other Defense shall you
ever find from the Wrath of the Lord, and from the Fury of you Devouring
Enemies, then your Faithfulness in God's Cause; and therefore relieve the
Oppressed, and take off all Oppressions, break down all unjust Laws, and set
all People free from unjust Burdens, and let all Oppressions cease, both in
Church and Civil State; and even all Oppressive Laws, and Unjust Judges, and
Evil Men in Power, let all this be removed, and the Nation clean quitted and
discharged even from all Men and Laws whatsoever, that have held under
Oppression the Persons, Estates and Consciences of the Good People of this
Land; and let the Nation be corrected, and all Orders and Places of men, and
Laws, and Decrees be purified; for this my Lord, the Great King, requires, and
he will suddenly have it brought to pass in the Nation, if not by you, then
contrary to you, and to your utter Destruction: and this is the very subst^^ce
of my Message to you, that my Master has given me to say unto you; and on his
behalf I am come to claim of you my Master's long lost Right; let him have his
Right, from which he has long been banished, I demand it of you, all ye
whatsoever, that seem to bear rule in the Nation; I charge you in his Name, let
him have his Title and Prerogative, let him be Lord and King wholly in his own
Kingdom, let him have the Exercise of his People's Consciences by his own
Spirit in all things related to his Worship and Service, and let him have the
full Authority by his Spirit in all things pertaining to Church, and Ministry,
and Faith and Religion; and let his Spirit have the alone Authority to persuade
and diswade People from or to such or such Ministry, Worship and Practices of
Religion; and let all forced Maintenance to Ministers, and Tithes, be speedily
taken away; and let all Laws and Decrees whatsoever, made and practiced in the
days of Antichrist upon the Bodies, Estates and Consciences of the People, in
Oppression and Unjustness about Church, and Worship and Religion, be utterly
repealed, and made void, and never more be in force in this Nation: But let my
Lord be sole Ruler and Governor, and have the full Authority in his own
Kingdom, in all things whatsoever pertaining thereunto; and let no man
henceforth hereafter be entrusted with the Liberties of the Members of Christ's
Kingdom, as they are such, nor to judge over them in any matters of Faith and
Worship, but give that Right and Privilege wholly unto the Spirit of Jesus
Christ; for unto him only it pertains, to be whole Judge, and to have full
Power in his own Kingdom, and until you give him the Right, and deliver up unto
him his own Kingdom, and the Exercise of Peoples Consciences in all things
about RELIGION, you shall never Prosper, nor none that comes after you, that
shall in any measure abridge my Master of his proper RIGHT, from which he has
long been Banished, as I have said; and till his Right be given him, in the
case aforesaid, He will dash one man against another, and none shall ever be
established, but Horn after Horn shall be broken, and one Power after another
brought into C^^^^sion.

And therefore, ye men, Do not strive with him in this matter, but yield unto
(...) the Exercise of your own Consciences by his Spirit in you, and let him do
(...) ^^to all others, even as ye hope to prosper, and upon the Penalty of his
sore D^^^leasure upon you in this World, and in the World to come; and let J^^^
Men, and Righteous Men, and Meek Men, and Men that have the Fear and Wisdom of
God in them, without Exceptation of Birth, or otherwise; (...) such men have
the Power and Judgment committed to them, to determine in things between Man
and Man. Down with all the false-hearted Flatterers, that (...) ruled for Man,
and not for God, and for themselves, and not for the good of the People; cast
all such out from among you; for the Good among you is choked by them: Down
with all that Judge for Rewards; and away with (...) Hireling Rulers, that
execute the Law for Money, and will not plead (...) Cause of the Poor without
great Fees: And down with all that will not (...) places of Trust, without so
large Stipends; away with all these things out of the Land; for they are
heinous Oppressions unto men, and great Abo^ons in the Sight of God, and the
Land has long groaned under the w^ight and burden of these things, and the
Earth is weary of them, and my Lord ^iers their utter Dissolution, as being
Iniquities fully ripe, and having the g^il^ of so much Cruelty, Injustice and
Oppression lying upon the Nation because hereof, therefore is the Lord's season
to destroy them, and remove them out of the Land; which if you he the
Instruments in such a Work, it will be your greatest Crown, and your perpetual
Honor; for the Lord's Purpose is (...) ^^y or other to cleanse the Land of all
these, and other Oppression whatsoever, that the People of this Land may be a
free People, from all the heavy Y^ of Antichrist, which have long sorely
pressed them down; and the Purpose of the Lord is, to break the Yoaks of
Oppression and Tyranny, from off the Necks of this People; and therefore it is
that he overturneth, yea, and will overturn all Men and Authorities that shall
oppose his Work, and none shall be (...) to stand before him; for the Presence
of my Lord is more dreadful to a Nation, when he shows himself in Wrath, then
any Multitude of Armed Men: and Woe is unto you, if you be found opposing of
him; and if you seek to stop his Work, you shall not cumber the Earth very
long, nor oppress the Nations ma^^ (...). Wherefore consider, Cursed will you
be, if you be unfaithful in what (...) have to do on the Lord's behalf; for
your Hour passes ever, that is allotted you, and will be suddenly expired,
never to be recalled, and then you cannot work.

And whereas there is a great Cry about Ministry, For sending forth, and
Main^ng, and Encouraging a Godly Ministry, as you say.

Now to this I do answer on my Lord's behalf, and I must tell you plainly; As
for a true Godly Ministry, truly called and s^nt of God, such a Ministry and
such Mi^isters you can never be able to hinder; but the Lord will send them
out, ^^^^taining them and preserving them, whether you will or no; and while
you are ^^^^bling your selves about such a matter, you are but meddling with
things above your Line, and out of your Jurisdiction, while you act in such a
case; (...) it belongs to his Government, to send out Ministers, whom, and as he
will, (...) (...) maintain them and defend them according to his own Pleasure,
and all this without you; for such Ministers, truly called thereunto, and sent
of the Lord, will not seek to you to be sent forth, or maintained by you, they
will not be beholding to you in such a case; but even without you, and contrary
to you must they be sent out, and maintained: So that the Lord will have a
Ministry in this Nation purely of his own, and not of Man, nor by Man, and such
a Ministry you shall not be able to hinder.

And I must tell you plainly, As for these men, called Ministers, in this
Nation, the way of their setting up, and sending forth; and the way of their
Maintenance, and the way of their standing and Defense, and in every particular
of their being such, they are the greatest and most woeful Oppression in the
Nation, even the most Abominable and unjust Cruelties and Tyrannies is acted
through them, as any other thing in the Nation; and they are (as such
aforesaid) the woeful Cause of the Nations Groaning under Merciless Dealing; and
there is upon their account the Guilt of Blood, Injustice and Oppression lying
upon this Nation; their Inqiuities, their Iniquities cry for Vengeance upon
their own heads; for they are full, they are full, and the measure thereof is
near finished, and God's Eternal Vengeance is their next Reward, from the
Eternal God. What shall I say of them, but this? The Earth is oppressed by
them, the Inhabitants groan under them, and the Righteous God is vexed through
them, and they are the very men of high Indignation and fierce Wrath, and all
their Practices (as such) are the Fuel of his Anger, to be consumed by the
Fire of his Jealousy; the Nation is weary, and its Inhabitants, and the Lord
is weary because of these men: And is this the Ministry cried up by you as
Godly, and Pi^^^ etc? Are these the men that the Nation must be forced to
maintain in their Pride and Idolatry? Is this the Ministry that must be
Encouraged? Well, if these be the men, and this the Ministry which must be
established and encouraged by you, in so doing you shall never prosper, but
thereby gain the Displeasure of the Almighty unto you, to bring a Curse upon
all your doings, even because hereof; for I must tell you, the Hand of my Lord
is against them; and whosoever shall seek to defend them, shall not prosper in
their doings, because their Oppressions, Cruelties, Deceit and Abominations are
nigh finished and fulfilled: wherefore take ^^ed unto your selves, for this is
my Master's Advice unto you; Let this Ministry alone, and join not your selves
to Baal, lest you perish, neither take part with Antichrist any longer, neither
be ye Fighters against the Lamb and his Kingdom; but free the Nation, and let
all its Inhabitants be freed from the cruel Tasks and Yoaks of such Men, and
such a Ministry, as aforesaid; uphold it not against the Lord; for if you do,
you shall never be established; and this is from the Mouth of my Lord unto you.

And last of all, My Master has a People in this Nation, even a suffering
People, that have born the Burden of the Cruelty, and Injustice, and Wickedness
both of Rulers and Teachers, who have as it were trodden them down, and made
them a very Prey to their Devouring Mouths; the very Cry of their Sufferings
have reached unto Heaven, and the very sound thereof your Ears have heard: And
this People are greatly beloved, and my Lord will assuredly honor them, and
his Hand shall be continued to preserve them and defend them against all their
Enemies whatsoever; and he does reserve them to himself, and for a glorious
Work, that he has to do by them; and he has formed them for himself, and they
cannot join with any of the Horns of the great Beast, neither can a Place of
Honor pervert them from their perfect Way: but my Lord, he compasses them
about on every side, and has kept them in the midst of Trials, Reproaches and
Sufferings, and covered them in the Heat, and in the Storm, till his Pleasure
is to make further use of them; they are His, and not their Own; and they must
fulfill His Will, and none besides; and they lie at Rest in Him, while Mountains
are overturned, and while one Potsherd of the Earth breaks another; and this
must be even till the appointed Time: And to say no more of them, though much
more might be said, They are had in Remembrance before the Lord, to do with
them even for his own Glory, and for this Nation's perpetual Good, and to the
Authority of the Most High, through them, shall Kings of the Earth, and Nations
of the World bow and tremble; wherefore ye men, touch them not, neither do ye
afflict them, even as you hope to prosper; remember their Cause, and suffer it
not always to be rejected, as it has long been, but keep your selves free
from the Injustice and Cruelty of them that have gone before you, who have been
Merciless, and Oppressors of that People, even till my Lord has confounded
them, and brought them into Confusion; for there is the weight of Blood, of
Tyranny and Oppression lying upon the Nation in that People's Cause, and my
Lord will revenge them in his Season; and though they are not weary of their
Sufferings, but are in the Patience which bears all things, yet the Nation
can never be happy, nor its Government ever blessed, while this People are held
in Bondage; and their Sufferings are deeply considered of the Lord, and the
Season thereof is expiring toward an (...); and when this comes to pass, then
Woe unto the kingdom of Antichrist, and to the Whore and false Prophet, even
when their strength is dried up, by which they have made War against the Lamb,
and his Followers; yea, Woe unto them, Great Fearfulness shall be upon all the
World when the King of that People Reigns upon the Earth, and the time is at
hand; blessed is the Man that wait^^^ (...) it, and blessed is he that is not
offended in his Coming, but is prepar^^ (...) receive him in his Appearing,
which suddenly comes upon all the World.

And thus I have told the Lord's present Message unto you, which I received
from him, and thus far I am clear; and whether you accept it, or reject it, my
Peace and Reward is forever with him; who am a Subject of his Kingdom, and a
Frie^^ to this Nation, however otherwise judged by ignorant Men.

Edw. Buroughs.
The 9th Month, 1659.

To the PRESENT DISTRACTED AND Broken Nation OF ENGLAND, And to all her
INHABITANTS: A Presentation and Declaration from the Seed of God, and from the
People called Quakers; with their Sense and Knowledge published, concerning the
present Divisions and Confusions come to pass in the Land; with Mourning and
Lamentation over it because of its Breaches, and the Causes thereof laid down,
and discovered. And also, Good Counsel and Advice held forth, how Peace and
Unity may be restored, and how the present Troubles may be Removed.
OH! poor distressed Nation, and full of Troubles; How art thou broken and
divided? How has Divisions and Distractions compassed thee about, and entered
into thy Bowels? And how are thy Inhabitants and thy People divided, even to
hatred one against another? and how are they filled, as with Mischief, one
toward another, even as it were thirsting for the Blood of one another? Oh!
How are thy Rulers and thy Subjects, thy Great Men and thy Poor, confounded
amongst themselves? And how is the Wisdom of thy Wise men turned into Folly,
and their Union into present Contention? and how do they seek the Overthrow one
of another? and how do they lie in wait to be avenged one against another? And
how are the Hearts of many filled with Envy, Contention and Revenge; and Love,
Peace and Unity are far away; Meekness, Patience, and Long-suffering, which
ought to be among thy People, seem to stand afar off? And oh Nation! this is
the Day of thy Trouble, and the beginning of thy Sorrows.

And forasmuch as it has pleased the Lord God Almighty, to bring, and suffer
things thus to be brought to pass, as if he would make our Nation a Heap, and
suffer Destruction upon it; and having suffered the Rulers and Great Men to
overcome and break down one another, and to rend and tear one another from o^^
the Throne, pulling down others, and setting up themselves, even through their
Ambition and Vainglory, and for corrupted Ends to themselves, whereby this our
Nation is brought into present Confusion; and many are begotten, through these
things, into Fury, Heart-burnings and Maliciousness, as if men were ready to
devour each one his Neighbor and their* Brother about Government and Ru^e,
being greatly divided and distracted in this matter; some crying up one way of
Religion and Church, and Civil Government, and some crying up another way;
being each one sort of People seeking themselves, and the prosperity of their
own Interests, and to have their own desires accomplished; but few seeking the
Lord, and to advance him in Truth and Righteousness: And because of this, there
is no Establishment in the Earth, but Strife, and Contention, and
Heart-burnings in the Bowels of the Nation, and great want of True Love, True
Unity, and True Peace, and all the contrary does abound among the people;
because of which the Nation is subject to present Misery, even to Bloodshed
and Murders, and liable also to greater Judgments, which may also come upon it
because of these things; all which we have deeply considered ^^th Mourning, and
with Breakings of Heart, on the behalf of the Nation, the Land of our Nativity*
We have seen, we have seen the Cause of thy Distractions to be the Sins of thy
Rulers and People; and we have seen the effect of them to be doleful and
miserable unto thee, except the Hand of the Lord turn it backward.

And oh! How do we Mourn and La^ent, to see the Out* goings of Men* and the
present Condition of the People and Rulers, in this the Day of their Trouble?
Alas! they do not behave themselves toward the Lord that his Judgments may be
turned away, they do not seek him in Truth and Righteousness, they do not turn
unto him with all their Hearts, neither do they tremble at his Word; but they
the rather reject his Counsel, and despise his Visitation, and they seek
themselves, and exalt their own Horn, and love the Honor of this World, and
their hearts are hardened, and the great men seem to be utterly insensible of
what the Lord is a doing; but seek great things for themselves, and each one
rejoying of another's Fall, and glorying in their Advantages one over another;
one sort being first down, and another sort comes up, boasting themselves over
the Fall of their Enemies, and not knowing that their time also is but very
short.

And thus is our poor Nation tossed to and fro, through the Ambition of men,
who even make a Prey upon the poor peoples Persons and Treasure for their own
corrupted Ends; and thy Rulers have not had respect unto the Counsel of the
Lord, but seem to refuse the Way of Peace, and even add Fuel to the Fire of
God's Wrath, by heaping up one Transgression upon another, and they receive not
the Instructions of the Almighty.

Behold, Oh Nation! Great Trouble is upon thee, and the Men that should Rule
thee, and which have pretended to Govern thee, they do not walk in the Way of
thy Peace, neither do they bring healing to thee. These things we have
considered, and thus we Lament over thee, and over thy present State; Oh
Nation! how art thou like an ungirded Vessel, that is ready to fall one piece
from another? and how art thou like a Body without a Head, and all thy Joints
out of order? and what Confusion art thou fallen into, which is thy present
state, and art even as a Widow without a Husband, and art even left
comfortless unto this day, and ready to devour thy self through the Envy that
lodges in thy own Bowels? Though thou have had Kings over thee, and chosen
thee Parliaments, and set up Protectors, and Committees and Councils have been
created in thee, to have been as a Defense upon thee, and to have born the
Scepter of thy Government; but alas! all these have left thee, and thou art now
as alone, and left comfortless, even as a Widow unto this day, and the Staff of
thy hand has pierced thee, and thy strength and confidence has betrayed thee,
and them whom thou have chosen have wrought no deliverance at all in thee, even
the men that thou thoughtest should have healed thee, they have made thy wound
more incurable, and they in whom thou have reposed trust, they have been
deceitful and treacherous in thee; for many have sought themselves, and who
should be the greatest, and they have trisfled away many precious hours in vain
contentions about Government, what it should be, and who should govern, while
as no good thing has been effected by them; but in the mean time of their
delays, and while they have been making themselves rich with the Nations
Treasure, and loved this worlds perishing honor, and vain titles, the Nation
has starved for want of mercy and just judgment, and the cause of its
necessity has been forgotten, and mercy and truth, and the freedom of the
people neglected, and the Cause of the Fatherless, Widow and Stranger, and the
Cause of the afflicted people have they not respected: Oh Nation, the men that
have sitten on thy Throne, they have left thee groaning under great
Oppressions, wounded with the Spirit of Tyranny yet un-cast out, and thy people
are yet unhealed, but the breach has been made wider, even by that Spirit
which has possessed thy Parliaments, thy Protectors, thy Councils, thy
Committees, who has proved Physicians of no value, but have bin the increasers
of thy grief, and even because of their iniquities; and the sin of their
Ambition and Oppression has the Lord dealt thus with them, and suffered them
to dash one another in pieces; and through Judgment unto themselves and thee,
Oh Nation, are they at present ceased from thee, and thou art left alone, and
without a Deliverer in the Earth, full of Troubles and Distractions: Oh that
thou would now look unto the Lord, and seek him in Righteousness, that he may
heal thee; for there is none of all them that do pretend to rule thee, that do
rightly proceed in the way of thy Deliverance, they do not apply healing Balm
unto thy Wound, they rather add unto the cause of thy Sorrow, then remove it
from thee; their hearts are not aright before the Lord, and how then should
they prosper in their doings.

All these things have we viewed, and pitied the condition of our Nation, and
thus we do declare the very cause of these things that are come to pass in thee
is in that, oh Nation, thou have sinned, thou have sinned, and the cry of thy
Iniquities is come up before the Lord, even the sins of thy Rulers and thy
People is the Cause of God's Displeasure against thee, and he is provoked
through their Transgressions; in thee is found the Blood of the Innocent, in
thee is found the Murder of Souls, in thee is found Treachery against God, and
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation with God and men; in thee is found Pride and
Oppression, Whoredom and Drunkenness, Stealing and Murder; in thee is found the
very burden of Iniquity, and the full measure of Transgression, even the
transgression of God's whole Law; deceit is found in thee, and unsoundness of
heart, and unconstancy in all good things; multitude of hypocritical Fastings,
Prayers and Services in thee is found; even destroying Sins of all sorts do
abound, and thou have provoked the Lord God by thy Abominations: thy Rulers
have been Oppressors, thy Teachers Deceivers of Souls, and thy People are
froward and perverse against the Lord; in thee is found the men that judge for
Rewards, and the Priests that preach for Hire, and the Prophets that divine for
Money; thy Sins are like Israel's of old for number and greatness, and thou
have lost God's Favor, and gained his Fury by thy own doings, and thou art the
very cause of this Misery, and have brought it upon thy self; and because thou
art departed from the Living God by thy Transgression, therefore has he
confounded thee, and turned thy Wisdom into Folly; and he is departed from
thee, and out of thy Councils, and men are left to the counsels of their own
hearts, and as it were ready to destroy one another, Ruler against Ruler, and
Neighbor and Friend full of strife one against another; and this is happened
unto thee as a Judgment for thy Iniquities, who have also nelected a gloririous
Day of Visitation; thy Rulers and Inhabitants have been warned, and the Cry of
Repentance has been sounded toward them all by a despised people, but warning
has not been regarded, but the word of the Lord rejected by thy Rulers and
People; and lo, what wisdom is there in them? not so much wisdom from God as
can preserve them; but it may be just with the Lord to suffer them to drink the
blood one of another, even because they have sinned against God, and rejected
his counsel, therefore is this come to pass in the Nation; for had thou, o^
Nation, walked in the Light of the Lord, it had been better with thee; had
every one obeyed the Light in his own Conscience; and had every one sought the
Lord, and not himself; had thy Rulers ruled for God, and had thy people been
ruled of God, then this day had not been a day of Trouble, but it had been a
day of Joy; and Sorrow and Anguish had been removed far from thee, and
blessings had filled thy Habitations.

And now whereas many wise men have been advising and consulting the peace of
this our Nation, and they have given in their counsel for removing these
Troubles, yet Peace and Unity seems to be far away, and though they have sought
Peace for this Nation, yet they have not walked in the perfect way thereof; for
innocence, truth, and simplicity have bin wanting, which God only will bless,
and by flatteries and deceits, and the policy and wisdom of this World have
they thought to make up thy breach, but it cannot be; for in the way of that
proceeding will not the Lord be found in a needful time, and his presence has
been wanting in their counsels, and therefore the fruit of peace is not yet
grown up, this we have seen, and therefore thus we do declare. O Nation, the
inward cause of thy destractions must be removed, even thy iniquities must be
forsaken, and thy transgressions repented of; thou must forsake thy former
ways and doings that are not right; thou must leave off thy hypocrisies and
flatteries with God and men; thou must repent thee of thy profaneness, and of
thy profession also; thy sin and thy righteousness must thou put away, which
are both Abominations unto God; thou must cease to do evil, and learn to do
well, and thou must be uncovered of thy sheeps clothing, thy large profession
of Religion, and the multitude of thy Prayers and Sermons, and the number of
thy oblations and offerings, these things have not been pleasant unto the Lord
from thee, but because hereof is he the rather provoked against thee, and thou
must be stripped of thy filthy garments, and set as in the day that thou wast
born, before thou can be clothed with divine righteousness: and O Nation,
thou must be changed, not in name only, but in nature; thou must be converted,
that the wrath of the Lord may be turned back from thee; every inhabitant in
thee must become a fighter against the evil in his own heart, and the plague
thereof must be sought out and removed; the sin must be forsaken that judgment
may cease, and every one must cease to provoke the Lord, and no longer vex his
Spirit within them; and every one must love the Light of Christ in his own
conscience, and become a follower of it, that will lead him out of all sin; and
every man must put off his Transgressions, and forsake himself, and lay down
the enmity, and cast it out of his heart that he has against persons, and he
must war against the Enemies of his own Soul, and the Enemies of his (...)
House must be ^^ain, even his own Lusts, and even the evil Affections of his
own heart must he become an Enemy unto; and every man must deny the false
Teachers and Deceivers, and must come to be taught of the Lord, every one must
turn to him, and come into his Covenant, and hear his Word, and obey his Voice,
and become humble and meek, and must tremble at the Word of the Lord, aad must
become upright and innocent.

And O Nation, If it were thus with thee, then should thou be a happy People;
if thou do these things, then shall all thy Breaches be healed, and thy
Sorrows be turned into Joy, and the Lord shall cease to smite thee, and his
Anger shall be turned clean away. This is our Counsel unto thee, Remove thy
Iniquities by Repentance, be converted to the Lord, and he shall heal thee, and
his Love shall be shed abroad; Peace, Plenty and Satisfaction^, Unity and
Concord shall be unto all thy Inhabitants, and the Lord himself shall be thy
King, thy Judge and thy Lawgiver: he will judge thee with equity, and not with
Oppression; he will teach thee in the perfect way, and thou shall not err, he
will defend thee from all thy Enemies: Oh Nation, if thou do these things, even
turn to the Lord with all thy heart, that he may walk in thee, and dwell in
thee, then should thy light break out of obscurity, and the dew of Mercies
shall fall upon thee, and it should be unto thee as a Morning without Clouds,
and thou should be refreshed after all thy sorrow; the Nation should be
happy, and the people blessed, and the Government of Peace and Truth should be
established, never to be confounded any more.

And thus thy Iniquities being removed, the Plague should cease, and the cause
of destruction being taken away, no fruit thereof should appear; wherefore let
men cease to hatch Mischief one against another, and to seek vengeance one of
another, and let them seek with all speed and sincerity to get victory over
their own sins, and vengeance may be taken upon their own transgressions; and
this is our Council for the healing of our Nations breach, and for turning away
the Anger of the Lord. But and if, O Nation, thou continuest in thy
perverseness, and in transgressions which the Lord hates; and if thou will not
turn to him that smites thee, and love his Rod that corrects thee, but wilt
always grieve the Spirit of the Lord, and be obstinate and stout-hearted
against the Lord, and his reproofs; and if thou will continue in thy accustomed
sins, then shall the reward thereof be upon thee, even breach upon breach, and
one Judgment upon another; and Mercy shall be withheld from thee, and the
Dew shall not fall upon thee, but thou shall be as a barren Heath, and thou
shall be given up to consume thy self in mischief, and in thy heart-burnings
one toward another; if thou will set up Rulers of thy own proud and ambitious
men, and will not choose the Lord to Rule over thee, but reject him and his
People, then shall thy Breach never be healed by the Men whom thou chusest, but
through them shall thy Breach be more desperate, and thy Wound be made more
incurable; and if thou will set up Teachers that teach for filthy Lucre, and
Prophets that divine for Money, and Priests that preach for Hire, and will not
receive the Covenant of the Lord, and him to be thy Teacher by his Spirit, then
shall thou err in thy ways, and stumble and fall, and never know perfect Peace
with God, nor one with another; but as thou love Oppression and Deceit, and
walk in Transgression, so shall it be unto thee, and thou must eat the Fruit
of thy own doings, Misery upon Miseries shall be upon thee, and thus shall not
see the Face of the Almighty to refresh thee: Wherefore, O Nation! consider,
before the Night comes upon thee, when no way will be found by thee to be
dilivered; for in the middst of thy Confusions God is a working; he has a Work
to bring forth, which shall be a Work of great Mercy and Deliverance, or of
Sorrow and of great Judgment, even to the whole Land.

And as for us, we hereby declare unto thee, We are not thy Enemies, we seek
not thy hurt, nor do we desire Vengeance upon our Enemies, we seek not thy
Destruction; but we desire thy Repentance, that thou may be healed: we have
not the spirit of Mischief and Rebellion in our hearts toward thee, neither
are we for one Party or another, nor do we side with one sort against another,
neither do we join our selves to this sort or the other, nor do we war against
any by carnal Weapons, neither shall we ever provoke the Nation against us,
otherwise then by our Righteous and Holy Walking; and we do declare, that we
are not for Men nor Names, nor shall we join with this or that sort of men, but
as they act Righteousness alone; nor any thing that yet appears, can we fully
embrace or rejoice in; for they are all corrupted in their ways, and that
cursed spirit of Self-seeking seems to be the Rule of, and to leaven their
principal Actions; and we rather yet choose to suffer by all, as for a long time
we have done alreapy, then to lose our Integrity and Innocence, by joining to
any in their unjust ways; for we reject all Places of corrupted Honor, and we
are yet kept free. It is true, we are a People gathered of the Lord into one
Spirit, and though a People little in Account, and very low in Reputation, and
greatly reproached, and (...) suffering People by all sorts of men, yet we are
a people loved of the Lord, and his Presence is among us, and his Dread fills
our hearts; and though we are ^ed as a cast-out people, yet are we dreadful
unto the Wicked, and must be their Fear; for we have chosen the Son of God to
be our King, and he has chosen us to be his People; whose Kingdom is not of
this World, neither is his Warfare with carnal Weapons, neither is his Victory
by the murdering and killing of men's Persons; but we are given up to bear and
suffer all things for his Name's sake; and our present Glory and Renown therein
stands till the appointed time of our Deliverance, without the Arm of Flesh, or
any multitude of an Host of men; this we declare: And oh Nation, though we have
born thy Reproaches these many years, and have passed under the Rod of thy
wicked Ru^^^s and People, and have been afflicted through their
Hard-heartedness, though we never have provoked thee otherwise, then by our
Well doing; and though Per^, Imprisonments, Whippings, Banishments, and all
hard things have been out Portion from thee, yet this has been for
Righteousness sake, and not for any Evil-doing; and we have born all these
things in much Patience; and we are not now provoked against thee, to seek thy
Hurt, or to work Evil is thee; and though thou have smitten us, yet would we
have thee to be healed; and though thou have sought to destroy us, yet would we
have thee to Repent, and be saved: and we are at this day thy Mourners, and are
afflicted for thee in our hearts, even because thou have provoked the Lord
against thee, though we do rejoice in the Judgments which smites thee, yet we
mourn for thee who has deserved such woeful Stripes, and also because thou
refusest the Way of Peace, and countest them that reprove thee even thy
Enemies, and hardnest thy heart against God's Instructions, and counts his
freeborn people thy Bondslaves, who has not any large Portion, nor great
places of honor in this Nation, nor any thing to glory in from thee but
Sufferings, Afflictions and Tribulations: Where is the place in this Nation
that we have not been reproached? In what Street have we not been reviled? And
in what Prison have we not been unjustly imprisoned? And among what sort of
people have not we been hated? And what one of thy Judges and Rulers can clear
themselves before the Lord from the guilt of our unjust Sufferings? O Nation,
our Portion in thee for these many (...) has been thy cruel reproaches; our
greatest place of honor in thee has been under thy cruel Oppressions, and
these things, and the guilt thereof will God charge upon thee, and reward thee
for, one time or other; yet notwithstanding all this, our present desires for
thee are good, and not evil, that thou may be saved, and not destroyed;
healed, and not wounded unrecoverably; and we would not add unto thy grief by
any just provocation, through any evil toward thee; neither would we work
offense in thee, further then what thou take for Righteousness sake, and for
the exercise of our pure Conscience.

And though there has been in this Nation diverse and sundry overturnings of
(...) days, and some have been turned out, and others brought into place, each
one sort of them crying against the evil of another, and promising to
accomplish such and such good things in this Nation; yet alas, what is there
effected unto this day? What Freedom and true Liberty to Subjects more then was
many years ago? What Oppressions taken off from the people? what establishment
in Government? Alas, not any of these things are accomplished, neither see we a
right thing pr^ded, and rightly prosecuted by any party yet appearing; but the
cause hardly yet appears carried on by any among them, which can be said of it,
This is of the Lord, and is perfectly right, and the Lord will prosper it: for
the most of the men that have yet appeared on the Throne, they have rejected
the Word of the Lord, and his Counsel; and what Wisdom is there in them? only
the Policy, and Subtilty and Wisdom of this World, wherein they build, but the
Lord throws (...) even before it be finished? and they consult therein, and
the Lord dasheth to (...); they set up, but he pulls down, because they want
his Spirit and Wisdom, and his Authority amongst them; and they are as the
Potsherds of the Earth, that the Iron Rod must break in pieces. And this we
declare, The Men (yet) seem not to appear in all these parties which are worthy
to handle the Lord's Scepter, and to be Crowned with the Honor of Authority in
his Government; but even this Part) and the other Party seems to be unworthy to
Rule for the Lord; for they appear to be choked with the Honor of this World,
and corrupted thereby, and incapable of receiving that Anointing that Men must
have that shall truly Rule for God: And though many in our days, that have
ruled over us, have promised great Things to the Nation, yet we see all
hitherto have wanted Power to perform, and have not been blessed with the
Presence of the Lord, so as this Nation has not been healed and redeemed by
them; and we are utterly out of all Hopes of this Party or the other Party, of
this Man or that Man, to bring Salvation unto this Nation, from all its Bonds
and Oppressions; for we know, whatsoever men profess to do, yet they cannot
perform any good Thing, nor Rule for God in our Nation, till that themselves be
reformed and ruled by him, and have the Spirit of God pourred upon them for
such a Work: And this we declare, Till that a man, or men, be ruled of the
Lord, they can never rightly rule for him, nor bring Deliver once and Freedom
to an oppressed Nation; though men may and have promised much, yet their Fruit
is but little; and thou, O Nation, have long been deceived by such men, who
have flattered thee with the multitude of fair words, and promised thee
deliverance: and hereby might thou learn Wisdom, O England, never more to
rest under the shadow of such men; make no more a Mountain to cover thy self;
rest no more under the shadow of dead Trees, that want the Virtue of God; but
now look at the Living God, and wait for that King of Righteousness and Peace,
whose Right alone i^ ^s to Rule; for he alone can bring Salvation to thee, he
alone can heal thy Breaches, even Jesus Christ, whose coming is at the Door:
and in the mean time, O Nation, while he is absent, thou art dry, and barren,
and empty, thou art tossed and shaken, and thou art tossed and perplexed, and
can not be rightly comforted; for men shall not be a Rest unto thee, but one
after another shall they be overturned; for it is the Lord alone, and under his
Government shall People find Rest and Freedom from all Oppression: For, What is
a King? and what is a Parliament? what is a Protector? and what is a Council,
or any other sort of men, while the Presence of the Lord is not with them, and
while his Spirit and Authority is wanting to them? What can any of these bring
forth? none of all these whatsoever, if the Lord be not chief in them and
amongst them, and his Counsel their only Guide, shall be any otherwise unto
this Nation, then as a broken Reed to lean upon, and no more then a Shadow,
which shall not save the people from the heat, nor from the storm; this we
know, and this we declare in the Name of the Lord. And we are not for Names,
nor Men, nor Titles of Government, nor are we for this Party, nor against the
other, because of its Name and Pretense; but we are for Justice and Mercy, and
Trust and Peace, and true Freedom, that these may be exalted in our Nation; and
that Goodness, Righteousness, Meekness, Temperance, Peace and Unity with God,
and one with another, that these things may abound, and be brought forth
abundantly: such a Government are we seeking and waiting for, wherein Truth
and Righteousness, Mercy and Justice, Unity and Love, and all the Fruits of
Holiness may abound; and all the contrary be removed, cast out, and limited:
And we are not for such and such Names and Titles of Government, that promise
fair things, and perform nothing; but if a Council, if a Parliament, if any one
Man, or a number of Men whatsoever, shall have the Spirit of the Lord poured on
him or them, and shall be anointed of the Lord for such an End and Use, to
Govern this Nation, under such only shall the Nation be happy, and enjoy Rest
from such men fitted of the Lord, and called by him; and under such a
Government of Truth and Righteousness shall thou O Nation, enjoy Rest from all
thy Travels; and under such a Government shall the Righteous rejoice, and the
whole Land sing for Joy of Heart, when Tyranny and Oppression shall be clean
removed, Strife and Contention and Self-seeking utterly abandoned, and when
Peace and Truth flows forth as a Stream, and the Lord alone rules in thy
Rulers, and he the Principal amongst them; and under such men, and such a
Government only, and not under any other, shall thou, O Nation, be happy, and
thy people a free People.

Wherefore, O Nation, when will thou begin to look to the Lord? when will thou
begin to set up Him, and not man? when will thou mind his Power and Presence in
and through men, more then any men themselves? when shall it once be, O ye
people of our Nation, that ye will seek after him, to be the principal and
chief Power among you? Oh! let your eye be turned to the Lord alone, that he
may deliver you, and bring Salvation and Freedom; and look no more at men, but
only as they are in him, guided by his Spirit, and only expect good from men as
they are guided by the Lord; and then shall you not ever any more be deceived,
as long you have been with Parliaments, with Councils, with Armies, nor any
others; for, in these have you trusted, and not in the Lord; from these have
you expected great Things without him, whenas, alas! what shall men accomplish?
or, what can they bring forth while they reject the Counsel of the Lord, and
his Word, as hitherto they have done? and therefore has he broke them, and
confounded them; yea, and he will break them and crush them under his Rod, even
till they come to learn his Judgments, and know him the alone Power, and give
Honor to him that does whatsoever he will; and he will overthrow it once and
again, even till he comes, whose Right it is to Rule, and he is at work in this
his Day; and because of Iniquities does he visit with Tribulation, and through
great Tribulation, and overturning of Men and Powers, will he advance his own
Kingdom and Government; and the end of all these things shall bring forth his
Glory; and men that will not honor him, by dealing Righteously in their Day
upon Earth, they must honor him in their destruction at their Latter-end; and
let not men glory one over another, while some are put down, and others set up;
but let them all know, they have but each sort their hour, and their end will
come even as others: for an everlasting Kingdom and Government will God setup,
that must rule over all, and this is the hope of a poor despised people, though
for present hated of all, and sought to be destroyed by all, yet our Souls are
anchored and staid even in the sure Promises of our God, in this the day of the
Nations trouble; and though we are poor, and rejected of all, and have nothing
to glory in among any party or sort of people, but even in our Reproaches and
Sufferings which we sustain from all, yet have we perfect rest in God, and
satisfaction over all these distractions, we know him in whom we have believed,
and we trust in the shadow of his Wing, and we are not of a doubting heart
concerning what can come, or whomsoever do rule, for this we know, though all
seek after our blood, yet he can deliver us if he will; we know him that can do
all things, and if he save none can destroy, if he bless none can curse; him we
know, and in him we rest, and we give our power in all things to him, and not
unto mortal man whose breath is in his nostrils, who must perish as the dung;
we cannot be afraid of their horror, nor can we be drawn by their love, but we
trust in his Name, and under his defense shall we be saved; we give our power
to him, to be defended and preserved by him alone, and we are well content with
our Sufferings, and murmur not, our Sufferings are our present Crown; but yet,
Woe unto that Authority which makes us to suffer, and woe (...) the men upon
whom God shall charge the guilt of our Oppressions; and woe unto that Spirit
that is found acting against Gods Anointed: Behold ye Mountains of the Earth,
behold ye Rulers, and ye People, the Lord has blessed his People, and every
Tongue that rises up in witness against them shall be condemned, and every
Weapon that is formed against them shall be broken; this is our hope in this
gloomy day, and the hope of a Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace which must be
set up, is our refreshment in this day of trouble; and let not our Enemies
glory over us, forthough we be very poor, yet shall we be made rich, and though
we have no carnal weapon, yet shall we conquer; and thus have we declared our
selves in much plainness and sincerity to our Nation whom we love, and whose
present condition we pity and and lament over, and we are Friends to an
appearance of good, that may come forth in Truth and Sincerity, and as
Righteousness do appear in any, we are ready to join with it in our Prayers and
Desires, yea, and otherwise; even that which has the Image of our God upon it,
whenever it shall appear, we shall rejoice therein, and be glad to see it
prosper: For, for the establishing of Righteousness in the Earth have we
labored; and it cannot be charged upon us, That we have sided with one or
another; for we have beheld all hitherto out of the Right Way, as we have said;
but we truly seek the general Good of our Nation: and though we are accounted
so and so, yet we have not lost true Reason nor Understanding; but we well know
what is wrong, and what would be right, even in way of Government; but the time
appears not to be yet, when Innocence and Simplicity of Heart can be embraced;
for men are yet too wise in their own wisdom, and cannot receive the Counsel of
the Lord, that they may prosper, and therefore are they, and must they be
confounded amongst themselves, and dashed one against another, till they learn
the Way of Righteousness and Truth.


The substance of this was given forth the Twentieth Day of the Tenth Month,
1659. being moved of the Lord by his Spirit thereunto, through Edward Buroughs.

A PRESENTATION TO LONDON. Being an Answer to the Young Men and Apprentices;
returned to some part of their Petition and Address, directed by them to the
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council Assembled: And this is directed to them, for
their better Information; and to the Citizens of London, for their better
Satisfaction, if the Lord shall so work upon their Hearts, as to bring them to
Moderation and the Spirit of Meekness, fit for his INSTRUCTIONS.
WHereas you say, It has pleased the God, and only Wise God, for yours and the
Nation's Crying-Sins, to manifest his Displeasure for many years together
against these Nations; and yet, you say, this Honorable City has been no
great Sharers in the Calamity, which your Brethren in other parts have
suffered, etc.

Answer, Friends, its very true, because of yours and the Nations Crying-Sins
the Lord's Displeasure is against you and the Nation, and his Judgments bang
over your City, and the Nation, even because of your Crying-Sins: O! the Pride,
the Hypocrisy, and Double-dealing, and Wantonness, and all other, the
abominable Wickedness which abounds among you, which are your Sins, which
indeed is the Cause of God's Displeasure against you and the Nation, which he
will show one way or other upon you; for Iniquity is full: But seeing that your
Sins have provoked the Lord, is it not now time to come to Humility, and
Repentance, and to forsake your Sins, that the Displeasure of the Lord may be
turned from you? or, Is it a time for you to be envious, and to seek Revenge
upon Men, and to make Insurrections, and Tu^^lts, and Bloodsheds, and so to add
Sin unto your Sins? Its not a time for you to proceed thus; for hereby you will
gain God's Displeasure more unto you, and not turn his Wrath away. And its
true, this City has been wonderfully preserved from the Miseries and
Calamities, which have come upon some in this Nation; and therefore, its time
for you to answer the Lord's Love unto you, by Meekness, and Fear, and
Righteousness; and not to abuse his Mercies, by opposing the Work of the Lord,
and setting your selves to fight as against him in his Proceedings; though the
time is at hand, even because of your own multiplied Iniquities, when you may
bring Calamity and Misery upon this City, and it may partake of the Nation's
Tribulations and Sorrows.

And then you complain of the general decay of Trading: But what can you
attribute that unto, but to your Sins also? For there has been so much Double
dealing, Deceit and Wickedness in the way of your Trading, that it is just with
the Lord to turn your former Mercies into a present Judgment in that respect;
but in this case you ought to be contented, and to be still, and not to murmur
against God, nor against any others in the Nation; but the rather to Repent,
that the Wrath may be turned from you.

And whereas you seem to make an Appeal to your Lord Mayor, Aldermen;
Common-Council-Men of this City; as if they should be Instruments for the
settling of the Three Nations, and for the removing of the Troubles, and for
the Peace of the Church, etc.

Answ. Alas my Friends! These Troubles, Distractions and Miseries that are
approached, and which further may ensue, is the Fruit and Effect of yours and
the Nations Sins; and cannot be removed nor remitted, but as you and the Nation
repents, and turns from your Sins; so that you take a wrong course to
remove the Judgments of the Lord from you and this Nation: for its certain,
That Repentance from sin, that removes the Judgment for sin; and its not adding
one sin to another; neither is it in the hand of those to whom you do appeal,
to remove the Judgments of the Lord; for what are they but Mortal Men, like
your selves, and Transgressors with your selves, and have a part in the Sins
acted by you, and must have a part in the same Judgments, though you stir them
up to improve themselves and their Tallent for the Peace of the Church, as you
say; whenas, alas! its Jesus Christ only that must keep his Church in Peace, by
his good Spirit; and not Mortal Men, with Mortal Weapons: Though you say, The
Discharge of their Trust may make these Nations Happy, or leave them Miserable.
To which I say, If they be faithful to their Trust, then they will keep your
City in Peace, and doubtless they would be blessed therein; but yet the
Happiness of these Nations depends not upon them, nor upon what they can do;
for while many are supposing that they improve their Trust, its possible they
may be persecuting Righteousness under the Name of Heresy, and persecuting
Christ in his People under the Name of a Deceiver and false Prophet; this has
often come to pass in this City and Nation, men have improved their Power and
Places to the Dishonor of God, and the persecuting Christ in his Members,
while as they have been thinking they have been punishing Sin, Heresy and
Error; and in such cases some have improved their Tallents not truly for God,
but rather against him.

But whereas you say, You humbly present, That the Privileges of the Gospel,
the Faithful Preaching and Dispencing of God's Holy Word and Sacraments, with
the Labor of so many of his Faithful Servants in the Ministry; and you humbly
desire the Ministry may be Countenanced and Encouraged, the Universities upheld
and maintained, etc.

Answ. Alas my Friends! What do you think concerning the Lord God? Surely you
have low Thoughts of him, and little Belief in him; Do not you think he will
maintain the Privileges of the Gospel, and the faithful Preaching and
Dispensing of his Word, and his faithful Ministry without you: Do you think
that he has forgotten to be Gracious, or that his Power is insufficient to
maintain his own Cause, and to uphold the Rights and Privileges of his own
Kingdom? Do you think that he has need of you, or a Multitude of wild and
heady Men and Youth to fight in his Cause, to uphold his Gospel, and Ministry,
and Ministers? Alas! no, you are deceived in this matter; for his own Arm shall
do all this, and he will do it without you, and not be beholding to you in this
matter: His Gospel, nor the Privileges of it, shall not fall; the true
Ministry, the Preaching and Dispensing of God's Word and Ordinances shall not
perish, though you be silent; for the Lord by his own Power will maintain and
carry on these things, and all others belonging to his Kingdom, without the
help of Mortal Men, or without the help of the Arm of Flesh: so that you may
put up your Swords, and be still in this matter, and leave it to God, who is
sufficient for these things, without a multitude of men, or without the Arm of
Flesh: For I must tell you, that the faithful Teachers of God's Word, and the
faithful Ministry, desire not your help to prosecute their Cause, and the Cause
of the Gospel; but they trust to the Lord to be maintained, countenanced and
encouraged by him alone, who is sufficient in that cause; though its true, the
false Ministers, and the antichristian Teachers through all Christendom, for
many Generations, they have sought unto the Arm of flesh to set them up, to
maintain and defend them, and their Gospel, and false Church; thus it is
through the Popes Dominion, and among some Protestants also; they cry unto the
Magistrates, unto the Kings, and Parliaments, for the making cruel Laws to
defend them; and to the rude world they cry, Help us, and save us, and defend
us, by fighting with Carnal Weapons, for Heresies, and Errors, and such like:
and they stand in their Ministry, in their Call to it, and Maintenance of it,
and defense in it by the Arm of flesh, and their Church is upheld thereby also:
but this is but Antichrists way, and these are Antichrists Ministers, and his
false Church hereby is defended in the World; and this shows, that the Weapon
of the Spirit of God is wanted by them, which the Apostles had; and its very
doubtful, O ye Apprentices of London, that your Ministers have prayed you, and
preached you into such a work, as that you should stand up to maintain them,
and fight for them and their church, against such that do oppose them; but I
must tell you, if their Defense be not in another hand, then in yours, they are
like to come to perpetual ruin, and their Gospel, and their Teaching, and their
Sacraments, and their Church cannot stand, if they have not the Lord's Help
more then yours. And as for the Universities, which you contend for; alas! many
of you are ignorant concerning them, and what Abomination is committed among
them; oh! if you knew but the Profaneness, and Ungodliness and Ill-education
that is among them, it would turn your zeal for them backwards: and its not
from humane Studies that the faithful Ministers of Christ come; but who are so
indeed, are made so by the Gift of God's Eternal Spirit, both in this Age, and
in Ages past. So that, O ye Apprentices, Be still, be still, and do not ruin
your selves and your City, by Rage, and Fury, and Disorders, upon such a
Proceeding; for your ground of Quarrel is not perfectly good, nor your
Endeavor in the Cause aforesaid well accepted with the Lord.

But if your Quarrel be upon the account, or about the matter of Church and
Ministry, leave that to the Lord, and to your Ministers, that they may defend
themselves, their Church, and Ordinances and Worship by the Spirit of God, if
they have it; for that is the Weapon of Ministry, Church and Gospel-Warfare;
and not Carnal Weapons, nor the multitude of an Host of Men: Let your Ministers
come forth in the best authority of spirit that they have, and plead the cause
of their Worship, and Gospel and Ministry, like Christians, and not like Jews
and Heathens; for they use Carnal Weapons, killing and murdering about Church
and Religion; that is the Papists Practice, and not the Practice of the Saints:
So that ye Apprentices, seeing you state your Quarrel against the Army, upon
the account of Church and Ministry, my Advice is to you, Proceed no further
upon that ground; but give your Trust to the Lord, for the maintaining of all
things related to his own Kingdom. But the Cry is, Those Sectaries, those
Sectaries, away with them: Your Trouble seems to be concerning them, lest they
prevail; but wherefore are you troubled in this matter, like as if you knew not
that what the Lord purposes must come to pass? who are of God, will stand,
this you need not doubt; and who are not, will come to naught; and its vain for
Mortal Man to oppose the Lord's Purpose: but this was the Cry in days past.

How did the Bishops and Prelates in their days cry against the
Non-conformists, as Heretics, and such like, even as the Ministers now cry
against Sectaries? But consider, how did the Bishops proceed, but in being the
chief Cause themselves of raising War against the then Non-conformists,
thinking thereby to have smitten them all? but you know it proved otherwise;
and as they thought to do unto others, so was it done unto them; which thing
may be an Example to you: For as they thought to have destroyed the then called
Puritans, in like manner were themselves destroyed; and this may possibly fall
upon you: Therefore consider; for I tell you, as an equal man between you and
them, that there is more Sincerity toward God, and Fear of his Name, in some
of them called Sectarians, then there is amongst you, and your Ministers;
though I do not here justify the Sectarians (so called) in all things, neither
do I in every thing condemn your Ministers; but this I say, and do know, If
that you and your Ministers raise a War against those called Sectarians, the
effect thereof will prove your own Sorrow, and their Advantage: So this is my
Advice to you, rest and be still, and that will prove your own Peace and
Happiness. Therefore take heed, and beware; lest ye oppose and gainsay the
Work and Power of God, which his purpose is to bring to pass in this his Day,
who is setting up his Kingdom in the midst of Tribulations, that comes upon men.

The second Particular humbly desired by you is, The Freedom and Privileges of
Parliaments, as being the Great Charter of the People, which you account very
dear unto you, and by which you hope to see (you say) a Settlement in Church
and State; and you humbly conceive that to be the probable means to establish
the true Protestant Religion, reform the Laws, secure the Liberties, promote
Learning, etc.

Answ. Now Friends, do but truly consider, and with a humble Mind, what the
Work of the Lord has been in these Nations for diverse years, and how he has
proceeded to overthrow, and overturn Powers and Authorities, Princes and
Rulers, and made them of no account before him; and though the Instruments
which God has used in that matter, in plucking down Men and Powers, have been
as much corrupted as those that have been overturned; and whenas the measure of
Iniquity in one was filled up, the Lord threw that Power down even as it were
by the Iniquity of another; and because of the Oppressions of Rulers amongst
us, the Nation has groaned, and been left without a Comforter from any man,
and could not repose Confidence in its Princes and Rulers; and this was, that
the Nation might look unto the Lord, and that through him they might be saved,
and expect healing from him alone; and in all these Overturnings you need not
fear, but the Hand of the Lord has been in them, and his Arm has suffered,
and even brought these things to pass; and therefore why should you murmer
against God, and be unsatisfied in what he has done? for its he alone, and not
another, that must settle a happy and lasting Peace both in Church and State,
and he that must establish true Religion, and reform the Laws, and secure our
Liberties, and preserve our Lives, and encourage all Virtue; it is the Lord
that will do all these things for this Nation, and its not any other in whose
Hand the Salvation of a Person or a Nation is; and how he shall do this, and by
what means, leave that to the Lord, limit him not to or from any thing; for, if
the Nation can be but patient and still, he will bring to pass these things in
his day and season.

Wherefore O Nation and City, Be still, be still, and be patient under the Hand
of God, which is upon you; combine not Mischief one against another, nor desire
the overthrow one of another; but be still, be still, this is the Word of the
Lord to you, be at quiet in your spirits, and wait upon the Lord, to receive
what he brings forth: For O ye Apprentices and Young Men of London, your rude
proceedings in these causes will but destroy your selves, and your City, if you
proceed any further; for what is a multitude of men, but as Briars and Thorns
in battle before the Lord? if he purpose a Work, you cannot prevent it; and if
he prevent a Work, its vain for you to endeavor it; these things are in the
Hand of the Lord, and Nations are unto him as Clay in the hand of a Potter: but
now I do not speak as your Enemy; for I love your City, and wish it well.
Alack! neither will I justify the Army, nor the men that you oppose in
opposition to you; for their ways are corrupted I know, and their own Ends they
seek; and they are for Condemnation, some of them; and their Iniquities are
fully ripe, and God will bring them down; but yet, let you them alone, the Lord
will deal with them, and he can execute his Judgment with his own Hand without
you; and if you can be but quiet for a little season, it will make for your
Peace hereafter; but if your spirits rage and swell, you may work Misery unto
your selves, and to your City; but you cannot redeem it from Misery.

So do no talk of the Church, as if you would Fight to uphold it, leave that to
the Lord; for Christ will look to that, to Govern it, and Preserve it out of
all, and from all its Enemies, and it belongs not unto you; but that which the
Lord requires of you, is Patience and Submission to his Will, and to be still,
till he appears with Salvation and Deliverance to this City and Nation, to
deliver them from all Oppression, and Oppressors; whose Coming is at hand, and
blessed are all they who are found in Patience at his Coming.

London, the 10th Month, 1659.
TO THE Present Assembly, MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AT WESTMINSTER: The
Consideration of a Servant of the Lord upon the Present State of Affairs;
presented unto you for to read and consider, as Informations unto you
concerning present Proceedings in this Nation.
FRIENDS,
ALL these Overturnings, and almost wonderful Changings, that do come to pass
in this Nation, they are all effected through the Justice of the Lord's Hand,
and his Hand and Power is in and over all these things; and it all Particulars
which have happened since your first appearing on the Throne were accounted,
what has come to pass but has been accomplished and suffered to be by the
hand of the Lord? But particularly, of the present state of things, and this
last Interruption which happened unto you; Was it not a just Reproof upon you
from the Lord, though effected in Ambition, and by corrupted Instruments? For
have you not promised great things unto this Nation, in matters of Freedom and
Liberty? But what have you done? Even left this Nation traveling under great
and sore Vexations, and undelivered from the Bondage of Oppressions; though you
have had time oftentimes put into your hands, wherein you might have done good
things for the Lord, and for this Nation, and Righteousness might have been
established amongst you, and in the Nation; but you neglected many precious
days, and effected not many good things: It would be large to instance the
particular Oppressions that yet remain almost upon all sorts of people in this
Land, which might have been removed long ere this day, had you bin faithful to
God: But because from day to day you have been rather careless, and served your
selves more then the Lord, therefore has he suffered you to be interrupted
once and again, and reproved by a Generation of men, as unfaithful as your
selves.

Well, But to pass all this, though much may be said, you are now again at the
stern of Government, and on the Throne, and I dare not but say it is of and by
the Lord, and that he has done it, contrary to the expectations of many; and
what his End is in it remains with him; but I am sure one Cause is, that you
may execute part of his Wrath upon that Treacherous Generation of Hypocritical
and Deceitful men (some of the Army I mean) some of whom have been deceitful to
God, and treacherous to the Nation, and who have been fearful Hypocrites by a
show of Religion more then others, and have mocked God as it were, and his
People. I need not say to you, how that many of them were raised up from a low
Estate; and instead of servnig the Nation, became their Lords and Oppressors;
they have abused the Lord's Mercy to them, and exalted themselves, and became
as great Oppressors, and as grievous to the Nation, as ever they were that went
before them; and some of them took the very Titles and Estates of their
Enemies, and followed their evil spirit also, though the Lord was
Long-suffering to them, and gave them a day, and put opportunity into their
hands, wherein they might have done good: but they also neglected to serve God,
and the Nations, to serve themselves; and because of the Ambition and Pride of
some of them, the Lord suffered them to make this last Interruption upon you,
which was great Treachery in man's account, that thereby their measure might be
filled up, and that he might give you occasion against them, and suffer you to
be filled with Indignation toward them, to break them to pieces: And what you
do to some of them, in casting them out, and afflicting them, you are but God's
Executioners therein; you are the Executioners of his Anger, in what you do to
them; and who shall prevent you, or forbid you to go on? for they have long
enough dissembled with the Nation, in professing more then others, and doing
less; and their Downfall is now come. And God has looked upon you to be
hard-hearted and cruel enough, and very fit Executioners of Vengeance upon such
men, as I have mentioned.

But now concerning you, and your present state, as you are in present Place
and Power, I have something to say to you; Though they are fallen, and you yet
stand, and you have a little time after them; but this I say, do not glory over
their Fall, neither glory as though you should stand forever; for they were not
greater Sinners then you are, neither are you one whit more Righteous then some
of them; but you are as sure to fall, as they are fallen, with no less measure
of Dishonor and Affliction then is come upon them; and you are in your last
Hour; and I dare not say, that God expects much more from you, then for the End
aforesaid (viz.) To be the Executioners of Justice upon men as sinful as your
selves: So do not glory over them that are fallen; but know, that your time
also is but short, and your Fall may prove to your Destruction, and theirs may
prove to make them better, and refine them: And if God has chosen you to
execute some part of his Wrath upon them, for their Wickedness, he will
doubtless find Instruments to execute his Wrath upon you, else he will do it
with his own Hand; for he purposes not to spare you; for your Sins cry as loud
as any other People, and the Oppressions are as great under you, as under them
whom you condemn. And I desire, if there be any good men amongst you, that such
who are wise may consider, and mind the Hand of the Lord in and through all
these things that are come to pass; for God is working as well as you, he is
seeking to set up a Kingdom as well as you, and his Government and yours cannot
stand together; and he will make you know, that he is stronger, and his
Government of more force, and your kingdom cannot stand in place with his.
Therefore oh that you would take heed! oh that you would be wise, if so be some
of you may be spared! and be not too zealous in your way, nor too furious in
your proceedings, do but to others as you intend to receive from others, and
from the Lord; and go not beyond your Commision; for a Permission at least you
have from God, even to scourge Hypocrites, and to be a Judgment upon that
Hypocritical seeming Religious Generation of men aforesaid, which have many a
time as it were mocked God, and pretended love to him with their Lips, when
their Hearts have yearned after Self-honour, and Treasures of this world; I
say, your present hour and permission is for this end, but not to persecute the
people of the Lord, nor to destroy God's Heritage; but if you shall extend your
Power unto such a work, and if you do persecute the Innocent without cause, and
make war against the Lamb and his Followers, and make Laws, and execute them to
the oppression of the Saints of the Most High, then you go beyond your
Commission; for God has not called you unto this, but to be Instrument in
another Cause. And the Children of Zion, they trust in the Living God, and fear
not the terror of mighty men, neither can they be afraid at the roaring of the
Sea, nor at the present threatening of the Heathen; for God is with them.

And I say to you, The Servant of the Lord has pondered and considered all
these proceedings, and viewed the present state of things at this day, and
there is no Vision from God unto you of Peace and Comfort, nor of a happy and
lasting Government, as you now stand: If any Prophet shall divine this unto
you, he speaks what he has not from the Lord, but the Vision of his own Heart,
and he deceives you and himself; for you are not established upon a right
Foundation, neither are you acted by a right Spirit, which can truly Govern for
God; but the Spirit of Wrath and Fury is put into you, for the work which you
are called. And I know not how to warn you, that you do not persecute the
People of God; For why? It may be you must fill up your measure of Wickedness
thereby that God may break you perpetually; yet the less will be your Judgment,
if you do it not; but and if you do it, the Lord will take occasion against
you, to wound you, and you shall never be healed; and as you do afflict others,
so, and much more shall it be done unto you from the Lord. Wherefore consider
what I have said; for this is the Vision of the Almighty unto you, that shall
not go unfulfilled: And what you do, you must do it quickly; for your time is
short and your Power will God subdue; and his Kingdom and Power will he
speedily exalt over your heads, and make you and the Nations know, that he is
God, and that all Power is with him, and that he can do whatsoever he will; and
it is his Right alone to reign, and his Childrens Portion to possess the
Kingdom with him. Let the whole Earth, and all the Powers thereof, Bow and
Tremble before him: let not your Hearts be stout and rebellious against him;
for he can grind you to Powder, and sink you into Confusion and Misery, as a
Stone into the Sea.


This was directed for the hands of the Speaker in Parliament, and accordingly
was given to William Lenthel, being enclosed to him with these Line following.

Friend,
THE enclosed I do commend unto thee, for to present unto the House, and to
endeavor sincerely the reading of it in your Assembly; for it is of special
Concernment to you all: and in the Name of the Lord, and by his Spirit, I do
charge thee not to be negligent in this matter, as though it were not of worth
to you; and I do lay it upon thee, as a Work of Righteousness and Truth, to be
done by thee. as thou will answer the contrary in the dreadful Day of God, when
the King of Righteousness shall judge thee and all Mankind.

Edw. Buroughs.
The 24th of the 11th Month, 1659.

AN ANSWER TO A DECLARATION Of the People called Anabaptists, In and about the
CITY of LONDON. Wherein their Weakness and Ignorance is Discovered under
their own Hands to the City and Nation, as hereby may appear.
FRIENDS,
WHereas your Declaration consists of five Particulars, four of which are not
of so much concernment to me to answer; but as for one of them, for the
Nation's sake, and for the Truth's sake; and that you may be reproved, even you
the Heads, and principal Men of your Congregations; and because you are such,
under whose hands your Declaration passes, therefore in that consideration,
with many others, this I return as an Answer to you, and to the City and
Nation, in pursuit of yours, that has proceeded from a Heart of Unbelief, and
unto Evil and Malicious Intents against a Despised People, whom the Lord has
owned, and will own, though you and the whole World do reject them.

And whereas you say, You are Misrepresented to the Nation, that you do
Countenance the People called Quakers in their irregular Practice: And to clear
your selves, you say, It is well known to all, there are none more opposite to
their irregular Practices then we are (say you) nor are there any that they
have expressed more Contradiction to then against us; though their Provocation
therein has not put us on a desire (say you) of depriving them of their Just
Liberty, while they live Morrally Honest, and peaceable in the Nation, etc.

Answer, Oh ye Heads and principal Men, and ye chief Pastors, Elders and
Members (so called) of Churches! What have ye done? and wherefore have you thus
proceeded? Why have ye renounced an Innocent People that never did you harm,
nor ever gave any Offense unto you, saving in crying against the deadness of
your Forms, and Traditions, and seeming Religious Practices, and reproving Evil
in you? Alas for you! (ye accounted Wisemen) Do you judge any Advantage will
be unto your selves in this thing? or, Do you think to work a Disadvantage unto
us by your Renouncing and Denial of us? I must tell you, We are not troubled
hereat for our own sakes, neither is any part of our Hope or Confidence
concerning you made void; for we never looked upon some of you to be otherwise
then our Enemies in your hearts.

Oh ye Hypocrites! whom God will judge because of your Hypocrisy, who now as
much as in you lies (if it were in your power) you would leave us to the
Mercilesness of Cruel Men, you would save your selves, and leave us to the
Mercy of the Devil; but though you renounce us, yet the Lord has owned us, and
will own us to your grief: And what are you become our Accusers? Are you become
Chargers of us with irregular Practice? Are you endeavoring to make us more
odious in the Eyes of Wicked Men, then we are, for Righteousness sake? But
wherefore have ye done this? Is it to save your selves from Reproaches? Have
you therefore Reproached us, and have you sought to make us Vile, that your
selves might appear free? And have you thought to gain the Favor of the
Wicked, and to make a Peace with your Enemies, by reviling of us unto them? Is
this your End, Oh ye Dissemblers! to Reproach us to the Nation and City behind
our backs? You Church Members (so called) and Teachers, and Pastors and
principal Men, that would save your selves, and gratify the Devil, and join in
Union with the Wicked, and make your selves Friends with them, by Slandering
and Renouncing the Peaceable People, who are more so then your selves, and none
of them guilty of Irregularity, as much as some of you; though you would fawn
upon the Nation and City by renouncing of us, as if we were Irregular, and so
and so; but do you think the Nation and City have not taken notice? or however,
hereby they may: What if I say unto them and you, That none of the Quakers ever
were so instrumental, by illegal Opposition, for the turning out of
Parliaments, and changing the Government of this Nation into Confusion, like as
some of you Anabaptists have been? And this the City and Nation may take notice
of the Irregularity of some of your selves, who have been instrumental, even by
illegal Opposition, and perfect Tyranny in men's account, and Treachery also, to
the turning out Parliaments, and thereby wronging the Nation for their own
Advantages; so that the practice of some of you has been more unlawful, and
contrary to Law, then ours has been, and the City and Nation may take notice
of it; as your Declaration is to them, so is this my Answer, Never any Quaker
(so called) in Warlike posture, has stood in Defiance, and been Instruments
to turn out peoples lawful Representatives: Did not some of your Brethren, even
of the Anabaptists, take Commission from the late Parliament, and no less then
Vowing Fidility to them, and yet presently rose in Opposition to them, and
turned them out of doors? And was not this Treachery and Hypocrisy, and
Irregularity? And can the Nation charge any of them called Quakers with any
such Work? No, they cannot; but some of the Anabaptists they may, even with
this and other the like illegal dealing: And more I might instance, and not
charge you behind your backs, as you have falsely done of us; but I may affirm
to your faces, and justly prove these, and such things upon you.

But why have you not named what irregular Practice the Quakers are guilty of?
I charge you, you Subscribers against us, and Accusers of us, to prove your
Accusation; I say, I charge you before the Lord, and this whole Nation and
City, to prove your Accusation, and to instance what particular Practices,
performed and owned amongst us, either in relation to just Government in Church
or State, that are irregular, and you shall have a Reply; though you say, There
are none more opposite to our irregular Practice then you are.

Oh! how fain would you flatter and fawn upon our Enemies, to make peace with
the Devil? how would you creep by Craft, and join into a League with our and
your Enemies? and how fain would you be at peace with them, and leave us even
to their Mercilesness, if it were in your power? have we ever dealt thus by
you? Have we ever sought to render you Rebels and Traitors to the Nation, as in
effect you have done to us? Have we ever sought Occasions against you, and to
present you to the Nation as vile as we could, for to save our selves, and
leave you to the will of your Enemies? this have you done to us, and we leave
you to be rewarded even by the Lord, who will never renounce us, nor cast us
out, though you do in such a time as this, a time of Confusion and Distraction,
wherein, if the Lord did not appear to be our Defense more then men, we should
be swallowed up of our Enemies: And must you, even a separate People, Members,
Pastors and Ministers of Churches (so called) renounce us at this season, on
purpose to have us destroyed so much as you may? Well, we have not dealt so
with you, neither do we desire to uncover your Nakedness to the Nation; you had
not had thus much, if you had not been the occasion of it your selves; and
surely what you have done in this particular, some of your own Members will not
accept it from you with thanks to you; but I shall say more to you when I have
under all your hands the particular Practices, which you charge to be irregular.

And though there has been and is Contradictions between us and you in matters
of Religion, and difference in particular Practices about Church, and
Ministers, and Orders, etc. Yet what is this? this was amongst our selves,
though hereof you have no reason to boast, as of any Victory that you have
obtained over us in any such Controversy, neither has the Spirit of God so
appeared in that Authority among you, as that you have gained any from us to
you, but rather the contrary; but what of these Contentions? we have never so
contended with you, as that we have hated your Persons, or sought to betray you
into the hands of devouring Mouths, the Lord is our Witness in this, though
you have done contrary (even sought to betray our Persons in this your work)
and I must tell you, Dishonestly and Undiscreetly have you done in this matter,
who never could unto this day, in any Contest between us about Religious
Matters, convince us of Error or irregular Practices, though now you have
accused us to the whole Nation, and not as in a way of Debate about Religion,
but as in matter of State Irregularity; whereby plainly appears, that you seek
to betray us, even our Persons into the hands of our Merciless Enemies; and you
would make Peace with them, and deliver us into their Merciless hands; and
thereby show hatred, not unto us as upon the account of Religion only, but even
Hatred to our Persons, and have accused us as of Personal Irregularity; and so
have not showed Love to our Persons, but rather sought our Destruction: Oh, ye
Wicked Men! to whose charge God shall lay this Iniquity of Treachery and
Unfaithful Dealing to us, even as with Brethren, which is the most deceitful
Iniquity.

And alas for you! What, are your Desires of depriving us of our just Liberty?
God shall give us Liberty, and from him we shall enjoy it whether you will or
no; and for our just Liberty we shall not be beholding to you, though I must
tell you, if our Liberty were in your power, it is greatly to be doubted, and
even your own dealing in this your Declaration gives occasion for it, that our
Liberty would be enslaved, if it were in your hands; but we bless the Lord, it
is in his Hand, and not in yours: for so much of Treachery toward us has here
appeared, even in giving us up (so much as in you is) to the will of our
Enemies, and the spirit is in you which would betray Brethren, that for the
time to come we can never trust you; but we do not give our Power to you, to
enjoy our Liberty from you, nor ever shall. And if we walk Morrally Honest and
Peaceable in the Nation, it is more then you do in this matter; for this your
practice is not morrally honest, in accusing of us behind our backs to the
Nation and City, and Authorities thereof of Irregularity, etc. though, as I
have said, never any of us had so great a hand by open opposition, tending to
make War in the Nation, as some of you in some things I might instance, even
for their sakes to whom you yove accused us; and that we are more peaceable
then some of your selves, the Nation and City knows: Have we thrust our selves
into Arms, and sought Offices, and Places and Commands, as some of you have?
Have ever any of us appeared in Arms against Parliament and Nation, as some of
you? Have we given the City or the Nation, by any visible Appearance, to fear a
War from us, as you have done? Let the Nation and City, and the Witness in all
men's Consciences judge; so that we are known to be peaceable, as much, or more
then your selves; for we have never sought to you to take up Arms with us, as
some among you have sought to others; which may demonstrate, that we are as
peaceable in the Nation, if not more then you; and so you needed not to have
premised such a thing on our behalf. And thus I have in short returned your
secret Treachery upon your own heads, and answered that same part of your
Declaration, wherein I and the Truth, and the whole Flock of God was any way
concerned; and as for the rest of your Declaration I will not seek occasion
against it, though in some other things also therein expressed, I might search
out your hearts, and discover the rottenness of them: And where you say, You
declare Magistracy to be an Ordinance, etc. might not I tell the Nation and
City, That you are not content with Magistracy, except of your own Sect? and
might not I say, Why were not you contented with that Assembly of men that last
sat? and wherefore was it that you, even some of you Anabaptists, were the
chief Instruments, with Swords in your hands, to dissolve them? and so were
Instruments in bringing the Nation into present Confusion.

And whereas you speak of the public Ministers of the Nation, You are far from
endeavoring to destroy them (say you) and it is your Duty to stand by them,
and preserve them from all Violence and Injury, etc.

To which I answer, What are you about to make a League and a Covenant with
Antichrist? Have you for these many years been opposing them in words, and are
you now recanting of what you have done, when you are sensible of a Danger upon
you? and will you now bind your selves to stand by them, and preserve them from
all Injury, and even as they are Ministers too? But let me ask you, Do you look
upon them to be Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist? If true Ministers of
Christ, wherefore do you oppose them, and cry against them in your Pulpits, and
have formerly your selves, and some of your Brethren yet do publicly oppose
them both by word and writing? Oh, ye Hypocrites! But if they are Ministers of
Antichrist, then how is it that you will stand by them and preserve them as
such, and would bind it upon them as their Duty to stand by, and preserve you?
Is not this a League with Hell and Death? Are you turned backwards into Love
and Affection toward them again, and so lost your former Principles? And is
your Zeal quite grown cold, or are you now only Flattering and Daubing with the
Ministers, because you see Danger from them, while you seek but greater
Advantage against them? They may indeed tell you, They look upon you as not
Destroyers of their Ways and Practices, neither to ease the Nation from any
Burden, which they have laid upon it: For it is manifest, though you deny them
in some particulars, some of you; yet you can cry against that in some of them,
and yet uphold the same thing; I may lawfully instance, that some of your
Brethren, some in this Nation, and some in Ireland, take, or have lately taken
Tithes for Preaching, and have Yearly Stipends, and so much by the Year out of
the States Treasure for Preaching, One Hundred Pound, Two Hundred Pound, and
Three Hundred Pound a piece by the year; which indeed does show that you are
not intending to destroy their oppressing and abominable practices; but the
rather, that you would turn them out of great Places and Benefices, and turn
your selves in: Oh Deceit and Wickedness! which I am forced to lay open upon
this Occasion, of your own just Provocation hereunto. And as for their
preserving you, and you them, against such as do oppose you; they may easily
join with you in this, if they could hope in your Faithfulness; for some of
you, and your Members, have showed as much Enmity, have been open Persecutors,
even as they and their Members have been; and your Members have been sending
the People of God to Prison, and persecuting them, even as the common Priests
of the Nation; and you appear to be guided by the same spirit in many things;
and if they be Antichristian in their ways and practices, its sure that you
are not of Christ, because you are like unto them in Nature.

And in that you say, You would have none tolerated in their Religion that
deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God; but you would tolerate Episcopacy,
Presbytery, or a ^^inted Form, etc. (say you.)

To which I say, I know that spirit that you are of, if it had its full
authority would tolerate none but your selves; for your spirit in nature
differs not from the spirit of the Church of Rome: And what are you now for
tollerating Episcopacy, who were once your selves (in your Zeal for God, when
your sincerity was not darkened, nor your hearts so much corrupted through
Places of Honor, and through such things, as now they are) Instruments to the
pulling down of Episcopacy? and will you now tolerate it again, and help to
set it up, and build what you have destroyed, as if you recanted of what you
had done? but plainly showing that you are not of the same Spirit that once you
were of; but have lost Sincerity, and can embrace Idolatry; for once ye were
the men that did oppose it, and did violently help to pull it down; but now you
are for tolleration. Oh! unconstant men, this is to you, not herein discovering
my Judgment in the case, and if Episcopacy, why may not Popery be tolerated?
seeing they are one and the self same in ground and nature, and not much
different in appearance, and you may agree to tolerate a stinted Form in
others, because your selves are in a stinted Form also; for what is yours else
but a form, crying up your water and bread and wine, and differing from the
World only in these outward things, when as the City and Nation knows you are
men as covetous, as worldly minded, as ambitious, as self-seeking of honor and
places as any others in the Nation; and your Religion appears to be a stinted
Form as much as others; Alas poor men, you have discovered your hearts in your
Declaration, and according to the corruption thereof I cannot but answer you;
and there are some that deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and say they
are the Words of God, and a Declaration, and a Treatise of what the Saints
believed and enjoyed; and Christ is the Word of God, that may in time to come
be tolerated in their Religion in this Nation, though you have renounced them:
but while they are owned and regarded of the Lord, they respect not your love
nor hatred, who are mortal men, and your breath in your nostrils, and must fall
and perish as the dung in all your beauty, and your profession of Religion,
before the coming of the Son of God.

And in your Postscript you say, you have under you hands sent forth your
Declaration in behalf of your selves, and others of your Judgment; but I must
tell you, I do believe there are some even of those called Anabaptists which
will reject your work, and to them my answer is not, for I spare them: but to
you fearful Hypocrites in a time of danger, that have in this juncture of time
renounced us without ground or reason in the Sight of God, but for your (...),
as if you would gain the favor of the Nation and City by denial of ^^s, and
looking upon your selves to be reproached because of us, when as you are a
Company of unworthy men, even unworthy of our reproaches, and to escape them
have denied us, as seeming to clear your selves; but you are deceived in this
matter, and it shall turn to work against you in the Nation, and in the City;
for we have a more surer witness in their Consciences, even in the Consciences
of all people, that we are of God, then you have; for take but away your
outward water, and Bread and Wine, and some few outward Practices, and what do
you differ from the worst sort of men in the Nation? for does not Pride and
Hypocrisy, and Self-Love, and Covetousness, and the love of this World abound
amongst you, as much as amongst any others? the Witness in Peoples Consciences
knows it, which shall be a Witness for us, and against you. You may indeed have
gained League with the worst sort of men in the Nation, but you have not gained
the sincerity in people, and while we have that on our side to witness for us,
take you the rude multitude, for we are not discouraged at all concerning this
thing, but the rather do glory in the Lord though we be denied of all, for
though men forsake us, yet the Lord cares for us, and your own doing shall
return upon your own heads: and thus much is sufficient to the substance of
your Declaration, and if I receive any reply, I shall expect it under the hands
of you all, that I may further search, and discover you unto your selves, and
to the Nation.

And whereas there is a Manuscript goes abroad, consisting of five particulars,
which is said that it was delivered in to the Committee of Safety, as Advice
and Counsel to them, but who the Authors of it are is something uncertain; but
certain it is, that some of the called Independent Ministers and Pastors were
the chief Promoters of it; and in the Copy which was delivered to my hands it
is said, These five Particulars were the result of a little Synod, made up of
Presbyterians, Independants and Anabaptists; but whether it is so or no, I
leave that, and would say something to some of the Particulars, and even to the
Committee of Safety, and Officers of the Army, and all others of the Nation,
for their better information then the same Paper describes to them.

The third Particular consists about the Magistrates Power in matters of
Faith and Worship, and the Authors say, Though they greatly prize Christian
Liberty, yet they profess utter dislike and abhorrency of an Universal
tolleration, as being contrary to the mind of God in his Word.

Answ. It appears the Authors are lovers of themselves, and prizers of their
own Liberty, but not of the Liberty of others, but do utterly dislike and ^^ber
the tolleration of others, which may indeed be more righteous then themselves,
and this is no less then the very Principle of the Whore of Rome, which
Promotes her own Liberty and makes others Slaves, and ahhor^, tolleration to
any but themselves; and they plead Scriptures as well as you for proof of their
Religion, and they will say all that differs from them are contrary to the
Scriptures, even as you say, when as there is very little better foundation in
the Scriptures for your Religion then there is for theirs; and it is doubtful
to many what Religion this day extant is perfectly according to the Scriptures;
but yet thus much may be said, That Church, and that Religion which are not in
the same Spirit as gave forth the Scriptures, are not according unto the
Scriptures; and he that can distinguish of this, and who it is that has the
same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, is only able to judge what Religion
is according to the Scriptures: But can the Authors show plainly out of the
Scriptures, that their Religion is only according thereunto, and all others the
contrary? and until they prove this; why may not the Rulers, that are of may be
in this Nation, give Tolleration unto other sorts of People, as well as to the
Independants, the supposed Authors of this Paper.

The fourth Particular consists concerning Tithes, and say they, The taking
away of Tithes for Maintenance of Ministers, until as full a Maintenance be as
equally secured, and as equally settled, tends very much to the Destruction of
the Ministry, and Preaching of the Gospel in these Nations.

Answ. Alas for you, poor ignorant Creatures, ye foolish men, that seems to
have no understanding of the Ministry and Gospel of Christ; Do you indeed think
that the true Ministry of Christ, and the Preaching of the Gospel depends upon
Maintenance by Tithes? Oh, ye Robbers of God, who have secretly dishonored him
in your hearts, and publicly disgraced him as much as in you lies to the
Nation, as if he were not able to save his Ministry, and the Preaching of his
Gospel from destruction, if Tithes be taken away; Surely, you err in your
Judgments, and have no acquaintance with God, nor with his Ministry nor
Gospel, who have thus dishonored him in setting up that Maintenance by the
forcible and unjust oppression of Tithes to be the preserving of Ministry and
Gospel, and as if Tithes were the uphold ing of Ministry and Gospel; and you
have thus falsely and wickedly measured God, his Ministry and Gospel by the
wickedness of your own hearts, who seem to be indeed of those Hirelings that
cheat Souls for money, and run for the gift like Balaam, and for the lucre like
the evil Beasts, and Slow-bellies; and so I do believe that your false Ministry
indeed, and your feigned pretense of preaching the Gospel do depend upon great
sums of money, and upon large Maintenances, and we believe that indeed is the
chief Reason of your Preaching; and of your Ministry, and it is very possible
that your Ministry and Preaching may fall, which is Antichristian, when Tithes
and Hire is taken away, which Ministry depends thereupon; but the true
Ministry and preaching of the Gospel will God maintain and uphold, though the
oppression of Tithes be vanquished; and I hope some of the Rulers of this
Nation, and Officers of the Army will not believe your advice; but yet you seem
to be willing to renounce Tithes, if you could have as full a Maintenance
settled another way; so that however great maintenance comes, you regard not, so
you can have that, whether by this way of Oppression, or the other, its your
Maintenance you love and follow after, and seek unto the Powers of the Earth
for that end; and how equally and legally Tithes have been settled, which you
seem to affirm, let all good People judge; given they were, and settled first in
our Nation by the Popes Authority, to be the Maintenance of that Whore's
Ministers, and the Laws that gave them, and settled them have been Antichristian
and Oppression in the Nation, and there is the guilt of Blood, and of cruel
unjust sufferings lying upon this Nation in that very cause of Tithes, and the
Hand of the Lord is gone out against it, and against all Contenders for it, and
God will redeem the Nation from ^^der it, though you be putting your strength
to uphold it through your hypocritical Prayers, and Preaching, and Flatteries
with God and man.

The fifth particular is, these Authors desire, that countenance be not given
unto, nor trust reposed in the hands of Quakers, being persons of such
Principles that are distructive to the Gospel, and inconsistent with peace and
civil society.

Answ. Here your wickedness and the malice of your hearts is let forth against
the despised People for their righteousness sake; and this spirit of yours
would not only discountenance them, but destroy them from the face of the
Earth, if it were in your Hands, and you are worse then Baalam ever was, and
far more blind then he; for you are as it were seeking enchantments against the
People of God for Money, and you see not the goodly tents of Jacob, as he did,
nor the People that are altogether blessed; Oh! ye envious persons that are
even a preparing as much as in you is the destruction of a peaceable People,
and that would keep them in slavery under you, and you would have the
countenance of the powers of the Earth, but they must not, and you would
Monopolize all the places of trust for advantage to your selves, and you would
hardly allow the People of God a place on the Ground; Oh! ye sinful Hypocrites
and Flatterers and Slanderers of the just; but what need you have made such
preparation against them? do they seek places of honor among you? do they
delight in great places among men? do they love to be great in this World? nay
their Kingdom is from above, and they reject the countenanance of the Be^^^
Authority, and they reject any confidence that the Dragon and unjust po^ can
repose in them, and you need not have been afraid in this matter, and thereupon
slandered us, and have back-bited us to the powers of the Earth, what do you
fear? even the thing which you fear will God in a judgment bring upon you, and
there is a Government to be set up in this Nation, even that which is of the
Lamb; and your Antichristian Monarchy the Beast with all his Heads and Horns
shall fall to the Ground, and the Lord may bring your fear upon you to your
utter confusion, though you are making defenses all that you can for your
selves and your Kingdom; and this seems to be (...)^^y wherein every man's heart
is tried, and every man and sort of People is pouring, forth the Maliciousness
of their Hearts against the poor People in scorn called Quakers; What say the
Papists and Episcopal men? Quakers are (...) New Sect, and Deceivers, etc. And
what say the Presbyterians and the Independan^^ of them? Oh! they are Seducers,
they are Witches, they are false Prophets, they are Vagabonds, not worthy of
Countenance, etc. nor any Place of Trust in the Nation, etc. What say the
Anabaptists of them? O! they are Blasphemers, and Heretics, and Irregular
Persons, and distructive to Gospel, etc. This and such like is the Cry of
these, and all sorts of people, against a poor despised People, whom the
Eternal God has made dreadful unto them all, who shall be a Rod in his Hand,
to break them and confound them, and utterly to destroy their Antichristian
kingdom; for they are beloved of the Lord, though hated of all men, and though
the whole Body of the Beast and Antichrist, and every Horn of his head do set
themselves to War against the Lamb and his Followers; and though all these
sorts of people mentioned, and some others, do at this day pour out their Fury
and Malice against this People, yet shall they not be confounded, for their
Trust is in the Living God; and as sure as the Lord lives, The Fear that People
have of the Prosperity of this People shall come upon them; and without Weapon,
or Arm of Flesh, or the Multitude of an Host of Men, will their God dash their
Enemies to pieces. And all ye Sects whatsoever, that are risen in Opposition
against us; what do we regard your Fury and Madness against us? What do we fear
your Reviling, you uncircumcised Philistines? We mock at your Terror, and we
reject your Strength as the Strength of a Straw; we despise your Authority,
which is not of God, as the Authority of so many Briars and Thorns; we can
glory over you in the Lord; What are you? and from whence did you come? is not
Babylon your City? and is not the great Whore your Mother, and the Mother of
Harlots your Nurse? and what is your growth, but even like the Grass of a
Summer's growth, that is soon cut down and withered; and like the Leaf of a
Summer Tree, that utterly perishes in Winter? The Mighty Day of the Lord is at
your Door, Confusion is begun amongst you, and the Sword of one may destroy
another, and the Strength of one shall tear another, and the Remnant that is
left shall be destroyed, and we must overcome them without Sword or Carnal
Weapon, and this shall come to pass in a day; and the Eye that is yet blind
shall see it, and the Child that is yet undelivered shall be a Conqueror over
the Beast, and over his Image, and over all your false Sects, and over every
Horn that is risen up against the Lamb and his Followers; the time of the
Lamb's Kingdom is at hand. Behold, behold, ye Mountains of the Earth, The
Sentence of Eternal Vengeance will pass upon you; ye Hypocritical Professors,
ye Pastors, Elders, Members and Ministers of Churches (so called) the Decree of
the, Almighty is coming out against you; you have provoked him by your
Wickedness toward him and his People, even to the Destruction of your own
selves: wherefore Tremble before the Lord; for his Dread, and the weight of his
Hand, shall be upon your Consciences.

Oh Nation, mourn over thy iniquities which have provoked God against thee, and
if men turn not unto him, his sore Judgment will be upon thee: we are not for
this Party, or the other, neither do we justify one side in opposition to
another; for we see the Earth is corrupted, and all sorts of men that are this
day striving one sort against another, are in a wrong way, and in a wrong
spirit; and we cannot side with any of them, but we rather mourn over the
Nation, who is torn in pieces by the ambitious spirit of her pretended Rulers;
and we desire the repentance of all, and not the destruction of any, and we are
for Gods part, and not for men.

E. B.

AN ANSWER TO THE Great Cry, The QUAKERS will soon FALL.
A Great Cry in the World has been by many people of all sorts; As for the
Quakers, they will soon fall, and come to nothing; they will stand but for a
while, as other Sects have done before them; For many Sects that have ^^de a
great stir for a time, they have come to naught, and so will these; they will
fall and ^^^e to naught in a Year or two, or the like; and they will forsake
this Way: And this, Noise and Stir about them will come to an end, and they
will have a Fall. And thus, and after this manner do the People of the World
Cry, and say one to another.

To this I answer, O ye Fools and Blind, that thus do judge and say! ye are
ignorant and sottish Children, and know not the Way of the Lord nor his
Judgments; neither do ye know his Secrets, nor have entered into his Counsel;
who told you thus, or by what spirit have you received it? and do ye not speak
as ye would have it? and because you would have it so, do ye not therefore
speak it? Ye Fools and Blind, whose Hearts are hardened, I tell you nay, your
words shall never come to pass; but you, and all our Enemies, shall be found
Liars, and as you say of others, so shall it come to pass upon your selves; and
that which you desire for others, it shall fall upon your own heads.

Again, I tell you nay, we shall not fall, nor be decreased, nor come to
^^^ght; but the Truth shall stand forever, and we shall be increased through
the World, and shall be the Renowned People of the whole Earth: For we are of
them whom the Lord is gathering from off the barren Mountains, and out of the
Mouths of all dumb Shepherds, whom the Lord will feed and keep, as the Sheep
of his own Pasture; over whom the Seed of David, Christ, the Heir of Heaven and
Earth is chief Shepherd; and he is set over us, and he rules in Equity and
Righteousness. And them we are spoken of, Ezekiel 34. which are the Sheep of
God's Pasture; and the Lord has sought us out even as a Shepherd his Sheep;
and we shall not fall, as ye suppose. And we are them spoken of in the
Revelations, whom the Lord is bringing through great Tribulations, and making
us white in the Blood of the Lamb, and redeeming us through his Sufferings. And
we are of that Numberless Number spoken of, which shall stand with the Lamb
upon Mount Sion; for we are of the Seed which is coming up out of Egypt, and
shall replenish the whole Earth: And ye Fools and Blind will be deceived, and
the Imaginations of your hearts will come to nothing: and its you that will
fall, and come to nothing; and not we, whom the Lord is bringing up out of the
Apostasy, which you all are in, and all Nations are in since the days of the
Apostles. And we are not any of all those Sects and false Churches, that have
been on foot for many Ages; for its true, they have risen and fallen, come up
and gone down one after another, and made a stir and a noise for a while, and
then withered, and come to naught, and dyed away of themselves; and this is
because their Foundation has not been Christ, the Rock of Ages; nor none of
them have been his true Church, his Spouse, elected to him; for if they had,
they could not have been prevailed against, nor fallen, as they have done; nor
they have not been the true Church, which is the Ground and Pillar of Truth;
for they have withered and come to nothing, and risen and fallen one after
another in a few years time; and they could not stand long any of them, but
must needs wither and be confounded, and one consume another, and be eaten up
one of another; for they have risen out of the Pit that has had no bottom, and
into that have they and must they all sink down again; and they have caused the
world to wonder after them for a little season, but being not upon the
Foundation, they could not remain; for they have all come out of the Pit, and
go into Perdition, and have risen one out of another, and been destroyed one of
another: and though some of them have made war one with another, and some of
them hated the Whore, yet have they given their power to the Beast, and the
Beast rose out of the Pit, which had no bottom, without Foundation; and the
Beast, and all these Sects, that have given their power to him, go into
Perdition with him, and its not possible that they should remain long, but
fall, and come to nothing, because Christ has not been their Foundation: but
as I have said, We are not any of all these, that give their power to the
Beast, but are of them that stand with the Lamb upon Moun Sion, that are
redeemed unto God out of every Sect, and out of Kindreds and Multitudes; and we
are of them that have overcome the Beast, and his Image, and the number of his
name, who are them that follow the Lamb whither soever he goes; who cannot be
overcome nor fall, because greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the
World; and he overcomes the world, and he is our Rock and Foundation, and we
cannot be moved; but he keeps us, and we may not fall, nor come to naught, as
our Enemies do falsely suppose and speak, as they would have it; but let them be
at rest, for we shall grow, and spring, and be increased into a numberless
Number, which shall stand upon the Sea of Glass, with the Harps of God in our
hands, singing Praises and Glory to the Lord God for evermore. What though the
Woman has been fled into the Wilderness, and we, her Seed, made war against,
and slain? and what though we be accounted as Sheep for the slaughter, and
killed all the day long? And what though some that are convinced, and come to
the Faith of Christ in measure? what though some such do turn from the Truth,
into the evil world again, and deny the Lord and his People, and their
latte^-end be worse then their beginning, and the unclean spirit possess them
seven fold more then at the first? and, what though the evil eye does see this,
and the Wicked do herein rejoice, and take occasion from such things to say,
They will fall, they will fall, and people turn from them again? O ye Fools and
Blind! notwithstanding all this, Truth shall prosper, and such as are faithful
shall never be ashamed, nor never fall; but the Lord will overcome, and the
Woman shall return, and shall receive her Seed to life again, which shall be as
the Stars for multitude; and your desires and conceivings shall be confounded.
And what though you say, They cannot stand long, for the Powers of the Earth,
and all the Rulers are against them, and Parliaments they will make Laws to
suppress them: Nay, ye Fools and Blind, all this will not prevail; for the Lord
has broken, and will break all that shall oppose his Kingdom, which he is
setting up amongst us, of whose Government and Dominion there shall be no end,
nor no falling, but it shall be increased forever and ever, and Powers nor
Dominions of the Earth shall not prevail; but all that which they do against
us, turns to our Increase, and their own Overthrow and Confusion, while they
think to suppress us; and all what they can do, and what you may suppose, it is
all nothing, and will come to nothing; for the Lord has spoken it: his Seed
shall grow, and his People shall replenish the Nations; and in time it will be
manifest whose we are, and how we shall be increased; and in the mean time, we
bear all things in Patience, knowing assuredly, that the Lord is with us, and
that none upon the Earth may prevail against us; and this shall all our Enemies
know in the Lord's Season.

E. B.

A DISCOVERY Of some part of the War between the Kingdom of the Lamb, And the
KINGDOM of ANTICHRIST: Held forth in this Account of several Disputes and
Queries, between a Minister of Christ (really so) and one that has the Name of
a Minister, but is proved to be a Minister and Member of Antichrist by evident
Testimonies. And is a short Account of the Covetousness, Ignorance, Envy, and
the Fruits of Darkness brought forth by C. Fowler, a professed Minister in
Reading. And here all may see (in some measure) the difference between Christ
and Antichrist, and their Authority and Weapons; and also the Fruits and
Effects of each of them are made manifest.
To the Reader,
Friend,
THE chief occasion of this being sent abroad to public view, is to the
people of Reading most particularly, but yet more general unto all, and though
that it be chiefly unto a particular Place, and against a particular Person, to
wit, Chapter Fowler, one that has the Name of a Minister of Christ in Reading,
whose Folly, and Weakness and Ignorance is herein discovered; yet it has
partly relation to the whole Ministry of the Nation; and all men that do not
shut their eyes may see and behold something of that great Opposition, that is
at this day between the Kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of Antichrist: and I
have no other end in publishing of this, but for the satisfaction of them that
desire it, and for the general good of all; and if Christopher Fowler shall see
himself justly reproved, and repent, it may prove of good to him also; and I am
not a man of Strife, for if he and his Brethren had not first challenged us to
Disputes, I had not had this Occasion th^^ to proceed now; and in what I have
done, I refer it to the Just Witness of God in the honest People in Reading,
and to all elsewhere.


FOrasmuch as great has been the Debate for these diverse years of late,
between the Lamb and his Followers, and Antichrist and his Followers; and the
one of them has been opposing the other in their own Power and Authority; and
great is the Debate at this day between these two Kingdoms, which is
endeavoring the Overthrow one of the other; and all the strength and power of
Antichrist is put forth in Defense of his kingdom, by Persecution, Injustice,
False-Imprisonments, Beatings, and Whippings, and Spoiling of Goods and
Persons, and Railings, Accusings, Slanderings, Reproachings; by these ways and
proceedings does Antichrist strive at this day, for the upholding and
maintaining his own cause and kingdom; and by this means and these Weapons
mentioned, does he seek to defend himself, his Church, and Ministry, and
Ordinances; these are his Weapons and Armor, by which he opposes and fights
against the Lamb and his Followers, whom the Lord has raised up for this end;
and they have within these few years, more then ever for many Generations, made
an Invation and Inroad upon Antichrist, his kingdom and government, and the
great City Babylon; and the Seige is raised, that has long been laid against
the Holy Seed; and the great City Babylon is taken, her Walls are scaled, and
her Gates broken, and her Strength defeated, and her Merchants spoiled of their
goodly Treasure; for the Day of the Lord is come, and the holy Seed is he
leading out of the spiritual Sodom and Egypt; and Mystery Babylon the Great
has God remembered for her Iniquities, and her Cruelties and Mercilesness, and
all her Abominations will God avenge upon her head; and this does come to pass,
and not by the multitude of an Host of men, nor yet by humane Policy and
Wisdom, nor yet by carnal Weapons, nor by Goals, nor Prifons, nor Persecutions,
these are not the Lamb's Weapons, but these are Antichrist's and the Dragon's
Armor and Weapons, which he makes War by, against the Lamb and his Followers,
even at this day in every Nation: But the Lamb's Weapons are Truth, Patience,
Long-suffering, Meekness and downright Sincerity of Heart and Tongue; and by
these things shall Antichrist be slain, and these Weapons shall Conquer his
kingdom; Love shall overcome Hatred, Meekness shall overcome Wrath, Truth shall
overcome Deceit and Falsehood, and God shall overcome the Devil.

But more particularly, Great has been the Opposition and Debate made one
against the other; and the Battle between Christ and Antichrist has
principally been held forth between the Ministers of the Church of England on
Antichrist's part, and the People called Quakers on the other part; no man in
the Nation can be so Ignorant how the Controversy has depended betwixt these
two, and what Weapons they have used the one against the other; and also, it is
in part known the Success of them both; and how the one of them (to wit) the
Ministers (so called) have had on their part the strength of Men, the
Magistrates Power, the Rude Multitude, and Humane Craft, and the Serpent's
Policy, not any of these things have been wanting to them; but yet, a little
Seed has sprung up in the Nation on the other part, unexpected by many, which
has had Sincerity and Truth in it, and the Lord has been with it, and he has
blessed it, though but little and very small in its beginning, yet it is
prospered into a Kingdom; for God's Might and his Authority dwells in it,
before whom all Nations of the Earth must Fear and Tremble.

But yet more particularly, my present Occasion of demonstrating these things
are as follows; and the Engagement that lies upon me hereunto, is not out of
any Personal Enmity, that I have against any; but my Intent is, For the
Discovery of the Truth, that men may embrace it; and for the laying open the
Deceits of Antichrist, and his Kingdom, that men may come out of Babylon, and
may not partake of her Sins, nor of her Plagues: and this matter now in hand
chiefly concerns the people of the Town of Reading for their Satisfaction,
concerning the Ways, Practices, Doctrines, and Proceedings of Christopher
Fowler, one of their Ministers, with whom I have been joined in opposion two
several times in dispute with him, and the third time was appointed for our
meeting upon Discourse, as hereafter is related; but he not appearing at the
time and place according to appointment; and he notwithstanding yet continues
in opposition to, and Reproaching of the Truth of the Gospel, which I profess
and contend for; therefore upon this account do I thus e^gage with him, and not
for Centention sake, but for the open vindication of Truth and Righteousness,
and sound Faith and Doctrine, held forth by us, and opposed and gain* said by
him.

The first opposition that fell out between him and me, was at a meeting
challenged by himself, in that Town about the ninth Month, in the year 1657*
and I shall at present forbear his detestable and Abominable Practices and
Sp^^ches against me and the Truth, at that Meeting; for indeed the remembrance
of it is much passed from me, but many in that Town may well remember to (...)
day, how he hooted and clapped his hands in the Palpit, as if he had been
H^nting on a Mountain; and also his ungodly speeches, and revilings toward me,
as calling me Dog, and Villain, and such like names; and when some of his own
people reproved him for such words, he said; The worst words he had in his
Mouth was to good for me; and indeed such was his carriages, and words toward
me, at that time, far off civility, and not like a sober Heathen, much less
like a Christian or Minister of Christ; and here follows what was written to
him, and to the Major, and whole Town, and sent the next Morning after the
dispute, which is some account of that days proceeding; and finding a Copy of
it by me, I thought meet here to infert it.

Friends, Rulers, Priests, and People of Reading.
A Few words to clear my Conscience to you all in the sight of God, I send
among you, occasioned by this days Meeting; ye people be ashamed of your
Priests; and ye Priests be ye ashamed of your People; and all of you together,
cover your Lips, and hide your Faces, and be ashamed of your Profession in
Religion, or to make mention of the Name of the Lord in that nature in which
you stand; whose Lightness, and Foolishness, and Rudeness, and Wickedness
exceeds some others; yea, many with whom I have ^ad to do in Disputes, you
excel in unreasonableness in words and Behavior, manifesting your selves some
of you not to be Civil Men, much less Christians; and this very day much of
your Vanity, Bruitishness, and Un^^vility appeared to your shame, in the Sight
of all Just and Sober Men, and to your condemnation in the Sight of God; who
takes notice of your wickedness, and unseemly behavior, which you may call to
mind and remember, that you may repent of your ungodly words, and cruel
speeches, and rude brutish gestures, which appeared in you without any Fear of
God, to your shame be it spoken; and like Priests, like People, all out of the
way, in folly and vanity, erring through Lightness, and Wantonness, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, but perverters of the one, and despifers
of the other; the sin of the Priest will be charged upon the People, because
you love to have those things so, and uphold him in his wickedness; and the sin
of the people will be charged upon the Priests, who through Lies and Lightness
cause you to err, and profits them not at all; but is a blind Leader of ye
blind People, till both fall into the Ditch together, who close your Eyes that
you may not see, and shut your Ears lest you should Hear, and harden your
Hearts that you may not understand; and your Destruction is of your selves, and
your Blood is upon your own Heads, who scorns to be reproved, and despises the
Way of the Lord, and will not receive his Truth in the Love of it, that you may
be saved; but is a blind, willful, and stiff-necked people; some of you who
have hearts, and cannot understand: Is these the fruits of your long
Profession, Railing, Mocking, Scorning, Laughing, Hooting; Foolish and Vain
Words, Nick-naming, and Reproaching? these things abounds openly among you to
your shame, especially at such a time, when Meekness, and Soberness, and
Moderation, had much better become you, to have been brought forth by you; your
Priests, exceeding the rest in vileness, and some of your Rulers hardly being
clear: remember your work, and call to mind your words, and ways, and let shame
cover your heads, from the highest to the lowest of you; and thou proud wild
reproachful professe^ Minister, cease thy vain presumptious boastings against
the Innocent; and now when thou puts off thy armor, if thou have gotten a
victory, glory; or rather hide thy face for shame, and stop thy mouth in the
dust, whose Lightness, and Wildness, has super-abounded some of thy fellows,
who may be ashamed of thee in thy words and behavior, whereby thou art
sufficiently proved to be one that was never sent of God, if we had no other
testimony: Thy proud presumptions boast against the Quakers, was with soberness
and in the Fear of the Lord answered, to thy shame in the sight of all such,
whose hearts are not altogether hardened, and given up to believe Lies, and to
do Wickedness, that they may be damned that believe not the Truth: and first,
as to the manner of the dispute on his part, were his Railing Envious
Reproachful unsavory filthy words, of God, or of the Devil? with much impudency
many times uttered in the discourse; as Villain, Sirrah, Wretch, Blasphemer,
Rogue, and such like lying words of Bitterness, more like the words of a
brawling Drunkard, then for a Minister of Christ, and were his booting,
laughsing, and clapping his hands, and rude and unseemly gestures, and
behavior, of God, or of the Devil? more like in appearance to a Stage Player,
then to a Minister of Christ, to his shame I mention it; consider and answer
these things, and let that of God in your Consciences judge, to which I stand
to be approved in meekness, and he to be reproved and condemned in his
filthiness and bruitishness, in the Sight of God; may not you who owned him in
that discourse, be ashamed of him in these his words and actions, which
appeared? who boastingly gave a Challenge to dispute of the things of God, and
then to manage it in Rudeness and Wildness, without any Fear of God, in Lying
and Slandring; and at the end, when things came to the head for Trial, to run
away, and not to stand to the end, though several times he was charged to it; I
appeal for Answer to the Light of Christ in all your Consciences; not like a
Minister of Christ in any measure he appeared, but as one that knows not the
Living God, nor his Law, and Fear, nor Judgments; and an unfit fellow upon
trial I found him, to dispute the Precious things of God, and through some
Nations I have hardly met with a worse, which caused me to be the more silent
then otherwise I would, for I chosed rather to be accounted a fool by silence,
then to offend the Just Law of God, by giving holy things to Dogs, or casting
Pearls before Swine, in which nature he and some of you appeared, who fasly
Slandered the Innocent with the name of Jesuit, and such like, crying away
with him; with Bitter and Cruel words and gestures, pushing with your hands,
and crying a Prison were the fittest, or such like; even like unto your
Forefathers the Pharisees, who persecuted Christ under the account of
themselves being righteous, and he a blasphemer, and they laid snares for him
to entrap him in his works, as you did; who when I would not answer according
to your provoking, that you might ensnare me, would hardly suffer me to answer
any thing, to clear and defend to the Truth, against the boast of the Wicked;
but by Hooting, and Laughing, and Clapping of Hands, and Foolish Jeastings, and
unreasonable Rudeness, prevented me from speaking, and them that would have
heard from hearing, as much as you could, even as bruit Beasts or Heathens, and
not like civil people, much less like godly Christians; nor like such as would,
or could soberly debate the Truth of God to edification, and truly may I say I
fought with Beasts at Reading, after the manner of men; but all was to make
your selves, and your pretended Minister manifest, and all could not be so
blind, but might understand his ways and words, not to be guided by the Spirit
of God, but by the spirit of the Devil; who is the Father of such Works and
Con^, as was brought forth by him in the Meeting, in many uncivil actions, and
reproachful words of envy. And also as to the matter of dispute on his p^^t
managed, was but a vain contention, boastingly uttered without the Fear of the
Lord, in a proud presumptious spirit, and a Snare laid in the midst of his
Questions, and Arguments to entrap the Just, but in vain was the Snare (...) in
the sight of the Bird, and I chose rather to appear a Fool to your wisdom, then
to be made a prey upon by you, and caught in your deeplaid Snare; for we are
learned to be as wise as Serpents; and deeply did he and s^^e of you fall into
the Snare of Confusion, and Wickedness, and False Doctrines, as would have been
laid open, if he had durst to have staid, or you to have heard. The Principal
Question was, whether the Scriptures are the Word of God? which he affirmed,
but could not prove by plain Scripture; ^^to which much might have been
answered, and said, if patience, or any moderation had ruled over your
despiteful spirits; but because I could not (to satisfy your wills, and to
fulfill your purpose) answer, yea or nay, and thereby make my self a
Transgressor; Therefore, hardly would you suffer me to say any thing, in any
manner of arguing, but by wickedness endeavored to stop my Mouth; My answer
was, and is, the Scriptures (the Writings) which are one, are but a declaration
and witness of the Word of God; which Word was in the beginning, and endures
for ever; as John and Peter testifies; and the Scriptures (which are Writings)
were not in the beginning, but began to be written by Moses many hundred years
after the beginning; Therefore, the Scriptures, which were not in the
beginning, are not the Word of God, which Word was in the beginning; further
the Scripture says, the Worlds ^^^e made and framed by the Word of God; but
the Scriptures made not the Worlds; therefore the Scriptures are not the Word
of God, which as the Scrip^^^e it self says, made the Worlds; many such like
witnesses might be alleged from the Scriptures, to prove the Scriptures are
not the Word God, (...) a Declaration (of the Word of God) and cannot endure
for ever; then (...) said he would prove the Scriptures should endure for ever,
but could not bring any plain Scriptures, as I demanded of him to prove the
assertion; but went about in Logic to prove it, and could prove no more, then
that the truth written of in the Scripture should endure for ever; which thing
I never did, or shall deny, and so needed not to be contended against by any
sober men; but unreasonable men, who have not Faith, will say any thing for
Advantage to themselves, and Disadvantage to the Truth, which they are set to
oppose. And he instanced, and said, It is written, Christ is God Blessed
forever; (...) then shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart; and said,
this should endure f^^^^er: To which I answered, That which is written of only
shall endure forever; but the Scriptures and Writings should not endure
forever. And further instanced, God was written, and was Scripture, and should
not endure ^^^ever, though God should endure forever, and he could not be
written nor ^^^^ained in a Book: and through your Vanity in Scorning, and
Hooting, (...) Unreasonableness, according to your own purpose, lest your
Deceiver ^^^^ld be made manifest, you prevented me, and would not suffer me to
speak, in what much more I had to say in this particular: and I observed that
in all the Questions and Arguments against me were hatched secretly a Snare to
(...) me into Suffering; and to this purpose some of you said wickedly; I ^^^ld
presently dispute my self into Prison: and further he instanced, Thou (...) ^r
thy Father and thy Mother, it is so written; and said he, This is a Command of
God, and the Word of God, and shall endure for ever, with presumptuous boasts,
and scornful invented terms, not beseeming any (...), much less a Minister;
and that he could prove this to be the Word of God against all the Quakers in
the World, and against all the Fiends in Hell, and against all the Jesuits at
Rome, or filthly words to this purpose, and much I desired moderation from you,
with diligence to hear my defense; and thereupon many times desired the Mayor,
who was present to command silence, but I could hardly obtain any from you, you
were so generally rude, and rash, and unreasonable; and to him I replied, that
to honor Father and Mother in the Lord, was a Command of God, and the Word of
God, and should endure for ever; but Luke's Writings (the Scripture) were but a
Declaration of this Command, and not the Command it self, nor the Word of God,
and would perish, and not endure for ever; and bid you read Luke 1. 1. There
Luke calls his Writings, which are Scripture, a Declaration, and much more
might I have spoken to this thing, if I had been yoaked against a reasonable
man, or if the Auditors had been but civil; but you could not endure to hear,
but said, I subtly insinuated into their People; and thereupon several times
some of you spoke to the Mayor to dismiss the people, I think, lest your
Hirelings should be discovered, and your Wickedness reproved; and thus the
thing came near an end, he not being able to prove by any Scripture, or right
Argument, the Scripture to be the Word of God, which shall endure for ever, but
must if his, and your eye ever be opened, confess to what I held forth, that
only that which is written of in the Scripture, or which the Scriptures
declare of shall endure for ever, to be the Word of God, and not the Scripture
or Writings; then presumtuously he said, prove him if I could, to be a false
Prophet; to which I answered, (and desired much your moderation, but could not
obtain it, as though you had set your selves to be rude and vain) to prove a
false Prophet was either by Conversation, or Doctrine, or both, and by his
Fruits he was known; to preach for Hire, and to divine for Money is fruits and
signs of a false Prophet, as the Scripture testified; which should be my rule
to try him by, if he durst stand to it, and they that preached for hire were
false Prophets; and he preached for hire, and therefore was a false Prophet
according to the Scripture rule; then he said, he preached not for hire, yet he
had hire for preaching; a poor shift to cover the Devils Deceits, but it will
not hide his Shame; and it was proved that he preached for hire to all, but
such who stopped their Ears; and it was manifest in his face, that he sued some
at the Law which would not pay him Tithes: And then I asked him to give any
Examples from the Ministers of Christ, where ever they took Tithes, or sued Men
at the Law who would not pay them Wages; but to this he gave no answer at all,
and thereby he was proved to be a false Prophet, and a Deceiver; and much more
might have been said, as to this, to prove him and his Generation to be false
Prophets, as may be done at any time; but such was the unreasonableness at this
passage, that you were nigh to lay violent hands upon me, some of you; and lest
your Deceiver should be made manifest, you would not suffer me to speak what I
had to say, but cried, Away with me: And tell me any of you, when he preached
any year or time, at this Town, when he had no hire? and therefore he is a
Hireling, because he preaches not without it, but for it, and so is a false
Prophet; and he being, I judge, sorely afraid lest he should be discovered,
went out of his Pulpit door two or three times, till I called him back again,
and charged him to stay if he was a man, and I would prove him to be a preacher
of false Doctrine, who in my hearing said, The Scripture was the Foundation of
Foundations; but when he heard this he ran away, and fled like a Hireling, and
would not stay; and I was, and am ready in the Presence of God, and any sober
men, to prove this to be false Doctrine, and of the Devil, and him to be no
Minister of Christ, who holds it forth. And all you sober minded men may be
ashamed of him, who managed his work with so much wickedness and impudency
while he staid; and when it came to the very trial then he run away, and would
not stand, though I desired him; hereby did his guilt appear is flying the
trial; and this is the substance of the Business, though not every particular
word; and I have gathered it up to send you and him, that when you see it, and
consider and read what you have done, you may be ashamed of him, and of your
own unreasonableness: And further, He is already proved, and may be more
largely hereafter, to be one that God never sent, both by Conversation and
Doctrine, and no Minister of Jesus Christ; and not only in the House, but when
we were come forth, such was your Violence to the stopping of us, when we were
pasting, and had not the Mayor prevented it, our Suffering from some of you had
been more then it was: let the Fear of God strike you, and let his Light search
Wicked and Ungodly Hearts, and repent of your doings, and cease to do Evil, and
turn from your Deceiver, if you love your own Souls; and learn the Way of
Righteousness and Peace, which you have not yet known; for in the broad way you
are, and the end of it will be unto your everlasting Destruction.

And to you this is a Warning, and a Visitation from the Lord, by a Lover of
your Souls, who is true, though by you called and counted a Deceiver; and this
in Love to your Souls is sent unto you.

E. B.


Here also follows certain Queries to Christopher Fowler the same time, to
which he never yet could give any Sober Answer, therefore I here insert them,
that he may yet give his Answer.

Christopher Fowler,
SEeing thou art a man so irrational, and so unsober to speak, and fairly to
debate things in Discourse, and thy Auditory so rude and inhumane in Behavior,
and words; therefore to thee these few Queries I propound, to try thee, whether
thou will show the spirit of a Man by writing, more then by speaking; seeing
therein I have tried thee, to be more like a Wild Inhumaine Creature, than a
Sober and Upright Christian.

Seeing the Scripture says, the Word of God was in the Beginning, and the
World was framed by it, and it shall endure forever, hence I query of thee,

I. Whether the Scriptures be the very Word of God, yea, or nay?

Seeing the Scriptures were not in the Beginning, neither was the World framed
by them, neither can they endure forever, hence I query of thee,

II. Whether the very Word of God be Scripture, yea, or nay?

Seeing it is confessed, that which is written of, and declared of, in the
Scriptures, is the Word of God, and the Truth, which shall endure forever,
hence Iquery of thee,

III. Whether the Scriptures (the Writings) and the Thing or Subject declared
and written of, are not two distinct things (so as one may have the one and not
the other) yea, (...) nay?

Seeing God, and his Word, Will and Mind is Eternal, Infinite and Endless,
hence I query of thee, if thou have an Understanding answer,

IV. Whether God, his Word, Will and Mind, is, or can be contained or holden in
Scriptures and Writings, or but only part of the Declaration of him, of his
Word, Will and Mind, yea, or nay?

Seeing such were false Prophets, which preached for Hire, and divined for
Money, and sought for Gain from their Quarter, hence I query of thee,

V. Whether by this Rule art not thou proved a false Prophet, who preachest for
Hire, and take Hire for Preaching, and have a Quarter (reading of some part
of it) from which thou seek Gain? answer in Plainness.

Seeing every Tree is known by its Fruit, as Christ says, hence I query,

VI. Whether by this rule, thou that bringst forth the same fruits as the false
Prophets did viz. Lies, Lightness, Pride, Covetousness, and false accusing, art
not the same Tree, viz. a false Prophet?

Seeing they were false Prophets, who ran and were not sent, and did not profit
them, the people at all; but clothed themselves with the Wool, and prepared War
against them that put not into their Mouths, etc. hence I query of thee,

VII. Whether by this rule thou art not proved a False Prophet, who can not
prove that thou art sent of God, neither are the people profitted by thee; but
are rude, and wanton, and wicked; and thou preparest war against them that put
not into thy mouth, by suing them at law for Tithes, etc?

Seeing Scorning, Lying, Slandering, Envy, Hatred, Lightness, etc. with much
more of which thou art guilty, are the fruits of the flesh, and of the Devil;
hence I query of thee,

VIII. Whether by this rule art thou not proved to be no Minister of Christ,
but of the Devil, and a Servant to him; and a Liver to the Flesh, and not in
the Spirit, in whom these Fruits of Darkness, and of the Flesh are abounding?

Seeing the Scripture says, the Word of God was in the beginning, and Christ
Jesus is the Foundation, and no other can be laid; hence I query of thee,

IX. Whether by this rule thou art not proved a Deceiver, and thy Doctrine
false, and Error, and contrary to Scripture; who said, the Scriptures are the
Word of God, (which were not in the Beginning) and said, that the Scriptures
(which are not Christ) are the Foundation of Foundations? and whether this
Doctrine of thine does not deny Christ, and so art proved to be Antichrist?
answer according to Truth.

Seeing thou confessest thou have Hire for Preaching, yet say, thou preachest
not for Hire; hence I query of thee,

X. Whether any of the People of Reading would give thee so much a Year if thou
did not preach to them? and if no then whether they do not give thee so much,
and thou receive it, because thou Preachest unto them? or, did they give thee
so much before thou preachest? or will they give thee any when thou do cease
to preach to them? try them when thou will, and prove thy self a true Prophet,
by Preaching some years and receiving nothing; and till then I charge thee to
be a false Prophet.

Seeing the Ministry which Christ Jesus sent by the Apostles, did bring people
that they needed no man to teach them, but as the anointing within them; hence
I query of thee,

XI. Whether by this rule thy Ministry is proved not to be of Christ Jesus, nor
thou sent of him, by which none can come to this condition, that they need no
man to teach them, (produce any one if thou can) and so a Ministry of
Antichrist, and thou of the Devil.

Seeing they that abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, have not God; hence I
query of thee,

XII. Whether by this rule thou art not proved to be without Christ, and
without God, who abides not in Christ's Doctrine; but are called of men Master,
and stand Praying in the Synagogue, and have the chief Seat in the Assembly,
and contrary to Christ's Command?

Answer these Queries with the Spirit of Soberness, if thou have it; and show
thy self a man, if thou have the Heart of a man; and Repent of thy Wickedness,
and own thy Condemnation upon thy Former Words and Works.

I am a Friend unto thy Soul, but a witness against thy Deceits. E. B.


And after which time, for the space of two years, I had no Communication with
Christopher Fowler, till this last nineth Month, at a place called
East-H^^sted, where a Meeting of Dispute was appointed, and challenged by some
of his Brethren, at which place again I met with this my Adversary, where we
had some hours Discourse, and many particulars of False Doctrine fell from
Christopher Fowler's mouth, some few of which hereafter follow.

First, one of his brethren in his prayer before the dispute, prayed to God to
forgive them the Atheism that were in their hearts of him and his Brethrens.

Answer, now an Atheist is one that denies God, and Atheism is denying of God,
according to common reputation, Atheism is so taken; so that how shall such a
Generation of men bring people to the Knowledge of God by their Ministry? or
how should they ever convert people, to profit them, who yet in their own
Hearts denied God, as the man acknowledged in his prayer before the Lord, and
many witnesses? the Poor People of England had thought that the Spirit of God
had been in your Hearts, but now we know that you deny God in your Hearts, and
you have confessed it to your own shame: are you Ministers of Christ, and yet
denies God in your hearts; and in whose hearts lodges Atheism? Oh! let not
people be deceived by you, but repent, ye that know not God, but with your
Mouths confess him, and with your hearts do deny him.

Christopher Fowler also affirmed, that day, That the Scriptures are the
Glorious everlasing Foundation of Foundations.

Answ. And hereby it is made manifest that he has totally denied Christ, and
so proved with his brother, confessed in his prayer, that indeed Atheism is in
their Hearts; and so he has denied Christ, whom the Scriptures say is the
Foundation, and no other Foundation can any man lay, and upon him were the
Saints builded in their Faith, and all their Practices of Religion; for he is
the corner Stone, as it is Written: and thus he has dishonored Christ, in
setting the Scriptures above him, and taking the Honor from him, and giving it
to the Scriptures; and I shall leave this his Doctrine to be considered, with a
query, to these people of his Church in Reading, whether he is worth hearing,
or giving Money to for preaching, that holds forth such Doctrine? and whether
it is possible he should bring them to Christ, who has in effect denied him to
be the Foundation, and held forth, that the Scriptures are the glorious
everlasting Foundation of Foundations: Much I need not say to uncover the error
of suc^ a Doctrine.

Again he affirmed, That a man at one and the same time might be a Minister of
Christ, and a Deceiver.

Answ. And here all may see the weakness and Ignorance of this strange Paradox,
and indeed which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, No man can serve
two Masters: and its very certain, that he that serves the Devil, does ^ot
serve Christ at the same time; and he that serves Christ does not serve the
Devil; and so his Doctrine is Antichristian, which would make People believe,
that though they serve the Devil, yet they are the Servants of God; and this is
as much as he has said, that one may be a Minister of Christ, and yet a
Deceiver; now a Deceiver is one that follows the Spirit of the Devil, and a
Minister of Christ is one that follows the Spirit of Christ, and these two
Spirits are contrary, and not both ruling in one man at one time: But then to
help the matter, he said, a man might serve Christ in Office, but not in Love:
to which my answer was, let him say, whether he and the Priests of England did
serve Christ by way of Office, or Love, both, or either, and I should prove the
contrary; but that we prosecuted no further: Some other things were affirmed by
him that day, not now remembered. He said, That Christ was a Sinner, from this
Argument laid down by him; all that dies ^^e Sinners, Christ died, therefore,
etc. These, and such things he held forth all that day, besides the unsoberness
of his words, and carriages toward me, who called me a Dog diverse times, and
did use very ridiculous jestures and words toward me, even to his own shame in
the sight of many people; and the people of that County do yet well remember
his unchristian-like proceedings; and were ashamed of him; but at last went his
way, and all his brethen, and I was left among the people; and I need not now
mention for many, even themselves know it, what loss and disadvantage they
sustained that day; and Gods loving Truth was advanced, and the advantage of it
that was obtained on the Lords behalf; but I being not yet as it were wholly
satisfied, but would endeavor further to the laying open deceit, and to invade
Antichrists kingdom; the next morning after the dispute it was upon me to write
forth, and to send him this paper of Propositions following: whereunto is
annexed his Answer.

C. Fowler:
FRiend, seeing thou art so high in thy spirit against us, and against the
truth which we profess, and from time to time do open thy Mouth so wide in
Justification of thy self, and thy Practices, and in false charges against us;
and though we have had diverse Meetings, and the differences between us always
appeared greater and greater; therefore this I propound unto thee, Whether thou will give another Meeting of open dispute for the trial of thee, and thy ways,
and of us, and the truths which we hold forth, for the satisfaction of the
people? and these things following I propound, as the subject matter worthy to
be handled, which may discover thee, and us, to the satisfaction of all that
desires in that case.

First, What be the evident signs and tokens of a Wolf in sheeps clothing? and
whether thou, or we, in the sight of the people, and of the Lord God can clear
our selves, to be clear and free, from the marks and signs of such aforesaid?

Secondly, Whether will thou stand to be tried in thy Ministry, in thy Call to
it, Practice in it, and Maintenance of it, by and according to the Scriptures
of the old and new Testament? and will thou admit of trial of thy Church, and
Worship, and Ministry thereby? and this being done, we do engage to suffer the
like trial in any part, and every part of our Religion.

Thirdly, Whether there be any other Foundation of Faith, etc. for the people
of God at this day, then Jesus Christ only, and alone? and whether he was not
the Foundation to the Fathers before the Scriptures were written? and whether
he that lays or preaches any other Foundation, does not dishonor Christ, and
speak contrary to the Scriptures?

These things with some others, which we may have occasion to speak of, are we
willing to discourse with thee, for the further clearing of the truth, and
laying open dece^; for yesterday I had much more to have spoken to thee, had
thou not go^ ^o hastily away: so if thou art willing to join in discourse w^^h
me again ^int place and hour, either this day, or to morrow, for my occasions
w^ll admit of either of these two days; always provided that we may have all
mode^^tion, and may proceed in meekness like men, and not like Raylers, as thou
appearedst yesterday to thy own shame. An answer hereof we do expect with
speed; and we are Friends to all that love Righteousness.

E. B. Thomas C^


THe original of this was delivered to the hands of C. Fowler in Reading, the
next morning after the dispute at East-Hamsted, and being given to him at his
Steeple-house-door, when he was coming out from his worship, he would have
given them again to the Messenger, after he had it in his hand, and opened it,
but not being taken, he said he would burn it: and thus people may see, that
though he cried against us as Deceivers behind our backs, yet he is one of them
dumb Dogs that cannot bark, nor fright us away, if we were such as he says of
us.

And here all sober people may understand the temper of this my Adversary, and
I shall leave them to judge of the proceedings between him and me; but yet
though he denies to meet me, yet when I was passed out of the Country, becaused
the following paper to be fixed upon the Steeple-house-door at East-H^^sted,
where the dispute was drawn up by him, and set there as a hidious vapor, to
enchant the minds of people; it may be, not supposing that ever it should have
come to public view, as now it is like to do, to his shame.

A true Charge in ten particulars against the people called QUAKERS
1. THey that pernitiously deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, are
Heretics and Blasphemers: But those called Quakers do thus deny the Scriptures
to be the Word of God; therefore they are Heretics and Blasphemers.

2. They that deny the Scriptures to be the Foundation of Faith, and Rule of
Life, they are Heretics and Blasphemers: But the Quakers do this; therefore
they are Heretics and Blasphemers.

3. They that do not own the Lord Jesus Christ to be God by Nature, are
horrible Blasphemers: But those called Quakers, do not own the Lord Jesus
Christ to be God by Na^^re; therefore they are Blasphemers.

4. They that say the good works of the Saints are meritorious of Eternal Life,
are Heretics, and Papists of the worst sort: But the Quakers say so; therefore
they are Heretics, and Papists.

5. They that deny the Ordinance of Water Baptism, and the Administration of
the Lord's Supper, they are Antichristian Heretics: But the Quakers do this;
therefore the Quakers are Antichristian Heretic.

6. They that deny the sin of Infants are Pelagian Heretics: But the Quakers
deny the Sin of Infants; therefore they are Pelagian Heretics.

7. They that deny the Resurrection of this Body, are Heretics: But the
Quakers deny this; therefore they are Heretics.

8. They that deny the Christian Sabbath, are very erroneous: But the Quakers
do this; therefore they are very erroneous.

9. They that quarrel at, and deride the singing of David's Psalms, calling
them the ^de of Hopkins, and Sternhold, the Kings Fiddlers, they are foo^
ignorant and P^ne in that: But the Quakers do this; therefore they are fooli^^
ignorant, and Pr^phane in this.

10. They that publicly charge the Office and Call of Ministers with Lies* and
Calum^, they are Railers and Slanderers: But the people called Quakers do this;
therefore the people called Quakers, are Railers and Slanderers.

These things through the Lord I am able to justify, and if I do not, I shall
be contented to be called a Deceiver: Let them choose their own time as soon as
they please; in witness whereof I have set to my hand, this twenty sixth of
November, 1659.

Christopher Fowler.

And according to providence, this paper coming to my hands, though its
believed without any purpose in him, to which I did return my Answer, as to
answer his Challenge, and neither time nor place being mentioned by him but
both left to us to appoint, I did appoint Reading for the plate, and nominated
a certain day ^^r the time, and he had ^^gh a week, notice from me, and the
time appointed I went to R^^ding to attend the Service, but when I came there,
I understood that be would not meet me according to his own Proposals and
Agreement, but nominated another place, and another time, which was supposed by
me and others ^o ^e but a present evacting of the ^er? whereupon his denial to
meet me at the time and plac^ appointed by me, this following Letter I sent
unto him.

C For,
WHereas a Challenge of ^hine (to us called Quakers, for a Dispute upon ten
Particulars) was set upon the Steeple-house door, at East Hamsted, and leaving
it to us to appoint time and place, I did appoint, Reading for the place, and
the fourth day of this week, called Wednesday, the 21th. of this month, for
the time; and in order to proceed (upon the Particulars in dispute with thee,
the place and ^^me above^^id) I ordered my occasions so as to attend upon the
Service the said time, but I being come into the Town this night, do perceive,
that thou art not content with the place and time, though they were left to our
appointing in thy Challenge, but have appointed another place and time, upon
some feeble Reasons which thou give, which I might show the weakness of, and
might upon many better reasons say, that Reading is the only place seasonable
to dispute at; ^or if thou be indeed a true Minister of Christ, the people of
this Town best deserve to know it, by hearing it to be so; and if thou art a
Deceiver, the people of this Town had the most need of any others to know it,
by hearing thee disproved: So upon this place I have pitched, and cannot now
change my resolution, nor alter neither time nor place, by me beforementioned,
my occasion will not admit me to it. Therefore I thought good to write to thee,
to know for certain under thy hand, whether you will give a meeting or not in
this Town, the fourth day next, as aforesaid; if not, this matter must yet
remain as it stands between us, till a more clear opportunity; for I cannot be
at Oking^^^ the day mentioned by thee, because my service is already determined
for that day, and for some other reasons also in my own breast: Let me have a
plain answer from thee, that I may dispose of my self is the Lord guides me for
his service. This is all for present I do desire, who am a Friend to all that
love the Lord.

Reading the 19th of the 10th Month, 1659 E. Buroughs.


But to this Letter his Answer was, he would not meet me at Reading, for there
was no need of Dispute there; and therefore it is my present work at this time,
for to answer his ten Particulars in writing, and to make them public to ^ll,
that all may judge of this matter. And indeed, but that for these te^
particulrs Charges, and that truth may be clear from those Charges in his ten
Particulars, I believe I had not thus proceeded in this public manner; but
because ^e cease not to speak evil of the Truth, and yet will not come forth
fairly to Trial, neither will answer me any Queries in public, but keeps a
secret reviling and reproaching; therefore do I thus proceed.

Answer to the first Position: Thy Major and thy Minor are both lame, and both
false, and thy so conclusion falls, to the Ground; for the Quakers do not
pernitiously deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but they in sincerity
say, that Christ is the Word of God, Io. 1. 1. Rev. 19. 13. and the Scriptures
are the Words of God, and a Declaration, and a Treatise, and this Testimony is
according to the Scriptures, Luke 1. 1: Acts 1. And it is not Heresy nor
Blasphemy to deny the Scriptures (to wit, the writings) to be the Word of God,
but the truth written of, and those things declared of in the Scriptures, (...)
^he Word of God, and not the writings, which are Scriptures, But this i^
^^^the^ (...) to before, m^ so I pass it.

Answer to the second Position: Thy Major Position is u^^^^ly (...), and not
grounded upon any part of the Scriptures, so that the Ni^, and the Conclu^^^^
are both denied and cast out: for a man may s^y, That Christ ^^e Foundation of
Faith, and the Spirit of God is the Rule of Life; for thus the Scriptures say:
and a man may lawful; deny the Scriptures to be the Foundation of Fa^^^, and
Rule of Life, and neither be Heretic nor Blasphemer: was the Apo^^^e a
Blasphemer and a Heretic, who said, No other Foundation could be laid, but
th^^ which was laid already, which was Christ? And was he a Heretic and a
Blasphemer, that said, The Sons of God were led by the Spirit of God, and
exhorted to walk ^y the Rule of the Spirit? and are the Quakars, Blasphemers
and Hereti^^s, who ^old forth, that Truth the Apostles held forth; and who walk
by the Spirit, w^ according, and not contrary to the Scriptures? O tho^
Perverter of the right way of God, who have falsely accused the Innocent in thy
illiterate Logic.

Answer to the third Position: In this thou have falsely accused; but yet let us
c^^sider thy words; There was a Nature in that Man Jesus Christ; that was born
of the ^^^gin, that was subject to cold, heat, thirst and hunger, and subject
to be tempted of the Devil; and this nature was not God, whose nature is
Infinite, Eternal Unmeasurable, me s^bject to hunger nor thirst, nor to heat
and cold, nor subject to temptations; so that a man may say lawfully, and be no
Blasphemer, that there was a Nature in him which was ^ot God, and yet the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him too; and he is the Everlasting Father, and
the Father is in him, and he in the Father: and thus by a sound interpretation
of the Word, (God by Nature) thy Major, and Minor, and Conclusion, are all made
void.

Answer to the fourth: The good works of the Saints are wrought in God, and by
his Spirit, and its God that works in them to will and to do, and all such
Works are worthy Works, glorious Works and blessed Works, even unto Eternal
Life, as the Scripture says, Glory, Honor and Peace be unto every man that
^orketh good, Romans 2. 7, 10. And no man by Faith without Works is justified;
for Faith without Works is dead, and a dead Faith does not justify: This is
our Faith, and the Faith which the Apostles were of; and we are neither
Heretics nor Papists no more then were the Apostles: and thy argument is vain,
and falls to the ground, and has no weight in it unto sober Minds, though
Self-righteousness is altogether Abomination to the Lord, and justifies not
any man.

Answer to the fifth Position: A man may deny the Sprinkling of Infants, and
the administration of Bread and Wine, as is held forth in your Assemblies, and
be neither Antichristian, nor a Heretic; for the Institution of sprinkling
Infants, and administering of Bread and Wine among unconverted people was never
ordained of God, nor practiced amongst the Apostles; if thou say it was,
prove it out of the Scriptures, or else stop thy Mouth; and to deny such
Ordinances and Practices, which God never commanded, nor the Saints of for^er
Ages ever practiced, is not Antichristian nor Heresy; but thu; do the Qakers,
and t^^^^fore they are not Antichristian nor Heretics upon this accomp^ and
t^^^ thy Position is not worth any thing, for the end proposed by thee; but thy
Weakness and Folly is made manifest, and thy idolat^ous Pr^ctices, so much
pl^^^ed for by thee, are denied and opposed by the Spirit of the Lord.

Answer to the sixth Position: As for the sin of Infants, we do not say, That
Infants in general, that is to say, every particular Infant that is (...) has
been horn into the World, has Sin; for some were fillen with the holy Ghost,
and some were ^^^ctified from their Mother Womb; and what Sin had such? And the
Script^re speaks, That the Unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Beli^ving H^
e^se (...) (...) C^ildr^^ unclean, but now are they holy: And what sin had
these. So that ^^y man is proved defective, and so thy minor and thy conclusion
is worth nothing, though as to the general part we do believe, there is a
nature whereby all are Children of Wrath, in Degeneration.

Answer to the seventh: This is a false Accusation, thy minor Proposition, and
is a Lie; and so thy Conclusion is utterly false.

Answer to the eighth: As for the Christian-Sabbath, we do not deny that, for
Christ is the Saints Rest; and the Seventh day of the Week is the Jews Sabbath,
and not the Christian-Sabbath; and so this is but a false Accusation, as the
rest. And as for the first day of the Week, which you observe for Sabbath, you
have neither binding Example, nor express Command in Scripture for that
practice.

Answer to the ninth: As for the singing of David's Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter,
and in the Custom as practiced amongst you, we do utterly deny to be any
Ordinance of God, or any part of his Worship, though you say it is; yet we
never had other proof of you then Tradition of time, and long Custom; and by
this you would seem to plead the practice to be a Duty: But this satisfies not
us, though we do not quarrel nor deride at your practice in this particular;
(as thou groundst thy Argument) but this we do, we freely give our Testimony
against your practice from time to time, in the Fear and Power of the Lord, yet
not as quarrelling and deriding after the Flesh; though we do say, they were
composed in Rhyme and Meeter by Sternhold, and Hopkins, and others, which were
Musitioners to the Queen; and in this we say true, and are neither ignorant,
foolish, nor profane, as thou say; and we give witness against such your
practice to be Antichristian, and you Deceivers of the People thereby: so
hereby is thy Conclusion made void, and a place is brought in for another; They
that act such things, and observe such practices, in pretense of Honor and
Worship to God, which is not commanded nor instituted of God, nor which his
Spirits leads unto, They are Idolaters, and their Worship, and their Practice
is Abomination unto the Lord: But thus do the Ministers and People of the
Church of England; and therefore the Ministers and People of the Church of
England are Idolaters, and their Practices Abomination unto the Lord.

Answer to the tenth: Thy minor Proposition I do deny; for we do not charge the
Office and Call of the Ministers of the Church of England with Lies and
Calumnies; but this we say, their Office, and their Call is not from the Lord,
nor by the Authority of his Spirit; neither is their Office and Call according
to the Scriptures, but it is different and contrary both to the Spirit of God,
and the Scriptures, and is not from Heaven, but rather from the Whore of Rome.
And though we do affirm these things concerning the Ministry of England, yet we
do not charge it with Lies and Calumnies, but we speak the Truth in
righteousness: And what would C. Fowler and his Brethren have said of the true
Prophets, that called the Priests and Watchmen of Israel, (that were made by
Divine Institution, which the Office and Call of England's Ministry never was)
that called them blind Watchmen, and greedy dumb Dogs, and devourers of Souls?
Might not they have said to the true Prophets, you charge the Office and Call
of the Priests of the Lord with Lies and Slanders? And this is like the case
between us and the Priests of England: And did not Christ call the chief
Priests Serpents, Vipers and Hypocrites, and those Priests were in their
Office, and Call of Gods Institution; but might not they have said, that he
charged the Office and Call of the Priesthood with Calumnies, etc. and the case
is the same with us; and it is accounted no sin by the Lord, for us to give our
witness against the Ways and Practices of the Priests of England, and utterly
to deny both its Office and Call; for they that do profess their Office and
Call to be of God, and from him, and yet can give no true Testimony thereof, by
the Spirit of God, and according to the Scriptures, such are deceived, and
Deceivers of others; but such are the Priests of England, and therefore, etc.

And thus I have returned Answer to his Ten Propositions, and laid down some
others in their place, his being confounded; and I must leave it to be judged
of by the Witness in every man's Conscience, whether he has not showed his
madness and folly in his matter, and in the way of his proceedings; as for the
matter he charges us withal, its wholly invalid, as for the end propo^ed by h^^,
and we account of his Work, as but the malice of an Antichristian spirit: And
as for his proceedings, they are inconsistent with a Minister of Christ, for
him and his Brethren to fly from me at his Dispute at East-Hamsted, as before
mentioned, as being not able to defend their Cause; this he and they did, as
many in that Country knows: ^^d then for him the next morning, when I did
invite him to meet again upon sober reasons, which he also denied, and refused
to meet me any more; and yet afterward, when I was gone out of the Country, to
go and hatch such mischief in his mind, as to invent ten such rain Arguments,
and cause them to be set up on the Steeple-house-door, o^ purpose to villifie
and reproach the Innocent People of God; this was his Wickedness, as all
upright men may see: And further, for him to challenge to dispute these
Particulars, and leave time and place to our appointing; which when time and
place was appointed, suitable and equitable on all parts; and yet for him to
refuse to meet at that time and place, this was his f^dy and madness, as
understanding men may discern: And further, for him yet to rail behind our
backs against us in his Pulpit, and to charge us, as if we refused to meet him;
this is his hypocrisy, and the deceitfulness of his heart, whereby he thinks
to keep the People in blindness; but the Light is now arising in the Hearts of
People, whereby such Deceits and Deceivers are fully discovered, and they
cannot now be hid.

And though for many Ages Deceivers, and false Prophets, have hid themselves
under the Profession of Ministers, and fine names; yet the Day of the Lord is
dawned, which has made them fully manifest, and now their Sheeps clothing
will not hide them, though they cover themselves therewith, and have deceived
the World thereby, and these Babylons Merchants, they have made great gain upon
people, and traded with the Souls of men, and Souls have been murdered, even
for dishonest gain; but the Plagues of God is coming upon the Earth, which the
Whore, the false Church has corrupted through her Sorceries and Witchcrafts;
and as she has done unto others, in causing them to drink her Cup of
Abominations, and false Principles, Doctrines and Practices, which the Beast
and his Power has imposed upon the Nations, and Nations have been made drunk
thereby; and in particular, this C. Fowler, with whom I am now dealing, is made
manifest to be one of these Merchants of Babylon, who has made Merchandise of
people for gain to himself, and such are his covetous cursed Practices, having
a heart exercised with Covetousness and Oppression, as is well known in the
Town of Reading; as for instance.

First, It was charged upon him, and confessed by him, that he sued at Law
twelve poor men of Reading, for the Tithe of their Turnips, and with much
malice and greediness did prosecute the twelve poor men, and put himself and
them to great Charges and Trouble; only he confessed he took but twenty Nobles
of them, and thought he did favorably with them. Now this was acknowledged by
his own Mouth, which is a clear demonstration of the Covetousness and
Oppression of this man, and that he is a grinder of the faces of the Poor, and
exceeds in Unmercifulness and Cruelty, the very worst of the false Prophets
that ever we read of in Scripture. Oh! abominable Practice, which shames
Christianity, and the Profession of Christ, that ever such a Fellow should have
the name of a Gospel-Minister, and that ever people should be so blind, as to
receive this man for a Messenger of God, who has a heart filled with such
cursed grinding Practices, who is in the way of Balaam, and exceeding him in
covetousness.

Secondly, He said, he did not Preach for Hire; but confessed, that he had Hire
for Preaching.

Answ. With this kind of foolish Paradox he would deceive and blind the people,
for if he have hire for Preaching (for) shows a reason, and it is the same,
he has hire, because he preaches; that is the reason wherefore he has hire,
and so he is a hireling: And it may easily be proved, that he will not preach,
if he have not so much Money, Tithes, or such things, and his own example
beforementioned, in suing at Law twelve poor men, for the very Tithes of
Turnips in the Garden, does demonstrate him sufficiently to be a hireling, as
also a third particular; which is,

He demanded Money of a certain man is Reading, for marrying the said man, when
as the man was married by another; yet notwithstanding the said Fowler forced
the said man to give him seven shillings and six pence, because he pretended he
was a man of his Parish (to wit) within his quarter, where he seeks his gain.

Answ. And thus it is fully manifest more and more, that he is one that seeks
for his gain from his quarter, and is a complete man in the very nature and
steps of the false Prophets of Israel, whose example he does follow, and not
the example of any of the Ministers of Jesus Christ. Was not this a piece of
griping coveteousness, to demand Money of the man which he married not? Oh
abominable! What, would thou have Wages without any work? this is a degree
beyond preaching for hire, to claim and receive Money of a man, having no
manner of due, nor title thereunto: Well, people cannot be so blind, but they
must needs see thy folly, wickedness and covetousness.

Fourthly, Christopher Fowler at a certain time did give a poor Minister, so
called, five shillings; and afterward there happened to be a Collection for
the poor Irish, and he snatched five shillings of that Money away which was
gathered, and said, he gave five shillings a while ago to a poor Minister, This
was his pretense, and thus he defrauded the poor Irish people.

Answ. Was not this also a foul covetous Practice, and hypocrisy too, in
pretending to give a poor man some Money, and afterward, as it were, to rob
others to pay himself? Here is a double iniquity, and unmeasurable
covetousness, which the Lord will judge: And the like of this manner of
greediness is seldom to be found so foul, and so extreme deceitful and
covetous: But all these things are but a further testimony of his naughtiness;
and this I do in order, that all men may beware and take heed of the mouths of
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, which tears the flocks, and devoures both souls and
bodies of men, such a one as this man, with which I am now dealing; let all men
beware of him, least they become his prey.

Fifthly, Another covetous Practice of Christopher Fowlers was, he sold one
Load of Straw twice, and the man that bought it first, did sue him at Law, and
it was prosecuted, and Fowler was Cast, to his great shame; and this the people
of Reading very well knows.

Answ. Nothing need be said, as to discover the wickedness and covetousness of
this Practice, the worst of men seldom ever is found in such a Practice: Is not
this an unfit person to mention the Name of Christ, or to take it into his
mouth? Oh deceitful man I who art unfit to be called a Christian, much less a
Minister of Christ: These, and diverse others such like covetous Practices is C.
F. highly guilty of, as many good people very well knows. Diverse other things I
could mention, but these for present are sufficient, for the end that they are
produced, which is to lay Christopher Fowlers wickedness upon him, that he may
feel the weight of it upon his conscience, and that all sober people may be
warned of such men, that they have not to do with them. But however, if
Chrisiopher Fowler shall answer my Queries propounded to him, and shall seek to
clear himself from what I have said, he shall hear further from me; however in
the mean time, let him stop his boasting, and vaunting, and vapouring
Challenges, till he has answered what is charged against him in this Book.

But and if Christopher Fowler does go on with his railing Accusations, and
presumptuous boasts against us, then let him appoint any time that he shall
please, and in the Lord's Power I shall engage, that he shall be met at what
time he will appoint, in any place in Reading. Reading I do appoint for the
place, let him appoint what time he please for to dispute of any such thing or
things as we may agree upon at our meeting: And though he is unwilling to
dispute in Reading, yet there is no other place so suitable as that Town is, for
many reasons, as may be showed; and I suppose justly, that his unwillingness to
dispute at Reading, arises, lest he should be discovered among his own
Hearers, and therefore would evade the matter, by seeming to be willing to
dispute at other places, which is not so suitable, nor yet so reasonable; but if
he will at Reading, let him appoint time at his pleasure, and he shall be
answered, if God permit.

Now C. Fowler, hold up thy hand; Guilty, or not Guilty; whether a Minister of
Christ, or a Deceiver? come to the Bar, and receive the Sentence, thou that
have long been accounted by some as an Oracle; thy glory is fallen, and thou
art brought into contempt: How have they been deceived, that have looked upon
thee as an Oracle? thy Language is sentenced to be of Bab^lon; and the Beast
false Prophet must be taken alive, and cast into the Lake of Burning: The Day
of the Lord is come.

E. B.

A 1660
RETURN TO THE MINISTERS OF LONDON, BY Way of Answer to their Seasonable
Exhortation, (so called) directed to their Congregations. With sober Reproof
sent unto them, because of their secret Smitings against the despised People
called Quakers, whom they have secretly reproached in their said Exhortation.
And this is written for the better Information of them and their particular
Congregations, and that Truth may he exalted, and Deceit and Iniquity may Bow
and Tremble.
1. FOrasmuch as you the Ministers in and about London, have sent forth a
Seasonable Exhortation (as you call it) to the people of your Congregations,
which I have seen, read, and considered, and do find something therein worthy
of Answer; for the end that People may be satisfied concerning things
doubtful, which are in controversy this day among many; for it is well known
the Controversy has been long, and is grown very high between us and you,
concerning Church, Ministry, and Religion; and diverse things in your
Exhortation are doubtful unto many; and that all doubts may be removed, if
possible, therefore I do return what follows, as an answer unto you.

Whereas you say, You are not ignorant of the prejudices and prepositions,
wherewith the carnal World is leavened, concerning you Calling, Office, and
Doctrines; and what Clamors; and fiery Contentions abound for them every where
that pleads Christ's Cause in the Gates, etc.

Answ. As for your Calling, Office, and Doctrine, there is much to be said
against them, in and by the Spirit of the Lord; for your Calling and Office, is
not according to the Example of Scriptures, though the Calling and Office of
Ministers of the Gospel has Example in the Scripture, yet as you are called
into your Office, that is not according, but rather contrary to the Scriptures:
And as for your Doctrine, it is in some things unsound also. Now as for
Seasonable Exhortations of Ministers to People, I do acknowledge, that it is a
Duty which ought to be done, but how seasonable and sound your Exhortations
are, that remains to be tried; and it is not only the carnal World, as you
speak, that are doubtful concerning your Calling and Office, but it the best
of the people, whose eyes the Lord is opening, to see and behold the false
immitations of the Calling and Office of Ministers, as you have stood for many
Generations; and it is true, them that pleads Christ's Cause, they are cried out
upon, and contended with, but this fully belongs not to you, though you apply
it to your selves, but it pertains more to others, for the World speaks well of
you, as it use to do of false Prophets.

And you say, We the Ministers of the Gospel in the City of London, do with
ear^ess exhort the people of this City, to awaken, as out of Sleep, and to lay
to heart, the great dangers that threatens you, which you represent under a
threefold consideration.

1 The fear of the return of Popery. 2 The distracted estate of Religion
amongst us. 3 Other symptoms of Gods wrath hanging over your Heads.
Answ. That you are Ministers of the Gospel, this is doubtful unto many, and
many more testimonies might be given to the contrary, then can be given for it.
But this is not the present debate, and therefore no more of it.

And what, is the people of your Congregations yet asleep? Have not you
awakened them in so many years time? Have you been preaching over them, and
taking their Money so long, and are they yet to awaken, as out of Sleep? Will
not the blame of this, and the condemnation of it fall upon you their
Watchmen, who has not yet awakened them? And may not they say that you have
dealt unjustly by them, who are left as asleep under all your preaching, and
are yet unsensible of the danger that threatens them? Oh Friends! will you
consider, and your people with you, what you have been preaching, and what they
have been hearing for so long a time, seeing you now acknowledge they are yet
asleep, and unawakened.

Now as to the first of your considerations, The fear of the return of Popery,
for which you lay down diverse things to make the people believe it: First, The
union of foreign Popish-Powers: Secondly, The vast numbers (say you) of Popish
Emissaries and Jesuits that swarms amongst you: Thirdly, The vending and
printing of so many Popish Books every year, etc.

Answ. As for Popery, I know it is Idolatry, and their Church and Worship, and
every part thereof abomination to the Lord, and the spirit that leads them is
not the Spirit of Jesus; and as for Popery, it was never yet truly cleansed out
of the Nation, but there has been, and are great remainders yet standing,
which may indeed easily recover its former strength: For is not the most part
of the worship of the Church of England made up of such things, as was first
instituted and practiced amongst the Papists, witness, the making Ministers by
natural learning, at Schools and Colleges, and their maintenance by Tithes,
and yearly Stipends, and their way of Parochial settlements, are not all these
things Papistical? and witness sprinkling Infants, calling it the Baptism into
the Visible Church, and witness the singing of David's Psalms, as now they are
sung among you; these things for the most part are of Popish institution, and
many other things also pertaining to your Church, Religion, and Ministry, so
that Popery was never clean cast out of the Nation, though the Lord has
wounded it, yet there is the remainder of it yet standing in great force, so
that while Tithes are pleaded for by you, and those things practiced by you, it
may indeed be feared, the return of Popery, seeing you stick so fast in those
Practices which were of Popish institution, and the cause of fear lies at your
Door, and upon your selves principally, and if there be vast numbers of Popish
Priests and Jesuits swarming amongst you, if you be Ministers of Christ, why
do you not discover Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and fright them away? Why do
you not lift yp your Spiritual Weapons, (if you have them) as the Apostles did?
whose Weapons were powerful and mighty through God; and who shall bear the
blame but you, if Wolves in Sheeps clothing tear your Flocks? that is a sign
you are lazy idle Shepherds, and that your want the Power and Authority of God,
and when the Powers of the Earth fails you, and your carnal Weapons are all
broken, then you are like to be overcome with the swarming of Popish Priests
and Jesuits, if there be any such among you look you to it, for I know not
any, and if you know any by name, and where they are, you ought by your Law to
discover them.

Now (you say) they are acting under the disguise of Sectaries, and subtly
insinuating many of their Doctrines, as teaching Justification by Inherent
Righteousness; Perfection, (...) lawfulness in joining in your Ordinances, and
nullity of your Ministry, etc.

Answ. Now these that you call Sectaries, may truly plead against you, against
your Church, Worship, Ministry and Practices, upon good grounds; and as for
Justification by Inherent Righteousness, it is a Doctrine of the Church of
Christ, that the Saints witnessed Christ, and his Righteousness within them,
and that none are justified by any righteousness without them, but who witness
Christ revealed in them; for all are Reprobate; that do not witness Christ in
them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And as for Perfection, that is the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and of Christ; for the Apostles spoke wisdom to them that were perfect, 1 Cor.
2. 6. and Christ commanded them to be perfect, Mat. 5. who never commanded
impossibilities. You might better have charged these Doctrines upon the
Apostles, then upon the Papists; and as for joining to your Ordinances, there
is many that fears God who are not Papists, that for good conscience sake
cannot join to your Ordinances, nor own your Ministry, neither in its Call,
Practice, nor Maintenance; and if these things were in dispute, I should show
you, according to Scripture, that it is not lawful for the Saints of God, to
join themselves to your Ordinances, nor own your Ministry; but it is lawful for
them both to deny your Ordinances and Ministry in their present standing; and
as for printing and vending so many Popist Books, as you say; Oh it had been
your wisdom to have mentioned, the Books by name, that all might have known
which were Popish Books; but because your Charge is general, I cannot answer
particularly, either to clear or to condemn, except you had mentioned in
particular, which you ought to have done, rather then to have slandered in the
dark.

Your fourth reason, whereby you would make your people believe, that there is
fear of the return of Popery, is, That the whole body almost of Popery is
published by Sectaries, especially Quakers; and you say, you cannot but observe
a ready co-incidency with Papists in their Opinions, etc.

Answ. As for the Quakers, which you have long opposed by Prisons, Goals, and
Persecutions, and your carnal Weapons, and now also charge great things upon
them, to make them odious to the people. Alas, do you not know that they are
blessed of the Lord? Is there never a man among you sixty one Priests, so wise
as Balaam was, he saw there was no Enchantment against Israel, nor durst he
curse whom God had blessed; but however, they have born with patience (and they
do therein continue) all that you have caused to be acted, and all that you
have spoken against them, and your words and works against them shall be your
own burden in the day of the Lord, and shall sink you into misery, who has
made the innocent people, the people of your malice and fury; but God is with
them, I need say nothing: and why have you not particularly instanced what
particular part of Popery they do publish? Why will you charge in secret, and
prove nothing in particular? therefore I do charge you to mention, what
particular things they do publish which is Popery, and not the truths of the
Gospel, and then you shall have a further answer.

Your fifth reason is, Jesuitical designs, and you mention the Protestant
Universities, and the impoverishing, and disgracing, and overthrowing a goodly
learned Ministry, etc.

Answ. As for the Universities, thousands are satisfied concerning them, that
they are of Popish institution, and are not the Fountains of Divinity, as they
have been falsely called; for its possible I could give large testimonies of the
wickedness of the educations which is there in those places, and how little
good they learn, and how much evil: but you have stated the Cause wrong; for
the plucking down the Universities would rather seem to be the removing part of
Popery, then to be the way to let in Popery: And as for a godly Ministry, that
is truly godly, and truly learned; alas! there is no fear of impoverishing,
disgracing, and overthrowing of that, for that is always poor, and low, and
contemptible to the World, and so it must be; and it is Antichrist's Ministers
that fears to be made poor, and that their Tithes and Stipends should be made
less; and it is they that fear to be overthrown, and not the Ministers of
Christ; for the Ministers of Christ are out of all such fears, because their
standing and falling depends not upon earthly powers, but are builded upon the
Rock of Ages, and cannot be overthrown.

Your sixth Ground is, Tolleration for Popery is publicly pleaded for in
Print, etc.

Answ. That Popery is Idolatry, and the Church of Rome a false Church, that I
have said, and I hope shall never renounce it, but shall always give
Testimony, until death, against the Church of Rome; but I must tell you
plainly, it is not my judgment, that the Papists ought to be burned for their
Religion; or if a Jesuit be taken in England, I would have him so tolerated,
that he should not have his life taken away by inhumane cruelty, not for
Religion sake, except something can be charged upon him, besides matters of his
Religion, or Conscience: This is my judgment, that both the Papists and you are
Antichristian (in this) in that you kill each other, when they take one of your
Ministers, and you theirs, to destroy each other; this is not of God, but of
the Dragon's power in both, and there ought to be more tolleration in both,
that lives may be spared; and you ought to conquer with spiritual Weapons, if
that you have them, and not to kill and murder persons, but to judge Spirits.
That is contrary to Scripture, and the Apostles Example, to destroy men's lives
for Religion sake: And why may not the Papists have tolleration, in matters
concerning God, as well as others? So those that plead for their Tolleration
upon this account, that they may be converted from sin, and not destroyed in
their sin, this is no Error, that their lives may be spared; but to plead for
their tolleration, as the right Religion, this is sin. And thus your sixth
Ground, wherefore you fear the return of Popery is answered.

Now I come to the second consideration, which is, The present distracted
estate of Religion, which you say is evidenced in diverse particulars: First,
your division in civil and spiritual things, so that the wonted love and
communion in holy Duties is interrupted, strangeness and distances fomented,
censures and hard Opinions of each others entertained, etc.

Answ. Here is your Error, for true Religion is not distracted nor divided in
it self, but it is one in unity and peace, and so are all they that are in it,
their hearts being united by the Spirit of the Lord in their Faith, Practice,
and Worship, and in all things pertaining to their Religion: Its true, there is
distraction amongst all the false Sects and Churches upon the Earth, and it
must be so, Babylon is divided, and confounded in it self, and one part of it
against another; so the distractions is amongst your selves, among Papists,
Prelates, Prefbyters, and the rest, tearing and rending one another about
Church-Worship and Religion; all like Wolves in Sheep's clothing, biting one
another, being divided in civil and spiritual things; one crying for this, and
another for the other way of Government in Church and State; and you are out of
the true love, and true communion in holy Duties, and interrupts one another;
and what one faith is right, another says is wrong: and all this is in
Babylon, among your selves, and none of it among them that are in the true
Religion, and in true Church-Union, who are gathered by the Spirit of the Lord.

Your second Evidence of the distracted estate of Religion (as you say) is, the
many horrid and hideous Errors, which for some years past have abounded amongst
us, against the Authority of Scriptures, the Deity of Christ, the holy Ghost,
Trinity of Persons, Immortallity of Souls, Doctrines of Repentance,
Humiliation, Sanctification, Resurrection from the Dead, the Eternal recompense
of Heaven and Hell; yea, diverse Sects increasing every day in numbers, power,
and malice, and under the name of Quakers, Ranters, Seekers, etc. opp^gning the
received Doctrine, and unquestionable interest of Christ Jesus amongst us.

Answ. That many horrid Errors have abounded amongst you, that is very true, as
in many particulars might be instanced: But why do you maliciously charge the
Quakers with opposing the Interest of Christ Jesus? The Lord shall judge you in
his Day, when he makes it appear to all the World, that those whom you charge
with the contrary, are the very Friends of Christ's Interest, and have been
patient Sufferrers for his Name sake, under the wickedness of your Generation;
and as for the Ranters, Seekers, and others, whom you have reckoned up together
with the Quakers, it is well known that we are in opposition in spirit unto all
these, and have given large testimony in the Fear of God against them; though
it is certain, that there is many as upright and sincere men toward God among
these Sects you have mentioned, as any of your Congregations; and though in
some things they are condemnable, yet in some things they are as justifiable as
you are, before the Lord: And what the Seekers, Ranters, Familists, and the
rest mentioned by you do hold, as in these things you have charged them with, I
will leave that, for I am not now pleading their cause, but the Cause of God
and his People, whom you in scorn call Quakers: and though you have joined them
in Accusation with others, yet I must separate them from others in my Answer,
and must tell you in the fear of the Lord, that you have belyed them, and
falsely accused them, out of your malicious hearts; for they do not deny the
Authority of the Scriptures, but gives that authority to them, which the Spirit
of God that gave them forth has formerly given; neither do they deny the Deity
of Christ, but do say, In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead; neither do
they deny the holy Spirit, nor the Father, Son and Spirit, but say there are
three, and these three are one; but as for your Trinity of Persons, that is
language beside the the Scriptures: and we do affirm the Soul is Immortal: and
as for the Doctrines of Repentance, Humiliation, Sanctification, Resurrection
from the Dead, the eternal Recompense of Heaven and Hell; these Doctrines are
publicly held forth by them in words, and also in practice, more then by your
selves* therefore with what face you could charge them with the denial of these
things, it is almost wonderful; and there are thousands of your Congregations
that are and have been sometimes hearing in your City, that shall bear witness
against your Accusations, and give Evidence that they have heard them whom you
call Quakers, give faithful witness of, and for all these things which you
charge them with denial of: Do you think that your Congregations are all so
blind as to receive for truth what you have herein spoken; nay I must tell you,
some of them are offended with you because hereof.

First, in that you have reckoned the Quakers with Ranters, and others, between
whom there is absolute opposition, and not agreement, neither in Doctrine nor
Practice.

Secondly, That you should charge the Quakers with such things as they are
altogether clear of, and known to be so by many; but this is, that your folly
and weakness might appear; and as you speak of increasing every day in number
power, and malice, some part of this is true; for the Lord does increase his
People daily in number and power, by his Spirit, but not in Malice, and that is
your torment, the increase of the Quakers, which as they have begun to
increase, so the Lord will continue them, and you, nor mortal men shall not be
able to hinder; neither the Magistrates Persecution, nor the Ministers
Instigation thereunto, though you have joined hand in hand against them; for
the Lord is with his People, and his Authority and Power is their Defense, and
they are not in empty Forms (as you say) but in the Power of Godliness; and as
for your Ordinances and Ministry, of which you speak, something I have said to
it already, and more I shall say to it hereafter.

Your third Evidence is, The odious Scandals of those that profess themselves
to be the People of God, as their self-seeking, their unparalleled breach of
all civil and sacred Oaths; whereby the Mouth of Iniquity is opened, and the
reverence of Religion abated, so that to us (say you) there appears no visible
way of repairing the credit of strict profession, but by a severe punishment of
Professors, etc.

Answ. It is true, many that do profess themselves the people of God, but are
not, but by their lives and practices gives odious Scandals, and are
Selfseeking, as you say; but upon whom the guilt of this may be truly charged,
that remains to be sought out; doubtless it lies as near your doors as any
others; for is not your pride and oppression by taking Tithes, suing people at
Law for Wages, and casting them in Prison, because for good Conscience sake
they cannot pay you, your seeking for your gain from your Quarter, and your
taking great sums of Money, and preaching for hire, taking so much yearly, are
not these odious scandals, and very self-seeking practices which you are guilty
of, while you pretend public good? as for Breaches of Oaths and Covenants, I
wish you to search your own hearts, for that Iniquity does lie as near your
Generation as any others; witness that you and your Brethren have from time to
time engaged to such and such things: As first, Did not you engage for the
Government to be without King and House of Lords? And did not you then cry up
the Protector, contrary to your Engagements, and now cry up another? And thus
it is very evident, that the guilt of breach of Oaths and Covenants lies near
unto your selves, which indeed opens the Mouth of Iniquity; for the very
Cavaliers and Prelates say, you were once strict in your Way, but now you have
struck hands with them, and are now your selves doing that which you cried out
against in them: And thousands in this Nation is abated in their affections
from your Church, and Ministry, as knowing them to be upon a false Foundation,
and to be of Babylon, and not of the Heavenly Jerusalem: And what do you mean
by severe punishment of Professors? Do you mean to set up Ecclesiastical Laws
again, and that all must be forced to your Church, Way, and Religion? Is it in
your hearts to drive the Nation by force; and if they will not, to punish them
with Fire and Faggot, and Prisons? If this be your meaning, as may justly be
supposed it is, the Lord deliver the Nation from you; this is not the way to
gain the credit of Religion, but the further you go on in this way, as you have
formerly walked in, the more will your Profession and Religion stink in the
Nostrils of all good men*

Your fourth Evidence is, Immensity and bounless liberty permitted, assumed,
and freely practiced by many, to Write, Print, and Publish all manner of
Blasphemies and Opinions, etc. the sad and woeful effects thereof appears in
many, some being in Apostasy, others in luke-warmness, and much decay in the
Power of godliness, etc.

Answ. As I have acknowledged (...) there are without doubt many Errors,
Blasphemies, and false Opinions extant in this Nation, both Written, Published,
and Maintained, but upon whom, and what sort of men this can truly be charged,
this is very doubtful to many; and your Charge being only general, no
particular Answer can well be given, only it appears, you would have none to
Write, Print or Publish, but your selves, or by your consent; and you would tie
the Nation up in the bondage of your own Spirits; and you would be the only
Judges of Blasphemies and Errors; but that we allow not; for Enemies must not
be Judges; and it is very possible such is your Darkness, that you may call
Truth Error, and Error Truth in some particulars; but if you shall instance any
particular Doctrines, Blasphemies, Errors, and Opinions, published and
maintained, in my next I shall freely give my witness, against them, if they be
really so, and against the people that holds them, as well as your selves, and
more particularly I cannot now say; and there is indeed woeful and sad effects
of Errors brought forth in this Nation, and many are in the Apostasy from the
truth, and in the luke-warmness also, and the power of Godliness is decayed,
and they have the Form, and holds that without the Power: your selves may do
well, and your Congregations also, to search your own hearts, by the Spirit of
the Lord in this case, that the guilty may see, and turn unto the Lord, that
his wrath come not upon them.

Your fifth Evidence is, Sabbath Profanation, both in Opinion and Practice,
grown to a greater height than ever formerly; the Jews Sabbath cried up,
instead of the Christian; Shops opened upon the Lords day; yea, some working
the works of their ordinary callings, in knitting, and sowing of Garments in
our Assemblies, even in the Pulpits, in the time of Gods public Worship, etc.

Answ. This remains doubtful to many, what the true Sabbath is, and whether the
Lord does require of this Generation the observing one day above another, and
if so, what day it is that he requires the observing of; as for the 7th day of
the week, we know that the Lord commanded the Jews to keep as a Sabbath, and
to rest, But that was never commanded to the Gentiles; and as for the first day
of the week, which is called the Christians Sabbath, that is doubtful to many,
whether God commands and requires the observation of that day by the Gentile
believers, yea, or nay, seeing that there is neither command nor binding
example for it, throughout the Scriptures; if there be, any I do desire that
you would show it in your next; and by what authority, whether from men, or
from Heaven, the first day of the week is now kept by you, as your Sabbath; for
really many are doubtful in this case, and you would do very well, if you have
a command from God, or example from his Servants in former Ages, to discover so
much unto the people; And as for your calling it the Lord's Day, it is certain
every day is his, and not one day more then another; and as for Shops opening,
and such things as you mention, though every one that do such things, may not
be justified in the doing of it, yet such a thing in it self may be justified,
if the Spirit of the Lord moves unto it, and who shall limit the Lord? And why
may not others labor in their ordinary callings that day, as well as you in
your ordinary callings? I mean, your ordinary calling of preaching; that is an
ordinary calling, it is certain, because you deny any extrordinary calling in
these days, and so I only query this, why others may not follow their ordinary
callings as well as you? for it has been affirmed very lately by some, that
preaching was a trade and a function for men to get a living by, and we do not
question but there are many now in this Nation, called Ministers, that do
preach for that end, and would cease to preach, if Money and Tithes were ceased
to be given them: I speak this of some, not of all, which does demonstrate,
that the way of your preaching, is an ordinary calling; which you labor in, on
your Sabbath Day.

Your sixth Evidence, is the pouring out by many, of a^^ Sects, with a full
mouth, all manner of obloquy and contempt upon Ministry, and Ministers of the
Gospel, openly interrupting them in the exercise of their Duty, whereby they
are discouraged in their Work, while they are represented under the notion of
Baals Priests, Gehazaes, Pulpited Divines, distributers of Sundays Doles,
Simonions, Decimating Clergy, common Incendiaries, etc.

Answ. It is certain, that the true Ministry, and Ministers of the Gospel were
in all Ages, and now are contemned and despised, and all manner of evil spoken
against them for the Name of Christ: but whether you are those true Ministers
of the Gospel, and your Ministry the true Ministry sent of Christ, this is
doubtful to many; and by many particulars which might be instanced, the
contrary does appear: The Ministers of Christ in the days of the Apostles,
they never complained of being interrupted; for they were haled before Rulers,
and commanded to preach no more in that Name, and yet they were not discouraged
thereby in their work; nor when they were called Movers of Sedition, and
Deceivers, and such reproachful names, they regarded not these things: but as
for you, you seem to be troubled that any should speak to you, or ask you (...)
Question, or exhort you to repent, if any out of good Conscience query with
you, concerning your Practice and Doctrine, and if any exhort to Good, and cry
against Evil amongst you, this you call interrupting of you in your Ministerial
Duty, and to Prison, Houses of Correction, and to Whips and Stocks must such
go, which was never the Apostles Practice, never was any sent to Prison for
opposing of them. And what if the Ministers of England be called Hirelings, and
false Prophets, and greedy dumb Dogs? the practice of some of them does prove
it that they are so; these things you must bear, as coming deservedly, and not
unjustly upon you; for the Servants of the Lord in all Ages ever cried against
Deceivers and false Prophets, and called them Deceivers, and greedy dumb Dogs,
and Serpents, and Vipers, and Evil Beasts, and Slow-Bellies; these names and
terms did Christ, the Apostles and Prophets use unto such, as are some of the
Ministry of this Nation, and not with Revilings and Reproachings, but with the
Spirit of Authority from God, that reproves the Wickedness of Prophets,
Teachers and People: And tell me, Have not some of you sued men at Law, and
cast them into Prison in this City, because they would not give you Money, and
Tithes and Hire, though such as have not heard you, nor received you as
Ministers, nor received any thing from you, and such as you did never any Work
for, have you sought Wages from, and caused them to be imprisoned that would
not give you? And tell me in good earnest, Can any less be said of such, who
thus walk, but that they are insatiable Hirelings, and as bad as Beal's
Priests, and even Cheaters, and greedy dumb Dogs? let the Witness in your own
Consciences answer, and you shall have a Reply.

Now I come to your third Particular, which are other Causes and Symptoms of
God's Wrath hanging over your heads; the frequent disappointment from time to
time of all Hopes of coming to any settlement in Government in the Nation,
occasioned by strange Confusions, which is a clear Evidence that God has in
Displeasure darkened our Eyes, and hid Counsel from us (say you.)

Answ. It is very true, that from time to time of late days the Lord has
disappointed the purposes of men, even concerning settling of Government, and
there have been almost strange Confusions in Changes; But to what can this be
attributed? Have not your sins been as great a Cause of it, as any others? And
have not you and your Generation been the Counselors in all these Matters?
Were not some of you, or your Brethren, in Oliver's days, and in Richard's
days, and in the Army's days, and in the Parliaments days, and are not you
and your Brethren busy at this day in ordering a Settlement in Government in
this Nation? But the Lord has hitherto disappointed you, and them that you
have counseled, and he has broken you into Confusion and Distraction, and
turned back even the proceedings of Rulers and Teachers; and the spirit of deep
Sleep and of Slumber is poured upon you all, and the Vision of these things is
as a sealed Book unto you, even because of God's displeasure against you. And
in that you say, Your Eyes are darkened, and Counsel is hid from you: In that
you say true, though to your own shame, And what trust can be put in such
Watchmen? What Confidence can be placed by your people in you, whenas you
acknowledge, that your Eyes are darkened, and Counsel is hid from you? The
Scriptures mentioned by you do prove there was darkness upon the Land; but
Isaiah does not say, nor David, that Counsel was hid from them, or that their
Eyes were darkened, neither did ever the Apostles say so; but witnessed, That
the Lord was their Light, and in him their Eyes were opened, and Counsel was
revealed to them.

Secondly, you say, This sadly presages of Unchurching the Nation, or the
Departing of the Glory of God from you.

Answ. By Unchurching the Nation I suppose you mean, making the Church no
Church; which if this can be done, then the Gates of Hell may prevail against
the Church, contrary to the words of Christ, who said, The Gates of H^^ should
not prevail: But I must tell you, The Nation of England, as to the general part
of it, has been long, and yet is unchurched, that is, ungathered by the
Eternal Spirit, into the true Fellowship in the Body of Christ; for the Night
of Apostasy and Darkness has been over the World since the Apostles days, and
over this Nation in particular, and your Churches have been no true Churches,
nor the people under your Ministry truly joined and united in true
Church Order, and under true Church Government; though I do not say but that
there are Thousands of sincere People, that love the Lord, yet remaining among
you: And the Day of the Lord is appearing, which will confound the Whore, the
false Church, which has been set up in this Nation, and through the World; and
Assemblies, which have had the Name of the Churches of Christ, will be found to
be otherwise in the Judgment of the Lord; and all the false Ordinances,
Practices and Ministers must be thrown down, that the Glory of the Lord may
again appear.

Further, You seem to charge your selves, With leaving your first Love and
former Zeal for the Truth and worship of God, but the present Coldness and
Indifferency in the things of God, together with your Barrenness and
unanswerable walking to the Gospel of Christ, etc. (say you.)

Answ. Though to your own shame, yet do I believe this is truly acknowledged,
that you have lost your first Love and Zeal which once was in you, in the days
when you were persecuted under the Bishops, you were full of Love and Zeal for
the Truth and Worship of God, according as it was made manifest; and then you
were sufferers your selves, but now you are Causers of others to suffer; and
there is indeed much Coldness, and Dryness and Barrenness amongst you, and your
People; I do truly desire you may repent you thereof, that if so be the Lord
may heal you: and your Walking indeed is Unanswerable to the Gospel of Christ
(to wit) Your taking of Tithes, and so much by the year for Preaching, and
suing people at the Law that will not give you Wages, though you do no Work for
them; these, with many other things which you practice, is an unanswerable
Walking to the Gospel of Christ; and seeing you have confessed your sins in
some measure, Repent, and sin no more, that your Iniquities may be blotted out.

Again, You complain of the prevalency of Atheism, and doting upon Error,
Endless separations, Common Ignorance, Unbelief, Profaneness, the Prejudice
against wholesome Doctrine, and all Order of Discipline in the Church, and many
other Confusions are upon us, etc. (say you.)

Answ. Alas! so it is; but where is the Blame? Oh you Watchmen! should not you
have better preserved your Flocks? should not you have fed them with Living
Food? should not you have been Examples of Righteousness and Truth unto them?
and should not you have nourished them with Knowledge and Understanding? But
because the Shepherds have been lazy and idle, and fed themselves, and not
their Flocks; but the Shepherds have ruled over their Flocks with Force and
Cruelty, and their Ministry and Preaching has been a very Burden and
Oppression upon the People, and therefore it is that their Flocks are divided
into many Sects and Separations, and great Confusions are in your Assemblies,
and among you, even the sin of the people in some measure will be charged upon
you their Teachers, whose Flocks are run into Errors and Atheisms, and despise
wholesome Doctrine, and are out of true Order and Church Discipline, even in
the Traditions of Men: Therefore, oh that you Ministers would consider! and
that you would learn more Wisdom, and that your people would come to receive
the Spirit of the Lord into their Hearts, whereby they may be led into all
Truth, and into the Covenant of God, where there is no Unbelief, Ignorance,
Profaneness nor Confusion; but Peace, Love and Unity altogether; and if you
and they did come into this, you might be happy, and the Judgments of the Lord
would be removed.

Now I come to some Particulars, which you do promise for your selves; First,
That you will use all holy Endeavors to keep Cod and his Truth among you.
Secondly, That you will be more diligent in watching over your Flocks. Thirdly,
That you shall endeavor the Establishment of your Congregations against Popish
Delusions.

To all which I Answer, You must first make clean your own hearts, and you must
first Repent of your own Iniquities, before you can heal others; and you must
first learn Obedience to God in your own hearts, before you can truly instruct
others therein: And indeed, there is need enough for you to mourn before the
Lord, and to fast, and to confess your Sins (as you say) for the Lord has been
long departed from you, and his Presence from your Assemblies, and that is the
Cause of Deadness and Dryness and Barrenness among the people, because God's
Presence is wanting among you; and you had indeed need to be more diligent in
watching over your Flocks; for you have been negligent therein, and have fed
your selves, and not them; and you have sought theirs, and not them, its partly
evident, and it is time for you now to amend, and to put away the Evil of your
Doings: but first, before you dispense the Word to others, you must feel the
Word in your own Hearts, to be as a Fire and as a Hammer in you; and you must
know another Foundation for Ministers than you have long stood upon, even the
Lord Jesus Christ must be your Foundation; and you must cease to Preach for
Hire, and to Divine for Money, and then should it be better with you, and your
Flocks would have comfort in you, if you had received freely from the Lord, and
ministered freely to them; but while you do it for Ends to your selves, they can
have no good Hopes nor Confidence in you.

And whereas you exhort your Congregations in diverse Particulars: First, To
take heed of false Teachers, trying their spirits, and holding fast that which
is good, especially to beware of Popish Insinuations, etc. (say you.)

Ans. Your Exhortation is good in it self; but you should have demonstrated
more plainly how false Teachers should be known, comparing their Fruits now
with what they were in the days of old, when the Scriptures were written; and
that had been a good way to have discovered false Teachers: That Mat. 16.
mentioned by you, bids them beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees; and Christ
said, They were such as were called of men Master, stood Praying in the
Synagogues, loved uppermost Rooms at Feasts, went in long Robes; and of such
Christ bids beware, and of such now the People in London are to beware,
wherever they are; for such as do these things are in the steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which Christ cried Woe against: and the true Prophets
cried against such in their days as preached for Hire, and that sought for
their Gain from their Quarter; and such you ought to cry against now, as seek
for their Gain from their Quarter, except the guilt of these things in your
selves stops your Mouths from crying against them in others: and the Apostles
cried against such as went for Gifts and Rewards, such as taught for Filthy
Lucre, and such as made Merchandise of People for Gain for themselves; such the
Apostles and Christ declared against, and such you ought to declare against:
But the People of your Congregations may say, Who are such now? and, Where are
they? That I leave to their Consciences to judge, who they be, and where they
are now, and whether there be any of them in this City now, and in the Nation,
that are called of men Master, and love uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and that
preach for Hire and Money, for Gifts and Rewards, seek for their Gain from
their Quarter, teach for filthy Lucre and Gain; who are found in these things
now, such are false Teachers, who ought to be taken heed of: I shall not now
say, it is any of you; but I shall leave it to you, and to your Peoples
Consciences, to whom your Exhortation is. And as I have said before, let all
Popish Inventions and Popery be first cast out of this Nation, and then, if you
join with us against it, through the Spirit of the Lord we will endeavor the
keeping of it out, and that it shall no more enter in amongst us into this
Nation.

And you say, That your Knowledge here, and all other Graces here are imperfect.

To which I say, Then you are imperfect Saints, imperfect Ministers; But what
do you mean by here? I suppose that you mean upon Earth: Now there are none of
the Graces of God that are imperfect; but the Grace of God is perfect in it
self, and the Spirit of God is perfect, and every Gift of God is perfect, as
say the Scriptures. Now that you should say the Graces of God are imperfect,
this is Error, even abominable Error, and you show unsoundness in Judgment even
in the things of God, and has belyed the Graces and Gift of God, which in
their measure are perfect.

And thus I have looked over your Exhortation, and thus I have returned to you
again, not but that I know it is the Duty of Christ's Ministers to exhort their
Flocks, and that Exhortation in it self is good; but when I find where Lies and
false Accusations are against the Quakers, whom I dearly love and own, upon
that account, and not otherwise have I engaged with you; and what I have done,
it is not rendering Evil for Evil; but rather to reprove your Evil, and to
undeceive your Congregations, who might otherwise take all for true that you
have said, if it were not reproved.

Again, You exhort your Congregations, That they manifest Sincerity, not only
by hatred of Error, but by a Love of the Truth, etc.

Answ. Sincerity of Heart is indeed precious, especially where the Spirit of
the Lord is the rule of Judgment, and does manage that Sincerity; but where a
false spirit rules in the Judgment, the Sincerity is often betrayed into a Zeal
against the Truth, and against the Ways of the Lord, rather than otherwise:
and thus it was with the Jews, whose Sincerity (through their Error of
Judgment) was turned into Zeal and Bitterness against Christ: And thus it is to
be feared it is with many in your Congregations, who may have a Zeal without
Knowledge, and be short of true Discerning between what is Truth and what is
Error; I speak not this of all, but of some; for its no small thing to discern
between Truth and Error, especially in this day, wherein there are so many Ways
and Professions of Church-Ministry and Worship, and yet all professing the
Scriptures are their Rule of Faith Worship and Practice; and seeing that all
Sects do profess Proof from Scripture for what they hold forth; what Ground
have the people to believe you more than others, or others more than you? for
where people receive Doctrine or Religion by Report from others, without the
Evidence of the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, this is not receiving of the
Truth unto Eternal Life: wherefore I exhort your Congregations, That every one
amongst them may wait upon the Lord, to have a feeling and discerning in their
own hearts, and that each one may be led and taught o^ the Spirit of God, which
leads into all Truth, that they may deny all false Ministers and false
Worships, and may worship God in Spirit and Truth, though the ministration of
his own Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences, and thereby will they discern
between Truth and Error, and will love the one, and hate the other.

Thirdly, You exhort, That they keep themselves unspotted from the prevailing
Corruptions of these backsliding Times, etc.

Answ. Concerning the Times many are ignorant; but this is certain at the
present Time wherein we are, is the Lord disquieting of men, and its the latter
days of Antichist's Reign and Government, that has been in full Power and
Authority for many Generations; and Babylon, that great City, her Ruin is
threatened, because of her Abominations, that have been many and great; for the
whole Earth has been corrupted (as its written) and now the Call of the Lord
is, That every man come out of Babylon, and deliver himself, that he may not
partake of their Plagues; and happy are they that are made clean and unspotted
from their Sins, that they may not be found covered with her Garments; for the
Day of the Lord is come, and coming upon Babylon, and all Back-sliders from God
and his Ways: Now Babylon is that great City, which has ruled over the Kings
of the Earth; and in her has the Blood of Souls, and of all just Men been
found.

Fourthly, You exhort, To endeavor a Healing of those sad Breaches and
Divisions, which have been amongst you, etc.

Answ. Now the sad Breaches and Divisions, which are indeed at present in this
Nation, cannot be healed, but as the Cause and Ground thereof be removed, which
is the Sins of Rulers, Teachers and People; and this is the Cause wherefore the
Lord has brought Distraction amongst them. Oh what Ambition and Self-seeking
has been among the Rulers! What judging for Gifts and Rewards! What neglect of
Mercy and Judgment amongst them! And oh how have they oppressed the Poor, and
trodden down the needy! and because hereof is the Righteous God vexed: And oh
what Covetousness and Greediness of Gain ^re the Teachers guilty of! How do
they Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money! How have they unreasonably caused
men to be imprisoned, and their Goods to be spoiled for Wages, and Tithes and
Hire! Oh, how has Covetousness, and Idolatry and Superstition abounded amongst
the Teachers in this Nation! Oh, abominable have been their Sins, their
Oppressions and Self-seekings! and because of these things has the Lord
brought Distractions amongst People; and the Sins of Rulers and People cry for
Vengeance from the Lord: and till these Iniquities be removed by Repentance,
and forsaken, the Fruit and Effect thereof shall never cease; but Breach upon
Breach will the Lord make, till the Rulers and Priests repent them of their
Iniquities, God's Hand will be upon them both in Judgment: and for their sakes
that divine for Money, and preach for Hire, and judge for Rewards, will the
Lord make the Nation as Heaps, and as a Ploughed Field. Therefore let all
people Repent of their Iniquities, and return to the Light of Christ in their
own Consciences, and become Followers of the Lamb; and this is the perfect Way
of healing of all Breaches, inwardly and outwardly.

Fifthly, You exhort, To be diligent in the Spiritual and Conscientious
Performances of Family Duties, etc.

Answ. Men must first be awakened and enlivened unto God, before they can act
for God in Holy Duties; and as for Duties, performed in pretense unto God
traditionally, and without the Teachings of the Spirit of God, is but Idolatry;
and the Nation is weary of such a Religion, which they have received and held
traditionally; for thereby the Soul Immortal cannot be nourished unto Eternal
Life: and while you teach Duties toward God by that Rule, while you teach
Praying, Singing, Repeating, Catechizing, by Tradition and Immitation, without
the Leadings of the Spirit of Christ in them, you do but teach Idolatry, as
long has been taught in the Christian Nations: the doing and performing such
and such things, as Christian-Duties and Practices, and the Forcing and
Compelling of doing such things upon People in the unregenerate state and
unconverted nature, this Religion, and such Performances of Duties, have been
of Babylon and of Antichrist, and a Cheat upon Peoples Souls, whereby many have
been murdered and slain in that great City; and the Form of Godliness without
the Power has been practiced while Duties have been performed unto God,
without the Teachings of the Spirit of God; and such, their Consciences are
blinded, and the Lord abhors their Sacrifices: And people must first come to
feel the Word of God in their Hearts to regenerate them, before they can
perform any acceptable thing to God; and therefore do not teach People to be
Hypocrites, do not teach them such and such Performances in the corrupt Nature,
without the Teachings of the Spirit of God in their own particulars; for if you
do, you make them but two fold more the Children of the Devil; and such Duties,
performed in that nature, shall not cover nor hide from the Wrath of the Lord,
which is coming upon all Hypocrites.

Sixthly, You exhort, That they would cause their Children and Servants to
submit to Catechizings, and train them up in the reverence of Godly Ministry,
etc.

Answ. It may be enquired into what you mean by cause them to submit; how cause
them? by Force and Imposition upon their Consciences, by outward external
personal Punishments or Threats? Is this your Meaning? Will you set up Religion
by Violence? And must Children and Servants be compelled by Restraint and
Force? This is not the right Way to promote Religion and the Worship of God,
nor to make Children and Servants truly Religious; it was the Beast, that
received power from the Dragon, that caused all to worship, both Small and
Great, Children and Servants; and this causing to worship was in the time of
the Apostasy, when the true Church was fled into the Wilderness; and all the
time ever since have Nations been caused and compelled to such and such
performances and practices of Religion and Worship, and such causing I am
jealous your Meaning is, whereby you would force and compel such manner of
Worship and Practices upon people. And what do you mean by Godly Ministry? Will
you admit of just Trial, according to the Scriptures, whether yours be that
Godly Ministry, or no? for all sorts of Christians, Papists and Protestants,
and all others, they will say, That they are in the right Way, and their
Ministry is the Godly Ministry; but the fruits of many prove the contrary; and
we cannot believe that yours is the Godly Ministry, except you will prove it to
us, by, and according to the Scriptures.

Now it is certain, That the Ministry of the Apostles was the true Godly
Ministry; and if yours agree with theirs, then we will confess, That yours is
the true Godly Ministry. Therefore tell us plainly, do you agree with them in
your Call, and in your Maintenance, and in your Practices, and in your Fruits
and Effects, in your lives and Conversations, and in your Doctrines? Are you
justly according to, and do you agree with the Apostles in all these things?
shall we lay you to the Line, that you may be judged?

This is but as a hint at things, whereby you might justly be tried; for if you
agree not with the Apostles, in these cases mentioned, then it is evident, that
your Ministry is not the true Godly Ministry; but hereafter we may have a
better occasion to try you.

And thus the principal part of your Exhortation is answered, and if you can,
receive it in Love.

TO all you Sixty One Teachers in London, under whose hands your Exhortation
passes, this I say to you in the Fear of the Lord God, Oh ye Men! consider,
and let it enter into your hearts; the Day of the Lord is at hand upon you, and
an Account of your Stewardship must you give, and his Reward must you have whom
you have served, and you must reap the Fruit of what you have sown: Oh look
upon your Flocks, and see what a condition they are in! Oh what Pride and
Vainglory is abounding amongst them! Oh how does Wickedness spring forth from
them! Are they like unto Sheep of Christ's Fold? or, Are not they appearing
outwardly Christians, when as the evil nature is uncut down in them? Oh what
Wickedness abounds in this City! What Double-dealing and Dissimulation? What
Lying, and Swearing, and Drunkenness? Oh, high are all the Fruits of the Flesh
grown amongst your Flocks! Your Vineyards are not dressed as they ought to be,
there are abundance of corrupt Trees and fruitless Branches, which cumber the
Ground: Oh! it makes the Heart of the Righteous sad to walk in the Streets, and
to view the Abominations that are daily brought forth by a people professing
Scriptures, Church, Ministry and Christ. Oh! it burdens the Just, and grieves
the Righteous Soul to consider how high Iniquity is grown among the Sheep of
your Pastures, whom ye should have fed with Knowledge, and converted unto the
Fear of the Lord, had you been Messengers sent of God: the very Jews and
Heathens they blaspheme against Christ, through the Abominations brought forth
among Christians, that have the Name to live, but are dead: Oh! let it enter
into your Hearts, and smite you, that your many years Ministry should have so
little effect; for your Vineyard is like untilled Ground, unploughed and
unbroken up: Oh! there is much Hard-heartedness amongst your People, and their
Hearts go after Covetousness, even while they profess God with their Lips: Oh!
the Righteous mourn in secret to see the Prophanness, the Scornings and
Reproaches that are brought forth in your City: And Oh the Idolatry that
abounds! let it repent you that you have been so sloathful, and never more
seek the Fleece, but seek the Flock that is gone astray from the Lord, who is
the true Shepherd, whose Voice has not been obeyed; and many Pastors have
destroyed the Vineyard, and many Shepherds have fed themselves, and not the
Flock: Oh consider! the Day of the Lord is at hand, and he will visit with his
Rod: You and your Flocks prepare to meet the Lord; for his Kingdom is nigh to
come, which will be a terrible Day to all the Workers of Iniquity.

And as for this your Exhortation, I say, As for Exhortation in it self,
Ministers ought to exhort their Flocks; so such a thing in it self I do
commend, and not oppose; but when I had read and seriously considered the Aim
and Intent of your spirits in your Exhortation, I found it secretly, and in a
measure openly opposing, and striking at, and secretly smiting the People of
the Lord, whom you have Reproached by the name of Quakers, who are dear to the
Lord, and he cares for them, though you see no Beauty in them, but account
them altogether vile; and in as much as you lifted up your hands against them,
upon that account was it upon my spirit to return something in Answer, for the
Information of many, that they might be Undeceived, and not in Envy toward
any, but in Love to all, to both you and your People, and you have occasioned
this upon your selves, though you are reproved: And not as a man of Strife or
Contention have I proceeded, but as one that desires the further Manifestation
of Truth, and that no false Accusation may rest upon it, which you have
secretly brought forth, with which the Lord is not wellpleased, that you should
set your selves in Opposition against his People; and if any of you shall
receive a just Reproof, and repent, it may prove to you an Advantage or much
Good; and be not so Proud as to say in your hearts, What a^t thou, weak man,
that reprovest us? or, Wherefore art thou so bold thus to deal with us? but
rather fall under just Reproof, for in Uprightness of Heart have I proceeded
toward you, and not in mine own, but in the Will of the Father.

And oh that your Flocks would also consider, among whom there are many that
are zealous in their way! Oh that their Zeal and Judgments were guided by the
Spirit of the Lord, then should it be well with them! Oh that they would be
meek and humble, and learn the Fear of the Lord! Oh that every one of them
would consider, and turn from their Iniquities, and become Followers of Jesus
Christ, then should the Glory of the Lord be revealed unto them, and Peace, and
Truth and Righteousness should be unto them, and their Families, and their
City; if they would come into Covenant with God, and be taught of him, and be
exercised by his Law in their Hearts. then should the Countenance of the Lord
be upon them, and then should they discern between Truth and Error, between the
Ministers of Christ and Deceivers. Oh! there is a Pity for many poor souls,
which are zealous in their way of Religion, without Knowledge; and they think
they do God good service, while yet their Consciences are not exercised by the
Spirit of the Lord; but a false spirit that rules and leads, and may hold the
Truth in unrighteousness, and they know not but that they do well: Oh that such
would consider, and not be hasty in any thing, to perform or profess Religion
in their degenerate estate, but that they would come to know the Regeneration,
and the renewing of their minds by the holy spirit, and that the Immortal Birth
might be born in them, even the Birth of the Spirit, which is Heir of God: Oh
that that might live and rule in them, then should they be Heirs of God, and
Citizens of the New-Ierusalem! And oh ye People of London! lay it to heart, you
must be born again, or else you can never enter into Gods Kingdom, you must be
changed in nature, and must be crucified to this world, that you may live unto
God; this must you come unto, or else you have no part nor portion in Eternal
Life; and your Duties and Performances in your Forms of Religion they cannot
save you, not justify you; all your Preaching, Praying, Singing, and all your
Duties whatsoever, they are all nothing, till you come to know changing and
renewing inwardly, and do witness the Seed of God raised up in you, and the
head of the Serpent bruised in you by the Seed of the Woman; this must you come
to witness, that your Souls may live. Oh that you would consider! be not so
zealous against that which you may call Heresy and Schism, for while you err
in judgment, you may soon speak evil of Truth, and persecute it under the name
of Error; many have woefully fallen into that Snare, and brought sorrow upon
themselves thereby: The wise Jews, even the chief Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, they were as confident in their Way, as you can be, and yet they
erred in judgment, and would not receive Christ, but persecuted him under the
very name of a Deceiver; and thus it is possible for many to do in this Age:
What though you have Christ's words, and the Apostles words; yet if you have
not the Spirit of Christ, that was in the Apostles, you know nothing rightly of
the Scriptures, neither can you understand them, nor have Salvation by them;
for you must know Christ in you, your hope of glory, else you are Reprobates,
and shut out of the Kingdom of God: And search the Scriptures, and see if they
do not witness this: Do not they say, Christ is in you, except you be
Reprobates? and do not they say, The Law of God is written in the heart, and
the Spirit of God is put in the inward part? And do not they say, That Christ
has lightened every man that comes into the World with the true Light? And do
not they say, that the Apostle exhorts people to hearken to the Word of God in
their hearts, and to be followers of the Spirit of God that was in their
hearts? And do not the Scriptures say, That it was the Light that shined in the
heart, that gave the knowledge of God unto the Saints? Search the Scriptures,
and see whether these things be so: and must not men be born again of the
Immortal Seed? Oh consider! and let not these Doctrines seem new unto you,
neither reject them, though they come unto you in weak appearance, not with
words of men's wisdom, but in Simplicity, and in sincerity, and in the Power of
God: And search the Scriptures whether these things be so; were not they false
Prophets, That preached for hire, and divined for money, and sought for their
gain from their Quarter? were not such Deceivers in the true Prophets time, and
them that preached for filthy lucre, and for money, and for gifts and rewards?
were not such false Brethren, and false Apostles? search the Scriptures whether
these things be so; for the day of trial is now come, wherein all must be
searched, and that Religion, and Worship, and Ministry, which is not according
to the Scriptures, which was given forth by the Spirit of God, let that
Religion, Worship, Church, and Ministry be utterly condemned of the Lord, and
all his People; and let such Ministers as cannot prove their Call, their
Maintenances and Practices, to be according to Scriptures, let such Ministers
be confounded, and silenced for ever; and come to try this matter when you
will. For whereas you cry out against us, as if we were Deniers of Scriptures,
as if we were Enemies to Church, and godly Ministry, and Religion, and as if we
were Deceivers, Heretics, Papists, etc.

But I say unto you, these things have you never yet justly proved against us,
but rather accused us behind our backs, to make us odious among people; and
though for diverse years together we have been public, yet when did ever any of
you Ministers seek by lawful means to convert us, or show us our Errors, if we
were as you say of us; oh, it had been your time to have sought our conversion!
and not to have Persecuted, to have sent to Prisons, Houses of Correction, and
by such Weapons of any outward force and cruelty have you dealt with us, and
not in meekness, and by the Spirit of the Lord, as Ministers of Christ ought to
do; but have cried to the Magistrates to defend you and your your Church, and
Worship, being unable, as it were, by the Authority of God's Spirit to defend
your selves: Therefore I say unto you now, lay down your Carnal Weapons, and
come out in the Spirit of Meekness, and come out in the Authority of God's
Spirit; if you have it, convince us thereby; if we be in an evil way, as you
say, let us hear your soundest Arguments by the Spirit of God, and according to
the Scriptures, to prove those things which you say of us; prove it by evident
Arguments, that we deny Scriptures, and that we are Heretics, and that we are
Papists: I challenge you all in the Name of the Lord, even all you Ministers of
London, let us hear your sound Reasons openly in the spirit of Meekness; and do
not back-bite nor slander in the dark; and let us not be bawled against by your
rude Members, as often we have been, even in the spirit of wickedness: but come
out you Ministers, we are willing to be tried according to the Scriptures, and
by the Spirit of God in our Religion, and in every part of it; and if you be
the same, then come forth in the spirit of Meekness, like Ministers of Christ,
and lay down your Carnal Weapons, and let us have fair dealing openly, that
Truth may be manifested publicly, and Error may be discovered; and let us not
envy one another persons, and seek to destroy one another lives; but let us
seek to destroy the evil in one another, that men might be saved; and this
would be a Christian-like way; we would hear what you have to charge against
our Religion, by sound Arguments in Meekness, that we may answer it, and then
we will charge something upon your Ministry, Church, Religion and Worship, and
we will prove what we say against you, according to the Scriptures; and we will
not impose our Religion upon you, by the force of outward Powers, and outward
Laws, neither would we have you force your Religion, Ministry and Church upon
us, by such means, but we will leave the effect of all thing to the Spirit of
God; and come out when you will in such a way as this, and this would satisfy
thousands; and let Meekness, and the Fear of God be amongst you, and this is
the way to exalt Religion: and we would think it a happiness, more then
otherwise, to be joined in sober debate and dispute against you, that you and
we, in your Religion, Church, and Ministry, and in ours also, might be tried
according to the Scriptures, that all may be satisfied who are doubtful, and
may hear you Principles and our Principles discussed, in the presence of the
People, who may judge by the Light and Witness in their own Consciences, for to
that in all we do appeal; and in such a proceeding, come forth when you will;
lay down your Carnal Weapons, and take the Weapons of of the Spirit, and come
to the trial, for the Day of the Lord is approaching upon all the World.

E. B.

The FOURTH General Epistle To all the SAINTS: Being a Visitation of the
Fathers Love, unto the whole Flock of Cod, who are called and gathered into the
spiritual Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace: To be read in all the Assemblies
of them, that meet together to worship the Father in the Spirit and Truth, in
the silence of all Flesh.
Dearly Beloved,
WHom the Father has called and chosen into the Election of Eternal Salvation,
and who have handled, and tasted, and felt of the Judgments and Mercies of the
Lord; and amongst whom the God of Heaven and Earth has appeared in his Spirit,
and in his Power, which (...) gotten you into the Heirship of the heavenly
Kingdom.

Oh Friends! our Kingdom and Victory is not of this World, nor earthly, but
from above, and spiritual; wherein we have Peace and Comfort, endless and
everlasting, which the World knows not of; I say unto you all that know these
things, Live in the Peace, and Victory, and Kingdom which is invisible, and
mind the things, as your greatest Treasure, that pertain to that Kingdom, even
the weighty matters of it, which a^ eternal and infinite; and that every one of
you may feel and enjoy a Portion in that Kingdom: Oh! it is precious for a
people to be Subjects of the heavenly Kingdom, and for a man to have an
assurance of Life and Peace in God, and to be an Heir of that Kingdom that
fades not away, and to have his name written in the Record of Life; and
blessed is every one whose Hope and Confidence, and Peace and Assurance is in
the living God, and whose Soul rests under the Government of the Almighty,
and who knows him to be Judge, King, and Lawgiver in all things; and this is
the Kingdom that is heavenly, and is altogether blessed; for Peace, and Truth,
and Righteousness, and all Virtue is enjoyed in it for evermore.

Now Friends, you must all be subjected in all things under the Power of the
Lord God, and unto his will, and he must work in you to will and to do; for in
this is true Rest and Peace unto the Soul, where the Will of the Father is done
and suffered in all things, and not the Will of man, which works sorrow to
the Creature, and not peace, in the obedience to it, and where it rules; and
that must be subjected in you, even in every Word, Work, and Motion, unto the
eternal Power, that you may die, and Christ may live; and in this you will have
union and fellowship in spirit with the Lord God, and he alone will be your
trust and confidence, and your glory, if he live in you, and walk in you, and
then you are his People, and he is your God. And Friends are to mind this, even
Peace, and Union, and Fellowship with the Lord, and the comfort of his
Presence, which is the only happiness of the Creature, even the enjoyment of
him that is invisible, who is God infinite over all, to whom mortal eye cannot
approach, neither can the mortal mind him apprehend, but in his own Life
manifested in mortal Flesh, and by the measure of his own Spirit that dwells in
us is he seen, felt, preceived, and enjoyed of us; so mind the Immortal Life
begotten of the Father in you, that that may live in you, even the Heir of God,
which is his Image and likeness, for in that alone is Covenant with God made
and kept, and in it is the Fathers presence enjoyed, and he Worshipped without
respect of time, place, or visible thing; and if that live in you, then yo^ in
that will live unto God, in all that which is answerable unto him; and your
words and works will be accepted of him, and well-pleasing to him, even because
it is him that works in you to will and to do all good things, and he alone
exalted in you, and you subjected, and the Maker is become the Husband, and you
married unto him; and he lives in Power, and Rule, and Command, and you liv^ In
subjecti^^ unto him, and in fulfilling his Will in what he guides in, by his
Holy Spirit; And this life is very precious.

Oh Friends! live in it, and dwell in it always, and then your Joy and Peace
will be with you over all this World, and you will be Comforted, when Fear and
Terror comes upon all men; for the Lord God whom we serve and worship in the
Spirit, will cause his Enemies to know his Power; and that he does and can do
whatsoever he will, and will smite his Enemies, and wound them in their
Consciences; for all Power, Dominion, and Authority is with him, he is mighty
to save, and mighty to destroy, and his Reward is to every one according to
their deeds; and this is the God whom we fear and worship, and all Flesh must
bow before him, when he shows his presence; though men (...) high and lifted
up, and go on in Rebellion against him without fear, yet the hand of the Lord
will be upon the^, and he shall smite them with the ^od of his mouth: Wherefore
all Friends, have respect unto the Lord in your (...) in all things that you
do, and in all things that comes to pass, for that is ^^^^^ed in a people; and
they shall prosper, their Souls shall be nourished, and their lives refreshed
with the Mercies of the Lord, even all they that do wai^ upon the Lord, and
have respect unto him and his Eternal Power, which does and suffers all
things that be; In which Power you must dwell and walk, and feel it in your
hearts, and it will be your Armor and Defense in all things, and it will carry
you through all that which works contrary. And it is very precious to be
Armed with the Armor of God, in the Day of Temptations and Trials, that you
may not be overcome of the wicked, nor spoiled of the Heavenly Inheritance. Oh
Frinds! put on strength, that you may stand, and never be moved from the hope
of Eternal Life, and feel the renewing of your inward man, even the increase
and growth of the Immortal Life in you, that you may live in that unto the Lord
God, and Covenant with him may be preserved, whereby, you may be a praise and a
glory to him in your Generation in the sight of the whole World, even all you
who have tasted of the Presence and Power of the Lord, and who have known his
Mercies and Judgments, and been acquainted with him, that you may be kept
faithful unto the end, and not be subverted by the wicked one, nor drawn from
the Obedience to the Truth, nor loose your Crown of Immortality, neither by the
flattery nor terror of the ungodly, but that you live in the Dominion of
Immortal Life, which keeps above all Mortal Temptations and Mortal Terror, and
gives Authority over all: And this Life is blessed, where the Glory and Peace
of this World, and the Troubles and Sorrows of it also, are seen over, and felt
beyond, and nothing of it can move the Heart, nor disquiet the Spirit, nor work
any Separation from the Fathers Love; and in the Seed of God, where it lives
above mortal, is this enjoyed by us and all the Faithful: But if the man's part
live above the Seed of God, that, will be drawn aside by the love or by the
terror of this World, for that is changable, and the evil one has a part in
it; so that part is to be kept in subjection in you, under the Seed of God, and
it must bear the Cros^ of Christ always, else you will be overcome of the
wicked; for in that part (the m^ part) which is of this World, the Devil has
something, a place to receive ^im, and p^^t to obey him; but in the Seed of God
he has nothing, neither place nor part: And so Friends live in the Seed of
God, for in that is your Victory and heavenly Dominion, and also your Election
and Assurance for ever, even in the second Birth, begotten of the Father; for
that is the Heir of God, and therei^ does man inherit Eternal Life, and Rest
and Peace to his Soul, and therein is Ble^^^^gs and Peace, and Life inwardly
and outwardly, and all fullness is enjoyed; where the Lord is the Teacher, the
Father, the Shepherd, the Master the King and Judge; and is become to us the
all in all, and the Kingdom delive^^^ (...) him, and all subjected under him,
even God with us, the Substance of (...) (...) ^^d of all, and all the contrary
put under, even the Lion and the Lamb (...) (...) together, and man lives in
Peace, according to the Promise; and the Mountain of the Lords House is
established on the top of all, in which nothing can destroy or hurt the pure
Life; but Life is in Dominion over all, and (...) is swallowed up of it.

Oh Friends! this is the mark that is before you, press on toward it, that you
may obtain the final end of all your Travel and Waiting, of your Obedi^^ce and
Suffering, and the end of your Hope and Patience, and the very end of the
Mess^ge sent of God, and delivered to you by us: The end of all is this, Th^^
you may dwell in God, and he in you, and be gathered up to him, to be ever with
(...); and that he may be your all in all, and you may be to him an honor and
praise ^^^^ghout the World in your Generation; even he your only God, and you
his only (...).

(...) Friends, certain it is, that the Way of Life, and Peace, and of
Salvation is m^de manifest unto you, and you know wherein everlasting Peace and
Reconciliation with God stands; and you also know, what the cause is of all
tro^^le, and sorrow, and condemnation; the Lord has opened many Hearts, and
given unto many a good Understanding: And seeing you know this, live in the Way
of Peace, and escape the other, that you may not come into condemnation; for it
is a fearful thing to fall into the Condemnation and Wrath of the Almighty.
And for this cause, That men should be saved from Wrath, and have Peac^ with
God, the Message of Life and Salvation has the Lord sent abroad plentifully in
this Nation, and you have received it, and believed the Report, though many
have rejected it to their Destruction, whose Judgment will be upon them; but
you have tasted, handled, and f^lt of the Word of eternal Life, by which the
Lord has wounded you, and healed you again; and many has he slain, and made
them alive, even through his Word and Power, which has entered into many
hearts, which kills the Enmity, and quicken^th the Seed, and which breaks
off from all the World's followship, both in Transgressions, and Righteousness,
and makes all void, all Covenants with Death and Hell, and marries unto the
Lamb; and the Marriage of the Lamb is come unto many, even unto all in whom his
innocent and heavenly Na^^re is begotten and brought forth; for this is of his
Flesh, and of his Bone; (...) here is his Wife that has made her self ready,
and is prepared for the Bridegroom; and blessed are ye, if ye know these
things, and are Witnesses of th^^, even the Marriage of the Lamb, and the
making ready of his Elected in you, (...) the receiving and quickening of his
Flesh, and of his Bone; for this is the (...) unto whom he is joined, that has
put away all other Lovers, and loves the Lord with all the Heart, and with all
the Soul, who is clothed with perfect Bea^ty and Innocence, and covered with
divine Righteousness, in which there is no Spot, being delivered out of the
Wilderness, and freed from her mourn^^g state, and is no more separated from
her Husband; but she again quick^^t into Life, and adorned with Beauty, and
married to the Lamb, to live with him ^or evermore.

Oh Friends! wait upon the Lord, that ye may possess these things; for to k^ow
th^^, and be in them, is everlasting Treasure and Riches; the Possession of
them are Riches to the Poor, Bread to the Hungry, and Clothing to the Naked,
and Life to the Dead: And if ye know these things, lay them up in your hearts,
as your most precious Treasure, and let none spoil you of it; And if ye are
married unto the Lamb, then are you the True and only Church, even his Body
and living Members of it; for such only are the True Church, that are married
to Christ, and United to him in his own nature; and all such are false
Churches, and are even of the great Whore, that has taken upon them the name
of Churches of Christ, but were never lawfully married unto him, and such are
deceived, and Deceivers of others with the very Name of Christ, calling
themselves by the Name of his Church, while they are in the nature contrary to
him, nor they ever lawfully married unto him; and this is the great Whore who
commits lewdness though Nations, in all false worships and Idolatrous Practices
and Ordinances, and in her false Ministry, and false Doctrines; and she was set
up in Nations, by the force of cruel and violent Laws, and men, and is upheld
by Oppression and Injustice at this day; and yet all this she does under the
Name of Holy Church, and uses the Name of Christ, as if she were his Wife, and
yet has other Lovers; and by such means has this great Whore deceived the
World: But now the Day of the Lord is come upon her, and the hour of her
Judgment is at hand, and all that have taken plea^^^e with her, shall mourn
and bitterly lament, because of her Judgments which comes in a day; but we
are delivered from her Judgments, because the Lord has called us from her
abominations; and we can no more drink her Cup of false Doctrines and
Practices, all which are Idolatry, and to be Judged of the Lord, though she
should drink our Blood, as she has done the Saints before us; But I say, the
Lord has led us out of this Babylon, He has delivered us from this great
City, and made us Spiritually free from its abominations and Idolatries, though
not outwardly free from her oppressions and cruelties: And though this great
City has Ruled over the Kings and great men of the earth, and subjected many
Nations through its wickedness and violence; yet certainly its ruin is near to
come, Else my Hope is lost, my Life is smitten, and the Lord has not spoken by
me: And the Lord will Reward this false woman, this false Church, that has
deceived the Nations, even according to her deeds, as she has done to others,
so shall others do to her, measure for measure; and much more might we say
concerning her, but the Lord has opened our eyes, and we see her abominations,
and she cannot deceive us: And this is the loving kindness of the Lord unto us,
for which he is worthy to be praised by us, for evermore. And in that ye have
received the Truth, and do know the Truth, live in it, and walk in it in all
faithfulness; and be not fearful and unbelieving, as though the Lord were not
with you, though ye suffer much for his Names sake; for he is not wanting unto
that man that does fear his Name, and that walks in his Way; but for the
deliverance of all such will he appear, he will free the oppressed, and the
afflicted people he will save, even by his outstretched Arm: Wherefore let our
eye be unto the Lord in all estates and conditions, whether of sufferings or
otherwise, for from him Salvation comes, and not from the Mountains of the
Earth; and keep your Meatings in your several places, and be faithful in all
things, that your Consciences may be kept void of offenses, both toward God
and men, that no disobedience nor load of iniquity may be upon you, but that in
the sight of God, you may feel clearness and freedom of Soul and Spirit, from
the burden of all transgression, that you may know the Remission of all sin,
and all iniquity may be blotted out, and no guilt of transgression may lie upon
you, but you may enjoy Peace in your Consciences, in the Sanctification and
Justification of the new man; and this is the heavenly Life, even upon Earth:
And when you are met together in the Name and Power of the Lord, mind his
presence amongst you, for that is life, and will make your Meetings profitable
and full of Virtue to your Souls, and the Lord will instruct you in all that
which is good, and Christ will be your Minister of Peace and Comfort, and his
Spirit will l^^d you into all Truth, and by his Word, even the speech of God in
your hearts, you will be quickened in Spirit, and your strength and Peace in God
will be renewed day by day; and walk in all Wisdom, and in the fear of the Lord
one toward another, and toward all people, that your Righteous and innocent
life, and your Holy Ways and Works of Truth, may have Evidence in the hearts
of your Enemies, that you are of God, by the shining forth of your light before
them; and that the Devil, nor all your Enemies may have ought against you,
saving concerning your God, and the Worship of him, and the matters pertaining
to good Conscience; and then if any suffer afflictions and tribulation by
wicked men, if it be for Righteousness sake, and concerning the Law of your
God, and the matters of his Kingdom; in such suffering the Lord will be with
you, and not forsake you, but he will give you Dominion, and carry you through
it all in Patience and Faith, which gives you Victory over all Enemies; And
nothing shall come to you, nor happen on you in the anger of God, but all
afflictions shall be turned to your Comfort, and by Persecutions and
Tribulations the Lord will but try you, and not destroy you, you being
delivered from his wrath, and from that which is the Cause of it: And therefore
Friends, it being much upon my Spirit, I do lay it upon you, to be mindful in
this very thing, that you walk in all Wisdom, so that your Enemies have nothing
against you, to cause you to suffer for, but only for Truth, and Righteousness
sake, and concerning the Law and Worship of your God; and then if the wicked
one take occasion against you, to inflict his wrath upon you by wicked men,
because of the exercises of your Consciences toward God, thereby shall the
Lord take occasion against your Enemies, to destroy them in his season, and he
will deliver you; and for this Cause does the Lord plead with the wicked in his
wrath, even because of the unjust sufferings of his People, for that always
drew down the wrath of the Lord upon Nations, and Rulers; and for this Cause
has many been destroyed; and in our sufferings must be filled up the measure
of the iniquities, both of Rulers and people in this Nation, that the Lord may
over-turn them with his hand, when their measure of oppression is finished, and
the burden of its guilt falls upon them.

Therefore let us have Patience toward all men in all Conditions, and Faith
toward God at all times, for therein is our Armor of Defense, and our Weapons
to resist all our Enemies, and giving up into the Eternal Will of the Father,
whether in Life or Death, in Tribulations or in Rejoicing, and giving our Power
wholly to the Lord, and nor unto any other, knowing, That not one Hair of our
Head can fall without him, whose Power is over all, and through ^ll: So that if
we Live, it may be unto him alone; and if we suffer, and dye, it may be for
him, and herein Peace shall be with us, in whatsoever comes to pass upon us,
if we can receive all things as from the hand of the Lord; and Live in the
feeling of that Power, which does all things, or suffers all things to be
done.

And blessed is he that is not offended in Christ, who cannot be offended in
him, nor separated from him by Principalities, nor Powers of Darkness, nor
Death, nor Life of any thing: And in this growth was the Apostle, which the
same is to be waited for, blessed is he that obtaines it; for that which takes
offense against Christ, is of the same with that which gives it; for all
offenses against him, arises from the corrupted nature which knows him not,
and that which receives any offense against him, is the same which knows him
not; Yea, though an offense may be justly given, yet that in which the offense
takes place, knows not the Father not the Son: And Christ said offenses should
come, but woe unto him by whom they come, and woe unto that which stumbles and
f^lls through offenses. Therefore every one is to mind, the certain evidence
of the Spirit of God, and of the Truth and Way of Salvation in his own heart,
and being persuaded concerning the Way of Salvation, by the Spirit of God, ^^at
Spirit will judge every offense that is given, and not embrace it; and that
Spirit which judges and casts out, that which gave offense against God, in that
Spirit may a man be preserved above all offenses, so as nothing can separate
him from the love of God; but though this offense, or the other, whatsoever may
arise, yet such a one feels and possesses the Mercy, Love and Peace from God in
his own spirit, and such a one lives in the heavenly Life, and cannot make the
evil example of another an occasion of iniquity to himself, but he rather hears
and fears, and keeps in more diligence and respect to the fear and presence of
God in his own heart, yet he covers not the offense that is given in it self,
but with a Spirit of judgment treads it down, and walks over it; and this is
the right Way for a man of God to walk in; and that Spirit is not right before
the Lord, nor that heart which takes unto it self an occasion to stumble at, or
deny the Power and Mercy of the Lord, because another may abuse them: But if
one be from the Spirit of God in their own hearts, their mind unsettled upon
that, and unseasoned with that, then the offenses enter, and works darkness and
prejudice in the mind, and the wrong part being up, it receives all things to a
wrong end, and it abuses Gods Mercies, and also wants the Authority to pass
Judgment upon offenses, and because hereof is a man undone; for prejudice will
eat out the good, and destroy Simplicity, and wound the Soul, and bring men
into Death and bitterness of spirit: Therefore this is to all Friends, that you
may be kept in the Spirit of Judgment, which will not receive an offense into
the wrong part, but will Judge all offenses in themselves, and hereby all will
be preserved, and Truth must travel through all his enemies, and blessed is he
that is kept faithful to the end, in the Power of the Lord God, that Reigns
over, and Judges the Power of Darkness in every appearance of it, Inwardly and
Outwardly.

And as concerning the times and seasons, and the present Confusions and
Distractions that is amongst men, much might be spoken; but certainly the end
of all these things, shall be turned for good unto us, and unto all that do
abide in Faith and Patience unto the end; and though the present times be of an
heavy countenance toward us, like as if we should be swallowed up through the
roaring of the Sea, and because wickedness does abound by the spirit that now
is exalted; yet in this let us respect the Lord, for certain it is, that Times
and Seasons are in his Hand, to change them at his pleasure, and to take them
from one, and give them to another when he will; the day is his, and the
Victory is in his Hand: Oh! let not mortal men glory against him, man's time is
but for a moment, and it is our Blessedness and Peace to be still, to be still;
And to have a Respect to the Lord through all these overturnings; And though
the spirit that now is, be wicked and abounding in iniquity, yet the Lord will
limit its way: And as for the men that now are in Power, it is very Just with
the Lord, to let them have their Day, even to try them what they will do, many
others before those have had also their Day, that have promised great things,
as to Liberty and Freedom of the Nation, even much more than these; but they
abused times and seasons, and opportunities, and were deceitful toward God and
Man, and sought themselves more than the good of others, and therefore are they
justly under reproach and sufferings, even for their disobedience sake, who
would not give ear to the Cry of our oppressions, though they were called unto,
but made our Yoaks more heavy, and our Tasks more great, though the Lord looked
for better things from them, yet they were rebellious till they were sunk into
Confusion; and we yet stand, and they are fallen, that thought to destroy us.
And this spirit, and these men who now are, which once the other had power
over, is now justly set in Power over them: And all this is accomplished, in
the Justice of the Lord's Hand, and therefore, Why should we murmur against
God? or say, Why have thou done it? But let us travel in Patience through all
the Oppressions, and in the Power of the Lord, we shall work through them, as
through others heretofore, even till the Lord deliver us: For this Spirit that
now is, must Rule, until the pleasure of the Lord be fulfilled concerning it;
May not the Lord do something through it, unworthy of a better spirit to be
employed in? God has vessels of dishonor; And the King of Assyria and
Nebuchadnezzar must serve his pleasure, when he will use them: And therefore no
man at present is found able to divert the Authority of it; for it seems right
unto the Lord, that it have its season, if not in love to it, yet in his wrath,
that its measure of wickedness may be filled up in this occasion given unto it,
that the Lord may destroy it; for though it have all Power to Rule, and to
subdue that which rises against it; yet this is not, because the Lord is on
its side, but thus he suffers it, for a Rod to correct others, that have been
unfaithful, even till the Lord correct it also with his Judgments. And the
purpose of the Lord is to prove the men, if so be some of them may learn
Righteousness and be saved, though some of them want the show of Religion,
which others have had; yet God has not left himself without witness in them:
And the Lord may be nigh to some of them, if he smite, they must be wounded;
let us walk in Wisdom and Innocence toward them, and be faithful toward the
Lord concerning them, and leave them to him.

And as for all the confusions, and distractions, and rumors of Wars, what are
they to us? What have we to do with them? and wherein are we concerned in these
things? is not our Kingdom of another World, Even that of peace and
righteousness? and has not the Lord called us, and chosen us into the
possession of that Inheritance, wherein strife, and enmity dwells not? Yea,
he has broken down that part in us that is related thereunto, and being dead
in that Nature of Strife, Bloodshed, and Wars, how can we live in strife and
contention in the World, or have fellowship with any therein? And can we have
pleasure in the confusion and distraction amongst men, or join in any thing
with them, if so be we are quickened in the new life to God, which is a life of
love and peace, and free from such things? and if we are crucified in the life
to this World, out of which all these confusions and strife does arise, how can
we live therein? and therefore these things are nothing to us, neither are we
of one party, or against another, to oppose any by rebellion, or plottings
against them, in enmity, and striving with them by Carnal Weapons: nor to
destroy any men's lives, though our Enemies: so we War not for any, nor against
any, for the matters of this Worlds Kingdom.

But our Kingdom is inward, and our Weapons are spiritual, and our victory and
peace, is not of this World: And our War is against souls enemies, and against
the powers of darkness, even by the Sword of the Spirit, which God has given
us, and called us to war therewith, to convert people from sin and death, and
from the very occasion of wars and contentions about the things that are
earthly; and this is our calling and work at this day; and these things all the
Children of the Lord are to mind, and to keep over the spirit of this World in
all people, which all this enmity, strife, and confusion that is up amongst
men, lodges in, and out of it arises; for these things are the fruits of the
spirit of this evil and sinful World, and the fruits of the Spirit of God are
of another nature, even Peace and meekness toward all, and not enmity toward
any, in which Spirit let us live and walk, admonishing all hereunto, and
Praying for our enemies, and not hating them, but doing good for evil, and not
rendering evil for evil; but being meek and humble, merciful and patient toward
all: and this is the true Christian life learned of Christ, and this life is
blessed in this World, and in the World to come; and them that live here are
redeemed out of the World, wherein is Troubles and Confusion, Wars and Strifes:
But let us not heed any of these things, for they Rise and Fall in their
season, and are brought forth and effected in the changable and erring spirit,
which works not the honor of God, but is in the dishonor to him; And
Friends, let us be a people separate from all that live therein, waiting for
the deliverance of the holy seed, in all: and believing, that through all these
things the Lord will set up his Kingdom; and thus it must come to pass, BABYLON
MUST FALL WITH A GREAT NOISE; for in strife and confusion was She builded, and
therein has She long stood, and thereby must She fall; and Tribulations must
come upon the Earth, that People may learn to fear the Lord through his
Judgments: And he will speedily do great things in the World, which cannot be
believed by many, if it were told them; for Hell and Death must be destroyed,
and both the Beast and the Whore must be taken alive, and cast into the Lake of
the anger of God: But blessed are they that do wait upon the Lord, and rest
under his shadow, and wait in his Counsel, and receive his Instructions; they
shall see the mavelous works of his hand; but the wicked and unbelieving
shall be turned into darkness, and shall not see the countenance of the Lord to
refresh them, but their sorrow shall be increased.

And as for me, If I were no more, this is the Testimony of my Love unto the
Seed of God, through these Nations, who am a Companion to all that travel after
Truth and Righteousness, and that seek the Lord in their hearts that he may
Rule; and these things were upon me, to send amongst the Flock of God, to be
read in all your Meetings. Oxfordshire, the 1st day of the third Month, 1660.
E. B.

A VISITATION AND Presentation of Love Unto the KING, and those called
ROYALLISTS: Consisting of I. An Answer to several Queries proposed to the
People (called Quakers) from a (supposed) Royallist. II. An Objection answered,
concerning the Kings Supremacy. III. An Epistle directed to the King, and those
that go under the Name of Royallists. IV. Certain Queries returned to them
(called Royallists) to answer.

An Answer to diverse Queries subscribed thus, To the Quakers some Queries is
sent to be answered, that all People may know your Spirit, and the temper of
it, and your Judgment concerning the Times and Seasons; and subscribed, let
your Answer be directed, Tradite hanc Amico Regis.
AS concerning the Quakers, that are scornfully so called, We are at this day,
and have been ever since we were a People, a poor despised and contemptible
People, in the eye of this World, and deep Sufferers under the Injustice, and
Cruelties, and Oppressions both of Rulers Teachers and People, and we have been
a prey to the Wicked, and trodden down under the feet of Ambitious men, that
have been in power in this Nation, and have Ruled in force and cruelty over us,
and this has been ever since the Lord raised us up to be a People, though we
have not been offensive to any just Law, or Government, or to any sort of
People, otherwise then that we have given our Witness against Sin and
wickedness in all People; but we have not been Oppressors of others, neither
have we envied the persons of any, but in all good Conscience have we walked
toward all men, doing no otherwise to any, then we would be done unto; and
this is the very Law we walk by toward all men, desiting the good of all, and
that all may come to Repentance and be Saved; and what we are as unto the Lord,
if I should declare, it could not be believed by many: But we are his People,
and he has chosen us, and he is our God, and we have believed in him, and
walked with him in the uprightness of heart; and we have this Testimony in our
own hearts, if we die it is for him, and if we live it is to him; and though we
have been, and may be clouded with the Reproaches and Persecutions of an
Uncircumcised Generation, yet in the Lord's Season it shall be manifest even to
the World, and to our very Enemies, that we are his People and chosen of him,
and he in the midst of us, whom we serve and worship in Spirit, in Truth, and
in Righteousness; and this shall be manifest in the day of the Lord, and in the
mean time we are willing to bear, and to suffer all things that is put upon us,
for the Name of the Lords sake.

Query 1. Whether you, or any of you that pretend to Inspiration and
Revelation, did foresee, or was it revealed to you, that ever Charles Stua^^
should be proclaimed King (...) Reign in England, ever anymore? or whether or
no any of you did believe it, or could have believed it by your great Faith
which you profess, if it had been told you long ago?

Answ. As for the Proclaiming of Charles Stuart King, to reign in England, it
was not improbable unto our Faith, neither is it contrary to that which some of
us has seen; for we know that God respects neither persons nor names, but does
give the Kingdoms of this World to whomsoever he will; and thus much was said,
as See G. Fox his Paper directed to the Parliament and Army so called.
may be seen in a Book, called, Good Counsel and Advice rejected, (and diverse
other Papers) etc. p. 17. In a Letter to Oliver Cromwell, it is said concerning
you that are commonly called Cavaliers; But what and if, for and because of thy
Wicked^^^^ in the sight of God, he should, raise them up, and make them
Instruments in his Hand to accomplish his wrath upon thee, even like as he made
thee once his Instrument to overthrow them, etc.

And here the thing was believed to be possible, that the Lord might raise you
up again for his pleasure, to fulfill his Will, because of the wickedness of the
Army and Nation; and it is now come to pass, even as it was seen and believed.

And also it was expressed in a Letter, written in the 10th Mon. 1659.
concernning them that were your Enemies, and that were at first raised against
you; The very same spirit of Pride, and Oppression, and Idolatry is entered into
them, (meaning your Enemies) and now lives in them in as high a measure as ever
it lived amongst you; and ^^^ir Iniquities are well nigh finished, and the Lord
will one way or other correct and reprove them, and they shall be dealt with in
like manner, as they have dealt with you; for they were no more then a Rod in
the Hands of the Lord for a season, and they must also be broken and cast into
the Fire; and whether the Lord may ever may make use of you to reprove them, as
he did of them to reprove you, this I determine not; but leave it to him who
can do whatsoever he will, by what Instrument he pleases: It is true you have
made many Attempts to be revenged upon them, but you have not hitherto
prospered; but could you be humbled, and come into the meek Spirit of the Lord,
then might you prosper, but hitherto the Lord has always defeated you, and
bowed you down under a People as unworthy as others, but their time will come
to an end: And submit unto the Will of the Lord in what is come to pass, and
seek not vengeance to your selves, and then the Lord will avenge your Cause,
for the Iniquities of your Adversaries are ripe, etc. And Charles Stuart must
either be converted to God, and ruled by him, or else he can never rightly rule
for God in this Nation; though this I believe, it is not impossible but that he
may be a Rod upon them that once smote him, and their Oppressions and Ambitions
may receive a check through him, etc.

These things were written in a Letter to all the people of your part, long
before there was any visible appearance, of that which is now come to pass:
whereby it does appear that these things in a great measure were foreseen and
prophesied of, and it was believed as a thing very possible, that thus it might
be as is already come to pass: And as for Visions, they are for an appointed
time, there is a time to see, and a time to speak what is seen; and revealed
things belong to us, and when we declare them then you may take notice of it;
but it was verily believed as a thing possible, that such a thing would be, and
also by the Proceedings and Transactions as they have fallen out; for your very
Enemies have so acted and proceeded as to destroy themselves, and to bring you
in over their heads, though they little intended the thing, yet the effect of
their proceedings could hardly prove otherwise then to destroy themselves, and
make room for you, and these things I observed; And also thus far we did
foresee, and it was revealed to us, and believed by m^^y of us fully, and we
did often Prophecy it, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth would destroy and
bring down the Government, and Authority as they have stood in this Nation for
diverse years, and that he would bring Judgment upon the Rulers, and upon many
of the Teachers, and People of this Nation, because of their oppressions and
unfaithfulness, and treachery, and hypocrisy, and wickedness, which abounded
amongst them, which we have felt and seen, and been sensible of; and we have
often given our witness against them, because of their guiltiness in their
sinful ways; Oh it has been loathsome unto the Lord, even the Oppressions and
treacheries of the Rulers! Oh how has Cruelty and Injustice abounded in their
Government! and their hypocrisy has been evident in our ^ight in many
Particulars, and even in that they have cried against and overthrown King and
Kingly Government, charging them with oppression and cruelty, and pretended to
ease the people in a better way of Government, when as though Governors and
Names, and Titles of Government, were changed and altered, yet oppression
ceased not, neither was injustice forsaken, nor was the heavy yoaks of great
bondage removed: but the rather these things were increased upon many good
people in these Nati^^s, and herein was the unfaithfulness, and treachery of
the Rulers very great in the sight of God, and their Government unjust and
unequal, wherefore the Lord has been provoked against them to confound them,
and overturn them, and we have often told it them, and also the hypocrisy and
deceits, and sinfulness of Teachers, we have seen and testified against, and
our witness to them both is and will be found true, and Gods justice will be
fulfilled upon them both; and these things we have observed, even the heinous
guilt of sin against God in both Rulers and Teachers, and the abo^^^^tions that
have been committed both in Civil, and Church Government (so called) also, and
many people have loved to have these things so, and we have been sensible how
the Lord has been provoked to overthrow the Governors of this Nation because
hereof; and this we have foreseen and Prophesied of, even that Judgment and
Confusion would come upon the Government, the Rulers, and the Teachers; but
particularly when and after what manner, judgment and overthrow should come
upon them, was left to the Lord, who has brought to pass his own will
according to Justice, and it may prove to be a just Judgment from the Lord,
upon the Unfaithful and Treacherous, and Unjust Rulers, and Teachers, and
People which I have mentioned, and the Lord may justly avenge himself upon them
who have abused his Mercies, and not improved his Deliverance to his glory, but
preverted the end wherefore they were at first raised up; I say the Lord may
justly be avenged of them by this means, of this man's coming in, and he may be
in the hand of the Lord a very smiting Rod to correct and rebuke, and may be a
heavy Judgment upon many in this Nation, even from that cause, and for that end
as before I have expressed.

Quer. 2. Whether you, or any of you, do adjudge is Reasonable and Equitable,
that ^e should come and inherit the Nations of which he is born the right Heir?
Or whether or (...) it is just or unjust to God and men, that he would Reign
King over these Nation? If you walk and judge by the Law of God which is Equal,
then judge of this whether he has been kept out this many Years, and now is
brought in again Reasonably and Justly, or Unjustly and contrary to Reason?

Answ. That he should come in, is Reasonable and Equitable, because through the
purpose of the Lord, his coming in is accomplished, who effects nothing but
what is Equal and Reasonable, and there is cause in God sufficient wherefore it
should thus be, and there is Sufficient cause and Reason appearing to us in
this matter; and upon the very account as laid down in my Answer to the first
Query, it is Equal as in the Lord, that he should be restored who has been
removed and cast out by such as have pretended to Govern and Rule better than
he, but have ruled in Oppression and Injustice, and not answered the cause
wherefore he was cast out; and that he should come in to be a Scourge upon
these, this is just, and in this particular does lie the Reason and Equity of
his coming in to inherit this Nation. And as for Reigning justly over this
Nation, that may better be answered when we have had experience of his Reign,
for if he Reign and Rule in Truth and Righteousness, in Mercy and in Justice,
and by and according to the Just Law of God; if thus he Reign, then he Reigns
justly, and it is just to God and men that he should Reign, and this the Law of
God which is Equal, judges, by which we walk in all things, and do judge of
all things: And as for his being kept out this many years, we do judge that the
hand of the Lord is in these matters, and they were done and suffered to be
done by him, in which he will be glorified; yet, thus far I say, they that have
kept him out, in pretense that they would Rule better than he, and yet have
ruled in Oppression and Injustice, as much more (may be) then he would have
done, they have dealed unjustly and contrary to reason, both to him, and much
more to the People of these Nations, while they have made and had new Names and
Titles of Government and Governors, but have continued the old oppressions, and
not releived the oppressed according to their own vows and promises, which they
have broken, and it is but just they should be punished for it; but if he
render not evil for evil, he does well.

Quer. 3. Whether or no ye can judge that his Reign and Government shall be
blessed to himself, and these Nations, or the contrary? Or whether shall Peace
or Trouble be in the Land in his days? And shall his days be many, or shall his
time be short; if this be revealed to you let us know?

Answ. We do judge that his Reign and Government may be blessed to himself and
these Nations, or not blessed; and peace may be in the Land, or trouble in his
days; and his time may be long, or it may be short; according as he walks in
the fear of the Lord, or as he walks wickedly, and according as his Reign and
Government is in Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth, or in Oppression and
Injustice, accordingly do I judge may he be blessed, and may have Peace, and
long days, or the contrary, if he walk in the way which brings contrary
effects: and we take not upon us to judge any thing before the time, but as
through time he discovers himself, so we may judge of him, (for we desire well
for him and all men) th^^ ^e may so Reign and Govern as to be a blessing to
himself and these Nations, that Peace may be in his days, and his Time may be
happy: And this we certainly know that there is an eternal God, who is over
all, and that can do whatsoever he will, even set up and pull down whomsoever
he will, and though his strength now be great, and his number very many, yet
there is an Eternal God above all, who is mighty to save, and mighty to
destroy, and if he please not God in his ways, and in his Reign, but be an
Oppressor, and walk in evil ways, we certainly believe he cannot be blessed,
nor have Peace, nor long time, but the Lord may bring to pass the contrary; for
as the Scriptures say, it is by him that Kings Reign, and he makes Kings
blessed or miserable, the Scriptures gives much evidence concerning the good
and the bad Kings of Israel, they that were good men and Ruled well, they were
blessed and had long days, and people were happy under them; and to the Kings
that were Idolaters and Oppressors, and walked in wickedness, and vexed the
Lord, it was contrary; for the Lord cut them off, and destroyed them, and
delivered the oppressed; and God is the same now as he was then, as powerful to
save the Righteous, and as mighty to destroy the wicked; and we rather desire
that he may follow the example of the good Kings of Israel, that the good
effects may follow, and that he may not follow the evil example of Tyrants and
Oppressors: But and if he do, the effect and reward will certainly be upon him,
and the Lord will rebuke him, and this we know by the Spirit of the Lord.

Quer. 4. Whether may be justly forgive, or avenge himself, of his and his
Father's Enemies; and if he do avenge, whether or no can that be called
persecution? and if any, or many suffer death, or otherwise on that account
because they destroyed his Father, and sought to destroy him also; do such
suffer for righteousness and good conscience or no? if some of you suffer, for
that cause shall you have Peace with God in it, or is it for the name of
Christ, as ye often say?

Answ. He may justly in the sight of God forgive his, and his Father Enemies,
and he will be the more blessed if he do it; for it is a happy thing to forgive
Enemies, and it is Christ's Doctrine also to forgive Enemies, and it would be a
good report unto him among his Friends, and it would win his Enemies, or be a
good means toward it, if he do forgive all Enemies, and it will be a good
beginning of his Government to remit Offenses; though yet in his heart he may
be persuaded, that he and his Father have been much injured, yet, I say, justly
he (...) forgive all in the sight of God, and also in the sight of men, as many
ways may appear; even in as much as his Father and he did flee to the Sword, to
determine their Controversy in this Nation, and the Sword went against them,
and did determine the controversy even against them; and that whereby they
thought to stand, they did fall, and that which they chused for their defense,
did destroy them; and who then shall they blame for that which befell them,
seeing the Sword destroyed them, But this is not meant of the King's Death.
which themselves did choose, and thought thereby to stand, but it determined
the Controversy against them; and if you cannot own it, as that the Hand of
the Lord went against you in Battle, yet you must confess that the fortune of
War (as some call it) went against you; and must such now suffer because
hereof? nay, they ought not, but may rather be spared by the King: and inasmuch
as he is restored again without blood or loss of lives, it may be very just for
him not to take away any men's lives, but it will be more just to pass by all
old things; and if he have a deliverance, let him turn it into the praise of
the L^^d in holiness, and not into the shedding of blood in the way of a fierce
revenge; and let him leave it to the Lord to avenge himself upon such as have
been his Enemies, and upon such as ^^ve cast out King and Kingly Government,
and pretended to a better Government, (...) to Govern more Righteously, and yet
have been Oppressors, and not answered their pretenses pretenses and
engagements, but broken them and acted contrary, by their Unfaithfulness and
Hypocrisy; and in that does lie the justness of punishment if it come upon
them, and if they be punished with death, or otherwise; if they suffer on that
account, I say, because they destroyed Kingly Government in Name and Title, and
pretended better things, and to Govern better, and did not make Reformation,
but were Oppressors, as I have (...) Suffering for that cause cannot be called
Persecution, nor is it for good Conscience, nor Righteousness sake that such do
Suffer: But none of us can Suffer for that cause, as not being guilty thereof,
as in the Answer to the next Query I shall have full occasion to show you; but
and if we Suffer in your Government, it is for the Name of Christ, and we shall
have Peace with God in it, because nothing can be charged against us in this
Capacity as we now stand, and in this State into which we are now gathered and
changed; not in any matter of Action or Rebellion against him nor his Father,
nor any thing but concerning the Law and Worship of our God, and the matters of
his Kingdom, and our pure Consciences; and if upon this account we are made to
suffer by him, and for this cause, the reward will be Sad and Heavy upon him in
the day of the Lord: And if any that are now amongst us, were any way engaged
in the Parliament Service in the Wars, it was not in Rebellion against him or
his Father, as that we sought their destruction as men, but upon Sober and
Reasonable Principles, and not for corrupted ends, nor to get Honor and Riches
to our selves, as some others might do, who went in the War for self ends, and
continued in action after the cause (which was once engaged for) was utterly
lost, as we have long seen it; and that principle which some time led some in
action to oppose Oppression, and seek after Reformation, we never have nor
shall deny, but that Principle is still justified, though we are now better
informed than once we were: for though we do now more than ever oppose
Oppression, and seek after Reformation, yet we do it not in that way of outward
Waring, and Fighting with Carnal Weapons, and Swords; and YOU, and the KING
ought to put a difference (both in their guilt and suffering) between such as
some time acted in the Wars against you, in and upon Sober and Reasonable
Principles, and that did not make themselves Rich and High in this World
through your Sufferings; and between such as have acted against you for self
ends, and have insulted over you, and have made themselves Great and Rich in
this World, through your Afflictions and Sufferings; for they who have walked in
that way, and are hereof guilty, they have not acted Righteously, nor walked in
good Conscience; and if such Suffer by you for that cause, it cannot be called
Persecution, nor is it for the Name of Christ, nor can such have Peace with
God: But we being clear from the sin of such, we cannot suffer as such, but if
we suffer by you it is Persecution, and our sufferings will be upon you.

Quer. 5. Whether the great Afflictions and Sufferings sustained by him these
diverse years, from the Subjects of his own Nation, and the guilt thereof, do
lie upon all the Subjects in general? Or whether upon any, or some particular
Sects and Sorts of People? (many which now are arisen) and if upon any
particular Sect and Sort, who are such more then others? distinguish them from
others, and clear your selves if you can from the guilt of his Sufferings.

Answ. As for the Afflictions and Sufferings sustained by him, so far as they
were just and righteous Judgments from God, because of Iniquity, can no man be
charged with, but that is on God's account, who was pleased to chastize with
Afflictions and Sufferings, and no man can be blamed with Injustice for that
Affliction which comes from the Hand of God, upon whom Injustice may not be
charged by any one whatsoever; and so far as his Sufferings were unjust, the
guilt thereof does not lie upon all the Subjects in general, nor upon every
particular sort of People alike, but upon some more then others, and such are
easy to be distinguished from others, if it be considered who they are that
first raised the War in this Nation against the King; and who was it that first
preached and prayed up the War, and prosecuted it against his Father? And who
is it that cast out the Bishops and Prelates from their Places, and took their
Revenues and Benefices, and are become men as corrupted, as covetous, and
selfseeking, as proud and ambitious, as unjust Persecutors as ever the men were
which they cast out? and the guilt is partly upon such who cast out others in
pretense of Reformation, but did it no^ A^^ who is it that has gotten great
Estates in this Nation, and Worldly Honor, and raised themselves from nothing
by the Wars, and by your Suffering, and became ambitious and insulting over
others, though they first began the War in this Nation, and pretended great
Reformation in the Civil State, as well as the other had done in Church State?
And who got the Estates and Titles of their Enemies, and pretended to free this
Nation from all Oppressions, but have not done it, but have continued the old
Oppressions, and have been striving among themselves who should Rule, and who
should be great, but have not Ruled for God, nor in Justice and Equity, though
they first Warred against the King, and carried it on, and removed the King and
Lords, and that Government, and all this in pretense of Ruling better, and in a
better Government, and yet kept not Engagements, nor Promises made in that
case? Upon such is the guilt of the Suffering of the King, so far as his
Sufferings are unjust, even upon Hypocrites, who have walked in these steps,
who as I have said, first made war against the King, and got great Estates, and
quite forgotten the cause once pretended by them, and now in flattery, Cries up
King and Kingly Government again, though this many years they have seemed to be
opposite against it; upon such as these may the guilt aforesaid in measure be
charged: And though there are risen many Sects and Sorts of People since the
beginning of the Wars, yet in the beginning there was but one sort that were in
a capacity to raise and prosecute War against the King; and upon such there is
guilt to be charged in the sight of God, who have foregone their Principles,
and been deceitful both to God and men: And as for Us who are called Quakers,
we are clear from the guilt of all his Sufferings, and in the present Capacity
wherein we now stand, and under the actings of that Spirit which now we are of,
we have no part in the guilt of these Iniquities; we have not cast out others,
and taken their places of great Benefices, neither have we made war with carnal
Weapons against any, never since we were a People, (mark) neither have we
broken Oaths and Engagements, nor promised freedom and deliverance, and for
self ends, and Earthly Riches betrayed, as others have done, what we pretended
to; and in many particulars it does appear, that we are clear from his
Sufferings; for we have been a Suffering People, as well as they, by the same
Spirit which caused them to suffer, which has been much more Cruel, Wicked,
and Unjust toward us, than it has been toward them, though our Persecution
has been in another manner; but what they have done against us we can freely
forgive them, and we would have you to follow the same example; and if you
could accuse them in many things, so could we; but this is not a time to accuse
one another, but to forgive one another, and so to overcome your Enemies, or
else you will appear in the same Spirit, that so he that condemns them cannot
justify you, though we do condemn as well as you, them that have pretended
Reformation, and Wared against you upon that account, and when they had gotten
victory did not reform, but become Oppressors themselves as well as others, and
became Cruel toward others, that would not say and do as they; and for this
Cause the Lord has brought them down, and may justly suffer others to deal
with them as they have dealt with others; yet notwithstanding I must still say,
and it is my judgment, that there was very great Oppressions and Vexations
under the Government of the late King, and Bishops under his power, which the
Lord was offended with, and many good People Oppressed by, for which cause the
Lord might and did justly raise up some to oppose, and strive against
Oppressions and Injustice, and to intend and press after Reformation in all
things; and that Principle of Sincerity which God did raise in many in the
beginning of the Wars, which in some things acted them forth, and carried them
on in opposing Oppressions, and pressing after Reformation, this Principle I
can never deny, but acknowledge to it, though many soon lost it, and became
Self-seekers, forgetting and foregoing the Cause pretended to, having lost
Sincerity, and became corrupted in their way, and Injustice and Oppression
abounded by them, and because hereof are they condemned in the sight of the
Lord, and not by me Justified, because they have lost Sincerity, and turned the
War, and all the Proceedings into Self-seeking; and therefore is God provoked
against them, though had they continued in their Integrity, and had really
performed what some time they pretended, and had forsaken all Sin, it had not
been thus with them, neither had this guilt been upon them, which now they are
like to be accountable for: And this is my Judgment concerning these things.

Quer. 6. Whether or no he may justly (think ye) and with more safety to
himself, and happiness to the Kingdoms, Tolerate and Allow LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE, (so called) to all the many Sects and sorts of People, and
Worshippers that are now in being in these Nations? Or whether he may
Tolerate some, and not all? Or whether he may Tolerate none, but reduce the
Government of the Church into the way of Bishops and Prelates, as it was in his
Father's days? Which of these may he do justly, and with more safety to
himself, and happiness to his Government and Kingdoms?

Answ. We do believe he may and ought justly, and with most safety to himself,
and happiness to the Kingdoms, Tolerate and Allow free LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE
in all the Matters of Faith and Worship toward God; for LIBERTY in exercise of
CONSCIENCE, in the Matters of God's Kingdom, is a very precious thing to the
Lord, and very dear in his sight, and he is tender of it; and I do steadfastly
believe, he will not bless the Rulers of this Nation, that shall deny (to the
People of this Nation) and oppose LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE in the exercise of
Faith and Worship toward God; for I do know it is not given of God to any
Earthly King or Ruler whatsoever, to exercise. Lordship over the Consciences of
People in the Matters of Faith and Worship, and the things pertaining to Gods
Kingdom; for Kings and Rulers, are but to Rule over men in a Nation, in the
Matters between one man and another, in outward things and worldly affairs; and
therein only men ought to Rule in Equity over a Nation, or City, or Country;
and Magistracy in this state, and for such an end is Gods Ordinance appointed
of him, for the preserving of peace and good order among men in outward things;
and it is a privilege of the Crown of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, to be Lord
and Ruler over and in men's Consciences, in Faith and Worship, and all the
Matters of his Kingdom, even as and according to his pleasure, and as his
Spirit leads and guides, for and if any man shall assume to prescribe God a way
how he must be Worshipped, and shall limit his Spirit from this, or to the
other way of Religion, and think to be Lord in men's Consciences in religious
Matters, such are but Usurpers, and are not well-pleasing to the Lord (in such
their way and Government) if they oppress men's Consciences, by limiting from,
or compelling to any such way of Worship or kind of Religion; neither are they
Ordained to Rule among men for that end, not to be King and Judge, and
Lawgiver in Heavenly and spiritual Matters; and this ought not CHARLES (the
King) to do (...) but and if he do it, and will not let Christ alone be the
Head over his Church, it cannot be with safety to himself, nor happiness to the
Kingdoms, (...) justly in the sight of God, but it will work contrary effects:
And he may and ought to Tolerate and Allow Liberty of Conscience in the
matters of God's Kingdom, to all sorts of People and Worshippers, that are
(...) this Nation; and let him mind God's Wisdom, how to keep the Nations in
peace and good order, in all outward and civil Affairs, between man and man,
and between one sort of People and another, that none destroy each others
persons or estates, nor be Oppressors one of another in outward and earthly
Matters, and that is the place and privilege of a just King and Ruler upon
Earth; and to leave Faith and Worship, and Duty toward God, as every one is
persuaded in their own Consciences is the right Way; whether they will read the
Common Prayer, or Preach and Pray after the order of the Directory, or
otherwise; Or whether they will meet in silence without words; and let all
these enjoy their way of Religion and Worship in outward peace, and not kill
one another about their Religion, Worship, Church and Ministry, nor imprison
and persecute one another about these things; but let them all be preserved as
men, living in peace one with another in all outward relations, and yielding
Subjection to good Laws which concern their outward man, and their peace and
well-being, as Subjects of a Nation; but there ought to be no Law of Bondage
and Force, nor violent Impositions by any man concerning Religion; for the Lord
alone is sufficient to give Prescriptions and Laws to his People, how he may be
served and worshipped; and this is the way of good Government in this Nation,
that only the outward man in outward things be Governed, and all Matters of
Conscience in spiritual things be left unto God, that his Spirit may therein
only rule and have the pre-eminence; and if the King do Rule thus, he may be
more blessed; and in that this Nation has his word for LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE,
it is expected; for because this has been wanting, (to wit) the allowance of
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE in spiritual Matters, because of this, have been much
strife, and contention, and heart-burnings in the Nation, while some Sects of
People have been tolerated and upheld, and others persecuted for their
Religion-sake by Law; and this was one of the chief causes wherefore the
Presbyterians (so called) first raised War against the Bishops, even because
they could not be tolerated, but were persecuted, while the other were guarded
and defended by Law; and this was a great cause of enmity, which if the
Presbyterians (so called) could have had Liberty and Tolleration at that day,
for their Worship and Faith, it is possible the War against the Bishops had not
so far proceeded; though when they had gotten Victory, they were no less
furions toward the Bishops to destroy them, than the other had been once
against them; and this arose by reason of persecuting for Conscience sake,
because all had not Liberty in the exercise of Spiritual things, which if the
King had declared it ^^at day Equal Liberty to both, in Matters of their Faith
and Religion, and yet ruled over both in outward affairs, and had Authority
over the Persons and Estates in Matters not related in Spiritual Worship, but
left them therein free, and in their Religion; by such means the War might have
been stopped, and not proceeded so far as it did, and into such destruction;
and this being now well considered, may be an Example to prevent the like
hereafter: So that (...) ^^y, it cannot be for his safety, nor for the good of
the Kingdoms, to Tolerate some sorts of People, and Religions, and Persecute
others, for that will be the very cause of strife among men, it will provoke
one sort to destroy another, and it will provoke the Lord God against the King
and his Government, to destroy them both; Therefore to reduce the Government of
the Church into the State, as it stood under the Bishops in his Fathers days,
and to prohibit all others that may differ in Judgment from that, this is not
the way for Peace and happiness in these Nations, nor the way that will be
blessed to the Government; neither can the Bishops and Prelates justly
themselves desire it, that only they and their Church Government, should be
Imposed and Tolerated, and all besides Prohibited; for this is not doing to
others as they would be done unto; and I may hope that their suffering this
diverse years, may have taught them the worth of Liberty to themselves, and so,
that they will allow to others (if it be in their power) the same which they
have desired themselves, in their time of suffering; and they having tasted of
some Subjection in Adversity, they know the better how to behave themselves in
time of prosperity; and they may compare others with their own state, and may
judge that others will as much desire Liberty, and from as good Principles, i^
their Worship and Faith, as themselves would have enjoyed it in times past; and
they may have learned to be good to others in that case, for which themselves
have suffered, and not cause others to suffer for that thing about which
themselves have suffered: And I do conclude, that he may justly and with more
safty and happiness to his Government, Tolerate and Allow LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE in the Exercise of Faith and Worship toward God, in all spiritual
Matters, even to all sorts of People in this Nation, and let him defend their
Persons and Estates, from the wrong one of another, by wholesome Law; and let
each sort defend themselves in their Faith and Worship, in their Church and
Ministry, by their soundest Arguments, and the best spiritual weapons they
have; and thus should it be blessed to the Government: And whatsoever sort or
sect of People are not contented with this, that is to say, to Allow the same
Liberty to others in Faith and Worship, which they do desire themselves, are
not worthy themselves to be allowed Liberty unto; and this every reasonable man
may judge.

Quer. 7. Lastly, what is your Judgment; (if ye da^e declare it) concerning
the Times and Seasons, and the present motions of them? And what are your
Observations of the present proceedings? Are the present Times and seasons, and
the proceedings and transactions in Mercy, or in Judgment to the King, and his
Subjects? If in Mercy, to whom is it Mercy? And if in Judgment, who are they to
whom these things are so? If ye be not faint-hearted declare your minds, now in
your last days (as many think) for many say, that your ruin is nigh come; and
if it be not so, many are deceived?

Answ. Yes, we dare declare our judgment concerning the Times and seasons, for
we have received the Judgment of Truth in our Spirits, and never have been, nor
are we afraid to declare the Truth, so far as Truth is necessary to be
declared; and we say the times and seasons are in the hand of the Lord, and the
motions of them are very swift; and the Lord gives to whom, and takes from
whom, (times and seasons) as he pleases, even as it were in an instant ^oth
the Lord give, and change, and alter, Times, Authorities, and things; and
mortal man ought not to glory in Times or Seasons, as if they were certain and
unchangeable to him; for behold the Motions of Times flies away, and Seasons
removes their course, and the most confident of men have no certainty thereof,
and that because they are in the hand of the Lord that turns them about, and
often contrary to men's will and pleasure; and therefore, (...) every man be
good in his Time, and fulfill she Will of the Lord in his Season, before Ti^^
and Season be no more, but removed from them.

And as for our Observations, they are very many of the present Proceedings and
Transactions: First, we do observe, that there is not any thing of all these
Transactions that are come to pass, but there is a secret hand of the Lord God,
through them, and in them; either doing of them, or suffering of them to be
done; and either as the cause by secret purpose, or as the means of their
accomplishment; it is not without him that these things comes to pass, but his
Eye and his Hand is over them, and that man is only blessed which has respect
unto him in all these things, that he may do or suffer for the Lord, and that
he may not rebel against him, in what is brought to pass by him.

Secondly, we observe how that the Lord has given unto many men a Day and a
Time, and tried them what they would do for him, and whether they would rule in
Righteousness, and in Equity, but many have proved deceitful, and not answered
to the Lord what he expected from them; and therefore the Lord has confounded
them in their Counsels, and suffered them to clash one against another, and
made them overthrow one another; and one self-seeking man has been the ruin of
another (as bad as himself) and even many by their own proceedings have
prepared a rod and judgment even for themselves, and through their blindness of
heart, which they have been given up to, because of their wickedness, they have
destroyed themselves, and given their very Enemies advantage over them to
afflict them, and this we have observed of present Proceedings.

Thirdly, We observe that there is a rude profane spirit, highly abounding
thoughout this Nation, that brings forth much bad fruit, as drunkenness and
wickedness in a great measure, which may justly provoke the Lord to wrath and
indignation against the Land, if it be not forsaken, though it be lifted up in
this wonderful rudeness in a pretense of glorying on the behalf of the King,
and his Government; yet it vexes the Lord and it works Sorrow in the hearts of
many Sober People who are pondering what the End of this Government may be,
that is thus rude and profane in its beginning, saying in their hearts, how
shall the Lord bless these proceedings, and make the end of them happy, which
are thus void of the fear of God in the first part of them; and if a stop be
not put, and a limitation upon the Spirit, it will provoke the Lord to work
sudden destruction, and overthrow the Nation.

Fourthly, We observe, that many Hypocrites and double-minded men, are afraid,
and terror has Surprised them, who have taken the profession of such or such a
Religion, on them for a Cloak and has been in the show of Righteousness for
earthly ends, such are afraid, and their ends are frustrated, and they are
turned into confusion and a profane Spirit abounding over their Hypocrisy,
and such will deny their Principles, and their Faith, and will fawn and flatter
to save themselves, and this is abominable; but men that have been and are
upright and sincere toward God in their way, they are not afraid, but are
confident in the Lord, and are given up in his will, whether to do or suffer
for his Name sake, and they have no terror upon them because of any guilt,
because they have been upright, in that way which they were persuaded to be
right, and such live in a patient and quiet life, and are contented whatsoever
comes to pass, because they have the Witness, that they have not followed their
Religion for self ends, nor taken the name of Righteousness for a Cloak, as
many others have, upon whom this overturning falls very heavy. And these
things, with many more the like, we do observe from the present transactions
which are fallen out in Mercy to some, and in Judgment to others, even a Judgment
upon all that do not fear the Lord, but walk in wickedness, and that have been
Hypocrites, and Hard-hearted, and Cruel, and to all that do not repent of their
sins, these things, and the end of them, are, and shall be great Judgments, and
shall be turned into bitterness, even their joy, and rejoicing, into howling,
and great Lamentation, this shall be the end unto all the Ungodly; but unto all
that fear the Lord, and depart from Iniquity, even unto such the end of all
these things shall be good, even Mercy ^^d Peace, and their Sorrow shall be
turned into Joy.

And as for us, we are not faint-hearted, though it be supposed that we are in
our last days, and as though our ruin were nigh to come; but we believe
otherwise, for we have clearness of Conscience toward God and all men, and
walk in Faith and patience, and knowing this assuredly, that if we be
persecuted and afflicted in Person or Estate, by you that are now in power, yet
it is for Righteousness s^ke, and for the Lords sake, and not for the guilt of
any Rebellion against you, that you have, or ever can have to charge upon us,
for we cannot be found in these things; for we can neither secretly flatter to
make peace with you, neither can we ^^^^ly rebel against you, or resist you;
but as our right from God and you, we claim the LIBERTY of the Exercise OF OUR
CONSCIENCES, in the Matters of Faith, and a holy Life toward God, that we may
mind the things of God's Kingdom, and may so walk and worship, as to have peace
with God in our Consciences, that no burden of Sin and Iniquity may lie upon
us, but that we may Live and Die in Peace with God, this is all we claim of
you: But and if you will not allow it us, but will persecute us, and seek to
destroy us only for our Conscience Sake, and because of our Faith and Religion,
if you do make and execute Laws against us, in opposition to the Law of our
God, that you may take an occasion against us to destroy us because thereof,
then Innocent blood and cruel suffering will be upon you, and the weight of it
will (...) into confussion, when your measure is full; and if you should
destroy these vessels, yet our Principles you can never extinguish, but they
will live for ever, and enter into other bodies to live, and speak and act
through other vessels; for our Principles are standing and unchangeable through
Ages, and Generations, and may be clouded but can never be extinguished, for
every man has a Light in his Conscience which Christ has enlightened them
withal; which Light reproves Men for sin, and with it they know they should not
Lie nor Swear, nor be Drunk, nor deal doubbly, nor walk in any sin: but and if
they do these things, and live contrary to the Light in their own Consciences,
then they deny Christ and are unbelievers, and they are condemned, and have
trouble in their Consciences; but if men do own that Light in their Consciences
which does reprove them for sin, then it leads them to Repentance, and to the
forsaking of all sin, and they cease from all Iniquity, and receive Jesus
Christ and his blood to cleanse them. And the Light of the Spirit of God leads
them into all Truth, to do, and speak the Truth in all things, and then he has
peace with God in his Conscience: And these are some of our Principles, which
can never be Subdued by all the Powers of the Earth, though the vessels which
now retain these were cut off, yet these Principles are unchangeable in
themselves, and can never be extinguished; so that this our Religion cannot
come to ruin, but they that think so, they are indeed deceived, and whosoever
shall seek to destroy that which Gods purpose is to exalt, woe shall be unto
them; and as they purpose toward others so shall it come upon them from the
Lord in his Day and Season.

And thus I have answered the Queries directed to the Quakers, and subscribed,
Tr^^ite hanc Amico Regis, and I do desire that the Friend of the King, and all
his Friends, and he himself, may receive and read over these my Answers, and
may consider them in coolness and moderation, for they may be to their
Edification if they be Sober minded. I am a Friend unto all men as men and
creatures, and a lover of all Souls, and am in Principles and Practices one of
them scornfully called, a Quaker.

E. B.

An Objection Answered, concerning the Kings Supremacy.
ANd whereas it is Objected by some, Whether or no we will be obedient Subject,
accepting of him as our Lawful King, and own his Supremacy, and will obey him
willingly or unwillingly, and be Subjects in Conscience, or against our
Consciences?

Answ. It is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, to be obedient
Subjects to whatsoever Power or Authority of man, or men, as have been in being
over us, either by doing and fulfilling their just Commands, or by suffering
under their Commands which have been unjust, and thus we are persuaded and
resolved in the Lord to continue, even to be obedient to the Commands of Men in
Authority, which are just, and according to our Consciences; but and if any
thing or matter be required of us, and Imposed upon us, which is contrary to
the Law of God and our Consciences, that we must fulfill by Suffering whatsoever
is put upon us by him, or any under him; and so we own him and accept him, as
knowing and believing, that he is set to rule in this Nation, not without, but
by, and according to the Purpose of the Lord, and that he has secretly
purposed and suffered the accomplishing of these things; and thus we account
that he is CHIEF MAGISTRATE, because these things are effected through the
Lord's Power, who does whatsoever he will, and we do own that he is set and
proclaimed to be the Head and Supreme over this Nation, in Civil and Outward
Affairs and Matters, and in those things that are related to the outward man;
and all his Commands which are just we can willingly be subject unto, even in
Conscience, and all hi^ Commads which are otherwise, we are willingly and in
our Consciences contented in patience to bear what men shall put upon us; and
thus we do accept of the King and his Government, as he, and it, are according
to God, and answerable unto him, if it be so, we are willingly, and in
Conscience accepting thereof, and shall be obedient Subjects thereunto; but if
it be otherwise, that is to say, if he Rule in Tyranny and Oppression, and his
Government be unjust and unrighteous, and contrary to God, then we must give
our witness against him, and it; yet not so, as by outward opposition, and
rebellion, to seek the overthrow of him or the Government by Carnal Weapons;
but shall patiently bear, and that for Conscience sake, all that cruelty, and
injustice, and suffering, which can be imposed upon us: And as for owning his
Supremacy, if it be meant his Supremacy over the Church, as if he were Head of
the Church, and were Supreme Lawgiver and Judge, and King in Church State, as
to give and prescribe Law for Worship and Faith, and to pass all Judgment in
matters that are Spiritual, and appertaining to Conscience, and about the
things of the Kingdom of God; if by his Supremacy this be meant, and intended
thus; we cannot own his Supremacy, but must deny it, and we do ascribe
Supremacy only to JESUS CHRIST, in, and concerning all these things mentioned,
and that he alone is Judge, and King, and Lawgiver in all the matters
concerning his own Spiritual Kingdom, and he must prescribe for us Faith and
Worship and must be the only Judge in all cases of Conscience and Spiritual
matters, and not Charles Stuart King of England, etc. not any other man upon
the Earth; for let it not be understood that we deny his Supremacy in
opposition to the Pope of Rome, as if we should own the Popes Supremacy over
the Church, for that we do not, nor any man upon the Earth, as I have said, but
only JESUS CHRIST is principal in that relation, and to him we give the
Dominion in all the cases of his own Kingdom; but if owning his Supremacy it be
intended, whether we will own him to be Head and Ruler, as in the affairs of
his Nation, pertaining to men's Persons and Estate, without any relation to the
Worship of God, or matters of Conscience, so we own him, as I have before
mentioned, and must be Subject for: Conscience Sake in fulfilling all his
commands whatsoever, either by doing or suffering; and this is our principle
which we are persuaded in, and resolved herein to continue and abide.

To Charles Stuart, who is Proclaimed King, and to all You that are called and
known by the Name of Royal-Party and Cavaleirs, and who have Suffered in your
Cause, and for your Principles
Friends,
THe Lord God who is greater than all, that does whatsoever he will, has given
you a Day, and you are raised up again out of your Suffering State; Oh that you
would consider the end of it, and wherefore the Lord has done, and suffered it
to be done; and that you would make right use and improvement unto God and this
Nation of this your Deliverance and Promotion; for certainly there has been an
absolute purpose in the Counsel of the Lord, that these things should be thus,
and his hand has even suffered it to be accomplished, even in a strange and
mavelous way, through the confounding of your Enemies, and giving of them up
to the folly of their own hearts in their Councils, that they should destroy
themselves, and bring in you over their heads, and make you a Mountain, and
break down their Mountain, and make it as a low Valley; and certainly these
things are in the Justice of the Lord's hand, and it will be well for you if
you can consider it, and acknowledge it: You have been a suffering People it is
true, for these diverse years, and Originally your suffering was partly just as
from the Lord; for there was a great measure of Iniquity and Oppression
fulfilled in this Nation on the part of Kings, and your Sins were great against
God; wherefore the Lord was Just in bringing Affliction and Tribulation upon
you, to humble you, and he might justly raise up others to reprove you, and to
subdue you before them for a season; and thus far even because of your
Iniquities which were great in the sight of God, your Sufferings and
Afflictions were Just: But as for those, that the Lord made use of in the
Execution of your Afflictions, they are not justified in all what they did
toward you, but they went beyond (in Violence and Cruelty upon you) what the
Lord called them unto; and thereby they brought a great measure of guilt of
Injustice and Cruelty upon their own Consciences, in proceeding toward you
beyond Justice and Equity: Though some of them might be more sincere and
upright in the beginning of these things, when they began to War against you;
yet it too well appears that many of them soon lost the Just Cause, and began
to have respect to your Estates and Titles of Honor, more than to free the
Nation from Oppressions and Vexations, though they pretended much thereunto,
yet so it was that they became foully corrupted in their way; and though they
Subdued you, yet did they not free the Nation, but became Oppressors themselves
no less than others before them, and they possessed your Riches, and Titles,
(yea and in great measure Unjustly) and then were exalted in Ambition and
Vainglory, and began to strive amongst themselves who should be the greatest,
and set up this, and the other, and some cried one way of Government, and
others another, and they pulled down and set up as they would, and cast down
and exalted whom they would; and thus they continued for some years, rolling up
and down in Confusion, and yet the Nation under very great Oppression and
Vexations, each one crying his Burden was the greatest, while they were exalted
in their Pride and Riches, and lived at ease, not remembering the end wherefore
they were first raised, nor keeping to sincere Principles, but caused them to
suffer deeply that were faithful to the Lord, and walked with him in sincerity;
and all this while you were as asleep, and not thought upon by them, as if ever
you should call them to an Account; but they thought that their strength was
great, and their number many, and therein they gloried, having no true respect
unto the Lord; and because thereof the Lord justly confounded them in their
Counsels, when their measure was full, and made them weak as Water; and you are
now justly raised up to reprove and correct them, even those that have abused
Gods Mercies to them, and that have forgotten God and sought to exalt
themselves forever, and had no respect unto the Lord and his People; though
these things are not said of them, to upbraid them, nor to kindle your Fury
against them, to add Misery upon their Affliction, but they have already been
told of their Treachery, and what would come to pass; And Oh, that they could
now humble themselves before the Lord, and confess to the justice of this their
Affliction; they might yet partake of his Mercy, through great Judgments.

And as for you, Oh, that you would consider these things, and by whose purpose
you are restored, and from what cause, and for what end it is accomplished! Oh
that you would mind what your Work now is, and that you would not exceed your
permission; for you are raised up for an end, and there is a Work for you to
do; Oh that you could do it with respect unto the Lord, it should be the better
for you; Oh those men that have long sat as Princes in this Nation, and
pretended, and vowed, and promised Reformation in Church and State, but they
have not done it as they ought, but as great Oppressions and Injustice, as
great Superstitions and Idolatries both in Church and State, were continued and
carried on in their days, as in days before them; Oh how abominable have
these things been! (multitude of words might demonstrate) but now their Reproof
and judgment is come, and their Fall is just upon them; who should pity them,
or mourn for them, seeing they have deserved all this and much more which has
yet happened unto them? as some of them may confess: and those things (their
Treachery, Unfaithfulness; and Oppressions I mean) must needs be avenged one
way or another; How often has it been foretold them, yea, it has been often
said unto them, That God would bring them down, and destroy their Power? they
have been told, that these things were not right, neither could they escape
unavenged; and it now appears as if the day were come: and if you must be their
Executioners, and must execute the Wrath upon them, who shall prevent you? or
say unto you, stay your Hand? Or rather, who of them that see these things,
shall not be patient while you take vengeance for the Lords sake, and for the
sake of his People, whom they have long vexed and oppressed? Nay, who of the
Lords People shall not say, Let the Lord's Will be done, and his Justice
executed upon his Enemies? If this be your work that you are called to, must it
not go on till it be finished? They have been hard-hearted and Oppressors
toward others; and by a hard-hearted People, may not the Lord justly deal with
them, and be a Plague unto them in that very manner, that they have sinned
against him? for this is usual with the Lord, even to destroy Oppressors by the
Wickedness of others; and often he rebukes the Sin of a People, by a People as
bad as themselves; he may justly give unto Men from the Hands of others, what
they love in their own Hearts: and even as those Men have loved Pride and
Ambition over others, and Oppression and Hard-heartedness toward others; even
so, and much more may justly be done unto them, and that according to the Will
of the Lord; and if this be your Work designed you by the Eternal Hand, who
shall prevent you? But yet, Oh that you would consider, and that you would have
respect unto the Lord, lest you out-go the end of your Restoration: You would
indeed be happy, if you could forgive your Enemies, if you could reward them
Good for their Evil; and you would be happy if you could not exceed the measure
of your Permission: be not too hard-hearted toward them, but show Mercy. And
Oh you must take heed lest you cause the Righteous to suffer with the Wicked,
and that you cause not the Innocent to Groan and Mourn in your execution of
God's purpose upon the Ungodly, you must be aware lest while you punish
Offenders, you smite not them that are free; Oh that you had hearts this to
understand, and that you could walk in the path of fulfilling God's pleasure,
and not go further, (I mean) though you may be raised to be a Plague upon
Hypocrites, and Disobedient and Treacherous men, and to avenge God's Cause and
his Peoples; but you are not raised to be Oppressors of the Lord's People, nor
to destroy his Heritage, this is not your Work; God has not called you to
destroy and persecute them that fear his Name, and tremble at his Word, though
you have power to be avenged on your Enemies: And Oh that your Hearts could
understand this, that you might distinguish in your Proceedings, between
executing of Justice upon Transgressors, and Persecution for Conscience sake;
the one you have to do, but the other is forbidden you of the Lord, and you
ought not to do it; for if you persecute any for good Conscience sake, or
because they are of such and such an Assembly of People, and worship in such a
Way; if you inflict Tribulation upon any because hereof, or because they are
such or such in their Profession and Religion, then you persecute for
Conscience sake, and you go beyond the End, and by the Path for which you were
raised; and if you turn your Hand and Power to persecute for good
Conscience Sake, then you divert the End and Purpose of this your Restoration,
and the Lord will require it of you, if that you go beyond his Permission and
Assignment, and beyond his Pleasure in persecuting his People, and so turn your
Power to a wrong Use and End; O then the Lord shall suddenly confound you, and
he will find out Instruments that shall fulfill his Wrath, and Justice upon you,
as he has found you fit to execute Wrath upon others; and therefore do not, O
do not persecute any for Conscience Sake; if you have nothing against them but
concerning their Faith and Worship, and their Religion, do not lay your Hand
upon them, nor let them be touched; for if you do, the Lord will take it as a
heinous Offense against him, and in this life, or hereafter, he will plague you
for it, and you shall not escape unpunished: and therefore I say once more to
you, as the advice of your Friend, Let no Man be persecuted for his Faith, and
for his Religion-sake, but make a difference between inflicting Wrath upon
Offenders that have been Hypocritical and Deceitful, and that have made
themselves rich through the ruins of others, and that will bow to any thing, or
any kind of Worship for their own ends; and between such as have a Principle
and do stand by it, and are humble and acted in the Principles of Sincerity,
and follow that way of Religion which they suppose, and are persuaded is the
best, and the rightest; all such ought to have Liberty under you in their
Profession, and Faith, and Worship, and ought not to be persecuted while they
live peaceable as men with one another, and toward all men; and the God of
Heaven requires it of you, and your Standing, or your Fall, the Blessing or the
Curse unto you depends hereupon; and this you shall find to be true unto you in
the day of God's Righteous Judgments: O therefore be not stout against the
Lord, but fear and tremble before him; let his Dread be upon your Spirits, and
do not offend him, nor provoke him against you, and this Nation, lest he tear
you to pieces, and number you for Destruction, lest he overturn you suddenly,
and deface your Glory in its morning: Oh how happy would you be if you would
regard the Lord and reverence him; and take him before you, and not go beyond
in any thing what his Purpose and Pleasure is, who has given you this one Day
to try you, if so be that any of you shall learn his Fear and turn from your
Iniquities, that you may be blessed, and not confounded: Oh therefore consider
what the Will and Purpose of the Lord is toward you and wherefore you are
raised up, and may fulfill his purpose, and not your own: Oh then this Day
should be made happy unto you; but the contrary works. I mean, if you do
Oppress, and Persecute, and seek to destroy his Heritage, and rule in
Oppression and Tyranny, then the God of Heaven shall cut your Day short, and
deliverance he will bring to this poor Nation without you, and even contrary to
you, and his hand shall be turned upon you, and your Mountain though never so
great, and high, shall be laid low, and an Infant of the heavenly Birth shall
leap over it; and shall say, Where is that lofty Babel that exalted it self
against my God?

And as for us, we are a very poor contemned and despised People; even since we
were a People unto this very day, and have nothing at this present, not
heretofore to glory in from any Power that has ruled: but the Power, Spirit,
and Presence of God in our Tribulations, Afflictions, Persecutions and unjust
Sufferings; these things have been our Portion, even from all; all have trodden
upon us in Contempt and Scorn, and accounted us as Sheep for the slaughter, and
we have not to glory in any Government that has been since we were a People;
we cannot justify one or another, but we say, they have all been Oppressors,
and we have groaned with deep sighs to the Lord under the Burden of their
unrighteous Dealing; and herein we assent with you, if you say they have been
unjust Men, we say the same; and if you say their Government has been
Oppression and Unequal, we say the same; if you say you have suffered Cruelly
and Unrighteously by them, we say the same; if you say they have Ruled by Will
and Force, more then by Law and Equity, we verify the same; and if you can say
you have suffered Afflictions, and Tribulation by them, so have we in another
manner, and far more unjustly: Wherefore we cannot justify them, nor will not
plead for them in opposition to you; but we partly believe we may receive as
much Equity and good Reason from some of you, as we did from some of them; and
thus we have been a suffering People even without cause: And at this day we are
threatened by the rage of Men as if we should be cut off and destroyed; but we
regard not these things, but do respect the Lord, whom we fear and worship in
our Hearts; and if we outwardly perish among them that may perish, yet it is
for Righteousness sake, and because of the matters of God's Kingdom, which we
hold; and if you do destroy us for this cause we are clear, and Innocent Blood
will be upon you, and the guilt thereof will sink you into misery here, or
hereafter. Oh take heed and defile not your selves, nor load your Consciences
with our guiltless Sufferings, as many others have done before you, even to
their ruin and woeful destruction; you are yet in a great measure clear from our
Oppressions; we have not much Iniquity yet to charge upon you in our Cause of
Afflictions: Oh it will be well for you if you keep your selves clear, the less
will be your Judgment, and the better success will you have in you Cause; for
Friends, the weight of Innocent Blood it has a loud cry, and God will hear it;
and if you burden your selves with it, it will soon overweigh you: therefore
keep clear, and condemn them by your Practices, that have said, they would not
persecute for good Conscience sake, but have done it, even contrary to all
Pretenses and Engagements; and if you who profess not so much in words toward
that thing, would do it; how should your Practice condemn their Hypocrisy in
the sight of God, Men, and Angels? But however I warn you, and do leave it at
your door; and do say unto you, Persecution for Conscience sake, is the crying
Sin, which draws down Vengeance upon Kings and Governments; be you warned
through the fall of others, least confusion come upon you, as it has come upon
many others for that cause: and be not too confident in your way, nor too
furious against your Enemies, but remember your breath is in your Nostrils, and
he that gave it you can soon take it away

And as for you, we have no Enmity toward any of you, nor do we seek the hurt
of your Persons, nor can we rise up in Rebellion against you, or seek your
Destruction by Craft or Policy; neither indeed can we seek Covenant or League
with you by flattery: It is true, you are in Authority over us outwardly, and
as you are so, we shall yield subjection to you in any of your just Commands;
and in all things it is our Principle to obey you, either by doing or
suffering; yet we cannot bow, nor fawn, nor flatter, nor deny our Principles,
nor our Religion of which we are persuaded by the Spirit of God in our
Consciences, that it is right and according to God; but I say, we cannot revoke
our Principle, neither for advantage to our selves, nor yet to save our lives;
you must find us constant, and not changeable as others are, who turn every way
for their own advantage, and cry up this or the other, and pray and fight on
the behalf of any thing which may make for their advantage, but God is grieved
with such Spirits; yet we are otherwise minded, and must only own your
Government and Authority; as it is just, and brings forth Righteousness, so we
can own it, and bow before it; but as otherwise, if it be Unjust and
Oppression, we must patiently suffer under it, whatsoever you have power to do;
and this is all the Peace we can make with you, or the Engagement that we can
bind our selves in toward you, though we cannot but own that this Day is given
you, either in Mercy, or in Judgment to you; yea, and we cannot but own, that
you may be God's Executioners; yea, what if we say, That you may be raised up
to avenge our Cause upon our Oppressors, though still we must bear witness
against that Wicked, Loose, Profane Spirit, that lives and abounds in some of
you and among you, and works Unrighteousness even to the dishonor of God,
throughout this Nation; this Spirit we bear witness against, that it is evil,
and brings forth bad effects in every City and Town throughout the Land;
whereby the Lord is provoked against you, and this Nation in an high measure:
Oh that you would consider of it while there is time, to be corrected and
amended, before it has brought forth unpardonable Iniquities, which it hastens
to fulfill, and draws down Wickedness as with Cords! Oh the Excessiveness in
drinking, and other Vanities! Oh what destroying of the good Creatures! It
grieves the Hearts of the Righteous, and vexes the Sober-minded to consider
it: and also there is a great deal of Hypocrisy and deceitful-heartedness
amongst many; I have considered this thing, and it is a Vexation to the Lord,
and cannot but be detestable to you; even in that many contrary to their
Principles, Engagements, Promises, and Covenants, do now cry you up for to save
themselves, their Lives and Estates who have been deeply engaged against you
publicly and privately, and yet now in Hypocrisy are fallen in with you; such
their Proceedings are loathsome to God, and your present Cause is no better
because of such; though as for some of you, that have stood to your Principle,
and suffered for it this long while, in your State, you are more honorable and
rather justified.

Oh, let the King fear and reverence the eternal God, knowing he is but mortal
Man, and his Breath in his Nostrils; and let him keep himself clear from
Persecution for Conscience Sake; for that will destroy Kings and Governments,
who are guilty thereof: and let him be meek and sober, and take the Lord before
him in all his Proceedings, or else he cannot prospe^; his Day, and Time is now
present, that God's purpose is to try him, if he Rule in Righteousness and
Truth, in Equity and Justice, he may be blessed; But if otherwise he Govern,
and walk not in reverence to the Lord, and spare his People; the God of Heaven
shall rebuke him, and deliver his People another way. Consider of these things
in a sober mind, read them over in meekness.

From a Lover of your Souls, E. B.


This was written about the middle of the 3d Month, called May.

A few Queries I do return to you, for you to consider and answer, relating to
the present Affairs and Proceedings in this Nation, even to all you, that are
called and known by the Name of Royallists and Cavaliers, that are really so,
and have Suffered for that Cause.
Quer. 1. TO what do you attribute the first Cause of the advancement of this
present Government? And whether or no ye believe, that there was any thing of
the Purpose and Hand of the Lord, by intending and bringing these things about,
without expectation by you, and contrary to the great strength of your Enemies,
who are suddenly of a great and high Mountain, made a low Valley; and you of a
low and trodden down Valley, suddenly raised up into a great Mountain? And to
what do you attribute this Changing and overturning of Power, and Authority,
and Rulers, even them that have been as Princes and Potentates, to be Rebels;
and them that have been accounted as Rebels and Traitors, to be Rulers and
Governors? I say, To what do you attribute these things, on their first Cause,
whether to the Policy of some, or to Accident, or to good Fortune (as some
call it?) Or whether you believe in your Consciences, that the Lord God by his
secret Power has purposed and suffered the effecting and accomplishing of
these things?

Quer. 2. And if you believe that there is any thing of the Hand and Purpose of
the Lord, in doing, or suffering these trans actions; then wherefore, and for
what Cause do you believe has he done these things? Is it because you are more
righteous in the sight of God than they who are cast out before you; and
because he loves you, and hates them? Or whether it is not because they have
proved Treacherous and Deceitful, and not answered unto the Lord what he
required of them, but sought themselves, and forgot the Lord, and took your
Estates and Titles of Honor upon them, and pretended a better Government, and
to govern better than that way of Monarchical Government, but did not, but were
Oppressors even as others before them? And is not this the Just Cause,
wherefore the Lord has suffered these Overturnings? May not we justly (that
are neither of you) Attribute this to be the very Cause, wherefore the Lord
has brought them down, and raised up you over them? whereas if they had
repented of their Sins, and been faithful to what the Lord required of them,
and to what themselves pretended to, and had indeed Governed Justly and
Righteously, and freed the Oppressed, and answered unto the Lord in an equal
Government according to his Law; whether may it not be believed, that these
things had never thus been brought to pass?

Quer. 3. Whether or no you believe that there is a GOD so mighty in Power, and
so wise in Counsel and Purpose, that can Turn and Overturn you and your Power,
and lay you low even as others, and raise up others who are now as low as you
have been for diverse years? Whether you believe there is a GOD, that by his
Power can effect such a thing, and accomplish it in his Wisdom? And whether do
you not believe in your Consciences, that he will do it, if you do not please
him and fear his Name, and forsake all Wickedness; and if you be Oppressors and
Cruel-hearted as others have been, and do not rule in Righteousness and Equity?
And whether you believe not, that the Lord does watch over you, with his Eye
that sees you, and marks all your ways? Whether do you consider, that the Lord
looks for good fruit from you, and that you should free the Land from
Oppression? which if you answer not the Will of the Lord in what he requires;
Whether do not you believe, that he is so wise in Counsel, and mighty in Power,
that he can and will, whether by Means or without Means, overturn and confound
you and your Government?

Quer. 4. Whether you believe in your Consciences, and do acknowledge unto God,
that there was any thing of his JUSTICE in your late Sufferings for these
diverse years? Or whether all of them, or no part of that Suffering, which has
been upon you, were any whit Just as from the Lord? And whether there was not a
great Measure of Iniquity filled up in Monarchical Government; and a great
Measure of Oppression upon the poor People of this Nation by their Lords and
great Men? And whether this Rebuke and Reproof, that you have had in this
measure of Suffering, that has been upon you, was not in some measure Just as
from the Lord; that you might be humbled before him: though it is by me
acknowledged, That your Enemies (these I mean) who are now cast out before you,
brought great guilt upon themselves, in executing wrath upon you, in that and
because they proceeded further, and into more Bitterness, and Cruelty toward
you, then they had either Commission or Authority from God; But whether there
was not a Justice as from the Lord in that which partly befell you? And was not
his Hand many times against you in Battle, though Number nor Valor was not
wanting on your part? yet are not you sensible how by a secret Hand you were
often defeated, and Victory given to your Enemies; though the less in Number?
And were not these things in the Justice of the Lord's Hand? Whether do you not
believe it, and acknowledge it?

Quer. 5. Whether or no you do intend any Reformation from OLD Oppressions? Or
whether you intend to tread in the very steps and to walk in the very Path in
every Particular of Government, as it stood and was carried on in the beginning
of CHARLES the first his days? And whether you ought not in the sight of God
and before him, to consider how to relieve the Oppressed, and break off all
cruel Bonds of Injustice, and how a Government may be set up, which may be
answerable to the Lord, and not unto your own and other corrupted men's ends?
but if you shall do so, Whether do you answer the End, or deny the End,
wherefore the Lord has thus dealt with you, in giving of you this Day
unexpected and contrary to all your Enemies? And whether do you not believe,
that God has set you between Good and Evil, between Right and Wrong, between
doing of his Will and the will of the Devil, in the doing and fulfilling one or
the other by you, whether does not depend Happiness and Blessedness upon you,
or the Woe and the Curse, your Standing or your Fall, your Renown or your
Dishonor perpetually?

Quer. 6. Whether or on you do not believe in your Consciences, that the
Prosperity, and Continuance, and Happiness of this your Government to your
selves, the King, and Kingdoms; or the Unhappiness, Overthrow, Misery, and
Confusion of the Government it self, the King and these Nations does not stand
and wholly depend upon the Government and Authority, as it proceeds in
Justice, Righteousness, and Equity, or as it is, and proceeds contrary, and
is, Injustice, Oppression, and Unrighteousness? and if therein it stand,
whether do you believe in your Consciences that God shall Bless it, and Prosper
it, or he shall Destroy it and Confound it? For is not the Hand of the Lord
stretched forth in Mercy or in Judgment according as Men walk in his Fear, or
without his Fear? And whether if your CAUSE be Just in it self, yet if you walk
in Unrighteousness, and Ungodliness and Oppression, and Cruelty; whether may
not you thereby destroy your Cause, and lose it, and provoke the Lord to Anger
against you, and your Cause, to confound you and destroy you? and whether you
do seriously consider of this? And is it not your Duty so to do? and ought you
not to endeavor to stop this Flood of Wickedness that is broken out, which if
it be not stopped, may provoke God against you, to overthrow your proceedings?

Quer. 7. What is the very End of Rule and Government outward in this World?
And for what Cause did God at the first ordain it? whether upon this, or not,
really consider; Was it not that Evildoers might be punished; and them that
did Well might be praised? And was not the outward Law added because of
Transgression, and to punish Transgressors; but for the preserving the
Peaceable and Meek who walked in the Law of God; and when the People had
forgotten God, and his Law in their Hearts, and his Power that executed
Judgment and Mercy; Was it not then that the Law outward was added, and
committed into the Hands of Men to execute upon such as regarded not the Law of
God in their Hearts? And is not this the very End of Rule and Government and
Magistracy, at this very day? Whether ought it to be extended further than only
over and concerning the Affairs of the outward Man, to keep that in good order,
not to be a Load, and Burden, and Vexation, and Bondage upon a Nation and
People; but to suppress that which would load, and burden, and oppress the
Creation and People, that all men may be preserved in their just Right, and not
vex and oppress one another Persons and Estates? And if your Government be not
from this Ground and this very end, shall it ever be blessed and happy, either
to the Governors or Governed?

Quer. 8. What do you believe of, and concerning LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, in all
Matters appertaining to the Kingdom of God? Whether ought not you to give the
LIBERTY in your Government, that every Man and all sorts of People may believe
in God, and Worship God according as he or they shall suppose, and be persuaded
in his or their Consciences; provided still, that he and they annoy not, or
oppress his or their Neighbors Person or Estate? for if he or they do that,
then he and they go out of the true Faith, and breaks the Law of God; and the
outward Law is to take hold of him and them: But whether it is not a just
Right, and may justly be allowed from you, to all the People of this Nation, to
live under what Ministry, and under what Worship, and to go to what Assemblies,
as they shall suppose, or be persuaded in their Consciences is the best and
rightest? And whether or no it be not GOD's proper Right alone to be Ruler and
Lord over men's Consciences, and that he alone should Prescribe, Instruct, and
Teach Faith, Worship, and Duty in all things, in the matters of his own
Kingdom? And whether God has committed that Power and Authority, ever since
the days of Christ, to any Emperor, King, or other Ruler whatsoever, to be
Lord, and to exercise Lord-ship in and over Men's Consciences in the Matters
appertaining to God's Kingdom? And whether it is not God's only and alone
peculiar Privilege to be Lord there; and not any Man to impose one upon
another in Spiritual Matters? And whether you your selves would be imposed upon
in such case? (that is) Whether you would have such a Church Government and
Ministry, imposed upon you, upon such or such a Penalty, which you know, or
believe, or suppose is not right, nor according to God, nor suiting with your
own Consciences? And then how can you with good Conscience in the sight of God,
Impose upon others, whenas your selves would not be Imposed upon in such a Case?

Quer. 9. Whether or no, If that you cause any to suffer Loss, or to be
Afflicted in Person or Estate, for and because of their Conscience Sake (that
is) because they are of such a Faith, and of such a Worship, and of such a
Principle in Religious Matters, though different from others and from you; yet
if they walk Honestly, and Soberly, and Peaceably as Men, and not Plotting and
Contriving any Mischief in the Nation: I say, if you cause any such to suffer
upon that account, while you can charge nothing against them, but Matters of
Faith and Judgment, and Opinion in Spiritual things: Again, I say, Whether or
no such Suffering is not absolute Persecution, (and Innocent on his or their
part that so suffers any Injustice, Cruelty, Tyranny, and Oppression) on your
part that do Inflict? and will not the Lord require it of you, if you bring
Innocent blood, and Cruel Sufferings upon your selves? And is not that Innocent
blood which is spilt, and Unjust and Cruel Sufferings which are Inflicted upon
a Man or a People, for his and their Conscience, and Religions-sake, when no
matter of wrong or evil dealing amongst Men, and in that Relation, is or can be
charged upon them? And whether do you not believe, that God will avenge such a
Suffering, which is for Conscience Sake, upon the Heads of the Cursers and
Inflictors of it in his Day and Season?

Quer. 10. Whether or no you have not so much Reason and Conscience in you, as
will give you to discern, and cause you to put a difference between such, who
have acted and been zealous against you, from corrupt Principles of
Self-seeking, and have raised themselves into worldly Honor, and great Estates
through your Sufferings and Losses, and have lorded it over you in Ambition;
though now such may bow under you, and fawn upon you? I say, Whether will you
not, or whether ought you not, to put a difference both in respect of
guiltiness in your Cause of Suffering, and in respect of your dealing toward
them in Reward, and between such as have formerly acted against you, upon sober
reasonable Principles, and have not raised themselves to Honor and great
Riches, not by your Afflictions, but ceased to act against you, when they
perceived the Wickedness, and Injustice, and evil Proceedings of your Enemies?
(and many such there are) and whether or no you have not so much Reason and
Equity in your Consciences, as to put a difference between such in your
proceedings toward them?

Quer. 11. What is the truest Honor that can be given to the King, and his
Government; and wherein, and in what kind of Words, and Actions, and Practices
does true Honor consist? And whether or no you do believe in your Consciences,
that these kind of Practices, as drinking Healths and Bonfires, and this
exceeding Lewdness, and Wickedness brought forth in the Nation, by way of
Rejoicing for the King, and his Government, be true Honor, and rightly
honorable Proceedings, and Practices, to him and his Government? Or whether
these things and ways be not woefully dishonorable unto you and him, and this
whole Nation; and the Cause wherefore the Wrath of God may justly come upon the
whole Nation it self, if these things be not speedily repented of, and
forsaken? And whether the Life and Practice, and Subjection of an upright
QUAKER (so called) whose Principle is to obey all just Commands, and patiently
to suffer under all that which is unjust, and that lives in Meekness, and Fear,
and Soberness, and Love toward all Men; whether or no such Men, and such
Practices, are not more Honorable, and Blessed in the sight of God and Men,
than this kind of Rudeness and Wickedness, Singing, and Drunkenness, Ringing,
and Swearing, and hanging Ribbins and Feathers about themselves, and their
Horses, and many other things which are said to be done in honor to the King
and his Government? But whether there be not a Principle in your Consciences,
which does rather condemn your selves, than justify you for these things, and
rather justifies a Sober Life; and is not that more blessed?

Quer. 12. Whether or no all that cry you up, and your Government, do it
really, and out of good Conscience, and from Principles of Sincerity? Or
whether they are turned to you in Feignedness, and Hypocrisy, and to save
their Heads and Estates, which some of them have gotten, even such as have been
your Enemies, and Preached, and Prayed, and Fought against you, and now cry you
up, and pray for you; but whether can you trust that these will be faithful to
you, that thus deny their former Ways, and Religion, and Worship? And whether
thus to deny their Principles, their Faith, their Religion, their former Oaths,
and Engagements, is commendable, and Justifiable in the sight of God and you?
Or whether a Quaker (so called) that will stand to his Principles, and not deny
his Faith, nor Religion, though he suffer for it, nor will bow and bend in
Hypocrisy under every sort of Men, is not more justifiable and condemnable in
the sight of God and your Consciences also? I say, do not they condemn these
Hypocrites, that have fought against you, and prayed against you, and yet bow
under you with deceitful Hearts, in the time of their danger?

Quer. 13. Whether or no you do not believe, and know in your Consciences, that
the QUAKERS (so called) are a Sober Innocent, and Harmless People, and of an
upright Conversation; dealing justly toward all, and such as do not Envy the
Persons of any, nor Plot and Project Mischief toward you or any? And whether
if you should proceed to persecute, and seek to destroy such a People,
concerning whom you have such a witness in your Consciences, Justifying them as
aforesaid, would not be greatly unjust in the Sight of God, and the very Cause,
to provoke God to destroy you, and your proceeding, if so be that you persecute
them for their Conscience Sake, while they live Soberly and Uprightly as men,
and injureth no man's Person or Estate by their Religion?

Quer. 14. Whether or no you do not believe or may not have just Cause to
believe, that your present Proceedings are not, and may not prove to be the
very natural Cause of Outward, Visible, external Judgments upon you and the
Nation, even Judgments of Pestilence and Famine? And do not you proceed in the
very path hereof? Is not your spending the Creation in such Excessive manner,
in Eating and Drinking, and wasting the good Creation after this manner as you
do; Whether is not this a natural Cause to bring want and Poverty, and also
oppressing your very bodies with Excessiveness in Drunkenness, Inflaming your
selves through Excessiveness of Wine and Beer, and through the abounding of
uncleanness, and through excess; and as well Defiling, and Oppressing your
very Persons, as wasting the Creation by so doing; Whether this is not a very
Natural Cause to bring and beget Pestilence and Famine (besides your provoking
the Lord through this means) as being works in themselves hateful and
abominable in his sight, and for which Cause he may justly bring Wrath and
Judgments, even Plague and Famine, if there were no other Cause for it? And
whether you ought not seriously to Consider of this thing, and to Turn from
these Transgressions, which are Natural Causes of great Judgments, and also
provokes the Lord to hasten and inflict Judgment: Oh that the Sober minded
among you would lay this to heart.

Consider these Queries in the Spirit of Soberness, for they are worth your
regarding, and be not high-minded, nor wicked in your way, least the Lord who
has all Power in his hand meet you, and bring you down, and destroy your
Cause, which he can do if you provoke him.

This was written in the middle of the 3d Month called May, 1660. E. B.

TO THE Friends of Christ IN LONDON.
DEarly Beloved, and much Respected in the Lord, who are of the Election before
the World began, in everlasting Love do I often remember you, and your
Remembrance is Precious and Pleasant to me, even because the Lord has chosen
you, and called you into his mavelous Light, and formed you a People for
himself, to show forth his Praise; and herein I do behold you very often; for I
have seen you as a few pleasant Plants, in a great Forest of fruitless Trees;
and I have seen you as a speckled Bird among the Birds of the Wilderness, and
even as a choice Virgin are you among Harlots in that great City, even as a few
righteous Persons, whom the Lords regards, amongst a Multitude of thousands
of ungodly Men; thus have I seen you, and thus does the Spirit bring you into
my remembrance, with earnest desires to the Lord God for you, that you may be
preserved through all Times and Seasons, and over all this World, that you may
be always unto the Lord as a pleasent Garden, bringing forth Fruits of
Acceptance unto him, wherein his Soul may be delighted.

Now dear Friends live in the Seed of God, and walk in the Faith which
overcomes the World, and feel your Election in Christ Jesus, and grow up into
it daily, that you may have the Seal of Assurance, of Mercy and Peace, and
Favor with the Lord God: and wait that you may receive the Promise of the
Father, even of the same eternal Life, the same Spirit, the same Power of the
same heavenly Virtue into your Vessels, as was in Christ Jesus, in whom dwelt
the fullness of all things, and in us the Fullness is manifest by measure; and
this is the everlasting Comforter, that will abide with you for ever, even the
Appearance of Christ Jesus in Spirit (God with us) and the knowledge of him, as
he was before Abraham: and this Life Immortal born in us, and this Knowledge
revealed to us is everlasting, and remains for ever, and if ye be gathered up
into this, to know him, and to be in him that was in the beginning, then are
you builded upon the Rock, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against you,
neither can the Flood of Death break in upon you.

And Friends, walk in the Love of the Lord God, of which you have tasted in a
good Measure, and in the Meek and Peaceable Spirit of the Lamb be at Peace, and
in Unity with him, and one with another, even as Members of one spiritual Body,
that the Head may be honored through you, and that each Member serve one
another in Love, and Respect, not any exalted above what ought to be, nor
striving for prehemenence above one another, but that each Member may know his
Service, into which the Lord has called you; for that is a blessed Thing to
dwell in Love and Unity, and to know, and to be known to one another in the
Lord; and the contrary brings the Curse, where Strife and Enmity lodges,
that is excluded out of the Body, and is of the Kingdom of Death, and not of
the Lamb, but is of the Body of Antichrist; and not of his Body who is exalted
at God's right Hand. And see that you walk in all Wisdom, wait that you may be
wise; and that Wisdom it self may be justified of you by walking therein, and
then you will answer the divine Principle of Equity in your Enemies, and you
will cut off that which seeks' occasion against you, and turn backward the
slanderous Tongue, and confound the Destroyer which seeks occasion every
moment; Oh how precious is Wisdom, its a Pearl, its better then Strength or
Riches, Wisdom is the chief of the Gifts of God, it comes from the Fountain,
and it leads answerable unto him who is the Giver thereof; Oh wait for Wisdom,
that she may possess your Hearts, that she may go in and out before you, and
may be the beginning and end of all your works, and so shall your Enemies have
no occasion against you, but you shall be preserved in perfect Peace; for
Wisdom is a preserver of Soul and Body, even that Wisdom that is from above,
which is pure and peaceable, and leads into all the Ways of Peace, Truth and
Righteousness; and take heed that none be led aside into Snares, and
Temptations of the Wicked, and thereby make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, and the whole Work of God, and so lose your Joy and Peace in God,
and come short of an Immortal Crown, to which you are begotten; but be faithful
to God in all things, and deny not your Principle, nor the persuasion of God's
Spirit in your Consciences in any thing, neither for the Love nor Terror of
this World; for that is honorable to be faithful to a heavenly Principle, even
whether in death or life, to be found walking answerable unto the Will and Mind
of God, as you have received the knowledge thereof: but if any turn aside in
the day of Trial; the Lord will have no pleasure in them, but his displeasure
will be against them unto their Destruction; and such shall not be reckoned
among the Righteous, but they are blotted out of the Book of Life, even such
who are Hearers, and not Doers of the Will of God, whose Hypocrisy the Lord
will judge in the justness of his Judgments.

And live in Patience in all Tribulations, and in a still and quiet Spirit; for
the Lord is there, his Presence is enjoyed in a still and patient spirit; and
such receive of his Mercies, even of his hidden Manna: and heed not the
Tribulations that are in this World, but mind your Peace that is in Christ,
that is everlasting, and be settled in your minds, and fully persuaded to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, whether in Death, or Life; and let nothing
separate you from that Love of God which you have received; not Powers of
Darkness, neither Love nor Terror of this World; but keep in the Dominion of
God, that his Spirit may be lifted up in you as the Standard, even when floods
of Temptations and Persecutions arises against you, which are but for a
moment, and they will pass away, but Truth and Righteousness will remain, and
cannot be shaked; and the Purpose of the Lord is Good unto us, and not Evil,
not to destroy us, nor suffer us to perish; for we are his, and he has chosen
us, and he has placed his Name with us; and for his Name sake which we bear,
he will do great things for us; he will visit his Heritage, and defend it with
his mighty Power: and therefore be in Patience concerning all things whatsoever
that comes to pass.

And the Lord having brought us out of Egypt, and often appeared unto us in
great Love and Favor, and his Eye is over us at this day, and he has not thus
far delivered us now, to destroy us, if we live and walk in the Power of the
Lord God, and feel his Life and Virtue, and heavenly Authority in our own
Hearts; the Lord will not suffer our Enemies to prevail against us, so as
utterly to extinguish us from off the Earth, though some of us may be tried
far, if not to seal our Testmony with Blood; but if so, it shall hasten the
Glory of the Lord, and cause it to shine forth abundantly, and it will fill up
the Measure of Iniquity, to the utter destruction of Antichrist; and for this
cause our Lives are not precious unto us, nor do I desire further to give
Testimony by words, if the Testimony of our Blood be required; for I know,
though power may be given them over the outward Man, yet we have a Life which
they cannot touch, and a Peace and Victory in the spiritual Kingdom which no
man can spoil us of; and we are given up already, whether to glorify God in
the Body, or out of the Body, so he is glorified we have our reward; for, what
is our reward, but this, That we may see the Name of the Lord exalted, and but
that our Confidence is sure, and our Faith and Patience steadfast, that we shall
behold the Glory of the Lord, and his Kingdom, and the overthrow of Satan, and
Antichrist, the Beast and the false Prophet, our days would be sorrowful, and
our Life a Death, and our Labor and Travels a Vexation and a Grief? but our
Faith is confirmed by many Witnesses, that the Kingdoms of the World must
become the Kingdoms of Christ, and Mystery Babylon must fall, in whom the Soul
of the Righteous has been slain; and the Purpose of the Lord must certainly be
effected, and no man upon the Earth shall prevent it: and this is our Faith,
and therefore our Travels, Labors, and Affliction are not grievous to us, even
because the Presence of the Lord is with us.

And as for me the Salutation of my dearest love is to all the Saints
everywhere, even with that love wherewith I am beloved of the Father, do I love
all them that are begotten of him; but unto you more especially my love is
abounding, amongst whom I am known in faithful Labor of the Gospel of Christ,
who never sought yours, but you; and I hope you have the Witness of me in your
own hearts, even as I have of you, and that in the Immortal Life, I am known to
you, where I desire only to be known of you; and though I have been as weak
amongst you, and in fear and trembling, yet the Lord has been strong and
mighty in his Spirit; and though I have been as poor, and lowly before you, yet
the Lord has filled me and you with his Riches, and given victory and
authority, even in your presence; though many times I have labored in Trials,
and under great Burdens amongst you, and in much, opposition by many potent
Enemies, that have appeared against the Lord; yet, the Lord has carried above
all, and given dominion over them through his eternal Spirit, and of these
things you are Witnesses. Oh when I remember the days past, and how the
precious presence of the Lord has been with us, and amongst us, while I was
with you, as I hope it is at this day, and will always be continued: I say,
the remembrance hereof, even of the goodness of the Lord fills my Heart with
holy Praises, and the same I desire for you, that the Love of the Father, and
his Presence, which has been, is, and shall be, may be always fresh in your
remembrance, that you may be comforted for evermore: And at this present, I
know nothing but that the Lord in his Presence, and Love, and Life, is more
large and precious then ever, and he has opened his Fountain, and we receive
of his fullness more abundantly; he has made us strong, and we are rich in him
even at this day to give our witness for his Name, and against Antichrist, and
all the powers of Darkness, in as much Boldness, Plainness, and Faithfulness as
ever; yea, it is in our Hearts to be as diligent and valiant in the Work of the
Lord, and to publish his Name, and to proclaim the destruction of Antichrist's
false Church, false Ministry, and Worship, now more then ever. Oh, how are our
Hearts filled with zeal to go on in this Work, we have no fear of man upon us,
not of him that can but kill the Body, we are not afraid of the Storms, and
Threats, and Persecution of the Ungodly; for we fear the God of Heaven, and him
we reverence and worship in our Hearts, and not mortal Men, whose breath is in
their Nostrils, and who are as Clay, and their Substance soon desolved, and
what shall these do against us? they can effect nothing without the Lord, who
is our Shepherd, that keeps us: and as for the Work of the Lord, we find it
goes on, and is prosperous, and the Flock of God every where is pleasant, and
they grow in Knowledge, in Wisdom, in Faith, and in Patience, and the Power and
Presence of the Lord is with us, as ever, and Truth keeps its Authority; and
the Lord has blessed it with a good Report, even to the confounding of our
Enemies, to perceive the Constancy and Boldness, and Faithfulness of the
People, whose destruction has long been threatened, and waited for; but we are
yet alive, even in him who lives for ever: and we live, because he lives in us,
and it is well with us, even because he is our saving Health, and we can speak
of his Praise, because he speaks by us. Meetings are very large and precious
every where in these Parts, because of the Presence of the Lord God, who is the
Fullness of all, and fills all with his Mercy, Peace and Blessings; and that
the same be continued unto you, even that you may be filled with the Fullness of
God, and ever comforted in him, is the desire of him, who is yours, as he is
the Lords.

Sommerset-Shire 25th 4th Month, 1660. E. B.

A TESTIMONY Concerning the BOOK of Common Prayer, (So called.) Being an Answer
to an Objection, Whether it be not in it self, and as practiced in this Nation,
heretofore, and at this present, the True Worship of the True and Living God?
Answ. 1. THE Book of COMMON PRAYER (so called) in its first Institution and
Practice in this Nation, did not but differ little from POPERY, and the Men
that were the Authors of it, and that constituted it into that Form and Method
as now it is, were of much Zeal for their Form, and some Sincerity, and of more
Tenderness and good Conscience toward God, in what they knew, then were they
of the Church of Rome; who cried out against them as Heretics, and the like;
and they had so much Light from God by his Spirit, as that they saw the
Idolatry and Corruption of the Church of Rome, and did dissent from her, and
denied her Worships and Practices in part, though they were because thereof
persecuted; and the Lord stirred up their Hearts to bear Testimony against the
Abomination of that time, as it was in both Church and State, (so called) and
they sought after Reformation, and did in some part Reform this Nation, and did
deny the Popish-Mass, and the Popes Supremacy, and many Idolatries, both in
Doctrine and Discipline; and instead of the way and manner of Worship, as held
forth by the Church of Rome, these Reformers set up the Common Prayer, to be
performed as the Worship of their Church, supposing that to be more acceptable
then the other, and no doubt but the first Institution and Practice thereof,
was in much sincerity and zeal by many, and they were held under persecution,
and suffered some of them even death ^or denying the Church of Rome, and her
ways and worships; even them who did first ordain and compose the
Common Prayer, (so called) though yet there was much error in their Judgments,
and darkness in their Understandings, and a vail of great Ignorance in many
things upon them, even while it was brought forth, and these things effected,
in the very beginning and proceedings of them.

2. And when it was formed, it being imposed on this Nation by force and
penalty, and set up by compelling all people into the practice of it, by
violent Laws upon the Bodies and Consciences of men; this was great Abomination
in the sight of God, and made the practice of it detestable unto him; for it is
contrary to God, in the dispensation of the Gospel, the way of forcing by
compelling and constraint through outward Laws any kind or form of worship,
though in it self never so holy, and like unto the true worship; yea, if the
very things that the Apostles practiced for worship, were imposed on any people
by force, when as the Consciences of Men were not first persuaded thereunto by
the Spirit of God, even this were Abomination unto God, and not the true
worship of him; which is not of force, but of a willing mind, nor in the
Ignorance of Men's minds, but in the Light risen in their Hearts; So that
because of Imposing the practice of the Common Prayer by force, it was hateful
to God as so practiced, and the performance of it, while it was so held forth
in this Nation, was no better then the Idolatrous Mass, nor no more acceptable
to God.

3. And as for the Matter in it self, partly, and diverse practices thereunto
pertaining, it is not the true Worship of the True and Living God, though never
so zealously practiced; because it cannot be believed that the Authors and
Composers of it, were moved, led, and guided, by the Holy Spirit of God, in
their very Institution and forming of it; and whatsoever is brought forth,
whether in Faith, or any practice in any kind of Profession and practices in
any way of Religion, and not only by the Spirit of God, is not the true
Worship of God, which is only in Spirit and Truth, and consists only of such
practices moved unto, and guided in by the Spirit; and the true Worship of God
is not otherwise, neither for matter nor manner, but in what things, and after
what manner, as the Spirit of God leads unto and guides in, for the Father
seeks such to Worship him, as Worship in Spirit and Truth.

4. As for the Method and Form of the matter, it is not according to the
example of the Holy Scriptures, nor agreeing to the practice of Worship, held
forth by the Apostles, but different from, and partly contrary to the Spirit
that was in the Saints, and their example of Worship, as in many circumstances,
(pertaining to the orders of Common Prayer Book) might be instanced; but even
some of the Practices themselves, and the manner of performing them, are for
the most part Invention and Tradition, traduced into the World long since the
Apostles days, and they are not according to the Scriptures, nor example of the
Saints Worship in the Church of Christ in their days; and therefore the Matter
in it self partly, and the Method of it, are not the true Worship of the Living
God, which is not after the traditions of men, as the manner of performance of
Common Prayer Book is, when as the Worship of God is in and by the Spirit of
God, as before witnessed.

5. And as for the Practice of it in this Nation, as by Imposition and force,
upon pains and penalties, as it was practiced for many years together, as so
held forth, it was not the Worship of God, but Abomination to him, as I have
showed; and that Worship which is practiced by any people, being forced upon
them, is but Hypocrisy and deceit, and outward conformity in such Worshippers,
and God requires it not of them; and such was the Worship in the Common Prayer,
(so called) for there were many who did bow, and conform thereunto, even
because of the terror of men, even many in the Ignorance of their Consciences,
and some against their Consciences, and contrary to the Light thereof; and some
were persecuted because they could not conform, all which was Abomination in
the sight of the Lord; even the consequence of the thing was as evil as any
part of either matter or manner also; even while many conceited themselves in
their Ignorance, that they had Worshipped God, and done well, while they had
only performed such Worship forced upon them, and which the Lord never
required at their hands; and that cannot be the true Worship of the true and
Living God which can be performed by a People, without the Spirit of God, by
which alone, and without it, God cannot be Worshipped; and the practice of
Worship after the order of Common Prayer, did many thousands, (if not most)
perform without the Spirit of God; whereby it fully appears, that in the
practice of the Book of Common Prayer, the Worshippers did not Worship the true
and Living God, but walked only in a part of the Form of Godliness, but had not
the Power.

6. But as for the Practice of it, as now in England, without Imposition upon
all by force and penalty, but by some, out of supposition that it is the best
way of worship, and that willingly, and neither forced upon them, nor they
forcing it upon others; as thus practiced is not so great Idolatry, nor of so
bad effects as if it were violently forced upon all; but if any suppose it to
be the best way of worship, and be so persuaded, such may more equally have
their Liberty in the exercise thereof, while they allow Liberty to others to
follow what worship as they are preswaded, and as it is unjust to impose by
violence that, or any other Form of worship upon people, so it is unjust to
impose penalty or punishments on the Bodies or Estates of any for their
conformity to the Book of Common Prayer, or any other kind of Worship; for as
it is contrary to God to compel by force to that Practice of Worship, so it is
unjust to stop by force from that Way of Worship, or to inflict Penalties upon
the Persons or Estates of any because thereof; for though many exceptions may
be justly made by sound Arguments against that way of Worship in matter,
manner, and effects, as I have said, yet none ought to be afflicted in Person
or Estate, for the error of their minds, while their error extends not to
destroy the Person and Estate of another; for all force by violence that has
been put on the Bodies and Estates of men, about Church-Worship, Ministry and
Religion of any kind, has been Antichristian, and not of God, even for many
Generations.

7. And therefore them that read the Book of Common Prayer, and all other sort
of Worshippers, that are either persuaded by the Spirit of God, or suppose in
their hearts of the Verity and Truth of their Way; let them all have their
Liberty in their way of Worship without force, or restraint by outward Laws,
while they impose not one upon another violently; for the true Worshippers
ought not to be persecuted for their Worship, but if they are, it will confirm
them in the truth of their Way; and the false Worshippers ought not to suffer
affliction of Persecution, nor loss of Estate, though they do err in their
Minds and Judgments about Worship in spiritual things, but if they are
afflicted, because thereof, it will harden them in their evil ways, and not
convert them, nor turn them from the evil of their ways; for men are converted
to the right way, and out of that which is evil by the Spirit of God, and
through persuading of the Conscience inwardly, and not by force or violence put
upon their Bodies or estates outwardly, never any were converted to God by such
means. And this is my Answer to the Objection, and my judgment of the case
inquired into: The Book of Common Prayer (so called) partly the Matter it self,
and the Method of it, and the Manner of its performance is not the true Worship
of the True and Living God, no not the free Practice there of without
Imposition, much less the Practice of it by Imposition and force, for that is
altogether Abomination, and has with it woeful effects, upon whatsoever People
it has been, or shall hereafter be forced and violently Imposed.

This is given forth for the Satisfaction of all that desires in this Matter.
The 5th. Month, 1660. E. B.
A Postscript.
AND some set up the Institution of Calvin, or Form of Prayer, as these have
now the Common Prayer; and both the one and the other have cast off the POPES
Form, and brought in their own; get into a Form of words, a For^ of worship
without either Life or Power. The PAPISTS in some things that they begin to do,
will say, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; And the
Protestants, or them who call themselves of the reformed Church. that are come
off from the Papists; some of them when they go about to do a thing will say,
Our help is in the Name of the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. Here both the
one and the other have a Form of words, but out of the Name, the one as well as
the other, out of the Life, out of the Power and Authority of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Therefore what they do, how can it be done in his Name, which
themselves are out of? Though they may be in the words, and do a thing in the
words. But that is not a doing it in the Name; for to do things in so many
words in their own Time and Will, that which themselves have brought in, is one
thing; But to do it in the Name, Power and Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ
is another; for words is not the Name nor the Power; and the Kingdom stands in
the Power, not in words.

Therefore all people see what you do, that it be done in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the true Light of the World, who lights every man that comes
into the World; in his Light, in his Power, then that will bring you to cease
from your own words, and following your own ways, doing it in his Power, in his
Strength, out of your own words, your own ways, and your own wills, in his
Name. For what has form or words either one or the other hitherto produced or
brought forth without Life or Power? Has your long Profession and Forms of the
words, brought any of you yet into the possession of the things? Or will it
ever do? If not; What serves it to? Who has required it, to have it done? And
is it not his right alone who is to be worshipped, to direct himself how he
will be worshipped? Or is not all other service and worship in the will? And so
Will Worship, that is not of his own direction or appointment. And the
Scripture says, John chapter 4. as you may read, God is a Spirit, and he will
be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth. (Mark that) He who is a Spirit,
will be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth that which the Devil abode
not in; for into a Form of words, Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Profane Persons,
unrighteous, which are shut out of the Kingdom, may get into words, in such a
worship, out of the Spirit; but that is not the worship which God requires; And
is it not equal that he alone direct how he will be worshipped, that is to be
worshipped? And thou art so to perform thy service toward him, that of him it
may be accepted; and so it is rightly done, when done as he has appointed it,
as he has directed. And Obedience is more than Sacrifice, whom thou art to
obey, if thou will do him service who is worshipped or served in the Spirit and
in the Truth; whose Will then comes to be done, and not thine, who will be so
worshipped, and so served: But otherwise is it not thine own will, and not his
that is done?

Therefore whosoever will come to worship the KING, the LORD of HOSTS, must
come to worship him in his own way; not in their ways, to bow down to his
Light, to bow down to the measure of his Spirit in them; for the Manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal; Otherwise, will not
People, Teachers and Professors be always in the profitless condition, Ever
learning, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth?

E. B.



TO THE BELOVED and CHOSEN of GOD in the Seed Elected, Particularly in LONDON
And elsewhere; who have seen the day of Christ, and received the Message of
Peace and Reconciliation, in these last Days of his Glorious Appearance.
THe dear salutation of my life salutes you all, in the most pure and dearest
love, with which I am beloved of the Father, and with which also at this
present my Heart is filled, and issues forth toward you, and the whole Body
of the elected Ones; and the remembrance of you in the Lord is very precious
unto me, as I see and behold, and have fellowship with you in the Immortal
Life, which the Father has begotten in you, and in me, and in which my
knowledge is of you, and my unity with you, and therein only is the remembrance
of my dearest love unto you, and in which I hope I am also known and remembered
of you, even in the spiritual Relation and Heirship of Immortality, being
fellow Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and Children of her conception and
bringing forth.

Now my dearest Friends, seeing you have believed in the Light and Life of men,
even in him that was, and is, and is to come, and have also tasted of that all
Fullness that is in him, you have a Witness in your selves, even of the Spirit
of the Father, which is greater then all, and you need no other Testimony, but
that of the Spirit, That the Lord is good and full of Grace, Truth, Mercy,
Peace, and Joy, even the Fountain and Treasure of all Virtue and Blessedness in
this present time and hereafter; I say, If you have tasted and felt of Immortal
Life, and if the Fountain has been opened in you, and you have seen his Glory,
and received of his Treasure, then the Evidence dwells in you of eternal
blessedness, and no man needs to teach you of these things, nor to say unto
you, know the Lord, if you dwell in him and go no more forth; yet bear with me
a little, that I may speak and be refreshed, not to diminish from what
Testimony you have in you, but the rather to add toward it; for my witness is
not another, but the same which ye enjoy, which is faithful and true; and this
I say, Oh how great, how mighty and powerful is the Lord our God everlasting
and infinite; he is that eternal Spirit that fills all, the Creator and
being of all things that are, the life and virtue in all, and the invisible
Substance greater then all, he is in himself the imme^^rable and infinite
Fullness, the Fountain of Life, of Mercy and Righteousness and Peace, and of all
Virtue, and of every good Thing; who can declare his beginning, or end? he is
without Time, Place or thing, yet gives being to all, and is present in all,
yet not known, saving of himself, and by his own Spirit, yet he effects all
things, and works whatsoever he will; who can utter his wondrous Works? Who
can number his Mercies? Who can account his Infiniteness? who can behold his
Invisibility? Who can reach his endless Being? He fills Heaven and Earth,
and of his Fullness every Creature in Heaven and Earth receives, and by him
does subsist, though it is only given unto Mankind, to behold, and perceive
of him, it is only his Gift unto his Saints that fear him, to understand of his
Ways; and in us he has opened of his Fullness and Treasure, even in our
Hearts; and the divine Mystery of this Infinite God is revealed and discovered
in the Hearts of the Sons of Men, whom he has chosen: and he has given us, to
enjoy and possess in us a Measure of that fullness that is in himself, even a
Measure of the same Love and ^ife, of the same Mercy and Power, and of the same
divine Nature, and a Measure of the same heavenly quality and property, which
is in him in all fullness, dwells in us his Saints by measure, even in all
that are born of him, in whom the Immortal Birth is brought forth, which is of
his own nature, and is Immortal, Spiritual, Holy, Meek, Merciful, even as the
Father; for the quality of him that has begotten is in us that are begotten of
him, we bear his Image, and are of the Father, Partakers of his Substance,
Immortal and Infinite, and are one with him in Nature and Fellowship, and
perfect through him that dwells in us, and has changed us into his likeness;
these things ye know, if ye be born from above, and if the Immortal Birth live
in you, and you be constant in the Faith, then are you Heirs through it, of the
everlasting Inheritance of eternal Life, and already have received the Earnest,
and Assurance thereof and all are yours, because you are Christ's, and he is
God's, and you have the Father and the Son.

And this Life and Immortality is brought forth in us, and Infiniteness it self
dwells with us, and eternity possesses us, and Fullness it self is shed abroad
^n our Hearts, and we have the Treasure of Life, of Wisdom, of Knowledge, and
of divine Fullness in our Tabernacles of Clay, which also are sanctified by his
Word and Power, to be fit Habitations for the eternal God to dwell in; And oh
what love is this with which we are beloved by him! Oh what Mercy is this of
which we partake from him! Who are become the Sons of God, and Children of the
most High, in whose earthen Vessels dwells Immortallity and Life, and Infinite
Substance, being gathered into his Shepherds Fold of defense, where we have
Immortal Food, and are established on the holy Mountain, where nothing can
destroy, and are at rest and peace and under the shadow of the Rock of Ages,
that Hell nor Death, nor wrath of Man can terrify: Oh what Eye has seen this,
what Ear has heard it, and what Heart has perceived it, and not admired the
loving kindness of the Lord? who among you are Witnesses of this, that says
not, great and Infinite is the Lord, and Immeasurable in Mercy, and Truth, and
Righteousness? Oh, Friends, if you know these things, and if ye receive daily
of this Fullness, and if the Measure of that Immortal Life be risen in you, and
has raised up you with it self into its own fullness, which once was descended
out of its own fullness of eternal Rest, and Strength, and was manifest in its
Measure, in poverty and weakness in your Hearts, in the feeling of Afflictions
and Wrath because of Sin, but it descended to suffer all, and to bear
Transgression, that you might be raised with it into its Life, and Glory, and
Fullness; and if this be finished and effected in you, Oh then how shall you not
live to his Glory and Praise in your Generation, and in Love, and Peace, and
Unity with himsel, and one with another, and magnify him in Soul and Spirit
that has called you, and chosen you, and now works all your works in you and
for you, and you live by him because he lives in you.

But though it is thus that some are entered into the Rest, and have received of
his fullness, and have the Testimony of Life and Assurance in the Father, and
are risen with Christ, yet are you and we, and all the Children of the Father,
so set and placed in this Creation, as that there is an Enemy to be ruled over,
and also a service to be fulfilled by us for the Lord that has chosen us, and
therefore watchfulness and faithfulness is required from us; and unto this I
cannot but exhort you all, even to walk in the Fear of the Lord, in
watchfulness and faithfulness, in Humility and Meekness, in Truth and Justice,
and in every good thing, and that you fulfill the Will of the Lord in all
things, whatsoever the Motions of his own Life draws you unto, that every
Member of his Infinite Body, which is highly exalted at his right Hand, may be
preserved in dominion over Sin and Death, and also may show forth the Honor,
and Glory, and Praise of him who is the Head (even Christ) whose virtue has an
ointed every Member, and is shed abroad through the whole Body: I say Friends,
of every Member is required the duty and service thereunto partaining,
according as it is placed of him, that the Treasure of Life may show forth its
virtue in one manner or another through you all, in all well-doing, to the
glory of him who is God above all; and that in the sight of your Enemies (whom
you know watches for evil, and would rejoice in any occasion against you, that
they might speak evil of the Lord because of you) you may walk without offense
in the answer of a good Conscience; and if you walk as such as are the Lord's,
you will cut off all occasions from them that seek it, and they will be
confounded, and you preserved in the blessedness and peace everlasting; and you
will grow in Immortallity, and into the knowledge and fullness thereof, more and
more, till you know the Father, even as you are known of him.

And be not unmindful of the Word of the Lord, which begat you, which first
entered into your Hearts, and wrought mightily in you, to the wounding and
destroying of Death and Enmity; and remember the Travel of the days past, and
the Indignation which once you felt because of Sin, through the Word of God,
and the Word endures for ever, of which you are begotten; and if any appearance
of Iniquity, or motion thereunto arise in you, into desire to be fulfilled, the
Word will quench it, and give you dominion over Sin and Death, and save you
from the effects thereof; for the Word changes not, but is the same always;
but if man change and pervert his Way into Iniquity, it reproves and corrects,
and so delivers him; for this Word keeps clean the Heart, and it sanctifies,
and also keeps in subjection the mortal man with all his thoughts, desires and
actions, and destroys the Man of Sin, the sinful Man, by whom the whole
Creation has been corrupted, and perverted into evel, in its practice of
degenerate man: and if you forget the Word, then Iniquity prevails again, and
the love of this World, and its vanities, and the Riches and Pleasures of the
mortal man steals away the Heart, and they possess the Habitation of God
unrighteously, and all things are become sinful, and the Body of Death comes
over the pure Life, and Peace with God in the Conscience is lost, and that
because the Word of God is forgotten, which once begat unto God; and where the
unclean spirit enters again, the latter end of such is worse then the
beginning, more finful against God, and more hated of him; and therefore let
none follow the way of such, for it leads to Death and Darkness, and Misery
will be the end of it. But Friends, mind him and feel his Power, who is the
Preserver of Men in Peace and Righteousness; and let not up that part in you
into liberty, into which Satan enters, and sows his seed of degeneration, but
live in the Cross of Christ, and in the meek and lowly Spirit, tha^ you may not
do your own wills, but the Will of the Father, and may fear him and his
Goodness, and that subjecteth the ground of Temptations, that Sin cannot
prevail; so shall your Peace be everlasting, and your Life as a River of
pleasure, and Joy and Gladness shall be your daily Portion, and the Lord shall
never forsake you, but be unto you a Tower of Strength, and Habitation of
Peace, and a Crown of Victory and Reward in this present time, and for ever.

And if ye abide in Christ the Vine, into which you are planted by
Regeneration, then will your Fruit be of the Vine, and acceptable unto the
Father, who is the good Husbandman, and through his Virtue you will grow into
Perfection, as partaining to the Conscience, where all guilt of sin is taken
away, and the burden of Iniquity and body of Death clean removed away from you;
for that is Perfection as partaining to the Conscience, where Sin and
Transgression is done away, and Power received over it, both in Motion, and
Action, and the Guilt of it, and the Conscience sprinkled with the Immortal
Blood of the Lamb, and no stain nor guilt remaining, but Peace altogether by
the holy Spirit in the Conscience; and this is perfection which was not
attained to by outward things in the first Covenant, but is witnessed in the
second, which the Lord has made with us, and confirmed unto us, where Sin and
Iniquity is blotted out, and Innocence and Immortallity lives and raigns; and
such stand before the Throne of God without fault before him, and no guile in
their Mouths, and these sing the Song of the Lamb, and of the Redeemed, where
all sorrow is fled away; if so be that the burden and guilt of all Transgresion
be removed, then there is no cause of sorrow; and blessed are they that dwell
here, and that are entered into the everlasting Rest, even into God; for he is
the Rest of the Immortal Soul, and the Life of it; and if ye know these things,
ye have satisfaction and comfort, which none know but they that have it; its
the portion of the Redeemed, whose Father, Master, Ruler, Judge and King is the
Lord God and the Lamb, and we are Subjects of that Kingdom, and free born of
that City, the heavenly Jerusalem, and we are made free through the price of
Immortal Blood, and then how can any of you, that are such serve this World and
the Vanities of it, by any immoderate care, or desire, or exercise in earthly
things; for this is the bondage of Egypt, but the Children are free from it,
and are not entangled concerning the things of this World, but they are
subjected under, and the Inheritance of a better Portion is their Crown and
Substance, and Esau's portion is the Earth, he that has no assurance in God:
wherefore live above this World in the Seed of God, and be without immoderate
care in every thing, as to earthly matters, not taking thought what shall come,
or be to morrow, neither cumbring your selves about uncertain riches, but leave
the issue of all things to the Lord, in whose hands are Blessings and the
Curse, to give, or take away, according to his pleasure: and be not Servants
unto, but Rulers over all affections in earthly things; for spiritual Blessings
are the Crown, and the Earth is the footstool of the Lord's Redeemed.

And as for the days and seasons in which we now are, let none be troubled, as
though it were not well, or could be better; for all things are well that are
come to pass, because the Will of the Lord has effected them, either as the
Cause, or as the Means, and it is good for us that these things are so; for the
prosperity of our Kingdom is going on through all, the Hammer is beating upon
the Rocks that will beat them to pieces, and the Axe is hewing down the Cedars,
and the little Stone prevails against the many-headed Beast, and the Image of
Idolatry is weakening, and the holy Seed grows in strength and virtue, and the
Purpose of the Lord can none prevent; But the light of the Son must be as the
light of seven days amangst us, and the Dayspring from on high has already
visited us, and we have seen of his Glory; wherefore let all the Upright have
Patience and Long-suffering, till the Measure of Iniquity in our Adversaries be
filled, which is hastening to be accomplished, and Transgression grows full,
and Sinners grow ripe for Vengeance; and we must pass over their Mountain of
Darkness, and in the mean time the Lord hides us under his shadow, even (...)
Transgression be finished, and covers us from the storm, and blinds the enemy,
and turns his rage backward; and we are not destroyed, but our life is renewed,
and righteousness, mercy and love are a defense about us; and how great is the
kindness of the Lord herein, mine eye has seen it, and my heart meditateth
thereon; the power, and wisdom and love of the Lord herein are very great, and
who can find out the depth thereof, or declare his immeasurable power and
wisdom.

And thus the salutation of my life unto all the faithful is expressed, and I
am well in him who is my fullness, and desire no more concerning you, then your
faithfulness in the cause of God; for without controversy the cause of God is
with us, and on our part, and as you are faithful therein, that is my reward
concerning you, and the addition to my joy; and in the Heavenly Spirit of the
Lord God Almighty are you committed unto him, who is able to keep you, even to
the end, and in the end, to glorify you in eternal life in rest and peace for
ever; and this is the portion of the faithful, and my desires on your behalf,
and my salutation of you, hoping that you have not so learned Christ as to deny
him because of the love or terror of this World, but that over all you will be
preserved in faith and victory.

I am now according to the Will of the Father in Ireland, it is some weeks
since I arived at Cork City in much peace and safety, with my dear Companions;
it having been long upon my spirit to visit the Seed of God in this Nation,
even of love have I felt it in me, and not of constraint, but of a willing
mind, and free spirit, and not of force; and after the time of patience and
waiting for many days to see my way clear for it, the Lord has ordered it and
brought it to pass acceptable unto me and many here; and this is the time which
this visitation must be effected, for till now my way was not clear; and but
that this Journey has laid upon me I should have rejoiced to have been present
among you, either in testimony, by suffering, or otherwise; but this is the
will of God: and it is in my heart to pass through this Nation, and to visit
the Seed of God by the Love and Word of the Father, as he gives of his Life and
Strength, and opens the way before me. I perceive in this Land Friends are
generally well, and truth grows in victory and dominion, and the Lord is adding
to the numberless number of them that must stand on Mount Zion; and through the
rage of men, and above it all, the little Flock is preserved in its beauty, and
the Seed sown in weakness and afflictions is received and quickened in much
power, which is my joy. About Bristol I continued about two months in much
precious service for the Lord, and truth had good authority over all, and great
acceptance in the hearts of many, and some convinced, and others edified and
confirmed, as many can witness in the spirit; and until after the time of the
F^ir I was not clear of that City, but imediately after I was free, and my way
made very convenient and clear to this place; and the hand of providence
ordered all things very well on that behalf, as I do hope, in the continuance
of the power and presence of the Lord with me through this work; and in his
power I am committed, even to do or suffer all things for his Name sake, and
that by virtue of his own life that dwells in me; And the Lord preserve all the
Brethren like-minded, that the work of the Lord may be fulfilled and finished
by us. Amen.

County of Cork the 21th of the 6th Month, 1660. E. B.

A PRESENTATION of Wholesome Informations, unto the King of England, etc. Being
a Defense Pleaded, and also appealed unto Him; even to the Testimony of the
Spirit of God in His own Conscience. In Answer to a certain Accusation, charged
before Him, (in a Printed Book, called, The thrice happy Welcome of King
Charles the Second, by one George Willington, of Bristol City) against Us, whom
in derision, the Accuser calls Quakers. And also, herein are laid down diverse
Considerations (in Answer to a Petition directed to the King, by the same
Author, in the Book aforesaid) concerning Church Government, and concerning the
making and sending forth Ministers; and concerning the True Prophets and True
Ministers, and the False; and how they are distinguished, in their Call,
Maintenance, and Fractises: and that none ought to suffer death of Body, or be
killed or spoiled in Person or Estate, though they may err in their minds, in
the knowledge and Judgment of spiritual things. All which is soberly presented
to the King and His Council, for Them to consider.
The Epistle to the King, and his Council.
KNow ye, That it is Righteousness, Justice, Mercy, and Truth, and the fear of
the Lord God; it is the doing hereof, and the walking herein, in which you
only may be truly honorable: I say, if you do these things, if you fear the
God of Heaven, and depart from all Iniquity; and if you be doers of Justice and
Mercy, and if ye break the yoke of cruel Oppressions, and let the oppressed go
free, then are you worthy to be honored, both in the sight of God and men: if
so be that you are possessed with the nature (I mean with Righteousness,
Justice, Mercy and Truth) then you deserve the name, but not otherwise; for if
Unrighteousness, Injustice and Falsehood dwell with you, and be brought forth by
you, then are you not honorable to God, neither can his servant in feignedness
and flattery give the name unto you; but and if I should give flattering titles
unto you, I should provoke the Lord to wrath against me, though yet I gained
your favor; but I have rather chosen to speak the truth from my heart in
Righteousness, and to be well-pleasing unto the God of Heaven, then with
flattering Lips, and a deceitful Tongue, be a man-pleaser, while I grieve the
Spirit of the Lord: and the chief desire of my heart is to keep my conscience
clear in all things, though I should gain the displeasure of you, and the most
eminent accounted of men.

And if you shall say, who art thou? I must answer, That I am a Servant of the
great God of Heaven and Earth; him I fear, and before his presence I tremble: I
fear not him that can but kill the Body, I flatter not any by feigned words,
for I regard not the love or hatred of this World; I have not learned to
practice a flattering tongue, nor can I use it toward you, or any upon the
Earth; but words of truth and righteousness are my delight, and the dialect of
my native Country, and the characters thereof are not in the eloquency of
words of man's wisdom, but to demonstrate by the Spirit of the Lord, in
plainness and soberness, with more respect to please the Lord then to please
men. Thus am I known among my Familiars, and thus I desire only to be known
unto you, not in words only, but in substance; not in flattery, but in an
upright heart.

And this my present occasion thus to write unto you, is, even in as much as we
have been accused, even to the King, by one George Willington of the City of
Bristoll, in a Book of his directed to the King; even therefore is it, that I
have taken in hand to answer and publish a defense against his Charge, with
some sober Considerations, chiefly laid down and directed, even to the King,
that he may consider them: and my hopes are, that he, and you of his Council
will read and consider the Defense, as well as the Charge, against us;
assuredly knowing, that it is good reason and equity for you so to do; and may
prove also of good consequence to you so to do; for if the King should receive
mis-informations, and thereupon proceed in Judgment; Oh what pits and snares
of danger did he run himself into, even to destroy himself! Now to the intent
that he and you may be better informed in some particulars concerning us, about
which we are charged and accused, and that you might know the truth, and may
escape the way of Destruction and Confusion; therefore is it, that the Lord
has put it into my heart thus to write unto you, and not for another end, nor
of my self have I done it; but as I found the drawings of that Spirit of the
Father, which leads into all truth, to which I was made willing to be
obedient, without respect to any thing, saving the Lord, and that you might be
advised in some things in present controversy, occasioned as aforesaid; and
there are a few things toward you upon my spirit, which well deserves your
consideration, as follows:

First, That there is an Eternal God, who is great and mighty, above all; and
^e alone ought to be the fear of you, and all mankind: for whatsoever he will,
it comes to pass, whether in Heaven or Earth; he planteth and plucketh up, he
builds and throws down, he exalts and abaseth, whether Kingdoms,
Governments, or Men, Kings or Princes, as he will, and what time soever, as he
pleases; he is only wise in Council, and mighty in Power; if he purpose, who
shall prevent him? he is the Being of all things that are, and before him are
all mankind upon Earth, even ye your selves, as Dust and Ashes, and Vessel, of
Clay; and your Breath is in your Nostrils, and he that gave it can s^^n take it
away from you, and in a moment dissolve your seeming glorious substance into
its first being. And this eternal God has overturned and changed Powers and
Authorities, Rulers and Governments in these Nations of late years, even to the
amazement of the Inhabitants, who must confess, that the God of Heaven has
pulled down and set up whom he would, and taken the Government from, and given
it unto whom soever he has pleased; and he has given unto many a day and a
time, to try them whether they would rule for him; and he tried one sort of men
after another, to prove them, if they would exercise Righteousness and Truth,
Justice and Mercy, and right Judgment in the Land: but when the Lord tried
them, they have all proved deceitful, and unfit men for the Lord to exalt his
name by; but they have neglected Justice and true Judgment, and the cause of
the Fatherless and the Widow have they not regarded, as they ought to have
done; but great oppressions and persecutions have abounded in their days, and
they have forgotten the Lord and his Judgments, and sought themselves and not
the Lord, and been ambitious and self-ended; and they have exalted themselves
in their Pride and Covetousness: and this has been the path of many that have
sitten in the Throne, even till the God of Heaven has been provoked against
them to confound them, and overturn them, even when their measure of oppression
and unrighteousness, of Injustice and Persecution was fulfilled; and when the
measure of one was finished the Lord brought that down with shame, and another
was set up to reign, till it had fulfilled its measure of that which went
before it, that it might be brought down, even as the other: and all this the
God of Heaven has effected by his power, that all the Earth might take
knowledge, that he can do whatsoever he will, and that he hates and abhors
Injustice and Oppression, Cruelty and Persecution, and that his Vengeance and
Judgments are extended forth against such Rulers and Governments; by whom, and
in which, Persecution, Cruelty and Injustice are brought forth; and because
hereof, has he overturned and confounded Rulers and Governments; and these
things have been visible in our eye.

2. Consider, that you are now set in the Throne, and are raised up out of your
suffering condition, and you are become the Rulers and Potentates in our
Nation, diverse having been cast out before you; and unto you a day and time is
given, to try you and prove you, what you will do, and whether you will rule
and govern alone for the Lord, and answer the end wherefore the Lord has
restored you; which if you do, and walk in the Fear of the Lord, and forsake
your Iniquities, and do Justice and Righteousness in the Earth; then the Lord
make you happy, and a blessing in the Kingdoms: But, if so be ye walk in the
ways of Oppression; and just Judgment, Mercy and Truth be wanted in the Land
through you, and you run on as others before you, in Pride, Ambition,
vainglory and Covetousness, and have no respect to the God of Heaven, and his
Heritage; then the God of Heaven shall reprove you, and deep confusion shall
come upon you, and as with a whirlwind shall you be overthrown, and you shall
know that there is a God that can do whatsoever he will, even he shall deface
your glory, and turn your Sun into Darkness, and your Day shall become a Night
of Misery. Oh therefore say not in your Hearts, that our Mountain is strong,
and we can never be moved; neither think in your selves, that your force is
great, and your number many, and none shall be able to prevail against us; but
rather consider that there is a secret and an eternal Hand, that can remove
your Mountain, and overcome all your might and power, and subdue your Number,
and turn all your Wisdom and Policy into Folly and Madness: These can his Hand
do, even the God of Heaven, who is greater then all; if he smite, none can heal
you; and if he kill, none can make alive; if he be^ your enemy to fight against
you, there is none that can deliver you out of his (...): all flesh is as
grass, that is soon cut down and withered, and the strength of (...) sons of
men, are as a Reed, that is soon shaken and bruised.

3. Consider, how that you are placed in your present state, between good and
(...), between doing the will of God and the will of the Devil; that ye should
do the one, and forsake the other; and in the doing of the one or the other,
depends the Blessing or the Curse, the Love or the Hatred of the Almighty;
and you are in your day that is given you to prove you; time is taken from
others, and given to you, even by the Lord that gives and takes time and power
according to his own pleasure; and no man has assurance of time unto himself,
but it comes and goes at the pleasure of the Almighty; and time and power is
now given unto you for a moment. Consider what the God of Heaven re^ires of you
in this your day; and if you fulfill the will of the Lord, then you may be
happy; but if otherwise, then other effects shall follow upon (...): and let
not the King say in himself, that because I am the true (...), and to me only
it belongs to govern these Kingdoms, and I may gover^^ as I will without
correction; as though therefore he might rule according to his own pleasure,
and the Lord take no notice: I say, let not this enter into any of your hearts;
but let the King know assuredly, that these Islands, and all the Kingdoms in
the World, are altogether at the Lords disposure, to give the governm^^t
thereof to whomsoever he will; he gives and takes away Power and Dominion
according to his pleasure; and it is his proper right to rule over all, even
the God of Heaven; and he it is that pulls down and sets up, according to
his own mind; and if you please not the Lord, but vex him in your proceedings,
you must know, that the Lord can take from you the Dominion, and give it to
whom he will; and there is no injustice in him thus to do, but of right he does
it, because it is his pleasure so to do, with whom there is no Iniquity nor
Unrighteo^sness.

Therefore let it enter into your hearts, to Fear the God of Heaven; assuredly
knowing, that it is he alone who has secretly purposed and effected this your
re^^^^ing into the Throne; and he has given you this day, and put this season
into your hand, that ye should do his will: But if ye provoke him, he alone can
cast you down, and take your day and season from you, and none can hinder; and
this justly, and none can reprove him.

4. As concerning the men that were cast out before you, whose persons, many of
them, are now under your power; be not passionate, nor of a spirit of Revenge
^^^ards them, neither seek their destruction; but be merciful, and patient, and
meek toward them; for though it is the pleasure of God to reprove them by you,
for their iniquities, yet it is contrary to his mind, that you should take
away their lives, and cause them to be put to death: for there is a seed of God
amongst ^^at people; and when they come to true repentance, and to the
forsaking of their ^^quities, the Lord will show mercy to them, and
peradventure heal them of all their backslidings and afflictions too. Therefore
show Mercy and Moderation ^^^ards them, and cut them not off in their sins,
lest that while you condemn them for being too cruel toward you in times past,
ye condemn your selves in the sight of the Lord, and all people, in doing that
to them (even in the same measure of cruelty) for doing of which to you, you
now condemn them; and so thereby bring the same guilt upon your selves which
lies upon them; but therefore show Moderation and Meekness toward them, and
leave vengeance to the Lord, to whom it belongs; if they be worthy of it, it
shall come upon them. It is true, they have been active against you, and it is
probable they were raised up of God, as a judgment and reproof upon you,
because of your iniquities, which were many and great against God; and the God
of Heaven had a just Cause against you, and improved them in it, as instruments
to reprove you; and they had once a just cause against Oppressions, and the
Lord blessed them in it, and gave them many Victories, and wrought great
Deliverances for them; even when they were both fewer in number, weaker in
strength, and less in policy and craft, even then oft-times did God appear for
them, and gave them Victories, and defeate^ their Enemies; and you your selves
must confess to this, That the Providence of War was clearly on their side,
which I call the hand of the Lord; and consider what a sad thing it would be on
your part, and how contrary to God, to cause them now to suffer, when you have
opportunity against them, for that which was effected by them, when the Lord
was with them: you ought not to cause them to suffer on that account; but if
you do, you will provoke the Lord against you, if that you destroy them, and
take away their lives, because they were once prosperous against you; even
through the Hand of the Lord, do I say, and through the Providence and good
Fortune of War, needs must you acknowledge.

Now its acknowledged, that they quite forsook the just cause, and forgot the
Lord and his mercies and deliverances, and became corrupted and abominable
before him, and insulted over their enemies in the spirit of ambition, and
began to set up the same things which once they had cried against in others;
and this was their Transgression and abomination; and in their corruption and
forsaking the Lord, they became fully guilty of the same abominations of others
before them, and the Lord became provoked against them, to reprove them, and
correct them, and afflict them, even because of their transgressions, who, as I
have said, did forget the Lord, and walked in the same Path themselves, which
they reproved others for; and the same abominations were set up by them, which
they once pulled down in others; and this was their Hypocrisy, in whom was
found a deceitful heart, which led them aside into treachery,
false-heartedness, covetousness and vainglory; and because of these their
iniquities, has the Lord bowed them down under you, and smitten them before
you, even because they were not faithful to the end, and not because they were
faithful at all; no, not because they were active against Oppressions at all;
but because they became guilty of the same abominations, and set up that in
themselves, which once they moved against in others; and because hereof, has
the Lord reproved them, and that justly, that they might learn his righteous
Judgments, and be humbled under his hand, and that all the Earth may know, if
Men forsake Him; he will give them up to the will of their Enemies: though he
may bless a man or a people, while they fear his Name; yet if they sin against
him, he can turn blessings into a Curse; and now they that were once exalted,
are abased and brought down; and you that were once low, are now exalted: and
if you become corrupted, and provoke the Lord through wickedness in this day of
your Exaltation, and if they become humbled, and repent of their
Transgressions, through their afflictions in this day of their sufferings, then
the God of Heaven can and may suddenly by his secret hand, bring you down, and
^^y you low, and raise them up, and exalt them, and bow down your strength and
might under others; these things can the Lord effect according to his pleasure;
he exalts and abaseth whom he will, he sets up and pulls down, according
as men reverence him, or regard him not: They that honor him, he honors;
but they that dishonor him by unrighteousness, he brings such to shame. O
therefore, ye Men, consider how dreadful the Lord is, and take his counsel,
lest ye perish.

5. Concerning Liberty of Conscience in the faith and worship toward God, you
ought to be considerate, and to take the counsel of God, lest you run upon the
same Rock, upon which many have been broken before you (to (...)) limitting the
Spirit of the Lord, and of such whose Consciences have been tender, and binding
them to or from, by force or violence, any such (...) such way of Worship, and
Profession of Faith, and exercise in Religion: if you do thus; and will not
allow clearly and freely Liberty of Conscience, but will by force and violence
limit the Spirit of the Lord, and tender Consciences; this shall be a Snare
upon you, and a Rock o^ offense against you, to break you to Pieces: for in so
doing, the God of Heaven will be displeased with you, as with others, if so be
that you take upon you to prescribe the Lord a way how he must be worshipped;
and will take upon you to rule and judge in the cases of Conscience, and in the
matters of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, which appertains to Christ alone, to be
Judge of, and Ruler in, and not man; and to him alone you ought to give the
whole Rule and Government in all the matters of his own Kingdom; and that he
may prescribe and teach Worship, and Faith, and Duty to himself, in all
spiritual things: and this I claim of you, on his behalf, even that you give
unto him the whole Rule and Authority, in all the matters of his own Kingdom;
and that you allow Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Faith and Worship
to all Christian people in these Nations; and that no man be compelled or
forced to or from, by outward violence, any kind of profession of Faith, or
practices of worship; for it is of Antichrist so to do: if that you impose any
S^rt of Worship and Religion contrary to men's Consciences, upon penalties on
men's Persons or Estates; if you do thus, you exercise not the Power of Christ
but of Autichrist and it is ^^depriving of Christ of his Heirship, and of the
Government of his own Kingdom, which will be reckoned against you as a fearful
abomination, if you ^^lk therein.

And therefore let men believe in Christ, and Worship him, according as they
are persuaded in their own Consciences; for a tender Conscience in the Sight of
God, is a thing greatly regarded of him; and if you limit it, and do violence
upon it, the Lord will be provoked against you, and these Nations will not bear
it; but it will beget fiery contentions in the minds of men, if any Religion
and Worship contrary to their Consciences be imposed upon them; and while some
men are gratified, others will be displeased: and if you allow not free Liberty
of Conscience in the exercise of spiritual things, the effect of it may prove
sad and Miserable to your selves and your Government: and this shall you know
in time to come, even the good effect of Toleration in Liberty of Conscience,
and of woeful effect upon the contrary.

Therefore be wise and instructed, ye Rulers of the Earth, and kiss the Son,
lest ye perish out of the way of Peace and Happiness.

Now you have your day and time to be made happy, or to be left miserable, that
your Government may be blessed; or otherwise, deprived of all Blessedness.

These things have I Written to You, in Love and Honor toward You, That Ye
may know and be informed what the Lord requires of You, if so be You may
escape the Wrath that is to come: And love, nor Wrath to You; Your prosperity,
nor overthrow, is determined upon You, or prophesied unto You by me; but as You
walk in Justice, Truth, and Righteousness; or as You walk contrary, and bring
forth Oppression and Persecution.

Bristol City, the 4th day of the sixth Month, 1660. Edward Buroughs.

A PRESENTATION of Wholesome Informations, unto the King of England, etc.
THe Servants of the Lord, and his People, that feared his Name, and trembled
at his Word, never wanted false Accusers in any Age, to repute them vile, and
to reproach them by slanderous words; and that even to the Rulers of the World,
and to the Kings of the Earth, have the chosen People of the Lord been falsely
accused and reproached by the slanderous Tongues of ungodly Men in all
Generations, as in many Particulars might be proved out of the Scriptures, by
the Example of things in the days of old; For even in those days it came to
pass, that the Elect People were reproached and falsely reputed by the men of
the World; as in the Case of the Jews, in their building of the Temple again,
when they returned out of the Captivity: How were the People of God at that day
accused and reproached? and that by the wise men of that Kingdom, even unto the
King Ahasuerus, Ezra 4. 15, 16. That good City of Jerusalem, the Habitation and
Dwelling of the Jews (and then, only named People of God) was accused of being
a bad rebellious City, and hurtful to Kings, and that the People moved Sedition
therein, to the danger of the Revenue of Kings, etc. And Neh. 4. 2. the People
of God were scorned, and reproached, and called feeble Jews, who builded the
House of God; and it was said in derision of them, that a Fox should go up, and
break down their Wall. And also, how were the holy Prophets and Servants of God
rejected, reproached and accused, even to the Princes and Rulers of the Earth,
in Generations past, as Daniel to the King! how was he accused? Dan. 6. 13. and
the three Children were accused to the King, Dan. 3. 8. and the Apostles were
reproached under the slander of being movers of Sedition, and suchlike, Acts.
24. 5. being many times accused and haled before Felix, Agrippa, and diverse
others of the Rulers of the Heathen: and it was told the Apostles, by Christ,
That all manner of evil should be spoken against them, for his Name sake. And
throughout the whole Scriptures, there is very large Testimony, how that in
Ages past, the Servants and People of God were accused and falsely reproached
before Rulers and Kings, by their Enemies, that sought their destruction. The
truth of this is so clear and full, that it needs no further Testimony.

And as it was in this case, in the days of old, so is it happened in this day;
who more now accused and falsely reproached, then the Innocent People of God? Is
not all evil spoken against them, and that even to Rulers, and Governers, and
Kings? And this is done by their Enemies, that seek to destroy them, even by
such as would not have the Work of the Lord to prosper, and his People to be
preserved; and on this account, the cry is great against us every where, as if
we were Heretics, Blasphemers, Seditious, and Enemies to Magistracy and
Government, to Church and Ministry, and such like. And these, with such like
have been, and are the Accusations against us, whereby we are reproached falsely
before men: and this has been our portion in this World, since we were a
People, by the Men of this Generation; and the very same is come to pass upon
us in this case, as was upon the People of God in former Generations; and as it
was done unto them, so it is done unto us; and therefore we are in Patience
under all our Afflictions and Sufferings, whether we are persecuted by Actions
or Words; and for the Name of Christ, and his sake, we bear all things, having
Prophecy and Example before us, of the same things that came to pass between
the Men of this World, and the People and Saints of the Most High.

And for as much as one that subscribes himself George Willington of Bristol
City, has publicly appeared in Print, even in the Work aforesaid, with his
Accusations and Reproaches against the People of God, whom he in scorn calls
Quakers, in his Book called, The thrice Welcome of King CHARLES the Second,
etc. Because of which his Accusations, are the very present Occasion of this my
present Work; and that his Accusations may be turned backward, and the minds of
Men, even of King Charles, may be better informed; for he has accused us to
the King, and being we are somewhat concerned in this matter, being thus
reproached, and that to the King, who has yet little knowledge of us and our
Principles; therefore it is upon me to give reasonable Answers to that Part of
his Book, wherein we are concerned and accused, lest that the King, to his own
hurt, should receive such Accusations for Truth, when as they are otherwise,
and so be induced to proceed upon Reports, if the Charge should not be answered.

And first, I shall affirm, and prove it in its season, That this same Man
(whose Accusations I am now going to answer) has proceeded in the same spirit
of all the false Accusers beforementioned, and he has lifted up his voice in
contempt of the Lord's People, and has rendered an evil Report of the Lord's
Elect: and though we forgive our Enemies, him, and such as he; yet will the
Lord plead with, and give unto them according to their Deeds; and we only may
reprove them, and leave Vengeance to the LORD our GOD, unto whom it belongs.

Now though we are, and have been thus proceeded against ever since we were a
People, even falsely reproached, and all manner of evil spoken against us for
the Name of Christ, by them whose Hearts are filled with Fury and Rage against
us; yet we are known in our integrity unto the Lord, who has placed his N^me
with us; and we know one another in Faithfulness, and Truth, and Righteousness,
and I hope we have a Witness in many Consciences, even of our Enemies, and also
of many in Bristol, that as to our Doctrines, Practices and Conversations, they
are according to the Truth, and answerable to the Scriptures, and justifiable
even of the Witness of God, in all sober-minded People, even of them that have
not yet joined themselves to us; and we are known to that in many, even to the
Witness of God in their Consciences; to which in all, we daily commend our
selves in Doctrine, Practice, and Conversation, that thereby only we may be
known and approved: and we praise not our selves, neither do we boast of what
we are, s^ving in the Lord; yet from time to time, we do, and can make our
Appeal in the sight of God, to the just Principle of Him in all Men, and even
to the King, before whom we now stand accused by this our Enemy, do I make this
desire, (though yet we are in a great measure Strangers to him, in Doctrine,
Practices, and Conversation) that he may in all Cases of this, and other
Matters, show Moderation, and the Spirit of Meekness, and may first try all
things, and then he may judge the more justly; for we are not afraid to be
tried before him, and all the World, in any Matter of Doctrine, or in any Part
of our Religion; and we should judge it greatly honorable in the King to hear
our Answers, as well as our Enemies Accusations; and to the Witness of God in
him, we can appeal for determination in any matter that is, or may hereafter
come in controversy before him, concerning us.

And it is most certain, that the proceedings of George Willington in this case
of his accusing us to the King, is not in love to Us, nor to the King and his
Government, but altogether contrary, as upon diverse found Reasons I might
^emonstrate, (and may in its season;) and his present work against us, is from
old inbred Enmity and Malice against us, who would have us destroyed, if it
were in his Power; for he has formerly manifested himself in writing
Reproaches and Slanders against us, which were sufficiently answered, and
hereproved, and refuted to his great shame, among all sober People; to which he
never yet replied, as being too Ignorant and too weak ever to clear himself
from what is charged against him in the Answer given to his former Book; but
now, as I have said, out of, and from that bitter, old, long-seated Enmity, and
devouring Malice, he has again appeared in Print against us, supposing himself
to have so excellent opertunity more then ever before, to have his devouring
mind satisfied of us; and therefore has he in haste presented the King with a
Welcome, partly of Reproaches and Accusations against the People of God, but
his Heart has deceived him in this case; for we shall live and not die; God
will preserve us, and no man shall destroy us.

Now it had been a Welcome of love far more to the King, to have sought his
Mercy and Meekness toward all, at his first entrance into the Government; and
the rather to have stirred him up thereunto, then to seek to provoke him to
rigor and wrath against any to destroy them; as this Welcome of G^o.
Willinton's tends unto; which is not true love to the King, but rather a
preparing a Net for to entangle him, and to lay stumbling Blocks of Iniquity
before the Feet of the King, that he might be destroyed, and fall, and never
rise. And let the King consider this, for if he be provoked by any means to
d^stroy, or seek to overthrow the Innocent People of God, that same shall be a
Net to entangle him to destruction, and a stumbling Block to fall upon, and be
everlastingly broken. So that hereby the Welcome of Geo. Willington does appear
to be, not of love, but of ignorant hatred to the King; and indeed, it is such,
especially that part of it now under hand) that it deserves reproof more then
acceptance, even from the King, if he rightly consider the ground and end of
the Author in his Accusations against us; notwithstanding his seeming fawning
and Flatteries, by which he appears to be some Pick-thank, or some News-teller,
or rather Tale-carrier, for some hope of Promotion or Reward: But I wish better
to the King, then that he receive or accept of the false Informations of this
Author, (our Accuser) or of any such like, lest that he ensnare himself, and be
taken, and stumble and fall, in receiving mis-Informations instead of Truth;
and thereupon proceed in judgment, or censure unjustly, which is a way to
destroy himself: Let him take heed to himself, I desire better for him, and
that he may shut his Ear against evil Informations, and may never have his
Heart opened to the sheding of Blood, or to persecute any for their Conscience,
and the exercise thereof toward God.

And now I come to the Accusation it self; which is this in substance:

That the Quakers are Enemies unto, and have sought to root out the true
Protestant Religion: The words are these, calling upon the King to honor the
Lord; which (says he) is done by establishing and preserving the true
Protestant Religion; which of late years, has been in great danger to be
rooted out by Anabaptists, Quakers, and Atheists, page 6. line 1, 2, 3. of his
Book.

Answ. In answer to this, diverse things are considerable, as to the manner of
his Charge against us.

That this Accuser has proceeded in the same manner, and by the same spirit as
the Jews, Scribes and P^^^is^^s, and chief Priest^ proceeded against Christ
Jesus; for they numbered him with Transgressors, as it is written, and crucified
him between two Thieves, that they might add to his Afflictions, and bring him
under the greater reproach to Ages after: and thus this Accu^^^ has done, in
numbering the Innocent People of God, called Quakers, with, and among
Transgressors; even that he may the more add to their Reproach, and have his
Accusation heard before the King; even that it might be received for truth, as
if the Quakers were no better then Atheists, that deny God; for, for this end
this Accuser, in these Terms vilified us, and made us equal in this account to
the Atheists; and thus numbered us with Transgressors and Sinners, and that
unto the King; and for this end, no doubt, that we might be destroyed and cut
off, and crucified with such as deny the Lord God. Oh how unjustly and
unmercifully has this our Accuser proceeded in thus dealing toward us, let
the King and all People consider!

2. As for such as are Atheists, who deny there is a God, or who deny the true
God that is, and who live after the desires of their own lusts, saying, Let us
eat and drink for to morrow we must die; and there is no pleasure in the Grave,
nor state of happiness or misery after this Life: such we do deny, and have no
Affinity, Amity, Union nor Fellowship with them, nor they with us; and this is
well known through the whole Nation, and fully believed in Bristol, and I am
persuaded, in the very Conscience of this our Accuser, he knows we are not such
as deny God, nor have any fellowship with such; therefore how heinous is this
man's Crime, both to God and Men, who has abused the whole Nation with his
Slanders, and endeavored to mis-use the King's Ears with false Informations,
and has perverted his own Conscience in speaking contrary to it, and has
vexed the Lord by his Lies; and all in this his numbering of us in Accusation
with the Atheists, as if we were one with them, and no better then they?

3. As for the Anabaptists (so called) the other Party with whom we are
accounted, and numbered in the Accuser's charge: It is well known what
difference there is between us and them, and how that we have been opposite one
to the other in Controversy about spiritual things; and also in matters of
Judgment about Government, and fighting with carnal Weapons, etc. and they
have dealt sometime with us, and proceeded toward us too hardly and
maliciously, as some of themselves know, in accusing us to the Powers of the
Nation, as this man has done. But I shall at this time say no farther of them
then this; There may be a sincerity and uprightness amongst them, in many of
them, more then is in this our Accuser, though there is no small measure of
Error in Judgment in them, as concerning many Doctrines and Practices held by
them; and its not my work now to accuse them, neither to reward them evil for
their evil; but only on this occasion I am forced to clear the truth, for the
better information of all: and I do wish well to them, and even that they may
confess to the justness of God's Judgment in what has befallen them in this
the day of their reproof; who have been too ambitious, and hard-hearted toward
others that have not been of their Way and Sect; and now the Lord deals justly
with them, in bowing them under others, and in defacing their glory, which was
of man, and not of God. But to the case in hand I return, and say, How
unrighteous still does appear the manner of this our Adversary's Charge! for
whatsoever the Anabaptists, or any others may hold, or do (though I at this
time) shall neither justify, nor yet condemn all what they profess and
practice) cannot we be charged guilty of, except it first be lawfully proved
that we hol^ and practice the same things.

And as for us who are scornfully called Quakers, (which Title was given unto
us of derision and nick-naming) I cannot in this place say much of us, lest I
should be said to justify our selves, which I seek not to do, because it is
the Lord that justifies us; neither do I love much to be heard in our own
Cause, when it is only our own; nor do I seek praise of men for us, nor of men
to be ^ed: yet this I may say on Gods account, and in his cause, and not of our
(...); we are the people of the Lord, whom he has called, and chosen, and
(...); and though hated of men, yet it is for the Lords sake, and not for any
(...) amongst men that can be changed upon us: And we are Worshippers of (...)
^^ue God in spirit and in truth; and we are of God; and they that are of (...),
are not against us, but with us: and as for any Doctrine or Practice in (...)
Religion, held forth by us, they are according to the Scriptures of Truth.
(...) I assert, and can prove, if need require, in opposition to any that shall
^^^y it: for we are not of a new Religion, as if we worshipped strange godds,
though by the ignorance of men we are so reputed; but are of the same Spirit,
(...) in the same way of truth; and we walk in the same light and life even as
t^^ Apostles and Churches of Jesus Christ were of, and walked in, in the days
(...) old; and this I am ready to make proof of, if so it come to pass, even
be^^^^ the King, and the whole Nation; and do further declare. That whatsoe^^^
Church Government, Ministry, Doctrine and Ordinances, Faith and ^^^ship, and
whatsoever Religion in whomsoever, that is not according to the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, but differing from* and co^^rary to, that Spirit of
God that gave forth the Scriptures; I do for my self, and on the behalf of all
them that are one with me utterly renounce and ^^y, and freely give witness
against, notwithstanding upon whatsoever foundation, such Church Government,
Ministry, Doctrine, Faith and Worship be builded; if not upon Jesus Christ as
the alone Foundation, and according to the Scriptures, and proveable thereby,
they are Antichristian, and the Lord will confound them.

The truth of these things being proved, and rightly considered by the King,
(...) all others, no just occasion will be found for this our Adversaries
Charge, nor (...) place can rightly be found in the heart of the King for the
reception of the ^tion, but may upon just trial condemn both Accuser and
Accusati^^ I mean, not destroy the man, but reprove the Accuser and his lies
^er.

And now I shall proceed to the Accusation it self, and shall lay open the
folly (...) ^^norance of the matter of his Accusation, as well as I have done
the wicked^^^^ (...) the manner of it.

(...) the true Protestant Religion has been in danger to be rooted out by the
Quakers, (...) This is the Charge it self.

^^sw. If by true Protestant Religion, the Accuser mean true Christan Reli^^^^
then I deny his Accusation utterly; and do charge him to be a Slander^ Liar,
and False Accuser: and must desire of the King, that such a (...) (...) taken
notice of, who has abused and dishonored him, and that very (...) in
presenting him with Lies and Falsehoods for Welcomes, which is in^ les^ then
disgrace to both the Person and Office of a King. What a (...) ^^tending so
much to Love and Loyalty, and so much rejoicing on his be^^^^ and as if he were
one of his choice Subjects, and gave such reverence and (...) to him, and
attempted so high, as to be the Kings Informer and Instructor, (...) to be
found a Presenter of Falsehoods and Slanders against as good Sub^ (...) the
Nation as himself? O how abominable is this both to God and the (...) and the
whole Kingdom, that these things should be, much more that (...) should pass
unreproved! for we are of the true Christian Religion, as be^ (...) have said,
even in the same way, and of the same Spirit as were the holy (...) and for
that Religion we stand, to do and suffer all things for that cause, (...) for
the true Christian Religions sake.

But if this our Accuser by Protestant Religion, mean the Sects of Luthe^ ^r of
the Sect of Calvinists (so called) or whomsoever else, which, I do (...)
heartily that I had the full intent of his mind, of whom he means by the true
Protestants; for his words admit of diverse acceptations, and so a sound Answer
can hardly be given, while I do answer only what I suppose to be his meaning
by true Protestant Religion: for there are diverse sorts of Protestants;
Lutherans, Calvinists, and many others, which are all Protestants, and have
protested against the Pope, each one sort of them saying, They are the true
Christians, and true Protestants; yet are very much divided among themselves,
even to the killing and persecuting one of another: so that, which sort this
man means, and who of them are of the true Protestant Religion which we would
root out, etc. this is doubtful: I would I knew his meaning, that I might give
him a true Answer and sound; for we may deny and oppose Protestant Religion, or
some part of it; that is, some Sects, or diverse sorts that have protested
against the Church of Rome, and yet be no Transgressors in the sight of God,
not many men: for diverse of the Protestants themselves are denying others of
the Protestants, and their Religion; and it is my belief in this case, that
some have deserted the Pope and the Papists Religion upon bad grounds, and have
taken up a Religion as bad and no better then Popery: not that I justify
Pop^ry in all things, but have a large Witness to give against it and men ought
to protest against it; yet I say, some called Protestants in their Religion,
are as corrupt as any of the Church of Rome: so on some account, I may as
lawfully deny Protestant Religion, (or some sort of them that do profess it, as
the Church of Rome; for it is as corrupted; (some part of it) and no more
acceptable to God, in the Profession and Practice of it. This is spoken in
general of it, because his Accusation is general. Now if I had his full intent,
whether he means Lutherans or Calvinists, or what others, if not them, that are
of the true Protestant Religion that we would root out, then I should insist
upon that particular sort, and give my exception against them; for I have many
things to object, at least, and some things wholly to except against in the
Protestant Religion, or some sort of it; not that I condemn or judge every
individual man of the Protestant Religion: for I believe there are many that
are sincere and zealous toward GOD, though with some Error in Judgment; yet
as to the Form of Worship, and Constitution of Church and Ministry, and
Ordinances in the Protestant Religion, it is much, if not wholly differing and
contrary to the Church, Ministry, Worship and Ordinances of the Apostles and
true Christians in their days: and more then this I now may not say; a more
full Answer I cannot give to this Charge, except, that, I did know what sort of
Protestant he intended; which if I did, I should utter my mind more large as to
the Matter, according as the Spirit of God gave me utterance.

And now that I have spoken of the manner and also of the matter of his Charge,
I shall hint partly of the end and purpose of his thus accusing as to the King:
His end, intent and purpose of his thus charging us, must needs be, and it will
appear to be out of Malice, Wrath and Enmity, for to incense and move the Heart
of the King against us, to destroy us, as I have before mentioned: And in
answer to this, some things most especially are considerable to the King and
all his Friends.

1. If he should upon the Report of this Man, or any others, let his Heart be
moved into Rigor and Enmity against us, and thereby seek, intend, or work Evil
against us, to destroy us, he did but fill the Land with Violence, Cruelty and
Persecution, and Innocent Blood, and fill his Government with Oppression and
Tyranny, and provoke the God of Heaven against him to destroy him, and
overthrow his Kingdom, and Power, and Government: and this would doubtless be
the effect of receiving such a Man's Counsel, and of his so proceeding, if that
he seek to pluck up what the Lord has planted: and if he dip hi^ Hand in
innocent suffering of God's People unjustly, and if he reach forth his Hand to
touch God's Anointed, and hurt the Peaceable in his Land, th^^ shall the Lord
take him from his Authority, and give his Dominion to another more worthy then
he: And this is for him to consider in the coolness of his (...).

2. ^f he did proceed to do any thing against us, or be moved in his heart
^unto, barely upon the report of this, or such other men, without hearing Face
to Face, and lawful trial in the matter, and hearing our Answer and ^^fence, as
well as our enemies Charge against us; then all the Nations of the World might
condemn him; and every sober Subject would cry in their Consciences against
him, for unjust judgment, and cruel proceedings; if he, upon report of others,
through prejudice should act against any people; and the Heathen King Agrippa
would rise up in judgment against him, who would not ^^^demn Paul from the
Accusation of others, without first hearing the Accused himself: and a
Christian King ought to show as much Mercy, Justice and Reason in what he does,
as the Heathen Kings have done in the like case. And let the King consider this.

3. Let him also consider what Enmity, and Malice, and Rage, is in the hearts
of these men, these Priests I mean, of whose Fraternity and Alliance this our
Accuser is one, and how they seek after innocent blood, who are thus ready and
^^^^ard at his first entrance into the Land, to present the King with
Accusations of Falsehood and Reproaches against an innocent people, to move his
heart, if possible, to destroy and devour the harmless: The spirit and nature
of these men are to be considered, whose works are often tending to shed blood;
but if he shall be guided and counseled by such, they will lead him into the
ditch: for they are of the spirit of Envy and Mischief, and Mischief rests with
them, even against all who will not bow under their Authority, and submit unto
their false Wor^^ips. And let the King beware of that Generation of men, lest
they be a snare upon him, and wound him.

And I shall now proceed to some other things in his Book, to that where he
^aith, He does upon his bended Knees most bumbly beseech the King, and the
Honorable Parliament, that they will, first,

Cut off false Prophets, Heretics, and perverse and incorrigible Seducers and
^^^^phemers; for these are the P^st (says he) of both Church and State, (...).

Answ. I answer to this: Many things are considerable to the King and
Parli^ent, and whole Kingdom.

1. It is to be considered who these false Prophets, Heretics, Seducers and
^^^^phemers are, which the Petitioner would have cut off, and destroyed: ^^^m
his meaning is of, is doubtful; for that there are false Prophets, He^,
Seducers and Blasphemers in these Nations, and that very many; ^^is is not
doubtful, but certainly believed and known: but what sort of men, (...)
perfectly who these are, distinguished from all others, this requires (...)
debate, and large trial; especially seeing that each sect and sort of ^^ople
cries against others, as if they were such and such; and this is usual with
^^^^sts, Protestants, and others, to cry for their own Liberty and Toleration,
a such who are in the right way; and each one sort almost desiring and
petiti^^^^^ the Powers of the Earth against others that are not of their way,
to de^ and cut off such as differ from them, as Heretics and Deceivers: but
such ^^^^it that seeks to destroy menslives on that account, is of Antichrist,
and (...) (...) God.

2. And if false Prophets, Heretics, Seducers, and Blasphemers, were cer^
known, and distinguished from others that are not so; yet the King (...)
^^^liament ought not to destroy such, and to cut them off from the Earth, (...)
^lling of them, or executing outward punishments and afflictions upon (...);
for God has not committed such power and authority to them; nei^^er to be
Judges infallibly, who are false Prophets, Heretics and Blasphe^^^^; ^or yet
to execute death and outward sufferings upon such as are: for these are
spiritual matters and Causes, to try and judge who deceivers are, and to
proceed toward Heretics and Blasphemers; and these Cases belong to the
Jurisdiction of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, and not to any earthly King^ and
Rulers at this day.

4. And if King and Parliament were able to judge of false Prophets and
^lasphemers, and who they are that are such, from others that are not; yet how
contrary to the way of God would it be, even to the example of Christ and his
Apostles, to destroy and cut off by death the lives of such false Prophets and
Blasphemers? for if men be in an evil way, even in the way of Heresy, and
Error, and Blasphemy, and be deceived, and deceivers of others, yet it is not a
time to destroy and kill such, like as if such should be sent straight to Hell,
being cut off in their wickedness and in their Error. This is not God's way, I
say; for he desires not the death of sinners, not to cut men off in their
Errors and evil ways; but its rather the time to instruct and exhort such, and
to correct and reprove them by sound Doctrine, and to win them to the Truth,
and out, of their errors, that they may be saved; and this Christ and his
Apostles gave example for; for there were many in their days that were false
Prophets, and Heretics, Seducers and Blasphemers, and that were perverse and
incorrigible, that did Blaspheme against Christ, and called him Devil, and that
did oppose the Gospel, and scorned the Apostles; and such were Blasphemers and
Heretics: but did Christ and his Apostles at all desire that such might be
killed, and cut off by death? Nay: they forgave their Enemies, and did instruct
them by sound Doctrine, and sought, to win their Persecutors, and not to have
them killed, as this Petitioner would, whose Spirit is manifest to be of
Antichrist, and the Dragon, and not of the Lamb: and if the request were
granted, and the lives of such as this Petitioner calls false Prophets cut off,
then the King and Parliament would rather provoke the Lord against themselves
to destroy them, then to give unto themselves blessings and peace.

5. But they being ignorant who the Deceivers and Blasphemers are, and not
being equal and just Judges in that case, but also divided among themselves
about it; and it being not committed of God to them, to destroy by death of
body such as may err in their minds, by killing such whom they may suppose
false Prophets; and they wanting infallible judgment to know who are false
Prophets; how soon may they destroy and cut off the lives of true Prophets, and
Christ's Ministers, and men that Fear God, instead of false Prophets and
Blasphemers, even for want of true judgment and discerning, and because of
their own division in judgment in that case? for i^s possible that some of the
Parliament may judge such to be Deceivers, whom others of them may judge to be
true Ministers; and whose judgment then shall stand? and also, thus it has
often come to pass in the World, the true Prophets, and Christ himself, and the
holy Apostles and Ministers of Christ, were accounted Deceivers, Heretics and
Blasphemers, and such like, by the Kings and Rulers of the World in former
Generations; and the true Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, were persecuted as
such, and destroyed as such, some of them, even by the Kings and Rulers of this
World, till they (...) provoked God against them, to destroy them; and some of
them he did bring wrath upon, because thereof. And how easy a thing it is for
the present King and Parliament to walk in the same way, even to account the
true Ministers (...) Jesus Christ and his People, through want of infallible
knowledge, Heretics, and Deceivers, and Blasphemers, and to destroy them on
that account, while Deceivers may be accounted true Ministers by them, even
till Gods displea^^^^ breaks forth against them, to confound them? And this is
worthy to be consi^^^ed by them, against the evil counsel of wicked men, who
would lay snar^^ (...) their feet, and cast stumbling blocks before them, that
they may be taken and f^^^, to their overthrow.

6. It is of the Devil, the Dragon, and Antichrist, all this killing and
per^^^^ting of one Sect by another about Religion, since the Apostles days: the
^ts and Witnesses have been slain, and all that would not worship the Beast ^e
been killed by the Dragon, the Devil and false power, as may be read in the
^velations; and never any of the true Churches of Christ, nor any Mem^er
thereof, at any time, in, or since the days of Christ and his Apostles, did
ever kill, or cut off by death, nor sought so to do, any false Prophet,
Heretic or Blasphemers; the true Christians never proceeded in that way, but
forgave Enemies, and did win their Opposers by sound Doctrine and Conversation,
or gave them up to Satan, and separated from them, but nev^r killed them; but
it was the Antichrist, the Wolves in Sheep's clothing that killed about
Worship, even all that would not Worship: The Saints and Martyrs, their Blood
was shed by the Beast, because they would not worship; and it was the Whore
that has drunk all this Blood of Prophets and ^ust Men, and not the true
Church, who wars with spiritual Weapons, and ^ills Enmity, and Powers of
Darkness; but kills not Persons, nor wars with ^arnal Weapons.

7. And if they should proceed to kill, and cut off by death such as are
Heretics and Deceivers, who err in their minds, how unjust would that be, to
destroy the lives of Men for the error of their minds and judgments in
spiritual things? And this the King and Parliament ought not to do; though
false Prophets, Heretics and Blasphemers must not escape unpunished, but ought
to be proceeded against; yet not in and by the way of killing and destroying
men's lives; for that is a Punishment not answerable to the Offense, and every
Offense ought to have a Punishment just, equal and answerable to the Crime: and
to punish the Body by death for the error of the mind in spiritual things, this
is not equal, nor according to the Spirit of the Gospel; but if any shall be
destroyed, in their Persons or Estates by Cruelty, for, or because they are in
Error of Mind and Judgment in Matters Spiritual, or may be supposed so to be,
it is no less then robbery and murder in the sight of God: And let the King
consider this, and keep his Hands from shedding of Blood on that account, lest
he provoke the Lord against him.

And now I come to the second Branch of the Petition, where the Petitioner does
request in these words: (says he) I most humbly beg your Grace, that the ^oly
Sabbath of the Lord, the Christian Sabbath, may by your Majesty's strict
Command, be more religiously kept and observed then heretofore, etc.

Answ. I answer to this: It is well worthy to be considered by the King.

1. That God did indeed command the People of the Jews to keep and observe the
seventh day of the week for a Sabbath; and that they should not do any manner
of work therein, they, their Servants nor their Cattle; but that day should be
kept holy unto the Lord by them; and to this the Prophets and Servants of God
in the time of the first Covenant, did instruct and exhort, upon the Penalty of
God's Displeasure against that People of the Jews, if they neglected to keep
the seventh day of the week Sabbath; and upon many the Lord did execute
Judgment because thereof, only upon the People of the I^ws; for to them only
was commanded the observing the seventh day of the week as a Sabbath, as a Sign
between God and them.

2. That God never commanded the keeping of the seventh day of the week (...) a
Sabbath to the Gentiles, nor to any Nation or People, saving only the People
of the Jews, of which people we are not (this Nation I mean) according to the
Flesh, after the Generation of Men: we are not of the Jews (...) of the
Gentiles; and therefore the seventh day of the week was never commanded of God
to this Nation to keep as a Sabbath; neither can we be con^^mned or judged of
the Lord, though we keep it not, because it was never commanded of God unto us,
nor to any of the Gentil^s, nor to any but to the People of the Jews, as I have
said; and it was but a sign to them; and Christ fulfilled all shaddows, and was
the end of the Law, and the finishing of the Sabbath days, and in him that
Type was ended.

3. That the observing of the first day of the week for a Sabbath; which has
been done in this Nation for many Ages, is only by Tradition, and not from any
Command of God, nor binding Example of the Apostles, that we read of: it is not
of Commandment from God or Christ Jesus.

The first day of the week has been observed as a Christian Sabbath but from
Tradition, and original Ordination of the Church of Rome, as themselv^s do
confess; and the Protestants have taken it up from them, though it is
acknowledged that the Scripture says, The Saints and Churches of Christians in
the Apostles days did meet together on the first day of the week; for they
that witnessed Christ come, did deny Temple-Worship, and first Priesthood, and
Circumcision, and Synagogues, and Sabbath-dayes, which were a shadow, Col. 2.
16, 17. and its said. They came together on the first day of the week; but that
this Practice of theirs is a Command to us at this day, or binding Example to
any Christians, that all must keep the first day of the week as a Sabbath by
force, and upon such or such Pains, Forfeitures and Penalties; this I have not
learned, neither from God, nor out of the Scriptures; but it is doubtful to
many, even whether the God of Heaven requires it now of Christians and
Believers, the keeping of any one day of the week as a Sabbath of rest from all
Labor, and to observe that day for Worship; and to others it is doubtful, if a
day the Lord requires, then which day, whether seventh day, or first day of
the week,? And concerning these Cases, there is present Controversy in the
minds of many men.

4. That to force and compel upon any Nation by violent Laws and Edicts, the
observing any one day as Sabbath upon such and such Penalties, and that only
upon the ground of Tradition and long Custom, while the Scriptures in that case
are silent, and fully determines not; this is not acceptable unto God, nor of
any reward by him, either to him or them that forces and compels the keeping of
a day; nor in that Nation, or from that People that so keep it by the Custom of
time, or the Commands of Men, when as their Consciences are not persuaded by
the Spirit of God in that case, by which way the God of Heaven is only rightly
worshipped; and the forcing of observing days and things either against pure
Conscience, or in the ignorance thereof, is but Abomination and Idolatry, both
in the Imposers, and in the Imposed; and with such Sacrifices God is not well
pleased.

And this is for the King to consider, whose greatest wisdom it will be, and
most pleasing to God in him, neither to compel and impose by Rigor the keeping
of a day, or observing of Practices as partaining to the Wor^^^p of God and
Religion; nor yet to punish or persecute any for the keeping any day, or for
observing such or such a Practice in Religion; but let every Man do in such
Cases, even in matters of Faith and Worship toward God, and about Religion, as
they are persuaded in their own Hearts and Consciences, without either imposing
upon them, or persecuting of them in any thing about Religion: and let him
only rule and govern in the Cases between man and, man and over men in the
exercise of earthly Things; but between God and Men's Consciences, let him take
heed how he meddles; for there he ought not to rule nor judge, but to leave
that to the Lord God, who alone is sufficient in such things to persuade the
Conscience, and to judge and rule by his Spirit in all the Matters of his own
Kingdom, and about Religion, and the Observances thereof; and this Trust and
Power is only in himself, to effect all this by his own Spirit, and is not
committed to any Earthly King.

And how I come to the first Branch of his Petition; which is in these words:
(says he)

I most humbly beg, That your Grace will uphold, cherish and f^ster a Learned
and Pious Ministry in your Kingdoms, who are accounted vile, and laden with
Reproaches, and such Ministers (says he) whose Loyal Constancy and Integrity
does bespeak them to be; not time-serving Polititions to g^^tifie man's humors,
and serve their own Interest; but Lux mundi, Sal terrae, etc.

Answ. In answer to this, let the King wisely and soberly consider,

1. That God has a faithful, pious and spiritual, learned and true Ministry,
sent forth by Jesus Christ to convert people to God from sin and wickedness,
who are indeed God's Ambassadors and Watchmen for souls, and are Lux mundi,
Sal terrae; the Light of the World, the Salt of the Earth: this is most
certain, and not denied nor doubted of; but who it is, and whom the Persons
are, of and amongst all the many kinds of Ministers and Sects that are now in
being in the Nation, this is very doubtful to many, its possible to the King
himself, seeing here are in this Nation diverse sorts of Ministers; as Prelates
and Presbyterians (so called) and diverse other sorts; all of whom saying, they
are the true Ministers, and they are the pious learned Ministry and that others
are Deceivers that differ from them, and this is the cry of them all; each sort
justifying themselves, and crying up their Ministry against others and their
Ministry, and this all of them do with pretense of proving their Ministry by
the Scriptures: But the Case remains still doubtful to many, who is it, and who
is it not, that are the true Ministers, and have the true Ministry sent of
Christ Jesus, seeing one sort as well as another do seem to justify themselves
according to the Scriptures, and yet are divided, and incontention among
themselves, to be killing and destroying, and persecuting one of another, and
each sort of others.

2. If the King without certain knowledge by the Infallible Spirit of God, who
the true Ministers of Christ are, and who they are not, distinguished from all
others by infallible Evidence; if he do establish and uphold any one sort as
the true Ministers, and pull down and persecute others as false Ministers, and
be but doubtful in his own Conscience who are the true Ministers, and who are
the false; how great danger does he run himself into, even to justify the
Wicked, and condemn the Righteous, and possibly may establish and uphold a
false Ministry instead of the true, and persecute and destroy the true Ministry
instead of the false? And this may he soon effect, for want of discerning and
right judgment in the Case; and in so doing vex and displease the Lord God,
and gain his Wrath and Fury upon him and his Government. Therefore it will be
great wisdom for him to wait upon the Lord, for to receive his Spirit, that he
may first discern and try between true and false Ministers and Ministry; and in
the mean time allow Liberty to all alike in their Religion, while they walk
justly and soberly as men, and are not hurtful to the Persons, or just Estates
of others by their Religion.

3. If Liberty be given to one Sect, and one kind of Ministry, in opposition to
others, and all other prohibited and persecuted; how would this ^^rage and vex
the spirits of many in the Nation against him and his Government? and while he
gained one sort of men on his part, and some Ministers to pray for him, he
disengaged diverse sorts; and many would seek God against him; and such
proceedings would be both contrary to God, and of very bad effect in these
Nations; for men would be provoked in their spirits not to fear any dangers,
rather then to be held in such captivity under the Ministry and Worship of such
whom they in Conscience could not join with; and there is a woeful Example in
this Nation of the effect of such prohibition and force: for was not that very
matter (to wit) the establishing of one ^ort of Ministers, and persecuting
others, one of the principle Cause of the last bloody War? And may not the
Nation fear the like now, if the same Ground be laid, and the Foundation
raised, as beforementioned? And therefore let this enter into the Heart of the
King to consider very weightily.

But the Petitioner seems to define to the King what Ministers he begs to be
upheld and cherished, in these words; Such whose Loyal Constancy and Integrity
do bespeak them to be, not time-serving Politicians, to gratify men's humors,
and serve their own sordid Interests; but Lux mundi, Sal terrae, etc.

Answ. 1. They who are indeed the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, that are
called truly of him into that work, and are God's Ambassadors, neither set
this Petitioner a begging for them, nor can accept of this his work; for
Christ's true Ministers are no Beggars, neither seek to be approved to Kings,
nor any Men, by Flattery and Deceit, but are approved to be the Ministers of
Christ, and sent of him, by Doctrine and Conversation, and through Faith and
Patience; and thus, and after this manner, were the Apostles and Ministers of
Jesus Christ approved in the days of old, even before Kings and Rulers, and
others; and they did not beg for themselves, nor any for them, approbation to
themselves and their Ministry before any: so that this Petitioner is not in the
Spirit and Way as the Saints and Apostles were in, who is begging even by
flattery, an Approbation of Ministers and Ministry, as he says, on his bended
Knees, that the Ministry may be upheld, maintained and established, and that
the King would do it.

2. If none are to be upheld, and maintained and established but such as this
Petitioner has described, then not very many of the men of this Generation of
Priests, because they come not under his own proposed Qualifications: For,
alas! the King may say, or without offense to him, I hope I may say for him,
Where shall we find such as are here described? shall he find one among many?
o^ any at all of that Fraternity, that have not been disloyal, unconstant, and
changable in their ways? And have not they, as for the general part of them,
(I mean, of the Priests) turned every way, and cried up, and prayed for this
and the other, that would but give them Money and Means; and the very self same
men sometime been for one Man and his Government, and in a very little time
been quite contrary to that, and so proved themselves absolute time-serving
Politicians, to gratifi^ men's humors, and to serve their own sordid Interests?
Does not ten thousand in England know this? and may not the King himself easily
believe it, and know it; especially when he considers who it was chiefly that
first preached and prayed up the War against his Father, and who it was that
made so many Flattering Addresses to Ol^^^^ Cromwell, and then to his Son
Richard, and then changed from that way of Government, and then cried up
Commonwealth-way again, and now are turned to cry up him? By all which it does
appear, that no one sort of People in England are so disloyal and unconstant as
that Generation of Teachers: and who can now put trust in such, that have thus
served Times, and been Men-Pleasers, even for their own ends? And how shall the
King ever, without great danger to himself, repose confidence in such as are so
changeable? or how c^n any man beg his upholding and establishing of them,
without shame to himself; and that under the name and qualification of constant
Men, and not-time-serving men for their own Interests, when as these very men
called Ministers, for whom this man is now begging, are qualified quite
contrary to his own description? And therefore the King has reason enough to
deny the request, because the general part of men petitioned for, are not Lux
mundi, Sal terrae, but blind Leaders of the Blind, and changeable Hypocrites,
and the Oppression of the Kingdom; nor are they all Watchmen for Souls, but
many for Money and Hire, nor God's Ambassadors, but Antichrist's Ministers, who
are out of the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ Jesus.

And now I shall proceed to the fourth Branch of his Petition, which is
expressed in these words; (says he)

I humbly beg your Grace, That ye would uphold a liberal and sufficient
Maintenance for the learned Ministry, because Christ has ordained, They that
pr^ach the Gospel should ^^ve of the Gospel; not a Niggardly but Liberal and
Sufficient Maintenance, that they ^^y be encouraged, etc.

Answ. As for ^^ue Gospel Ministers, they beg not Means nor Money of the Powers
of the Earth, but are therein without care; only careful how to please the
Lord, and to fulfill in Faithfulness their Calling: Nor did ever the Apostles
seek for Maintenance that way; though its true, the false Prophets, in
Generations past, they could never have enough of Maintenance; but every one of
them sought for his Gain from his Quarter, Isa. 56. 11. and the false Prophets
and Priests they Preached for Hire, and Divined for Money; and all that would
not give them, and put into their Mouths, they prepared War against them,
Micah 3. 11. And the false Teachers of old, they taught for filthy ^^^re, and
by feigned words made Merchandise of people, Tit. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 3. such as
walked in these practices in days past, were reputed and taken for De^^^vers
and false Teachers, but Christ's Ministers and the true Prophets, and Apostles
never went in this Way; but trusted the Lord, that sent them, with ^^re for all
outward things; yea, some of them labored with their hands, that by all (...)
they might make the Gospel of Christ without charge.

2 But yet it is certain, a Maintenance to the True Ministers of the Gospel is
allowed by Christ, and by his Apostles; but not by so much Money a Sermon,
(...) O^e Hundred, Two Hundred, or Three Hundred Pound, or more or less, as
they can bargain for, and get by the Year; nor the Tithes of men's Labor, and
Increase for Preaching; nor any forced and imposed Maintenance whatsoever:
(...) a way as this Christ never ordained that his Ministers should be
maintained in the World; nor did the Apostles ever allow, institute or practice
such a way of Maintenance in their Ministry: But this kind and way of
Maintenance is altogether Antichristian, and like to the false Prophets way
beforementioned, and not at all according to the Scriptures, nor the Example of
Christ's Gospel Ministers in former Ages.

3. The Maintenance which Christ and his Apostles allowed Ministers, and that
Way whereby Christ's Ministers were fed, and clothed, and maintained by out^^^d
Necessaries, was, Into whatsoever House that was worthy the Disciples entered,
they (...) there abide, and eat such things as were set before them: For (said
he) the ^^^kman is worthy of his Meat, and the Labourer is worthy of his Hire.
And Paul said, (...) a small matter to reap Carnal things, where they had sown
Spiritual things; and he (...) pe^^^heth the Gospel may live of the Gospel. And
that was the way of the Apo^^^^^ Maintenance, even by Free Gift, from them whom
they had begotten (...) ^^e Faith; and they that had planted a Vineyard might
eat of the Fruit of (...), and he that kept a Flock might eat of the Milk
thereof; and this was E^^land Just, That that Church whom they had planted, and
among whom (...) labored, should administer outward Necessities to them; but
yet they (...) not any sum of Money, nor Tithes of Peoples Estates, nor so much
(...) the year as a Debt; for this way was not the way of a Gospel-Main^^^^nce
in the days of the Apostles; but by a FREE GIFT of the ^^^rch, and not by
Imposition and Force upon any were they maintained in ^^^^ward things.

4. Let the King know, That it is not at this day a just and lawful way of
Gospel-^^intenance to Christ's Ministers, this forced way of Maintenance by
Tithes, (...) so much Money a Year, or claiming so much as a Debt of those
which may (...) do not receive or believe such a Minister is a true Minister of
Christ; and all (...) suing people at Law, casting them into Prison about
Ministers Maintenance, (...) not of God, but Antichrist, and not after the
Example of Christ's true Ministers, but after the Example of false Prophets and
Deceivers: And it is a lawful Maintenance at this day of Christ's Ministers,
That each Minister be maintained by the free Gift of the people under his
Ministry; and its just, that every Minister be maintained by the people to whom
he labors, and that every Form of Worship maintain their own Ministers, how,
and as they will; and if men preach the Gospel, let them live of it, and let
their Gospel maintain them, without begging Maintenance of the King, or
troubling him with such matters as pertain to another state, even to the
spiritual Government of Christ, who calls his Ministers, and gives his Gifts to
whom he will, and sends them out whither he will; and their Gospel has effect
to change and convert people, and to beget Love in the hearts of people: and
such as are begotten to God, by the preaching of the Gospel, can freely give of
their carnal things; and a Minister of Christ cannot want any thing. And
therefore let not the King be careful nor troubled about maintaining Ministers,
but let him maintain his own, how, and as he pleases, and leave all his
Kingdoms to the like; that every sort of people, whether Papists, Protestants,
or any others, maintain every one their own Ministers, how, by how much, and as
they will; and this is the way of Lawful Maintenance to every Ministry; and not
this way of begging of the King; And that not Niggardly, but Liberally and
Sufficiently (says the Petitioner) which shows Covetousness and Impudency in
any Beggar, that they may be encouraged, says the Petitioner, etc.

5. Now that Ministry whose Dependancy is on outward things, and may be
encouraged or discouraged by having or wanting large Maintenance, this Ministry
Jesus Christ never sent forth; but it is of man, and by the Earthly Powers, and
not of God; for were the Apostles discouraged in the Work of their Ministry
when they were in Wants, and Necessities, and Sufferings, and Afflictions, as
often they were? No; but they approved themselves the more to be Christ's
Faithful Ministers thereby: And it may be a very certain Evidence to the King,
That such who will not go forth to minister without such or such large
Benefices and Maintenance, by so much Money, Tithes, or yearly Stipends, are
not the Ministers of Christ, neither were they ever sent of him to preach his
Gospel; but have run for Gifts and Rewards, like Balaam, and have not been
truly called by Christ Jesus into his Ministry.

Now I come to the fifth Branch of the Petition, which is in these words; I
humbly beg your Grace, That in order to the establishing a learned Ministry to
Posterity, your, Majesty will be a Fosterer and Patron of the Schools and
Nurseries of good Learning, especially the two once famous Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge.

In Answer hereunto, let the King consider;

1. That the true and lawful Ministry of Jesus Christ is the absolute free Gift
of God, to whomsoever the Lord is pleased to give it: and it is not bought nor
sold for Money, nor received by Education and natural Learning; but God gives
the Gift of Knowledge and Utterance, and every part of his Ministry to whom he
will: so the Apostles received the Ministry, and so it is received at this day,
by all that have it. It is not a Natural Science, or Art of Knowledge or
Utterance; but it is the Gift of God, and ever was, whether to Plough-men, or
Fishermen, or to whomsoever, as the Lord gives it; for, As every one had
received the Gift, so they might administer, as say the Scriptures.

2. That the Establishing of the Ministry pertains to Jesus Christ alone, and
that it depends upon the Power and Spirit of God to establish his own Ministry,
and to overthrow that which is contrary; and the Lord alone will do it, and not
man; for it is he that sends out Ministers, whom he will, and he defends them
and establishes them against the Devil, and all their Opposers: Neither did
ever any of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, beg to the Kings of the Earth
Maintenance and Establishment; but they knew the Lord, and trusted in him, and
therefore let not the King trouble himself with care in these matters, but
leave them to the Lord, to whom they do belong; and let him rule well in
outward Affairs, and leave the Government of the Church and Ministry to Christ
Jesus, to whom only it pertains.

3. As for Oxford and Cambridge, and sending Ministers from thence, and making
them there, by natural Arts and Sciences, according to the Custom there used;
there was no such thing in the Apostles days, as making Ministers at Schools
and Colleges by natural Learning; but, as I have said, It was by the Gift of
God's ^^^y Spirit that the Ministers of the Gospel were made and sent forth:
And this way of making Ministers at Oxford and Cambridge, at Schools and
Colleges, and all that pertains thereunto, as the Orders, Names and Practices,
for the most part, the very Habits and Degrees of Schools, and all that stuff
is all come up since the Apostles days; and that way of creating Ministers,
and sending them forth, was never known not in being among the Apostles; but
much Abomination and Idolatry is brought forth at such places, and in such
ways, to the Grief and Vexation of the Lord God, whose Wrath will break out
like Fire, to devour Idolatry, with the Cause and Ground thereof. And happy is
that man that partakes not of the Sins of others, he shall not partake of the
Judgments.

And in the last part of the Petition, it is craved;

That the Seminaries of Sin and Satan, Wickedness and Vice, may be beaten down
and suppressed, etc.

Ans. These things are abounding which provoke the Lord to great wrath against
the Land: Oh! that indeed the King would consider, that Iniquity may be
stopped, and Righteousness brought forth; then should the King, and Kingdoms,
and Subjects be made Famous and Dreadful through the World: For, because of
Oppression and Wickedness the Land mourns, and the great Judgments of the Lord
are at the door, except Repentance be made unto God.

And thus I have in much fear toward God, and Honor toward the King, laid
diverse Considerations before him, worthy to be minded, upon the occasion of the
Charge against us by George Willington; and it will be Wisdom for the King to
consider our Defense; as well as of our Enemy's Charge. By a Servant of Christ,
E. B.

THE Everlasting Gospel OF REPENTANCE AND REMISSION of SINS, Held forth and
Declared to the Inhabitants of the Earth, that they may Turn, and be Converted
to the Living God, lest they Perish in the Day of Vengeance, which is near at
hand. And this is a Message of Reconciliation to all People every where in
general, but more particularly to the Inhabitants of Ireland, and to all sorts
of People therein; even to the Rich, and to the Poor; to the Professor, and to
the Profane; that every one may be stirred up to seek the Lord by Repentance.
With certain Propositions of FAITH laid down, which every one must believe, or
else they cannot be saved. And certain Objections answered, relating to the
present days. With the Way of a Happy and Blessed Government Discovered in the
Kingdoms of this World, etc.
OH Ireland! The Day of God's Visitation of Love and tender Mercy has been
upon thee, to try thee and to prove thee; and the Lord would have gathered thy
People into Covenant and Fellowship with himself, to live in Love, Unity and
Peace; and the Lord would have made thy Inhabitants Blessed, but they would
not; but many have refused the Day of his Love, and they have neglected his
Loving-kidness, and have chosen their own ways of Iniquity and
Unrighteousness, rather then the Way of Truth and Peace; Though the Lord has
often smitten, and caused his Judgments to be known in the Land, and suffered
great Destruction in days past, even Plague, Sword and Famine were sore upon
thee, have thy Inhabitants forgotten the Dealings of the Lord toward thee? Are
his Judgments and Mercies clean gone out of Remembrance, which the Lord showed
in thee not many years since? And because of thy Iniquities and Transgressions,
which were grown very great against God, he was angry with thee, and provoked
against thee, and did give up thy Inhabitants to Hardness of Heart, and Cruelty
of Mind one against another, so that they were given up to destroy and cut off
one another; and Thousands of them fell through the Malice and Wickedness of
each others Hearts, and Hands, and cruel Murders, Robberies, Treacheries, and a
very great Destruction was committed amongst thy People; and this was because
Iniquity at that day was full, Pride and Oppression, Drunkenness and Whoredom,
Double-dealing and Treachery, and all manner of Unrighteousness was grown to
the height, and therefore did the Lord suffer a very great Rebuke in the Land;
and by Sword, Plague and Famine did he plead with thy Inhabitants for some
years together, even that he might humble thee, and correct thee, and that thy
People might turn unto him, and forsake their Iniquities.

Oh! why have thou forgotten the Dealings of the Lord, running into the same
Abominations? For since the Lord stayed his Judgments, Iniquity is increased,
even as before: Though the Lord has given thee Rest and Peace for diverse
years, and healed thee of thy Sorrows and Miseries, and replenished thee with
People, and thou have had Peace and Fullness for a good season; but yet thou
have not made a right use of these Mercies, as thou ought to have done:
Though the Lord has showed Love and Favor toward thee, in delivering of thee
from thy former Troubles and Miseries; yet thou have turned, to thy own hu^t,
^is Blessings into a Curse, through thy abuse of them: And now through Re^, and
Peace and Fullness thy Inhabitants are corrupted, and become abominably sinful,
and they have laden themselves with Transgressions, and he^ped up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath, even Wrathful Matter for the W^ath of God; and former
Judgments and Mercies seem to be both forgotten, many having abused them to
their hurt, though the Lord intended them for their good; and thy Inhabitants
are, as before, many of them hardened in Iniquity, rather then turned from it;
and they are turned into their old Paths, and drink of the same Cup of
Abominations? and Pride, and Oppression, and all Unrighteousness, in every part
of it, is grown as high as ever it was in thee.

Oh! how does Wickedness abound, Drunkenness, Wantonness, Vain-Pleasures, Envy,
Wrath, Contention, Heart-Burning, Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness,
Double-dealing, False-heartedness, Idolatry and Hypocrisy, and all Fruits of
the Flesh, how do they abound in thee? even as high as ever before, as though
thou had never felt Judgment because of thy sins, and as though thou had
never tasted of Mercy, that thou should live a better life; but both Judgment
and Mercy bypast are neglected, and the Remembrance of them worn out; and thou
have said in thy heart, We love this world, its Pleasures and Vanities, and
after our ways will we go.

Oh Nation and Kingdom! this is thy Condition, and thy present State; Thou
drinkest up Iniquity as an Ox drinks Water, and thou addest sin to sin, as if
all thou could do were too little, and like as if thou were appointed for no
other end but to commit sin; and thou hate Reproof, and despisest Correction;
and him that reproves thee thou countest thy Enemy: for the whole Pleasure of
many of thy people is in sinning against God; and thus thou think to serve
him with thy sins, and requitest the Lord evil for his good toward thee, and
his Judgments and Mercies have no place in thy Heart; though yet thou have been
warned for these diverse years, that thy People should turn from their
Iniquities, and serve the Living God; Repentance and Forsaking of Sin has been
preached thorough thee; and Warning has been given of the Judgments of God,
that are to come; but hereof have thou taken no notice, as thou ought to
have done; but thy Inhabitants have despised the Lord's Servants, and
persecuted them; and thou have held in Derision and under great Afflictions the
People of the Lord, and persecuted them for good Conscience sake.

And this is the fulfilling of Wickedness in thee, and the heigh^ of thy
Inhabitants Transgressions, in that they have persecuted such who have warned
them, and despised the Lord's Reproof, and would not hearken to the Advice of
his People; but do always reject the Message of God's Light, which reproves
people in their own Consciences, because of Sin, that they should turn from i^
and be saved; this Message has been proclaimed thorough the Land, even for
some years together, wherein the Lord has visited thee with his Love, that he
might gather thy People, and condemn their Iniquities, and save their Souls;
but thy People have rejected this Message, and would not be turned from their
Idolatrous Ways and Worships, nor from the Hypocrisy of their ways, that
they might be healed: But thy people have forsaken the Living God; and rebelled
against the Light; and the Way of Peace they have refused; and turned their
Backs toward the Lord, and not their Faces; and after Covetousness and the
Love of this World they have gone; though there has been a great Profession of
Worship and Religion in thee, much Preaching and Praying, Sabboth-keeping and
professed Church Fellowship, Ministry and Ordinances, and a Sect here of one
sort, and there another, that have cried, Lord, Lord, and have made a show of
Worships and Duties toward him; yet notwithstanding, Hypocrisy,
False-heartedness, Covetousness, Double-mindedness, and the spirit of Pride,
Ambition and Vainglory, have possessed the Hearts of both Teachers and People
in all the false Sects and diverse kinds of Religion; though they have had a
show, as if they were the Lord's People, and a Pretense of Worship, and
Conformity of Church Fellowship, etc. yet their Hearts have not been right
before the Lord: but of these it may be said, Even they have professed God with
their Mouths, and with their Lips honored him, and in the very time their
Hearts have gone after Covetousness, and been far departed from the Lord; and
though they have cried, The Temple of the Lord, and we are the Church of
Christ, and Members of him, and have Gospel, and Ministry, and Ordinances; yet
these People have walked in Pride, and Arrogance, and Covetousness, and their
Hearts have been Corrupted in the sight of the Most High, and all their
Religion has been but as the Fig Leaves, by which they have sought to cover
themselves, but it cannot be.

For, Behold ye Professors and People of Ireland! God has beheld your
Hypocrisies, and the Deceitfulness of your Hearts and your Nakedness does
appear; for, though you have professed much of the Spirit and Spiritual Things,
yet you have walked in the Flesh, and brought forth the Fruits thereof; and
your Garments of feigned Prayers and Practices, and your Profession of Church
and Ordinances, will not cover nor hide you from the Wrath of the Lamb.

Oh People of Ireland! many of you have been corrupted in your Hearts, and
polluted in your Minds; and from the highest of you to the lowest you are found
Transgressors against God, even from the Professor to the Profane, the Lord
has found no good Fruit amongst you well-pleasing to him; but four Grapes and
bitter Fruit have you brought forth, even Fruit of a bad Taste and loathsome
Smell unto the Lord: and now the Lord has found you out in your Wickedness,
and the Cry of your Iniquities call for Vengeance; for of you it may be said,
Ah Nation, laden with Iniquity! ab sinful People! a seed of Evil doers;
corrupted from the crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot: These things are
so, and they cannot be hid.

But now the Lord's Purpose is, to deal with thee because of thy sins, seeing
he is provoked against this People by their Iniquities, who have been
disobedient to the Living God; therefore will he renew his Judgments of old,
and withdraw his Mercies, and he will plead with this People in his Justice:
his Judgments are at the door, and he will punish the Stout-hearted, and Proud
and Arrogant, till they learn Meekness and Humility: He will correct the
Transgressors with his Rod of heavy Wrath, till they turn to him by Repentance;
and all that will not how, and kiss the Son, and cease from Evil, and learn to
do well, they shall be broken, and cut off, and perish in his Anger, and he
will never heal them; even the Feller will come upon thy People, O Nation, who
will hew down thy Cedars, and cut up thy strong Oaks; the Fanner is coming upon
thee to sift thee, to preserve the good Grain, and to separate the Chaff into
the Fire; thy Strength will be made weak, and thy Crown will be trodden down,
and thy Beauty shall be marred; and all thy Glory and Might shall fade like a
Flower in that Day, when the Lord of Hosts pleads with thee; and when he
rewards thee for thy Wickedness, then Woe unto thee, and unto all the Wicked,
and Workers of Iniquity; and he will cause them to remember what they have
done: Thy Sins, O Nation, shall be set in order before thee, and thy
Persecution of the Lords Servants shall be charged to thy ^^^ount; and the Rod
of Affliction shall reach close unto thee because thereof: And as thy Rulers
have done to others, so shall it be done to them; into Captivity shall they go,
and the Spoiler shall come upon the Land, for just is the Lord, and his
Judgment altogether equal; and though he be Long-suffering and of great
Forbearance, yet he forgets not to plead with his Enemies, and to Plague the
Ungodly, nor to show Mercy to them that trust in him: And doubtless there is a
Cup of Wrath prepared for the Wicked to drink, and it seems to be near; even
a Day of great Wrath and Tribulation upon Sinners and Transgressors, who have
rejected the Lord, and despised his Reproofs, and would not receive the Message
of the Light of the World, that they might be healed.

Wherefore Repent, Repent, all sorts of People, all Sinners and Transgressors;
Tremble before the Lord ye Stout-hearted and Rebellious Children: Woe unto ye
unjust Rulers and Judges, that have exercised unjust Judgment in the Land, that
have judged for Gifts and Rewards, and that have turned aside just Judgment,
Mercy and Truth, and that have persecuted the Innocent without just Cause.

Woe unto you that have been Oppressors of the Poor and Needy, ye that have not
judged for the Lord, as ye ought to have done; but have been Ambitious, and
Vainglorious, and puffed up in the Flesh by high Titles, and Places of Honor.

Ye that have exalted your selves above your Brethren, and sought Honor of
Men, and loved the Honor of this World more than the Honor of God; Woe unto
you, for the Day of the Lord's Judgment is at hand, and an Account of your
Stewardship must you give.

Ye that should have judged in Mercy, and Truth and Equity, but have perverted
just Judgment, and made the Innocent Offenders, and have not been a Praise to
them that do well, nor a Terror to Evildoers, as ye ought to have been; Woe
unto you, and to the Oppressing and Flashearted Lawyers, and that Train, who
have been greedy of Gain and served your own Ends, and sought Riches to your
selves, and the Cause of the Poor has not been freely pleaded by you.

Woe unto all ye that have made a Trade of doing Judgment and Justice, and have
been exercised in the Law for your own Ends, and not singly for the Lord.
Tremble ye Sons of Wickedness, ye that have exercised the Power of Antichrist
and the Beast; for the Judgments of the Lord are at hand to be executed upon
you.

Woe unto you Great and Rich Men, ye Covetous and Earthly Worldlings, ^e that
have made your selves Rich by Oppression, and Grinding the Faces of the Poor,
that have got Gain by Hard-dealing, and added Land to Land; and Field to Field,
and that have overreached the Ignorant, and oppressed the Widows and
Fatherless, and that have exercised Cruelty and Hard-dealing to your Tenants
and Servants, and have laid heavy Yoaks upon such with whom you have dealt, and
that have made your selves Great and Rich in the Earth by such means; Woe unto
you, Misery is coming upon you: Weep and Howlye Earthly, Greedy, Covetous
Wretches of this World, who have sought Riches more than the Lord, and gotten
Gain by Oppression and Overreaching your Neighbors; your Riches, so gotten,
shall never prosper, no^ be blessed to you; but shall be a Curse to you, and
your Children: And your Covetousness will God plague; Ye that have gotten
Goodt, and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of your days.

Woe unto you Carnal Minds; all the Treasures of them are corruptible; your
Lands, Gold and Silver are fading Treasures: The Day of the Lord's Judgments
are at hand upon you, and the Rod of his Wrath will smite you; and ye shall
have Poverty and want instead of Fullness and Excess, and ye shall have Leanness
and Barrenness, and God will plead with you in the way you have sinned against
him: The Time of your Visitation draws near.

Woe unto you Merchants, Traders, Buyers and Sellers, that have been
Double-Dealers and Double-Tongued, and dealt deceitfully in your Commodities
with your Neighbors: Woe unto ye that have got Gain by Double-dealing, and by
feigned and flattering Speeches have beguiled one another, and sought to
out-reach in your Bargaining every man his Brother; these things have ye done,
O ye Covetous Men! ye have even robbed the Poor by your Craft and
Guileful-dealing, by your smooth and flattering Tongues; and if any amongst you
could not use Fraud, and Dissemble, such have been your Prey and Scorn; and its
your Use to discommend a Commodity when you buy it, and to praise it when you
sell it; and ye make a fair outside to please the Eye, and ye use multitude of
words and fair speeches, and dec^ive the Simpl^, and get Gain by Oppression,
Craft and Deceit: Woe unto you, Repent of this your sin; Cleause your Hearts,
you Sinners; and purify your Hearts, you Double-minded. I charge you by the
Lord, Give over your Double-dealing, and deceitful Merchandise; cease to Lie
and Defraud; cease your Flattery and Feigned words, and speak the Truth every
one to his Neighbor; and come out of your Iniquities; use not a bad Conscience
any longer, for its a fearful Abomination against the Lord: But mind the Light
of Christ in you, which will convince you in your Consciences of your noughty
and sinful ways; and that Light will exercise your Consciences to do the Truth
and speak the Truth to your Neighbors in all things, and this is Blessed, and
the Gain that is thereby gotten is not a Curse; for ye ought in all your ways
to reverence the Lord, and respect him, that he should lead you and guide you
in your exercise of all Earthly things; For the Earth is the Lord's and the
Fullness thereof, and it ought to be exercised to his Glory: and there is
suffient in this Creation for all People, and therefore covet not Earthly
things one from another, neither oppress nor overreach one another about them;
neither treasure up Earthly things, while the Poor want; for if ye do, you hide
your selves from your own Flesh, laying Field to Field till there is no Place
for the Poor; and Woe unto such, the Day of the Lord will be upon you: But learn
the Wisdom of God, how to be ordered, and how to order all things of this
Creation, and be in Unity and good Agreement amongst your selves; and do not
fall out, nor strive, nor contend, nor envy one another about Earthly things;
but if ye have much, or if ye have little, be contented with what you have, and
do not grind the Hearts and Consciences one of another to get Earthly things,
for they will fade and perish away; and seek not after that which perishes,
but after that which is unto Eternal Life: For the Day of the Lord is at hand,
and his Judgments upon all Oppressors, Double-dealers and False-hearted
Flatterers, that are Covetous of Earthly things.

Woe unto all ye Drunkards and Swearers, Whoremongers and Profane Persons, the
Judgments of the Lord are upon you unawares; ye that destroy the Creation upon
your Lusts, that are rnn into the Excess of Wine and Beer, and that covet it
excessively, and that drink till ye inflame your selves, and spend your time in
it; ye are like the Beasts of the Field, and like the Swine that wallow in
Filthinefs; ye pervert the right use and End of the good Creatures of God, and
spend them upon your Lusts, and have not regard unto the Living God; and one
sin even begets another, Drunkenness begets Swearing, and profane Words, and
Whoredom and beastly Affections; and thus ye add sin to sin, and heap up one
sin upon another, con^^ary to the Light in your own Consciences; and thus ye
serve (...) ^il and Satan, committing Iniquity with both hands, as it were, by
(...) (...) and swearing, and taking the Name of the Lord in Vain, and (...)
Sp^^^^es, and falling out one with another; and your Minds are e^^ed (...) the
Lord, and (...) abuse your selves, and your (...) Bodies, which were made f^^
the service of God, and not (...) whor^ (...); and ye slay your own soul^ by
your own Iniquities, and mames provoke the Lord to destroy both Soul and Body:
Woe unto you, (...) ^lagues of God are your Portion, and Misery your and here
and hereafter; (...) of your Iniquities, and turn from them, left the Lord find
you in (...) Iniquities when he comes to Judg^ment; (...) if you continue in
them (...) can never be pardoned, but you si^ unto death, and the Lord will
come upon you suddenly; for ye that followed Drunkenness and Prop^^^ess, you
live contrary to the Light in your own Consciences, and you sin against your
knowledge, against that Knowledge that God has given you; and this is your
greatest sin, even because ye do the things which ye know ye should not do,
(...) the Light in your, Consciences does she^ you, that these things are evil
before you do them; but ye doing the things contrary to the Light in your (...)
Consciences, this makes your Crime (...), and your sin u^pardonable, (...) ^e
continue in sin and profaneness, contrary to the Reproof of God's Spi^^^ (...)
your own ^nsciences: Wherefore ye profane Persons, cease to do evil, ^est the
Lord's Judgments come upon y^^ suddenly to your D^struction, and the Lord
smite you, and you never be healed.

Woe unto all ye ^^ypo^ri^i^^l and deceitful Prof^ssors of Religion, that hold
the Truth in Unrighteousness, th^^ have a talk and a show of Religion, and that
have the Name of Church Members and of Worshippers of God, but are (...) in
Sins and Trespasses; ye that are Christians by Name, but want the N^^ure, who
are Wolves in Sheep's clothing, that have Christ's words, the Prophets and
Apost^^s words, but want their Spirit and Life; Woe unto you, the D^^ of the
Lord is at hand upon you, ye Hypocrites, ye that serve God with your Li^^, and
with your ^outhes profess much love, whenas your Hearts are full of ^^^y.
Covetous^^^^ and Earthly-mindedness; ye are the Apostate Christians, th^^ have
taken the Form of Godliness upon you, but want the Power; ye preach and pray,
and hear sermons, and keep Sabbath Days, and perform Duties, (...) ye are not
changed in your Hearts, but the old Nature is alive, and the old Birth lives in
you; and ye are unlike unto God in Nature, ye walk in the ^iesh and not in the
Spirit; and ye take Christ's words and the Apostles words, and use your
Tongues, when God never spoke to you; O ye Hypocrites! ye have a Name to live,
but are dead, and ye think ye are rich, w^ as you are Poor, Miserable, Blind
and Naked, and your souls are le^^ and want the Bread of Life, and ye have not
put off the body of sin, nor have you overcome your souls Enemi^^, but the
burden of sin lies upon your ^onsciences, and Temptations overcome you daily;
and though you say, ye have Faith in Christ, yet your Hearts are not purified,
but the old Man with his Deeds, is yet alive, and the new Creature is not
brought forth in you, nor is Christ living in you, and speaking in you; the Day
of the Lord will come upon you, you false-hearted men, ye Apostate Christians,
that ^old the Profession of Truth, and Church, and Gospel, and Ministry in your
^^righteous Minds; your Sacrifices are not acceptable to God, nor your
Offerings well-pleasing to him; for your Hearts are not aright before him, and
your Hypocrisy will God judge, and his Wrath will go out like ^ire to cons^me
your glory, and God will cloth himself with Zeal as with a Cloak, and with a
Garment of Vengeance, and he will slay you with his Sword, and wound your
Consciences with the Words of his Mouth, and your Religion will not s^ve you,
^or your Garment cover you from the Wrath of the Almighty: Woe unto you, the
mighty Day of the Lord is at hand upon you, ye earthly Professors, who would be
Heirs of two Kingdoms, who would enjoy God and this World too, and love its
Vanities, and Profits, and Pleasures, and Honors, and live in Strife and
Contention one with another abo^t ^^^thly things, and about your Religion too,
and are not of one Heart, and Mi^^ and Soul, but are Strangers to the new
Covenant of God; though you hear Sermons, and say a Form of Prayer, and keep
Sabbaths and Lecture-dayes, and perform Ordinances, and Duties, and yet your
Hearts are hard, and the body of Sin and Death li^^ upon your Consciences, and
you are not changed into the Divine Nature; this Reli^^^^ will not save you,
away with it all, its of Antichrist, and his spirit leads you; while you walk
in the Form of godliness without the Power, the Lord will come upon you
suddenly; therefore repent ye of your Hypocrisies, and turn to the Spirit of
God within you, hear its Reproofs, and obey it, and walk in the Spirit, and be
ye changed, or else you can never be saved.

Woe, Woe unto all ye false Teachers, and blind Leaders of the People, ye
Diviners and false Prophets, the Day of the Lord is at hand upon you; ye have
deceived souls for dishonest Gain, ye have run and never were sent of God, and
ye have not profited the People at all, and ye have taken the Name upon you of
Ministers of Christ, when he never sent you forth; and you have kept a prating
and preaching up and down, and run for Gifts, and Reward, and Hire; ye have
deceived the World, and the Blood of Souls rests upon you; O ye Generation of
Serpents! Poison has lodged under your Tongues, your Hear^^s have been rotten,
and your Tongues feigned and full of Flattery, and you have been as
Canker-worms in the Earth, that have corrupted the whole World; whom have not
ye deceived by your Lies and false Divinations? Whom have not you cried Peace
unto, if they would but give you Gifts, Money and Hire? What Form of Religion
would not you take up for advantage to your selves? how often have you turned
from one Way to another? Oh ye false-hearted men! the God of Heaven will show
you no Mercy; ye are the men that have made the Earth drunk with false Faith
and false Doctrines, and with Contention and Dissension, sometime preaching up
one Government, sometime another; and sometime being for one way of Worship,
and sometime for another; Treachery has lodged in your Hearts above all
others; ye have eaten up the sin of the People, and cried Peace unto the
Ungodly: Woe unto ye that have gone in Cain's way, that have bred Contention,
Persecution, Strife and Emulation amongst People, and that have gone in
Balaam's way for Gifts and Rewards, and would do any great man a Pleasure, and
even curse the People for Money; ye have been such as all the holy Prophets
cried against, your Fruits and Works declare it; ye have sought for your Gain
from your Quarter, and could never have enough, such as Isaiah cried against,
Chap. 56. and such as Micah cried against, Micah 3. That preached for Hire, and
divined for Money, and leaned upon the Lord, and cried Peace to them that would
give Money, and prepared War against them that would not; and these things have
you done, some of ye Teachers and Priests; and ye have been blind Watchmen,
and ye have been idle and lazy Shepherds, such as Ezekiel cried against, Chap.
34. that ruled over People with Force and Cruelty, and killed them that were
fed, and did not heal the Diseased, nor strengthen the Weak, but pusht with the
Horn at such as went astray from you; and idle and lazy Shepherds have you
been, who have not fed the Flock with living Food, but you have caused them to
drink of the foul Waters, and their Souls are lean and barren under your
preaching; Oh look into your Flocks, and see what Fruit is brought forth by
them, and what may be gathered from them! Oh the abundance of Pride and
Wickedness, of Ambition and Vainglory, and Covetousness, and the love of this
World, Lying and Double-dealing, and all the Fruits of the Flesh! How do they
abound amongst the Flocks of your Fold? who are in their fruits, and by their
works not the Sheep of Christ's Pasture, but are like Goats and Wolves under
your teachings; can ye behold this and consider of it, and not be ashamed of
the fruit of your Ways; What have ye brought forth these many years; Or what
profit have the People received from you, who are yet in their sins, unturned
from them, and not converted to God? whereby it appears you have run, and never
were sent, because the People are not profited at all; and it grieves the Heart
of the Righteous to look into your Vine-yards, and to s^^ such bad fruit
growing; you have been sloathful Tillers, and have not sown the good Seed in
the Hearts of the People, but the seed of corruption brings forth fruit in
them, and your Vine-yards are like barren and untilled Ground, that is unplowed
and undigged, and unplanted with Trees of Righteousness: Oh ye have been
unprofitable Vineyard-Dressers, and ye have labored for your selves, and not
for the Lord, as is manifest; and ye have been idle and lazy, and the God of
Heaven is weary of you, and the time is at hand he will pluck you up by the
Roots, and visit you with great Destruction, and your name shall be a Reproach
amongst men; for ye have not sought the Lord's Honor, but your own; and ye
have been changable in your Ways for your own advantages; ye have preached for
filthy Lucre, and through Covetousness made Merchandise of People; and ye have
traded with the Scriptures, and made a Trade of the preaching the Gospel; and
ye have made Traffic of the Souls of Men: and these things have you done, and
the Lord has kept silence, and he has forborne to smite you, and therefore
have you been hardened the more in your Transgressions, as though the Lord took
no notice; and you have filled your Hands with dishonest Gain in your
unrighteous Ways, and your sins are increased every day against the God of
Heaven; you repent not when you are warned, but reject reproof, and go on
without fear; ye are a company of proud men, heady and high-minded Men,
ambitious and self-seeking Persons, even such as the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles marked forth for Deceivers, and your Fruits and Works do preach it; ye
have been covered with Sheep's clothing in your unrighteous natures, and your
Iniquities are almost full, and the Lord wi^^ bring unresistable Destruction
upon you, in a Day when you cry, Peace, Peace, then sudden Destruction will
come: Woe unto you, because of your Iniquities, the Earth is weary of you, which
ye have corrupted through your false ways, and the Kingdoms groan under your
Oppressions, and the Earth will spue you out, and the People, whom you have
deceived, shall rise up in judgment against you; the dreadful Day of the Lord
is at hand upon you, the Apostates from the Life and Faith of Jesus Christ, for
of that Race you are, even of them Apostates that went out in the Apostles
days, that went in Balaam's way, and Cain's way, for ye are of the spirit that
kills and persecutes People about Worship and Sacrifices, and Religion, as Cain
did; and you go for Gifts and Rewards, even as Balaam did: these things are so,
the Witness of God in your Consciences shall answer, and all People shall
acknowledge the truth hereof in the day when God pleads with all the Wicked.

All People return and repent of your Iniquities, the dreadful day of the Lord
is at hand, ye Sinners and Transgressors, ye hypocritical Professors and
profain Persons, the day of Vengeance is at hand; whither will you fly, and
where will you leave your glory? where will you seek a defense, or where can
you be hid? the Mountains will not cover you, nor the Rocks will not fall upon
you; the Wrath of the Lamb you cannot escape, even the long-suffering of God
will be turned into a flame of Anger, and Patience will be turned into sharp
Rebuke, the Wrath of the Lamb will utterly smite you, and the Cup of God's
Indignation you must drink, all the Earth must taste of it, and the Wicked
shall drink the dreggs; wherefore all ye Inhabitants of the Earth forsake your
Transgressions, that the Lord may not cut you off for ever, but let God arise
to de^^^oy your Iniquities, and to save your Souls, let him take Vengeance upon
your Inventions, that he may forgive you: Oh! why will you dye, why will you
perish? the Lord would have you to return, that he might save you.

And this is the day of your Visitation, the door of Mercy is yet open for a
little season, and the Lord yet calls unto you for a moment; but the time is at
hand, that he who is filthy, shall be filthy still, and that determination
shall be passed, Come, ye Blessed, and, Go ye Cursed; the doleful sentence
shall be pronounced to all workers of Iniquity, Into everlasting Burning must
they depart, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and shall not see the
Countenance of the Lord to refresh their soul, but in the presence of the Lord
and of the Lamb, shall the Wicked be tormented: Wherefore hear and tremble, all
ye Transgressors that live and act contrary to your knowledge, and against the
Witness of God in your own Consciences; and this is your great sin, for which
the wrath of God comes, not because you have acted in Ignorance and without
knowledge, but because you have acted against the Light in your Consciences,
and sinned against your knowledge, and done the things which you know were evil
before you did them: and because hereof you are not to be excused, but the
burden of your own sins, and the guilt of them will fall heavy upon you in the
Day of the Lord; For this is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come
into it, but you have loved Darkness rather than Light, and followed evil deeds
and loved them, and this is contrary to the Light that is come into the World,
and which has enlightened your own Consciences.

Certain Propositions of Faith laid down, which every one must believe, or else
they cannot be saved.
I. NOw none can be saved from the Wrath of the Lord but they who are saved
from their Sins; for Sin bring the Wrath of God upon the Conssciences of men,
and Anguish upon Soul and Body; and who are not saved from Sin, cannot be saved
from Wrath; for Wrath pursues the Guilty, and he that does evil, sin lies at
his door, and continual anguish upon his spirit because of sin, and the load
and burden of the Body of Death oppresses his soul, and anger from God
kindles in his Breast, because he has sinned; and he knows he is guilty of
Transgression, and the Lord wounds him in his Conscience, and no man in that
state can speak peace unto him, nor can any save him from the Wrath of God,
because he is not saved from his Sin, nor from the guilt of it; but his grief
and burden is, because he has sinned against the Light in his own Conscience:
And therefore whosoever will be saved from Wrath, must be saved from Sin, and
Christ must purify his heart, and the Blood of the Lamb must sanctify him,
and his Conscience must be cleansed from the guilt of Transgression, and Christ
must live in him, and he must live the Life of Faith, which gives victory over
all Sin, or else he cannot be saved with the Salvation of God eternally.

II. Again, whosoever will be saved with the salvation of God, must own the
Light of Christ Jesus in his own Conscience, and he must believe in this Light
and walk in it, even the Light in his Conscience, that convinces him, and
checks him for his evil de^ds, and that lets him see what sin he is guilty of;
you must believe in this Light, and follow it, and depart from that, and
forsake that Iniquity which it convinces you of, and do that Good which it
moves your hearts unto, or else you can never be saved; for if you continue in
evil-doing, contrary to the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, you are in
a condemned condition, and you cannot be justified of the Lord, while you are
accused by the Light within you, of such and such sins, and that you are guilty
of them, and sorsake them not; for the God of Heaven condemns and justifies
men according to the Witness of the Light in their own Consciences; for it is
Gods Evidence, to bear witness for God, and to accuse or excuse every man in
his sight, and according to its evidence, God justifies or condemns all the
Children of men.

III. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must be born again of the seed of God,
and must be changed and renewed in Mind and Heart, and Spirit; and old things
must pass away, and all things must be made new; and a new Nature must live in
you, and the Image of God must be brought forth, which is in Righteousness and
true Holiness, which is like unto God; and this is the new Creation, which
every one must witness to be wrought in them that ever ^^^^ers into Gods
Kingdom; For says Christ, Except a man be born again he can^^^ enter into the
Kingdom of God; for it is not a profession of Religion made with the Lips, nor
the practices of Duties and Ordinances taken on and performed in the old
nature, and a holding of truth in unrighteousness; this is not the way of
Salvation, but it is the regenerating and making like unto God, being his Image
of Justice, Truth and Righteousness; it is this in which men may be saved
everlastingly.

IV. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must receive the Spirit of God, and it
must dwell in them, even the Spirit of the Father; and they must be taught by
it, and led into all Truth, to do the Truth, and speak the Truth in all things;
even the spirit of Truth must be received, to teach and to lead in all the
ways of God; it alone must teach; and all the Hireling-Teachers of the World
must be turned away from, by whom peoples souls have been deceived; all such as
have run, and God never sent them; that have cried up T^^ching and Ministry,
and through whom people have not received the Spirit of the Father, all such
Teachers must be denied, their Church and Ministry; and the Spirit of the
Father must only teach and lead; and you must walk in the Spirit, and not after
the Flesh; for if you walk after the Flesh, in the ways and works of it, you
are in the state of Condemnation, and not of Salvation: and the Spirit of God
does not teach you, but you are out of the New Covenant of God; in which
Covenant all are taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness are they established:
the Spirit of God is put within them, and the Law of God is written in their
hearts; and they need no man to teach them, but as the Spirit teaches: and
this is the New Covenant of Peace with God, into which all must come to witness
this, or else they cannot be saved.

V. Again, all that will be saved, must be sanctified, cleansed and purified
from all Unrighteousness, by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby every Heart
must be made clean, and every Conscience sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb;
and the body of sin and death must be put off, and the bondage of Corruption
must be broken, and Iniquity must be forsaken, and turned from, and si^ must be
judged in the Flesh, and Purity, Holiness and Righteousness must live and reign
in all that will be saved; and Sin and Transgression, and the guilt of it must
be removed; and you must show forth the Image of God in Holiness and
Righteousness; and must be pure, as he is pure, in kind and quality; and you
must walk in Holiness and Righteousness, being freed from Corruption, and from
the Ways of Sin and Death, being sanctified in Body, Mind and Spirit, by the
Word of the Lord; and Sin must be blotted out, and Transgression must be
covered, and Iniquity must be remembered no more, and in all things you must
cease to do evil, and learn to do well, if ever you will be saved.

VI. Again, whosoever will be saved must witness Christ revealed in yo^, ^^d ^e
must live in you, and you must be Followers of him wheresoever he go^s ^^d your
Bodies must be the Temples of the Living God; and God must walk (...) you and
dwell in you, according to his Promise; and he must be your King, your Judge
and Lawgiver, your Teacher, Father and Master, and he must be (...) in all
unto you, even God the Father who is blessed for ever; you must ^^ow him near
you, and feel his Presence in you, to be your Joy, Life and ^eace; and you must
have fellowship with him in spirit, and must worship him (...) Spirit, and by
the Spirit, without respect of Days, Times or Places: every one that will be
saved must come into this, and witness it; for this is the way of the Salvation
of God.

VII. Again, whosoever will be saved, must live in the Power of Godlin^ss, and
must deny all Forms of Religion without the Power; all Profession of
Scriptures, Ordinances, Church-member-ship, Praying and Preaching, which is not
in the Power of God, and by his Spirit, must be denied, and that part that
holds it, (that holds the Form of Godliness without the Power) must be
crucified; and every one must come into the Power of the Spirit of God, and
must witness that to work in them, to will and to do; and no more professing
the Things of God, but as they are witnessed by the work of his Spirit in their
hearts: you must not hold Truth any longer in unrighteousness, nor make a
profession of it in your your unrighteous minds; no more talking of
Justification and Redemption, nor of any of the matters of Gods Kingdom, but
according as they are witnessed by the working of the Spirit of God in the
heart: and every one must feel in himself the evidence and Testimony of the
Spirit of God to witness the Truth in his heart (or Conscience) of what he
professes with his mouth.

VIII. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must witness the Scriptures of Truth
fulfilled in themselves: the things that they have read of without them, must
be wrought within them, wrought in their hearts by the same Spirit as g^ve
forth the Scriptures; they must pass through the same conditions as the holy
men of God did; and the same truth that the Scriptures declare of, must be
revealed in the heart, by the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; and
none must profess more than they do enjoy from God; and all flesh must be
silent from speaking of the things of Gods Kingdom, which they have not seen,
handled, rasted and felt, by the working of the Spirit of God in their
Consciences: and this is to witness the Scriptures fulfilled, when you have
experience of the same conditions, and of the same operations and
manifestations which the Servants of the Lord passed through and bad experience
of; and so that you may speak what you have heard, and seen, and handled, and
tasted of the Word of Life: All that will be saved must come to this, and
witness it.

IX. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must believe in Jesus Christ, and receive
him; and they must take up his daily cross and follow him; and must know him to
mortify and crucify them to the World: and he must work the same things in
you by his Spirit spiritually, as he wrought without you in his Person, or else
you have no part in him, nor salvation by him: For it is not enough unto
eternal life, only to believe that there was such a one as a Christ, and that
he did and spoke such and such things at a distance without you; for many may
make a belief and a profession of this, and yet perish; but Him that was, of
whom you read, without you, must you receive, and witness within you; and you
must know Him as he was before Abraham was, and before the World was; and He
himself by his Spirit in you must give you the knowledge of Himself, what He
was before the beginning, what he is now, and what he shall for ever be.

X. Again, Every one that will be saved, must come up out of the Apostasy into
which all Christendom has been fallen, and must come into the same Spirit,
Life and Power, as the Apostles were in; from which Life, Spirit and Power, all
Christendom have been Apostates, and they have held the words and practices of
the Apostles without the same Life and Power, and made Sects, Churches and
Ministers, but out of the same Life and Spirit as the holy men of God were in;
and all that will be saved, must be restored and received into the same Spirit
and Life in their Churches, Ministry and Ordinances, as the Apostles of Christ
Jesus were in: and this is Restoration, when People come again into the same
Life and Spirit of God, which the Apostate Christians have all wanted, and been
in the Form of Ministry, Churches, Religion and Godliness, without the Power:
And unto this is the Lord God restoring People, his Day is dawned, and his
everlasting Light is risen, and his Name will be known in the Earth: and none
can be saved with the Salvation of God, but who believe, receive and understand
these things.

A General Objection answered.
^ject. 1. And whereas there is a great cry by some People of late, That there
must be no private Meetings, but all People must come to Church (as they say)
^^d that there must be no more Conventicles, etc.

Answ. As for Conventicles, I understand you mean Meetings out of public
Steeple Houses, and that there must be no private Meetings for preaching and
Praying, but all People must be forced to come to public Places of Worship.
Now I say, If the Authority that is now set up, and has the Power, does
exercise it self in this way, then the God of Heaven will be provoked against
it, to overthrow it and confound it, if it proceed contrary to the End of just
Rule and Authority ordained of God, which is for the punishment of them that do
evil things between man and man; but not to impose upon men's Consciences, in
things relating to the Worship and Service of God: But the Lord God (...)
wholly Judge in such Matters, and not any Man; and if any Men (...) er^ in
their Minds concerning Faith, and Doctrine, and the Worship of, God, that
belongs to the Lord to punish, and not to any Earthly Authority.

And what, must not the People of God come together to worship the Lord in
Spirit and Truth? Must not People conveen together in this Age, as the People
of God did in Ages past? Did not Christ many times preach in the D^sert, and
sometimes in a Ship by the Seaside, and someti^es on a Mountain, as you may
read in the Scriptures? And did not he often preach unto the Pharisees, and
sometimes to his Disciples, out of the public Synagogues? And might not the
Jews have called those Meetings Conventicles, because they were not in their
public Synagogues? And also, did not the Apostles and Saints, after the
Resurrection of Christ, when they returned from Jerusalem, meet together
privately? for they went into an upper Room, and waited upon the Lord, an^
continued with one accord in Prayer and Supplication: And again, at a^er time,
they were about an hundred and twenty in number, that were in one Place to wait
upon the Lord, and Peter preached unto them; and were these Meetings
Conventicles, because they were not in a public Synagogue, but in (...) upper
Chamber, and in a private Place? And thus the Saints of old met together, as ye
may read, Act. 1. and worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth, and preached and
prayed; and must not the People of God now meet together to pray and wait upon
the Lord, but they must be reproached with the (...) of Conventicles, and
threatened and punished for so doing? Oh how blind i^ this Generation, and how
contrary to the true Christian-Spirit in their Practices! And did not Philip
preach Jesus unto the Eunuch in a Chariot, as (...) ^ent on the way? and this
was not in a public Synagogue, as in Act. 8. (...) ^id not Peter preach to
Cornelius, with many others, in Cornelius his house? (...) ^is was a Meeting,
and not in a Synagogue, Acts 10. And did not the ^les and Saints meet together
in an Upper Chamber, where Paul preached until midnight amongst the Saints?
Act. 20. and was this a Conventicle, and a^ unlawful Meeting? Might not the
Jews have said, this was an Unlawful Assembly, being in a Chamber, and not in a
Public Synagogue? And again, Did not Paul preach in his own Hired House for
two whole years together, and received, all that came in unto him? Act, 28. And
here were Privat^ Meetings out of Public Synagogues. But did the Jews threaten
them, and inflict sufferings upon them, because they met in private houses, and
would not come to their Synagogues and Public Worship? or did they reproach
them with the name of Sectaries and Conventiolers, when they met together to
wait upon the Lord, sometime in praying, and sometime in preaching? And thus
you may see by many Examples, that the Saints and true Christian Churches in
the days of old met together, sometime on Mountains, and sometimes in Deserts,
and sometime in Upper Chambers, their own hired houses, and not in the public
Synagogues; but they were gathered from the Temple and first Priesthood, and
from the Worship which God had once commanded, which stood in outward things
and Ordinances; and when they had received the substance, they denied the
shadows, types and figures, and did not uphold them any longer: And they were
gathered by the preaching of the Gospel into the second and new Covenant, and
they met together in private Houses, and upper Chambers, and by the Seaside to
preach and pray, and to worship the Lord; and we do not read that the Jews
persecuted them for so doing.

And will you that have the name of Christians persecute the People of God,
though they meet together in private houses, and their own hired houses, and
cannot come to your Temples and Steeple Houses? And will not you suffer such to
meet together out of your Public Places, but you will persecute them, and call
them Heretics, and such like? Is not this worse than ever the Jews did to the
Apostles? And so you are out of the Example of the true Christians, who met
together, and preached and prayed often, and not in a Synagogue or Public
Place; but you cry against them that do so, and threaten to persecute for it:
and thus you show your selves out of the true Christian Example, and in this
you are worse than the Jews and more cruel, if you should persecute People for
meeting to wait upon the Lord in their own houses, or in what place or time, as
the Lord should move their hearts; but if you proceed in this way, and will not
permit the People of God to meet together in their own hou^^ and not in your
Idol-Temples; then the Power of the Lord will confound you, and God will break
you to pieces, and you will feel his heavy Wrath upon your Consciences, and God
will smite you with his Judgments inwardly and outwardly.

Now for your restraining of people from one way of Worship, and forcing them
to another, and compelling them about Religion by cruel Laws and Commandments
of men; this is of Antichrist, for you to do; and of the Devil: for all forcing
of People to this kind of Worship, and from another, (...) posing upon their
Consciences in matters of Gods Kingdom; this is also of ^tichrist, and contrary
to Christ and his Way; for he won People by sound Doctrine; and by Love, and by
a good Conversation; and so did his Disciples, for they never forced any by
outward violence to their Worship, nor (...) (...) Church Government and
Ordinances: but it was the practice of the Beast, and the Dragon, that first
forced People, and compelled them (...) ^^^ship, since the days of the
Apostles, Rev. 13. It was Antichrist that first (...) upon People in the
Ignorance of their Consciances, and contrary to their ^ences, by the
Commandments of men, false Faith, false Worship, false Ministry, false
Doctrine, and false Religions; so that now, if you should force any contrary to
their Consciences, to your Steeple Houses, to (...) and say your Form of
Prayers, we shall say then you are Antichrist, (...) of the Devil, if so be you
should endeavor to compel any, either against (...) Consciences, or in the
Ignorance of their Consciences, to your way of Worship or Religion.

Therefore take heed how you meddle in these things, lest God confound you. And
as for us, we are the People of God, we fear his Name, and worship him, and
cannot bow to the Devil; and we need not be forced to worship the Lord, for his
Spirit leads us into all Truth, and we need none of your outward Prescriptions,
or Form of Prayers, for the Spirit of God teaches us in all these things,
when, and where, and how we should worship the Lord God, who is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, which is free, and not by outward
force; and all the Worship that is otherwise, and not in the free Spirit of
Christ, is of great Babylon, whom the Lord will confound and destroy.

Another general Objection answered.
Object. 2. Again, whereas it is said by some, Now there must be no more
private Preachers, unlearned men, and men not ordained must not now preach
anymore; Lay-Persons must not be Preachers that are not so qualified, nor so
and so ordained: and this is the present talk among some People.

Answ. To this I also answer, and say, Woe to them that would stop, or quench,
or limit the Spirit of God in Sons or Daughters; for such are Denyers of the
Scriptures, and the Power of God; and such bring guilt upon their own
Consciences, and work fearful Abomination against God. And what, must not the
Spirit of the Lord speak now, where it is, in this Age, as it did in the days
of old, as you may read in the Scriptures; for, was not Elisha a Plowman, and
was not he called from the Plow, 1 King. 19. and became a Prophet of the Lord
unto the House of Israel, and had the spirit of Elijah poured upon him? and
would not you have said he was a Layman, a Plowman, unordained, not fitting
to preach, if you had lived in his days? And was not A^^^ called from
following the Flock? who had been no Prophet, nor no Prophets Son but an
Herds-man, Amos 7. 14, 15. and it was lawful for him to preach the Word of the
Lord, though he was but an Herds-man and had been no Prophet, nor Prophets Son;
which if he had lived in your days, you would have called him a Layman, an
unfit Person, unlearned, and one not ordained for the Ministry: and you, like
Amaziah the wicked Priest of Bethel, would now quench the Spirit, as he would
have done in Amos, who was a Tradesman, and such a one as you call Laymen,
who are not (as you say) fitting to preach. And did not Christ Jesus himself
choose Fishermen, and sent them forth to preach the Gospel, and such as were
men of Trades, and unlearned in Books, as it is written, Act. 4. 13. When the
Ru^^^s saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived they were Unlearned,
they ^^velled; and these were Ministers of Christ, and preached the everlasting
Gospel, whom you would have called Laymen, and men unfit to preach, (...) you
lived in their days. And Paul himself by Occupation was a Tent-^er, it is
said, and he labored with his Hands, and yet was a Preacher of the Gospel; and
there are multitudes of Witnesses in the Scriptures of these things, how that
men of Trades, and unlearned in Letters and Books, and never were brought up at
Schools and Colleges, but followed the Plough, and were keepers of Cattle, and
some followed Fishing; such as these in old (...) had the Spirit of God given
them, and they preached the Gospel: And what if the Lord at this day give his
Spirit to such as these, and send them (...) to preach the Gospel, even to such
as were brought up and educated (...) ^ay be) at Handy-craft Trades, and are
laboring men, and are not (...) at Schools and Colleges; will you limit the
Lord, and quench his (...), and reproach his Ways and Servants, and now call
them Lay-per^ and say they are not fitting to preach? for they are not Learned
nor ^ed, say you; and calling them Mechannicks and private Preachers, and (...)
they must not now be admitted to preach the Gospel; and in this you (...) the
Scriptures, and the Example of the Saints in former Ages, and so neither (...)
the Scriptures, nor the Spirit that gave them forth: though you say, (...) own
the Scriptures, yet if the same things come to pass which they declare (...)
you deny them in this Age, and ^ry against such as Heretics who wit^ the
fulfilling of them, which shows you are of Antichrist, and that you quench the
Spirit in the Sons and Daughters, which God has promised in the New Covenant,
that he would give and pour forth upon Sons and Daughters, and they shall
prophecy: And are not we to look for these things now? What must not God's
Promises be fulfilled? must not an Heards-man now preach, if the Word of the
Lord come unto him? and must not Plow-men now speak of the things of God, if
they have experience of them? and must not Fishermen and Tent-makers bear
witness to the Name of Christ, if they have received of his Spirit? and will
you deny the Scriptures, which says, As every one has received the Spirit and
the Gift, so let him administer the same one to another? 1. Pet. 4. or do you
say, None must have the Gift of the Spirit, but such as are brought up at
Schools and Colleges? or will you limit the holy One to such and such Men and
Ways? Oh you are blind and ignorant, who would quench the Spirit of God, that
it should not speak in these days; and thus you are denyers of the Scriptures:
but God has given of his Spirit, and spoken in our Hearts, and we must
prophecy, and speak as the Spirit of God gives utterance, as the Saints of
old did, Act. 2. 4.

Now for your way of making Ministers at Schools and Colleges, and so
quallifying them with knowledge in the seven Sciences, as it is said, and
ordaining them in that manner and way, as among Papists and Protestants has
been practiced for Ages; this way of making Ministers, and sending of them
forth, was never known among the Apostles; for they were not thus made and
ordained, and sent to preach, nor was this way of making and sending forth
Ministers, till the Spirit and Power of God was lost and forsaken by the
Apostate Christians; and the Scriptures make no mention of such ways, nor give
no Example for such things; and we cannot own any Religion, nor any Practice
thereof, but what we have Example for from the Saints of old before us: and we
believe that it is generally of Antichrist, to invent and introduce such and
such Practices for Religion toward God, and for the Worship of him, for which
there is no Example in all the Christian Churches in the Apostles days: and we
believe that way of making Ministers, and sending of them forth, which is not
approveable by the Scripture,, nor according to them, is of Antichrist, and not
of God; neither can we own such Ministers nor their Ministry, who are not
ordained of God, and according to the Scriptures; nor can we deuy private
Preachers nor their Ministry, as you call them, if they have received the
Spirit of Christ, though they be not so learned outwardly, nor ordained
according to what some may call the right way; but who are Ministers, made and
sent of God, and have the Authority of his Spirit, such we own, and cannot
deny; and such the Lord will bless with his Presence, to the confounding of all
their Enemies.

Concerning Settlement in a happy Government.
Object. There has been great Divisions and Distractions in these Nations for
many years; and in the midst of them the great cry has been by many for
Settlement and Peace, and for a quiet and happy Government.

Answ. These things has the Lord suffered to come to pass in the World; even
great Contentions, Divisions and distractions, and much Changes of Government
in these Kingdoms; And the appearing Cause of these things, has been from the
Lust that has warred in the Members; for from thence does Wars and Strife
arise: and many have been Ambitious, Vainglorious, Self-seeking and Covetous
of the Honors and Pleasures of this World; the lust and desire of these things
has possessed the minds of Men, and induced them to Envy and Wrath one against
another, and has filled them with Heart-burnings, and cruelty of mind, to the
killing and destroying of one another, by Wars and Blood-sheds, and by Plots
and Contrivances have sought how to extinguish one another from the Earth, that
themselves might be exalted: and thus from the desires that have warred in men's
minds, have Wars arisen against the Persons of Men, and among them: and this is
the appearing Cause of the Wars and Distractions that have been in these
Nation, though the hidden cause (which has not so appeared) has been in God;
and because of the wickedness of Men, both high and low, and because of their
Oppressions and Abominations, which have been many and great in the World;
therefore has the God of Heaven been provoked in just Judgment toward Rulers
and People, to suffer Men to destroy one another, and to execute Bloodshed and
Destructions one upon another; and he has brought it to pass, in giving up men
to the fulfilling of their cruel intents, which have been hatched in their evil
Minds, every Man against his Neighbor, and even because they have been
departed out of his Counsel, and followed their own wicked Ways, and Justice,
and Mercy, and Truth have been wanting amongst Men in these Nations; so that
this is the principal cause wherefore the Lord God has brought about and
suffered these Wars, Distractions, Confusions and Discord in these latter
days; and out of the justness of God's Judgments, because of the wickedness of
men, have these things been.

And now these Distractions, and confusions and Discords amongst Men can never
wholly and truly cease to be, till Iniquity and Transgression be repented of,
and turned from, which is the very cause wherefore God has done and suffered
these things, as I have said; and so Men must cease from Oppression, from
Cruelty, and from all Unrighteousness, and must turn to the Lord, and become
cleansed from their Sins, ere ever the Judgments of the Lord be removed, and
these Distractions, Wars and Confusions cease to be in these Lands; and till
Men become Meek and Humble; and till they cease to seek revenge one of another;
and till they cease all Oppression and Covetousness, Injustice and
Unmercifulness; and till they forsake their worldly Honor and high Titles,
which puff them up in Arrogance and Ambition; and even till every Man forsakes
his particular Iniquity; till all these things be, Distractions will not cease,
nor shall Settlement, and Peace, and happy Government ever be: This is
certainly so; for except the Cause be removed, the Effect can never cease: and
there appears to be at this day as great (if not far more) Dissatisfactions in
the Minds of some People, than has been heretofore; and it appears to be as
far from Settlement and true Peace in an happy Union in Government, as for many
years; though it has been expected by many, that we should have Peace and
Settlement in Government, yet, behold it cannot be; for there are Discontents
and Murmurings in the Minds of Men, and Unsettlement in their spirits, and the
Foundation of a happy Government is not yet discovered unto many; nor do the
People walk in the way of Peace; but Iniquity is abounding, Oppression and
Cruelty yet lives, Hard-heartedness and Envy, Pride and Ambition, are not yet
cut down, neither in all the Governors, nor in the Governed: and this is not
the way of Peace and true Settlement; but it is the way of Troubles and
Distractions, and the very Foundation of great Distractions and Wars, rather
than of Settlement and happy Government: These things are so, and therefore
true Peace and settlement in good Agreement, who can expect? because the ground
of Distractions and unsettlement is continued and increased, rather than abated
and removed amongst (...), and the true Foundation of Peace and settlement in
happy Government, is not yet raised up amongst men; but because Injustice and
Oppressi^^ are continued, therefore will God be provoked to bring Distractions,
Wars and Tribulations upon the Kingdoms of all the World; and God will ^^^found
and dash in pieces, Powers, Authorities, Rulers, Nations and Peoples; and he
will break one Potsherd against another, and overthrow one Mountain against
another; and the Hands of cruel Men will God suffer to devour one another; and
ambitious and malicious Hearts shall be suffered to finish one another ends,
because of their own wickedness: and therefore be not deceived; Blessedness in
the Kingdoms of this World can never be, except Iniquity and Transgression be
departed from; except Oppession and Hard-heartedness dye; and except the
Foundation of War and Strife be removed, and the Foundation of Peace and happy
Government be raised up among^^ Men.

Again, True Peace and settlement in good Government can never be, except the
Lord alone be owned as Judge and Lawgiver, and his righteous Laws to be
executed in the Earth; that Justice and true Judgment may flow down, and all
the contrary may be stopped and limtted by the just Laws of God; and all unjust
and unequal Laws (made and established in the Ignoranc^ of Men) which have not
been justly according to the Law of God, nor depended thereupon; such Laws must
also be made void, judged and cast out, and the Law of God must enter: This
must be accomplished, if ever true settlement in a pappy Peace be amongst us;
the Laws must be changed, the unjust and unequal cast out, and just and equal
Laws brought in; for because hereof, while unjust and unequal Laws have been
executed in Judgment, therefore have we wanted settlement and peace in a happy
Government, and the cortrary has been, and will continue, till all unjust,
unequal and oppressive Laws be discontinued.

Again, If ever true peace and settlement in a happy Government be amongst men,
Governors Rulers and Executioners of the Law must be just Persons and
righteous Men, Men that fear God, and hate Covetousness, and that depart from
every evil way; and all ambitious, self-seeking, and unjust Men must be cast
out, even all they that have sought themselves, and not the Lord, in their
places of Trust; such as have perverted Justice and true Judgment for their
own corrupted Ends, and such as have been cruel and hard-hearted Oppressors;
all such as these must be cast out, and the Law must not be committed to such
to execute, neither must such sit in judgment over the People; for because
hereof, and while such men have ruled and governed, and executed the Laws, no
true settlement in a just Government, but the contrary has been, even
Destractions an^ Tribulations; and while such men do continue to rule and
judge, and execute the Laws in any part of the World, we shall never have a
happy Government nor settlement in it in this World; nor till just men, that
have the Spirit of God, and sound judgment, that are humble and meek, patient
and merciful, and such as fear the Lord, and walk in his Ways, be called to
rule and judge, and execute the Laws: and the Laws must be just and holy, and
the Executioners of them equal and upright men. Till these things be
accomplished, a happy settlement in this Worlds Kingdoms can never be, but God
will dash one Mountain against another, and throw one Hill upon another, and he
will give no Peace among the Kings of the Earth, but stain the glory of all the
Worlds Governments, till Truth and Righteousness come to reign, and till just
Laws be executed by just Men, and till M^rcy and Justice, Truth and Equity flow
forth abundantly.

Therefore all Nations, you have been deceived while you have turned up and
down, from one way and manner and kind of Government to another, and from one
sort of Governmten to others: sometimes you have been for a Parliament;
sometime for a Protector; and sometime for neither; from each of these to
others you have changed, thinking to have peace and settlement in a happy
Government, but it could not be; for there are continu^l Distractions until
this day in the minds of M^n, and they are yet unsettled in their spirits; and
there are Heart-burnings, and ^nvyings, and seeking of Revenge; and while these
things are, nothing but Distractions and Tribul^tions; not Peace, but Troubles,
even till these things be removed: And till ^e have just and equal Laws,
according to the Law of God, established over (...), and just, and holy, and
Righteous Men to execute them in Judgment upon us; and till we have Truth and
Righteousness sit on the Throne, until this be, no true Settlement in a happy
Government; but Distractions and Contentions, and woeful Tribulations in the
Kingdoms of the World, and amongst men* and this is certain, and according unto
the Will of the Lo^d: and in the justness of his Judgment these things come to
pass; for it is Injustice and Oppressions, and want of Mercy and Truth, which
is the Foundation of Contentions and Distractions; and it is Justice and
Equity, Truth and Righteousness, that is the only Foundation of Peace and
Settlement, and a happy Government for a Perpetual continuance.

To all False Christians.
THere are many false ways in the World, and many false kinds of Religions,
and People are in much disagreement about their Church, Worship and Ministry;
Papists are opposing the Protestants, and the Protestants the ^^pists; and
there is a great contention in the World. But the Papists are in a wrong way,
and so are the Protestants too; and their Religions are both false in many
things; for whilst they profess Christ and Christianity, and make a show of
Righteousness in outward appearance, yet many of them live in sinful ways, and
bring forth the fruits of Iniquity against the living God; and Pride, Cheating,
and Double-dealing, Covetousness and Envy, Drunkenness and Whoredom, and all
Wickedness is abounding and brought forth, both by the Apostate Christians,
though they cry up the Name of Christ, and the Profession of Godliness, yet are
they wicked in the sight of God, and they are not changed in heart and mind,
nor do they know the New Birth; and ^ll such are out of the right way, in the
way of Error, if they have the Form of Godliness, but want the Power; though
they may have Mass, or say Common Prayer once a week, o^ oftener, yet all this
is but Abomination and Deceit, whilst they practice Iniquity, Hatred,
Backbiting, Lying, Drunkenness, and the like; they that act these things, the
Plagues of God will be their portion, and Misery their end, and their
Profession in Religion will not save them.

The Day of the Lord is at hand, ye Hypocrites, ye false Christians, ye ^^at
profess God with your Lips, and your Hearts are far away: Therefore repent ye,
and tremble before the Lord, lest h^ smite you with Vengeance: and forsake your
false Religions, both your Mass, and your I^s of Prayer; and be not Idolaters,
in professing love in your mouths, and honor with your Lips, w^ilst your
hearts are departed from the living (...); and now come to learn the true
Religion: Depart from all Iniquity, and do not Lie, nor Swear, nor be Drunk,
nor Steal, nor Murder, nor Envy; but love the Lord with all your hearts, and
your Neighbor as your selves: And this is the true Religion, in which man may
be saved; and live in Soberness, Meekness and ^^nestt^y, and speak every man
Truth to his Neighbor, and live in love (...) with another, and be kind, and
gentle, and bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit of God; Cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, and depart form all ^^iquity, and follow after Righteousness:
This is true Religion, and in it ^ou may ^e saved; this is the right way, all
that walk in it shall have Peace and Blessing from God; and all that walk
contrary, Damnation is their portion.

Therefore you Papists and Protestants (so called) turn from your Hypocrisy,
and learn this way, and cease from your false worships, that are after the
Forms and Traditions of men, and not after the Spirit of God; and learn to
worship God in the Spirit, that you may be saved: You have a Light from Christ
in your Consciences, which lets you see what sins ye are guilty of, and it
reproves you for your sin: If you believe in the Light, and walk in it, that is
the right way, then you will deny what is evil, and follow what is good in your
Conversations; but if you follow what is evil, and act contrary to the Light in
your Consciences, and repent not, Vengeance in flames of fire will be you^
portion.

This is the day of your Visitation, the Army of the Lamb is gone forth, and
the Sword of the Spirit is drawn amongst them, that will wound your
Consciences, and God will smite you with the words of his mouth; ye Rocks, and
Hills, and Briars and Thorns, and fruitless Trees, the God of Heaven will hew
you to pieces, and pluck you up, and cast you into the fire to be consumed.

Repent, for the Day of the Lord is at hand. By one that seeks the Good of all
men, E. B.

A VINDICATION OF The People of God, CALLED QUAKERS, Directed Unto Roger Boil,
Called Earl of Orrery. Charles Coote, Called Earl of Mountrath, Theophilus
Jones, Called Sir Theophilus Jones.
Being an Answer to a Book, dedicated to them, by one George Pressick of Dublin.
In which Book many Lies and Calumnies are presented against the Innocent People
of God. And this is for the clearing of the Truth, that no Lie may rest upon
it; And for the Satisfaction of all Sober People in Ireland, and elsewhere.
With a Word of Good Advice to the Chief Governors there.
THere is Irreconcilable Ennity between the two Seeds, (to wit) the Seed of
God and the Seed of the Serpent; and these two are always opposite and
contrary one to the other, in Nature, Fruits and Effects; and the seed of the
Serpent is always persecuting the Seed of God, in every Age and Generation;
and they in whom the seed of the Serpent is living and ruling, are always
projecting and contriving mischief and hatred against the People and ^^^vants
of the Lord, in whom the Seed of God lives and reigns; as it is written, He
that is born of the Flesh persecutes him that is born after the Spirit; Thus it
has been in all Generations, and thus it is at this day: Great is the
^^^^sition that is made by many in Lies and Slanders, in Reviling and Re^hing,
in Imprisoning and Persecuting, and in all manner of evil works (...) words
against the innocent People of God, called Quakers: How have the hands of
ungodly men been lifted up to smite that People by many kinds of abuses? and
how have their Tongues been set on fire, to reproach, and revile, and slander in
all kind of evil-speaking? and all this for Righteousness-sake, and not for any
evil doing: For who is the man, and where is he, that can justly charge Evil
upon that People, either in Doctrine, Faith, or Practice? or in any ^^ing
relating to their Religion to God-wards, or in relation to their Conversations
and walking toward men? It is true, we have not wanted Accusers to every
Authority, but such and such things have been falsely charged against us, and
that to every Power that has been since we were a People, under whom we have
been a suffering People, even from all that ever have sitten in the Throne,
since the Lord raised us up to bear Witness of his glorious Name and Truth in
the World.

Now the present occasion of this my present work, is, Forasmuch as we now
stand accused of great and heinous Crimes in the view of this whole Kingdom of
Ireland; and more particularly before you three, in a Book called, A brief
Relation of some remarkable Passages of the Anabaptists in Germany, etc.
published by one George Pressick of Dublin, and dedicated in a special manner
to you; that his Work may pass with the greater Credit, and his Slanders and
Calumnies, be received for undoubted Truths: Now that the Innocence of the
Upright may be cleared, and that no Lie may rest upon the Truth, nor that you,
neither any others, may receive Falsehoods for Verities, because of our silence;
therefore it is that the Lord has put it into my Heart, to defend the Cause of
God and his People, by returning plain and sober Answer to the principal part
of his Book, wherein we are concerned and falsely Charged; and for the end that
the false Accuser may be reproved, and his Calumnies returned into his own evil
and malicious Heart, from whence they came; and that you, and all men, may be
truly informed, and prevented (if possible) of being seduced into the belief of
Falsehoods, lest that your Hearts and Hands should be stirred up, to act or do,
in your Authority against the People whom God has blessed; and from the ground
and cause of Mis-informations, and false Accusations, without better Testimony;
which would be a way to destroy your selves, and to bring the unjust Sufferings
of the Lord's People upon your own Heads, which would draw down the heavy Wrath
of God upon you.

I cannot flatter you by feigned words of guile, nor give you flattering
Titles, but I judge you are reasonable men, in that degree as to hear and
consider our Defense, as well as our Enemies Charge; and I hope you are wise in
that degree, as to judge between Truth and a Lie, and to distinguish one from
the other; and I suppose you are just in that measure, as to receive what ye
know to be truth, and to reject what you know to be false, being convinced in
your own Consciences; and as such, I must place my Plea before you
particularly, and make my Defense to your judgment Seat [even to the Witness
of God in your Consciences, I intend and mean] and I shall omit to say much to
the Accuser himself, as supposing him, a man more full of envious raging
humor, than of solid and wise judgment, to receive either reproof or
conviction; for many such as he I have dealt withal in this case, whom I have
found men so filled with Prejudice, that neither the authority of sound reason,
nor of the Word of God, could convince them of their evil Proceedings;
therefore, before you, I shall state the particular Accusations, and the
Defense against them.

The way in which our Adversary has proceeded in his Accusations is obscure,
and yet malicious enough, and also in great ignorance; for he tells (...) in
his Epistle, he has gath^red up out of several Authors, the most remarkable
passages both of the Doctrine and Practice of the Anabaptists (so called) i^
Germany, (...). years ago, and then he charges the same things upon the
Anabaptists and Q^ (as he scornfully calls them) in these days; and then he
applauds you the (...) words of high style, for being Instrumental to suppress
their insolent tyr^^nical (...) Authority, which they exercise ever God's
People in this Nation, to ^nslave (...) (says he) to their insatiable lusts.
These are his own words in his Epistle.

Answ. In answer to all this, diverse things are very considerable, which I
desire to lay before you.

1. Concerning the Anabaptists (so called) in Germany; and their Doctri^ and
Practices, with the several transactions falling out in that tim^: It is not my
work now to plead their Cause, nor yet can I justify them in their
proceedings, if the relations given of them be true, which are many, and to me
seems not in every thing credible; because I find it were their Enemies, who
are our Authors; who seldom give true Relations of such whom they hate: But be
the Relations true or false, it is not material in this case in hand, for my
occasion is not concerning a People so far off, as in Germany, and of so long
time, as above a hundred of years; but I am to clear the Innocent who are now
living, from the present Accusations of an envious man; though, if it were
necessary; or would edify, or were a matter of pertinency, I could say
somewhat more concerning that Peoples appearing in Germany, but being a matter
not suting ^y occasion, I do forbear it.

2. As for them, called Anabaptists of this our Age and Country, I shall not
plead their Cause at this time, though I cannot believe that they are of that
spirit of Murder and Tyranny, etc. as is reputed by your Informer; though their
Judgment in every case, neither about civil or spiritual things I dare not
justify; nor may I lawfully clear all of them from a large measure of the
spirit of Ambition and Covetousness, Vainglory and Self-seeking; for which the
Lord has justly brought them under a just Reproof, and by this time I believe
some of them may see some Error in their own way, and more I may not say of
them, but that I believe the present Accusation against them, by your present
Informer, is more out of bitter and perverse Emnity, and devouring Malice, that
he bears toward them, than out of any other end; and I doubt not but they are
sufficient to answer for themselves, and to clear their Innocence in things
wherei^ they are not guilty; and if they are guilty, let them fall in their
Trial: I leave them to speak for themselves, thus omitting any further Answer
on their behalf.

3. As for us, whom in scorn the Accuser calls Quakers, and whom he has
accused as guilty in all things, with the Anabaptists (so called) in Germany,
and in this Nation; I say, there is great difference both in Judgment and
Practice, in things, Civil (so accounted) and things Spiritual between us and
them, as is well known; and were they fully guilty of all what is said of them
(which I dare not believe) yet how can we be charged guilty of their Crimes,
being they and we are different in Judgment and Practice, as I have said:
Surely your Informer has neither showed good Conscience, nor yet pure Reason
in his proceeding, who has laid things to our Charge which we never knew, and
has accused us guilty of that which never entered into our Hearts to practice,
and has (as it were) charged other men's Crimes upon us, being wholly innocent,
as will appear in the prosecution of this matter; and I hope to make it plain,
that he has wronged us, and abused you, by dedicating Falsehood for your
ap^roof, and sent Slanders abroad, as it were, under your Name or Pa^^^^age.

4. As concerning the Charge it self, included in these words, says your
Informer; And considering how Instrumental your Honors have been to suppress
their ^t, Tyrannical, Usurped Authority, which they exercise over God's People
in (...) Nation, to enslave us, etc. In these words there are very deep
Accusations, ^ders, and unjust Reproaches vented against us; and with what Face
(except ^ent) we can be thus charged, is almost wonderful; especially consider^
^^at we have been our selves a suffering People by every Authority, since (...)
time the Lord raised us up, and never had any outward Authority in (...)
Nation, but all were cast out of all Place and Power, both Civil and Military,
when as they have become one with us in our Way, and this has been the manner
of dealing with us by all that ever have ruled; and yet we are charged most
unjustly with exercising Insolent, Tyrannical, U^d Authority in this Nation,
etc. for its said, Their Insolent, and they exercise, to wit, the Quakers; when
as it is manifest, as I have shewe^, that we never excercised any outward
Authority at all, but have been suffering People by all Authorities unto this
day: therefore I do appeal to the Witness of God in your own Consciences, how
great is this Slander, and how false this Accusation, and how wicked is our
Adversary in thus accusing us before you, in the things which you so well know
are utterly and detestably false; and the Accuser and his Accusations are to be
condemned together.

5. But and if it had been so, or should be so in time to come, that we had
any, or all outward Authority in our Hands, (I may suppose impossible things,
to manifest the truth of our Principle) our Principle is not to be insolent,
tyrannical, nor to be Usurpers over God's People, to enslave; but far the
contrary, even that Justice, Mercy and Truth may sit in the Throne, and that
Peace and freedom may be held forth unto all; that no Usurpers nor Tyrants, but
Just Men, and men that fear God and hate Covetousness and every evil Way, that
such alone may sit in Judgment whom God calls to that Place; who will rule in
Righteousness and Justice, and regard the Cause of the Poor and Needy; we would
that such only ruled, who were ruled by the Lord; who would be a Blessing in
the World, and to all People; not desiring more Liberty to our selves, than
what we would give unto all others in all just Ways. This is, our Principle, as
to matters of outward Authority among men, and not as this false Accuser has
suggested out of his evil Heart.

6. As to the matter of your suppressing us, which your Applauder says, you
have been instrumental to do: This is as false as the rest; for we are no more
suppressed than before, you exercised your present Authority, but are every way
in as much liberty of Persons, and otherwise, as in their days before yours;
and are no way suppressed, nor fearful of it: So the Author of such Lies, has
but flattered you, and fawned upon you, in telling you, ye have suppressed us,
whenas its nothing so: but and if it had been in your hearts, or be at this
day, to suppress us, and to hinder us of our Liberties, and to persecute us,
the Lord shall plead our Cause against you, and give no success unto your Work;
but it shall be turned to our Renown, and to your Overthrow, and the secret
hand of God shall confound you, and break your Purposes, and deliver his People
out of your Mouths; Thus it shall come to pass, ifthat your Hand sshould be
stretched forth to hurt us, who are Gods Heritage, and the Sheep of his Fold.
And thus much in answer to his Epistle.

Now I come to a second Accus^tion of his, stated in his first page, in these
words. We may see from whence Anabaptists, Quakers, Ranters, and Levellers, all
had their Original, namely, from the Papists, etc.

Answ. 1. As for the Anabaptists, Ranters, and Levellers, I leave them to plead
their own Cause; and though we are accused with such, yet there is much
difference in Judgment and Practice between us and them; though I believe, they
are all further from Popery both in Judgment and Practice, than is this Accuser
of them; but yet they shall answer for themselves; and I shall only mind the
matter I have in hand, which is, to clear the People of God, called Quakers,
from the Accusations charged falsely against them, whom I know to be innocent,
from these false Accusations.

2. That we did arise from the Papists, or, that they are our Original, in
Doctrine, Faith, or Practice, this is utterly false; for between us and them,
is perfect separation, and we are of another spirit, and divided from them; as
appears every way, even by their persecuting of us for our Testimony bearing
against them, and their Religion; and they have written against us, and we
against them, diverse Controversies; and they have imprisoned diverse of our
Friends in their Dominions, for giving Testimony against their Ways: by all
which it does appear, that we are not of the Papists line, nor arisen from
them; for if we were of Them, they would love Us, and not persecute Us; and
that herein we are falsely accused, as in other Things: And this is an old
out-dated Accusation, and is of no Account; for now we are otherwise known
through these Kingdoms, and we are manifest to the Consciences of men in the
sight of God, to be such as fear the Lord, and walk in his ways.

3. And as for our Original, It is the Lord God alone that has raised us up,
and planted us a People, that were not a People in times past; and not from the
Apostate Christians, neither of Papists nor Protestants (so called) are we
sprung; but are of the Apostles Line, and of the Stock and Race of the true
Christians, that believe in Christ, and follow him: and in every part of our
Religion, both in Faith and Practice, and in Conversation, we are agreeing with
the holy Apostles, being witnessed unto by the Scriptures in all that we
profess and Practice; and the Lord has raised us up out of the Apostasy, into
which all Christendom has been fallen since the Apostles days, whilst
Antichrist has reigned over the World; and we are as the first Fruits unto God
and to the Lamb, since the f^lling away from the true Faith; and Truth and
Righteousness is our Original, and Christ Jesus it our Foundation, on whom we
are builded, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against us: and this
Testinony the Spirit of God gives for us, and in us, in contradiction of the
false Accusations of all our Enemies.

4. And if it be an offense to be risen from the Papists, and if all that be
evil which they are the Original of; then the Protestants (so called) are in
the Offense, and their Ministry, and the chief part of their Church Government,
Worship and Ordinances are evil; for did not the Protestants spring from the
Papists? and did not the Papists institute the Way by which the Protestants
Ministers at Schools and Colleges? And was it not they that first Instiuted
sprinkling of Infants, and calling it Baptism into the Faith, and into the
Church? And was it not the Papists that first taught the Protestants to keep
holy days, as Christmas and Candlemass, so called? and many other particular
things relating to the Protestant Church, Ministry and Worship, were originally
ordained and first practiced by the Church of Rome and Papists: and so while
this false Accuser is charging others, himself and the men of his Way, are
found guilty of the same things; and the Papists may justly say to the
Protestants, that they are false: hearted to them, in denying of them and their
Church, when as their Fathers were the Instituters of the principal parts of
the Protestants Worship and Ordinances; and so they, like unnatural Children,
have denied their Mother that bred them up, and ordained them a way of making
Ministers, and maintaining them, and many other parts of their Religion: But
because she has not been the National Interest for these many years, therefore
the Church of the Protestants have denied the Church of Rome, though originally
they rose out from them.

The next thing in his Book I take notice of, is, where he seems to charge
us, with boasting that we talk with God, and God with us, and have Revelations,
and as if God commanded them to kill all the Wicked, and to make a new World: a
Sect in Saxony (says the Accuser) arose that held this; and the Quakers now
are like them: which is as much as charging all this upon us.

Answ. 1 That we do boast of talking with God, or of Revelation. This is
another of his false Accusations; for we boast not, nor do we glory in any
thing, saving in the Lord, and this is no Error, but that which we must
acknowledge unto, or else deny the Truth, to talk with God, and God with us, in
and by his own Spirit; for all the Saints have converss with God, and union and
fellowship with him in his own Spirit, as the Scriptures do declare: and as for
Revelations, we do acknowledge according to Christ's Words, that we had never
known the Father, nor the Son, but by Revelation; For none known the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, as it is written: and all such as
have not converss with God, and that have not Revelation, are not in the Way of
Eternal life, but are ignorant and without God in the World, and neither know
him, nor have fellowship with him.

2. As for killing all the Wicked this is another false Charge; for it is not
our Principle to war against the Persons of any Men, and kill them with carnal
Weapons, about Church and Ministry, and Religion, as the Papists and
Protestants do one against another; but it is our Principle to war against the
evil spirit in men, and to smite that with the spiritual Sword of God's Word;
and we would have men's wickedness killed, and their Persons saved, and their
Souls delivered; and this is the War we make, even till men be changed by the
Power of God, and all things made new; even a new World, and a new Earth we do
expect, according to the Lord's Promise, so that it is no error to expect a new
Earth, and a new World; for there is a new Creation which the Saints do
witness, created anew in Christ Jesus, to bring forth good fruits unto the
living God: and all that do not witness this, are in the transgression of the
old Creation, which brings the Wrath of God.

Again, The Accuser tells a story of one, that professed the Gift of discerning
spirits, and to know the Elect from Reprobates, and that made holiness consist
in speaking little, and living homely and sordidly* as our Quakers do, says he.

Answ. 1. As for discerning of Spirits, that is a Gift which the Saints of God
do receive in all Ages; for the Apostles said, to some was given the discerning
of spirits, by the manifestation of the Spirit of God: So to profess discerning
of spirits, is no error in us, though it be stated as a great error before you,
by an ignorant man, who knows not what he says, nor whereof he affirms: And
its possible to know the Elect from Reprobates by their fruits and works; for
the Children of God (who are the Elect) are known by their holy and Righteous
works and fruits; and the Children of the Devil (who are the Reprobates) are
known also by their works and fruits of unrighteousness, which they bring
forth; and this the Scriptures bear witness of.

2. As for speaking little, and living homely and sordidly: If he means, by
homely and sordidly, plainly and without superfluity; this is also works and
fruits of holiness; and its better to speak little, than to utter multitude of
vain words; and its more justifiable to God and just Men, to be plain and
homely (as he says) in Apparel, than superfluity of naughtiness in vain
Attire, and more holy; for true holiness consists in the Power of God, which
crucifies all idle words, and all superfluity in Apparel, and whatsoever is
not like God: And was but this Accuser as wise as he is envious, he would never
be seen to scorn the Quakers (scornfully so called) with speaking little, and
wearing plain and sober Apparel; but Fools love to be meddling to manifest
their own folly, as it is written.

Again, The Accuser tells another Story of Muntzer, how he did exhort some
that were on his part, (viz. Anabaptists) to kill every Mothers Son, for a
Sacrifice to the Lord; and says he, by this we may g^ess, if Anabaptists and
Quakers should get the upper hand, what they would do, etc.

Answ. 1. As for the Quakers getting the upper hand, we strive not for it by
carnal Weapons, to have victory over men's Persons, though we know the Lord will
give us victory and dominion over the Beast, and over the false Prophets; for
the Lamb shall get the victory, and they that are with him, who are called, and
faithful, and chosen; but this victory is spiritual, and obtained spiritually;
and thus we believe the Lord will give us the upper hand, even victory over ^ll
our Enemies.

2. But what a wicked envious si^rmise and suggestion is here coutched under,
as if the Quakers, if they had victory, would kill every Mothers Son for a
Sacrifice, and that, they would make War, etc. The Lord rebuke his slanderous
Tongue, who hatched Mischief in his mind against the Innocent, and presented
you with forged Lies and Surmises, and imagined and guessed cruel and evil
things against us, who are far otherwise Principled than as he suggesseth: but
all this his own doings, does but manifest the folly of his own Heart, and
(...) own wickedness; for we are of the Spirit of Mercy and Peace, and not of
Murder and War; not to kill men's Persons, but to war with the Spirit of God
against spiritual Enemies; that men's Iniquities may be slain, and their Persons
and Souls saved.

Again, The Accuser, page 4. tells a long story of Micher Hopman, and others
with him, what things they held, As they condemned the Baptism of Children:
they would not take an Oath: they pulled down Magistrates: they undertook to
kill all Princes: they taught, that in their Churches all were holy; and that
it was lawful to have many Wives: that all Learning is profane, and that mean
men are fittest to expound S^riptures; and there must be no ordinary calling in
the Church, but every man must speak as he is inspired: And thus it is (says
the Accuser) with the Quakers and Popish Agents, who are their Ringleaders,
have been endeavoring in these three Nations these eight or nine years
bypast, etc.

Answ. 1. It is to be considered, that all these things are fully charged upon
us, as being guilty thereof, and so to every particular I shall answer. As to
that of the Baptism of Children, we do say, there is neither Command nor
Example for it in all the Scripture, God never commanded it, nor did the
Apostle ever practice it in their days, but it is a Tradition of the Church of
Rome, introduced into the World long since the Apostles days; and except
better ground can be showed for the Practice of it, than bare Tradition, it is
lawful to deny it, as being no Ordinance of God in his true Church; except (I
say) that it can be proved that God ever commanded it, or the Apostles and
Saints practiced it; till which be done, it is no error to deny the sprinkling
of Infants, and to deny it to be the true Baptism into the true Church.

2. Concerning taking an Oath, we say, Christ Jesus commanded, Mat. 5. Not to
Swear to all; and the Apostles James said, Above all things; my Brethren, Swear
not: so that to deny to Swear and take Oaths, is according to the Command of
Christ and his Apostles, and is no error, though the Accuser has here charged
it on us as a heinous crime; but we do deny all swearing, in obedience to the
Commands of Christ, and our Yea is Yea, and our Nay is Nay, as Christ has
taught us, without an Oath; who has commanded us not to take Oaths, nor Swear
at all.

3. As for pulling down Magistrates, and killing all Princes, and that it is
lawful to have many Wives: These are Lies and Slanders charged upon us by a
false Accuser; for our Principle is, to obey all Magistrates, and all Princes,
in every thing, either by doing or suffering; and we would have Princes and
Magistrates to rule and reign in the Power of God, justly, righteously, and
according to the Law of God; and would not have them killed and pulled down:
And we say, it is better to keep in the single chaste life, than to have many
Wives: but any Accusation to make us appear vile, this your Informer spares
not; but according to his Work will be his Reward in the Day of the Lord.

4. Concerning all being holy in the Church: we say, That every Member in the
true Church of Christ, is holy: for the Church of Christ is his Body, and every
Member of his Body, which are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bones of his Bones, are
holy, as he is holy, in kind and quality; and it is his Exhortation to his
Saints, Be ye holy, for I am holy, says Christ: So that to hold that every
member of the Body of Christ is holy, is no error, though it be so reputed by
an ignorant man.

5. Concerning all Learning being profane, and that mean men are fittest to
expound Scriptures: I do say, that Learning in it self is a gift of God, and is
not profane; though as to the knowledge of God, and the things of his Kingdom,
learning in Tongues and Languages, is little available; for it is the Spirit of
God that teaches the things of God, and reveals all the things of his Kingdom;
and none can know God, but as the Spirit of God discovers him; for the
Disciples, who were some of them unlearned men in Books and letters, had the
knowledge of the matters of God's Kingdom taught them by the holy Spirit: and
such as have the gift of the Spirit of God, be they poor or rich, are fitted to
expound and understand Scriptures; for none can understand the Scriptures, nor
the things therein declared, but by the Spirit of God that gav^ forth the
Scriptures; and it is not Latin, Greek or Hebrew that teaches to understand
the Scriptures, but it is the Spirit of God, and to whomsoever that Spirit is
given (and God gives it to whom he pleases) they only are fit to declare the
things of God unto others, and to expound Scriptures, and none else but them
who have experience of the operation of the Spirit in their own hearts: and
this we hold and believe.

6. Concerning ordinary Calling, and speaking as he is inspired: I say the
Scriptures no where speak of ordinary calling; and if by ordinary calling it be
meant, calling to any Office in the Church, without the Spirit of God; I say,
there was no such Calling; for the Ministry of Christ in the Apostles days,
was called by the holy Spirit, and the Ministry of the true Church, is made,
ordained and called according to the Gift of God's holy Spirit, which he
gives; And as every one (says Peter) has received the Gift of the Spirit, so
let him administer the same one to another. So that it is manifest by the
Scriptures, that the Call to the Ministry in the Apostles days, was not of
man, nor by man, says Paul, but according to the gift of the holy Anointing,
the Spirit of God: and also every one in the true Church might speak, as it was
revealed to them, for says Paul, If any thing be revealed to another that
stands by, let the first hold his peace; for ^e may all speak one by one, that
all may be edified: So that it is no Error to hold, that every one in the true
Church may speak as the Spirit of God gives them utterance, and to whom the
things of God are revealed by the Spirit.

7. That there are Popish Agents among us, and that such are our Ringleaders;
this is a false slander, and you ought to put the Accuser to prove it, it is
your duty so to do; and that such Popish Agents be named, and where they are:
And I challenge the Accuser to name one among (...), or else let him stop his
Mouth for a Liar; who has abused your Names, with dedicating Untruths to you
for your approof.

Again, He accuses us for saying, The Spirit blows where it lists, and he
says, we judge none have the Spirit but our selves.

Answ. 1 Christ himself said, The Wind blows where it lists, and so i^
every one that is born of the Spirit: And we do judge God has given of his
Spirit to many that are yet Ungodly, and many are convinced of sin by the
Spirit of God in their Consciences, that are wicked and ungodly, who are not of
Us: but yet we say, as the Saints in Ages past said, We know that we are of
God, and that the whole World lies in Wickedness; and they that are of God,
hear us, and are one with us, and we do inform all People to the measure of the
Spirit of God in their Consciences, that they may come to the Knowledge of God,
and to be one with us.

Again, He accuses us to be acted by the same deluding spirit as John of
Leyden was acted by.

Answ. 1. What spirit John of Leyden was acted by, we now dispute not, neither
does this Accuser well know, but what he has from the reports of others, which
may be false as like as true in foam particulars; but the Spirit that we follow
is the Spirit of God, by which we are acted in the ways of Truth and
Righteousness; and are not deluded, nor Followers of a deluding spirit; for we
are willing to be tried in our Doctrines and Practices according to the
Scriptures: and though we stand accused of these, and the like things, yet we
challenge him to prove it before you, and that we may be admitted to make our
defense; and we shall the rather easily prove that our Accuser is acted by the
spirit of the Devil, who is an Accuser of the Brethren like the Devil; and that
is a deluding spirit that teaches men to backbit^, ly^ and slander, as this
man has done; so he is proved fully guilty of that whereof he has accused
others, and must own the shame and condemnation to himself, which he would
bring upon others.

Again, The Accuser charge us, That we would neither have King, Magistrate,
(...) Ministers, but of our selves, etc.

Answ. 1. I have before mentioned what kind of Rulers and Government we would
have, even such as are just men, and men of Truth and Righteousness, and that
hate Covetousness and every evil Way; and such are of us, even such we would
have to reign as are approved of God, who would be a praise to them that do
well, and a terror to Evildoers; and that would only rule and reign for the
Lord, exercising and executing his Righteous Laws by the Spirit of God; and
such will be blessed in their Authority.

2. And till such only rule and bear the Sword of Justice in the Earth, we do
know Peace and Happiness can never be in the Kingdoms of the World, but
divisions and confusions will arise and be brought forth; for it is the only
blessedness of a Government in any Nation, when the Authority it self is just
^ad according to God; and when such as bear the execution thereof are just
Kings, Righteous Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice, that will judge for God
and not for man, and we seek not the Place of Government in this World, nor do
we intrude our selves into such Places; though this we say, while that spirit
reigns and rule in the Nations of the Earth, which is not of God, but contrary
to us, Peace and Happiness in good Government amongst men through the World can
never be; though we are truly subject to whatsoever Authority is set over us,
by doing or suffering.

Then the Accuser speaks of teaching the Ways of Righteousness, and says,
according to this, the Quakers have gone through Ireland, and he speaks of
God's Wrath following for hardness of Heart, and this (says he) is just like
the Quakers Doctrines now.

Answ. That the Quakers (scornfully so called) have gone through Ireland, and
through many other Nations of the Word, to teach and preach Truth and
Righteousness, this is true, and without occasion of an evil Charge against
them for so doing; and the Lord has prospered us, and been with us, to the
turning of many from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God;
and we have Testimony in the Consciences of many for the truth of our Doctrines
and Practices; and this is not Error nor Heresy, to proclaim the Wrath of God,
because of the hardness of Peoples Hearts; for that is the Portion of all
hard-hearted men: and we are not ashamed of this Doctrine, for it is according
to the Scriptures of Truth; and but that this Accuser is given up to blindness
of mind, he would never have mentioned these things against us, nor used our
Names in reproach in this matter.

And lastly whereas he says, some of the Quakers say, they are Jews, and are
not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan: and thou chargest James Naylor with
^^ying, that he was Christ: and that one should say, George Fox was John
Baptist, and such false Prophets and Prophesies we have heard too much of, etc.

Answ. 1 That they say, they are Jews, and are not, are such as have a Name to
live, but are dead, who say and do not; but we are not such; so this his Charge
is false and wicked, and of the Synagogue of Satan he does manifest himself to
be, by his accusing of the Brethren: And as for I^s Naylor he never said he was
Christ, through this has been cast, as a foul Reproach, upon him by others,
yet it never was proved against him lawfully, no^ any thing tending thereunto,
saving that he said Christ was in him, as (...) i^ in every Member of his Body,
according to measure. And as for the story of George Fox, there are many such
lying stories that have gone abroad in these Nations, in opposition to the
Truth of God made manifest; but over all these things Truth ^ath gotten the
victory, and the Lord's Work must prosper in the Earth; and all Ly^rs must be
confounded, and have their Portion in the Lake: And this i^ our Portion from
the World, as Christ said. They shall speak all manner of evil against you
falsely for my Name sake; but great shall be your Reward in Heaven: And this is
for a Testimony against them, that our Enemies are of the Devil, and for a
Testimony to us, that we are of God.

And thus I have returned our Defense before you, against his several Lies and
Slanders, and its left to the Witness of God in your Consciences to be Judge in
this Case, between us and him; and if you be clothed with the Spirit of
moderation and meekness, and will judge according to Equity, I doubt not but
the Cause is clear against our Adversary, who wrongfully, and to a wicked and
evil intent has hatched Mischief against us, and brought it forth before you;
and we desire nothing of Revenge toward him for his evil work, but do leave
him to be rewarded of the Lord, who will justly give him and all men according
to their Deeds.

And now I have a few Considerations to present unto you three in particular,
as such in that capacity who bear rule in this Land.

1. Consider how that you are set in Place and Authority, and ought to judge
and govern for God alone, and to be a Terror to all Evildoers, and a Praise to
all that do well; and the living God requires of you, To do Justice, Truth and
Righteousness in the Land, to hear the cry of the Widow and Fatherless, and to
judge uprightly the Cause of the Poor, without respect to your own selfends;
and ye ought to be meek and humble men in your Places of Care and Trust which
i^ committed unto you; and take heed that your hearts be not lifted up in the
honor of high Places, and so Judgment, Mercy, and Truth be neglected, and
Oppressions and Cruelties be brought forth.

2. Consider, that if ye do Justice and Righteousness, and walk humbly with the
Lord, and exercise Mercy and Truth in the Land, and hear the Cry of the Poor,
and deliver the Afflicted; then the Lord can make you a Blessing to your selves
and to the People: But if you be proud and exalted, and ambitious and
vainglorious, and exercise Cruelty and Oppression, and tread down the Poor, and
vex the Needy, and grieve the Lord God by your Iniquities; then God will cast
you down, and lay your honor in the Dust, and make you a Curse and a Reproach,
and your Names and Memorial shall be a stink, and the justice of the Lord's
Hand shall effect it.

3. Consider that ye are Men, and not God, and your strength flesh, and not
spirit; and there is a God greater than all, who is above all, who can suddenly
in a moment save his People, and destroy his Enemies; and he can break you down
and never raise you up; he can turn his Hand upon you and all mankind, as the
Potter does with his Clay, even tread it and mould it for honor or dishonor;
and if his Spirit blow upon you, and if he smite you, you perish, and none can
restore you: Take heed to this God, and have respect unto him, and remember you
are but as Dust before him; and you now have a time for a moment, which the
Lord has given you to try you what you will do, and how you will walk toward
him; an Account unto him must you give of all your ways: Remember this now in
your lifetime, while you have time, and the day of your visitation is not
quite extinguished.

4 Be tender and compassionate toward all men; not perverse, hasty and
froward, thinking to bow men to your wills by rigor, but rather win them by
love, and this is of good report to you, to be humble, meek and tender toward
all, even toward your Enemies; and insult not over the Afflicted, neither add
to their Sufferings; for the Lord can raise up, and bring down whomsoever he
will, according to his pleasure; and remember that Law to walk by it, Do to
others but a^ ye would have others do unto you in the same case; and be not too
cruel to such, who cannot conform to Times, and Things, and Men; for what know
you, but some men's Consciences may be tender in things which you yet make no
Conscience of; meddle not to persecute any for their Conscience sake in
religious matters, but rule and govern well in outward Affairs, according to
the Law of God; but afflict not, nor persecute any for their Conscience sake
toward God, while they walk justly, as men, in things between man and man:
Take this Counsel, lest you vex the Lord against you, to destroy you.

5. Be moderate and compassionate toward this same People, that are accused
before you; though they are at this day a People under Afflictions and
Sufferings every way, yet show not the height of Rigor and Oppression against
them; though you have Power to imprison them, and to deal hardly with them, yet
be tender and meek, and show bowels of mercy and forbearance; and use not the
extent of your Power, to seek their Destruction, lest ye provoke the Lord
against your selves: for the God of Heaven remembers their Cause, and does
give ear to the cry of their innocent groanings under their heavy Burdens, and
Deliverance may he work for them, whether you will or no; Though it be an hour
of Affliction, and a day of great Trial upon them, yet Woe unto them that shall
be found adding to their Afflictions, by increasing their Burdens through
Injustice and Persecution: Therefore as ye hope to receive Mercy from the Lord,
and as ye would have his Compassion showed to you, do the same to his People,
for Power is in your Hands to be Merciful or Cruel, to relieve them or
persecute them; and it is your day of trial what you (...) do; ye have your
hour to do Good or evil, and according to your Works will the God of Heaven
reward you.

6. Consider the Innocence of this People; they are clear before the Lord and
you of plotting, or contriving, or designing Evil against you, or this
Government, they seek not the hurt of any man's Person, nor do they intend Evil
toward the Government or Governors; Who have found them agitating any such
things? of all such things they are innocent, and are peaceable Subjects under
the Government, and are persuaded in Conscience so to ^^ntinue: And as for
their Deportment in their Callings and Occasions, and Tradings amongst Men, ask
their Neighbors; Do not they deal justly, truly, and equally in all their
Dealings and Occasions? Do not they speak the Truth to their Neighbors in all
Matters? and are they not Persons of upright and inoffensive Lives and
Conversations? Do they defraud their Neighbors? or are they Drunkards or vain
Persons? ^et the very Witness of God in their Neighbors answer. And if you
should fall a persecuting this People, and seek to destroy them, concerning
whom the Witness of God in Men's Consciences gives such an Evidence, Woe, woe
will be unto you; for you cannot hurt them, but you act contrary to the Witness
of God in your own Hearts, which will condemn you in the Day of Judgment. So
let this dwell upon your spirits, and be aware what you do; take good
Consideration, lest you act out of God's Counsel to your own overthrow.

7. Consider what became of all the Persecutors of old, Were not they Eminently
destroyed by the Hand of God who persecuted the Lord's People? What became of
Pharaoh? and what became of Hammon? and what became of Herod, who persecuted
the Lord's Heritage? Let this enter into your Hearts, to be Examples to you,
that you persecute not the Innocent, lest God overturn you by the Roots; for as
I have said, The Cause of this People God regards, and he will avenge himself
in his season of all their Persecutors; Have not your Hands dipped in their
unjust Afflictions, that God may bless you; and spare them, that you may be
spared in the Day of Vengeance; if you have no matter of Evil against them in
things between man and man, nor in the Affairs of your Government, as
contriving against it; nor nothing but concerning the Worship of their God, and
the Matters of their Conscience in spiritual things; Touch them not, Persecute
them not, Afflict them not; but be tender toward them, as you will answer the
same before the God of Heaven. These are only Considerations of Warning to you:
and I commit the Matter to the Lord; and ye have time to do Good or Evil, and
accordingly will God reward you.

A Testimony concerning Government and Authority.
WE are a People whom God has raised up out of the Apastacy, Darkness and
Ignorance which all Christendom has long been fallen into; for since the days
of the Apostles many have professed the Words of Christ, and had a Name of
Churches, and the show of Religion, and have professed the Scriptures, but have
wanted the same Spirit and Power of Godliness which the Apostles lived in; the
Life and Spirit of God has been wanting amongst the false Christians, and they
have been persecuting one another about Religion and the Worship of God, and
imposing upon one another Consciences, in spiritual Matters; and Kings and
Rulers have been setting up what kind of Worship, and Religion, and Church
Government as they pleased; and they have imposed upon Kingdoms, and made
people subject to them, to profess and conform to such a Way of Worship and
Religion, some in the ignorance of their Consciences, and some contrary to
their Consciences; and all this has been in the Apostasy, since the Apostles
days, while men have been fallen from the true Faith, and many have been
subject to their Rulers and Governors by force, and for fear, and not for
Conscience sake; for Love, Peace and Unity has been wanting among Christians,
and Bitterness, Frowardness and False heartedness, has been amongst them: but
out of all this the Lord has redeemed us into Peace and Comfort with God, and
one with another.

And as concerning our Principle about Magistracy, and Government, and
obedience thereunto, this I do declare.

1. We do own and acknowledge Magistracy to be an Ordinance of God, instituted
of him, for the punishing of Evildoers, and for the praise of them that do
well; and we acknowledge all subjection to Authority, Magistracy and
Government: This is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, known
through these Kingdoms, that we are subject by doing or suffering, to
whatsoever Authority the Lord pleases to set over us, without Rebellion,
Sedition, Plotting or making War against any Government or Governors.

2. That Government and Authority which is justly according unto God in all its
Statutes and Ordinances, we are, and do engage to be subject thereunto, by full
Obedience to all the Commands and Injunctions of such Authority and Government,
whose Laws, Ordinances, and Commandments are grounded upon right Reason and
Equity, which leads to do to all men as we would be done unto, and punish the
contrary; to such Government and Authority we are readily subject in all things
and cases; and we are for the Order and Assistance of such Government in all
Righteousness.

3. That Government which is contrary unto this, which is Injustice, commanding
and requiring things contrary to the Law of God, and imposing upon People in
Matters and Cases, contrary to Right Reason and Equity, whose Commands are
different to the Will of God; yet to such Government we acknowledge subjection,
by patient suffering under all Penalties inflicted for disobedience to the
Commands which we cannot perform by Obedience for Conscience sake: And this is
our Principle, though an Authority and Government were never so Unjust in it
self, and in its exercise, yet we may not plot nor contrive, or make turbulent
Insurrections to redeem our selves from such Government and Authority, but we
must commit our Cause to the Lord in such case, of suffering under any unjust
Commands of Men.

4. As concerning Church and Ministry, and the Exercise of Religion, We believe
and acknowledge that Christ has a Church upon Earth, and a lawful Ministry;
and we are not Enemies to Church, and Ministry, and Gospel Ordinances, as we
are falsely reputed by Men, ignorant and slanderous; but we only bear witness
against the corruption and degeneration of the Church of Papists and
Protestants (so called) wherein they are different and contrary to what the
Churches of Christ were in the Apostles days; they are different and contrary
I assert, to what the Churches of Christ once were in Ministry, (in its Call
and Maintenance) in Ordinances and Worship, in Discipline and Government; in
all these things there is difference to what these things were in the true
Churches in the Apostles days: And our Principle is, for the reforming of
Ministry, Church Government, Discipline and Worship, and not to destroy them.

5. As concerning Imposing of Faith, and Doctrine, and Practices, and Worship
in Religion by the force of Laws and Penalties, in the ignorance of men's
Consciences, or contrary to their Consciences: We do say, This Practice never
was in the Apostles days, but is an Intrusion of Antichrist, and we bear
Testimony against it, not to be of God, but contrary to him: And that outward
Government and Authority in Kingdoms and Nations, is to be exercised over the
outward man, in things between man and man, and not over the inward man, in
things between God and man's Conscience in spiritual Matters, and Worship, and
Duty to God-wards: No King, nor Ruler upon Earth, has Power given him of God
to exercise such Authority over the Consciences of Men in the Matters of God's
Kingdom: And further, Religion and Church Government so set up and established
by force, upon Pains and Penalties, can but reform a People into Hypocrisy and
false Conformity, and not into any real Performance of Religion or Duty to God:
And such Performance of Religion, Church Fellowship and Ordinances is not unto
eternal Life, but to the making of men two fold more the Children of the Devil.

6. We do believe, That it is the Convictions and Teaching of the Spirit of God
that does make men and People only truly Religious: It is that only that
persuades the Conscience from all Evil unto that which is Good; and true
Religion, and the Worship of God, and Duty toward him, is not truly learned by
Traditions of time, Commandments of Men, or Custom of Countries, or the like;
but it is the Spirit of God, and its Teachings in the Consciences of People,
that leads into all Truth, according as Christ has said; so that the Way of
forcing Religion and Duty to God upon People by force and outward Penalties,
this was never known among the Saints and Apostles of Christ.

These things are presented to your Considerations; The Lord give you a right
Understanding of them, and that you may walk in the way of your own Peace with
God and Man.

E. B.
Written in the 10th Month in Ireland, 1660.
SOME CONSIDERATIONS Presented unto the King of England, etc. Being an Answer
unto a Petition and Address of the General Court of Boston in New England;
presented unto the KING (as is said) Feb. last, the Eleaventh Day, 1660.
Subscribed by John Indicot, the chief Persecutor there; thinking thereby to
cover themselves from the Blood of the Innocent.
OH King, this my Occasion to present thee with these Considerations is very
urgent, and of great necessity, even in the behalf of Innocent Blood; hoping
that my Work will find such Favor with thee, as to induce thee to the reading
and serious consideration hereof.

My Occasion is this, Because of a Paper presented to thee, called, The humble
Petition and Address of the General Court at Boston in New England: In which is
contained diverse Calumnies, unjust Reproaches, palpable Untruths, and malicious
Slanders against an innocent People, whom they scornfully call Quakers; whom,
for the Name of Christ's sake, are made a Reproach through the World, and by
these Petitioners have been persecuted unto Banishment and Death: It is hard to
relate the Cruelties that have been committed against these People, and acted
upon them by these Petitioners; they have spoiled their Goods, imprisoned many
of their Persons, Whipped them, cut off their Ears, Burned them, yea, Banished
and Murdered them: and all this I aver and affirm before thee, O King, wholly
unjustly and unrighteously, and without the Breach of any just Law of God or
Man; but only for and because of difference in Judgment and Practice concerning
Spiritual things; and without any Transgression of the Law of God, or their own
Laws, saving, that they made Laws against them on purpose to spoil their Goods,
imprison Persons, cut off their Ears, yea, and kill them; which Laws were made
by them, without any Power truly derived from the lawful Authority of England,
contrary to their Patent.

And now, O King, these same men have presented thee with a Petition, in which
is asserted very many extreme Reproaches, as I have said, in Contempt and
Derision of that People; and all this, as if those People were guilty of
heinous Crimes, that it might appear to thee, as if these Petitioners had done
nothing but Justice in what they have done; and they seek to cover themselves,
and to hide their Wickedness before thee, in what they have unjustly acted; and
this seems to be the Current of some part of the same Petition, already
presented unto thee, like as if they had done no Evil, though they have
Unjustly Banished, (...) off Ears, Whipped inhumanly, and taken away lives, as
aforesaid: And they would have thee believe, they are Innocent toward thee,
and toward us; whenas it is evident, as the Sun at Noonday, that they are our
Persecuters, and that they have ^^justly persecuted us unto Death for the Name
of Christ; and that also they are not unto thee as they Hypocritically feign
themselves.

And therefore, O King, for the clearing of our selves, and the Name of the
Lord which we profess, and for reproving of their bold and impudent
Insolences, both in what they have already done to us, and now in seeking to
cover themselves unto thee: And also, if there be any doubtfulness in thy Heart
of these Matters, for these Ends and Causes, with Respect to the Fear of God,
and Honor (...) the King, I hereby presume to pursue their said Petition, even
unto thy Court, and to wipe away the Slanders and Reproaches of Ungodly Men, as
much as possible; hoping thereby thou will receive due and just Information in
this matter of proceeding between us and them, that thy just Judgment may be
given accordingly.

And I shall transcribe some few of their own words, presented to thee, and
thereupon spread some few Considerations before thee also; and I pray God give
thee an Understanding to judge justly in this and all other cases.

The first thing that I note, is, whereas they say, That they have chosen
rather the pure Scripture-Worship, with a good Conscience, in this poor remote
Wilderness (to ^it, New England) among the Heathens; than the Pleasures of
England, with subjection to the Imposition of the then so disposed, and so far
prevailing Hierarchy, which we could not do without an evil Conscience, etc.
say they.

The Considerations presented unto the King, upon these words, are diverse.

1. The Worship, Doctrine, Discpiline and Constitution of the Church of
New England is different and contrary, and not purely according unto the
Scriptures, in the Administration of the Gospel, nor in a pure Conscience,
purely guided by the Spirit of God, though they seem to justify their own Way
and Case before the King; and this may justly be made appear in his Presence,
upon good Occasion; only at this time I assert the Case, and if ever God gives
opportunity, I may prosecute it with Proofs and Evidences, and that to the great
Reproof of the Church (so called) of New England; who are not only in Doctrine,
Worship and Conversation contrary to the Scriptures, but impudent and too
presumptious, to affirm their own Self-justification and Innocenc^ before the
King, when, as it is manifest, as the Day is from the Night, that the Pastors
and Members of the Church of New England want the Spirit of God, that gave
forth the Scriptures; and follow the spirit of Persecution, Violence and
Cruelty, and are void of a Good Conscience, both toward God and Men. To prove
this, there needs no greater Evidence than their own Deport^nt toward the
Harmless Quakers for these five years time; who, as I have said, have spoiled
their Goods, and imprisoned their Persons, cut off their Ears, Banished them,
and inhumanely put them to Death; and all this because of difference in
Judgment and Practice in Religious Matters, when as no manner of Evil could be
charged upon them in the things between man and man. And if these be not works
contrary to the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them forth, and contrary
to a Good Conscience, I am yet ignorant, and must leave it to the Judgment of
the King, before whom this Matter is brought to receive his Judgment.

2. Let the King consider, how they have ignorantly condemned themselves in the
same things, for whith they have judged others; for while they seem to complain
of the Impositions of the Bishops, which they style prevailing Hierarchy; if it
was Transgression in the Bishops in days past, to impose upon these
Petitioners, and to Persecute them for Non-conformists; how much more are these
men guilty of Imposition and Persecution of tender Consciences? Nay, they have
exceeded in the same Transgression, and become sevenfold guilty of the sins
themselves which they complain against in others; for they have gone further in
Cruelty and Persecution toward the Innocent Quakers, than ever the Bishops
proceeded against them, even so far further, as the murdering of a man is more
than cutting off his Ear: And the Cause of the Quakers toward these
Petitioners has been as Innocent, as ever theirs was toward the Bishops.

Oh hypocritical Generation! who are condemning of others for that whereof
themselves are guilty, and imposing upon others in a far higher degree than
ever the Bishops imposed on them; witness their Law in New England, which
judges every man to pay 5s. per day, who come not to their Assembly; and
imposing Fines of 40s, and 50s. apiece on such as meet together to worship the
Lord; which are evident signs of an evil Conscience, as themselves speak.

The next thing that I note, upon which the King ought to consider, the
Petitioners say concerning the Quakers, Open Capital Blasphemers, open Seducers
from the Glorious Trinity, the Lord's Christ, the Blessed Gospel, and from the
holy Scriptures as the Rule of Life; open Enemies to the Government it self, as
established in the hand of any but men of their own Principles; malignant
Promoters of Doctrines directly tending to subvert both our Church and State.

By way of Answer to this, let the King consider;

1. The envious and detestable spirit of maliciousness of these Accusers, and
how vehement and fervent their persecuting spirit is drawn forth with
reproachful Terms in the highest degree, like as if they could not utter
sufficiently the Envy of their Hearts; or, as if they wanted words to
demonstrate their Malignity and devouring Malice against that People, whom they
in scorn call Quakers; and all this to present us Odious and Abominable before
thee, O King: I say but this of them unto thee, The Lord forgive them, if they
have not sinned unto Death, and Unpardonably; I have no desire of Revenge
toward them, but I leave Vengeance to the Lord, who will recompense in his
season; neither do I desire to provoke or incense the King against them, only
Duty to God and the King teaches me, and Love Constrains me, and an absolute
Necessity presses much upon me, to spread our Denial of their Bitter and
Malicious Accusations against us before the King, unto whom we are thus foully
accused: And I say, I am confident, That the King has better Experience of us,
than to believe these our Malicious Accusars: And I do appeal to him, from the
knowledge which he has already of us, that he believes we are Innocent, and
not guilty of those things thus unjustly charged upon us; and I question not
but he will rightly understand that these Accusations are more out of Hatred
and Envy against us, than out of desire to benefit the King by such
Presentation.

2. I do testify unto the King, and before the whole World, That we do profess
and believe concerning the Father, Son and Spirit, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Blessed Gospel, and the Holy Scriptures; I say, we do believe and make
prefession in Truth and Righteousness concerning all these things; and by our
Doctrines and Instructions do persuade all people to believe, and not seduce
any from these Truths of the Gospel; and this is known through these Kingdoms
concerning us, though we stand now accused falsely concerning these Matters
before the King. But as for the Scriptures being the Rule of Life; we say, The
Spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures is the Rule of Life and Faith unto
the Saints, and leads not contrary, but according unto the Scriptures in the
Belief and Practice of whatsoever the Scripture says: And if these Petitioners
did make the Scriptures the Rule of their Lives and Practices, for the denial
of which they here accuse us, they would not have cut off Ears, Banished and
put to Death for the Cause of Conscience, which is contrary to the Scriptures,
and proceeded from another spirit than that which gave forth the Scriptures.

3. Concerning Government, our Principles and Practices are well known to many,
and partly to the King; We are not Enemies unto Government it self, as these
our Accusers do charge us; but it is our Principle, and has ever been, and is
our Practice to be subject to whatsoever Government is set up over us, either
by doing or suffering; and neither to vilify nor rebel against any Government
or Governors, by any Malicious Plots or Contrivances; but to walk in Meekness
and Humility toward all, being subject for Conscience sake, as I have said,
either by doing or suffering: and I doubt not but the KING is sufficiently
informed hereof, and believes this Testimony.

4. As for our Doctrines tending to subvert both Church and State, this is also
a false Accusation and Slander; for our Doctrines are to convert, and not to
subvert; even to convert to God, and Truth and Righteousness, that men should
live in these things, and forsake all that which is contrary; and this Effect
our Doctrines have wrought in the World, as the Testimony of many Consciences
shall bear witness.

Oh let the King consider of our Defense, as well as of our Enemy's Charge; who
have thought it not enough to Whip, most cruelly Banish, cut Ears, and put to
Death the Innocent, but must still accuse them ^alsly, and seek to cover
themselves by fawning and flattering Addresses unto the King, like as if they
had done no Evil; whenas the God or Heaven is Witness, to whom we can appeal,
That our Brethren suffered the Tortures of shameful Death in New England
(through their unjust Laws and Sentences) as Saints and Servants of the Living
God, for the Name of Christ Jesus, and for his Truth, which they held until
Death, and not for Evil-doing. And the Executioners of these inhumane Cruelties
seem so far from Repentance for their Evil doing, that they rather justify
themselves in what they have done, and cease not to smite, and wound and
reproach the Innocent, and that before the King, and that after they have
Martyred them.

Again, These Petitioners say, After all other means for a long time used in
vain, we were at last constrained for our own safety (say they) to pass a
Sentence of Banishment against them upon Pain of Death; such was their
Dangerous, Impetuous and Desperate Turbulency to Religion, and to the State
Civil and Ecclesi^stical, as that (...) unwilling soever, could it have been
avoided, the Magistrate, at least in Conscience both to God and man, judged
himself, called for the Defense of all to keep the Passage with the Point of
the Sword held toward them; this could do no harm (say they) to them that
would be warned thereby: their willing rushing themselves thereupon was their
own act; and we with all humility conceive a Crime, bringing their Blood upon
their own Heads.

By way of Answer to this, let it be considered;

1. What Means was for a long time used, before they put them to Death, is
shameful to mention; Was it not by the means of Cruel Whippings, Banishment,
Imprisonment, Cutting off Ears, and taking their Goods by Violence? Its true,
by this Means the Petitioners dealt with the Quakers, and never by any
Christian like Means; for the very first of our Friends, that ever came among
them, they made them Prisoners ere they came on shore, and inhumanely dealt
with them, and Banished them; and this was the first and fairest Means that
ever was used by them, which are not Gospel-Means, nor the Way by which the
Church of New England ought to have proceeded: Had our Friends been in Error,
and such as they say of them, it had been their Duty to have gained them by
Love, by Mercy, and by Long-suffering; these are the Weapons of the Spirit of
God, which ought to be used toward them that are in Error, in order to the
converting of them from the Error: but contrary to this, the Magistrates and
Church Members of New England took Cain's Weapons, and dealt Cruelly, and not
like Christians, nor like sober Men toward the Innocent; but their thus
proceeding was in vain, as themselves acknowledge; for notwithstanding, the
Gospel of Christ grew and increased, and many were converted to the Faith of
Christ Jesus throughout New England.

2. Let it be considered, what their dangerous and desperate Turbulency was to
States Civil and Ecclesiastical; Did ever these poor People, whom they
condemned and put to shameful death, lift up a Hand against them, or appear in
any Turbulent Gesture toward them? Were they ever found with any Carnal Weapon
about them? or, What was their Crime, saving that they warned Sinners to
Repent, and the Ungodly to turn from his way? We appeal to the God of Heaven on
their behalf, whom they have Martyred for the Name of Christ, That they had no
other Offense to charge upon them, saving their Conversations, Doctrines and
Practices, as Saints of the Most High God; and this is witnessed by many of
their Neighbors, though themselves have hardened their Hearts against the
Reproof of God's Witness. And we certainly believe, it was their Malice and
Envy that constrained them to pass Sentence of Death upon them, and not the
Equity of either just Law of God or man; for they deserved not the merit of
Death, such was the Innocence of their Cause: And they are no more safe by the
taking away the Lives of our Guiltless Brethren, than they were before; no more
safe I say, but more liable to the Justice and Terror of the Almighty, and to
the Justice of the King, and the good Laws of England, for, and because of
their Barbarous Cruelties: But, as I have said, we leave Vengeance to the Lord,
and commit them to the Justice of God's Hand, which we doubt not but it will
pass upon them in his Day and Season.

3. Whereas they would seem to extenuate their Crime of putting to shameful
Death the Lord's Servants; they tell the King, as if they only kept the Passage
with the Point of the Sword held toward them, as if they had no intention to
hurt them, and this the Magistrate did both in conscience to God and man: I
say, It is to be considered what occasions were given them to stand in the
Passage with the point of the Sword toward this People; Was it for any Cause
on their parts, but as aforesaid, for reproving their Sin, and crying against
their Wickedness, whenas their Lives and Conversations were Harmless and
Innocent amongst them? I say, This was no just Cause for the Magistrates to
stand in the Passage with the Point of the Sword, and therefore they were
Unjust in so doing, if they had done no more, and proceeded in the way of
insolent Usurpers: For what Reason had they to stop the Passage with the Point
of the Sword, for hindering of as good Subjects as themselves to pass through
the King's Dominions? Is not this derogating from the Honor and Authority of
the King, for the sub-ordinate Magistrates of New England to usurp such
Authority over freeborn People of England, as to prevent them from Egress and
Regress in lawful Occasions in any part of the King's Dominions? And I suppose
this will be found contrary to their Patent and Prescription, delivered them by
Charles the first, even this standing in the Passage with the Point of the
Sword toward the Innocent, and imposing great Fines upon men that came ^o
their Harbor to sell their lawful Commodities; if they had but the Name of
Quakers, though no other thing could be charged against them, yet they were
imposed upon by Fines and Imprisonment, and the Point of the Sword was held out
against them; and all this I suppose is contrary to their Patent, and in
Derogation and Dishonor to King Charles the second.

4. But to extenuate their own Fact, of putting to shameful Death the Innocent,
they charge their Death to be a wilful Rushing, and their Death was their own
Act, and their Blood was upon their own Heads: Concerning which, let it be
considered, they no more wilfully rushed upon their Death, neither is their
Blood on their own Heads more then the Prophets and Apostles, that were slain
for the Testimony of Jesus. But these Petitioners do plead, These Quakers (so
called) knew there was a Law proclaimed against them, Sentence of Banishment
upon pain of Death; but they would not keep away, but came again, and run
themselves upon the Sword point: And after this manner of arguing they would
make it appear, their Death was of themselves, and their Blood was on their own
Heads; but these poor Evasions, and favorable Interpretations of their own
Cruelties, ought not to cover them from the Justice of God, not from the
Justice of the King; for its to be considered, That where God commands one
thing, and men another, God ought to be obeyed, rather then men: and it is
fully believed by us, That these Sufferers did not go into New England in their
own cause, but in God's Cause, and in the Motion of his holy Spirit, and in
good Conscience toward God; they did rather suffer the loss of their own Lives
for their Obedience toward God, than to disobey him to keep the Commandments
of men: And this was the Apostles Case, when they were commanded to preach no
more in the Name of Jesus; Did they at all obey it for fear of Man? And when
the three Children were commanded to bow to the Image, did they do it for fear
of Man? or, If they had dyed for their Disobedience of the Kings Commandment,
could it have been said, That their Blood was upon their own Heads, and that
they rushed themselves upon it? and this is in part the like Case, that our
Friends suffered under the Injustice of these Petitioners, who would now cover
themselves like men of guilty Consciences; But the God of Heaven will let them
know one Day, and the King may justly do it, That the Blood of our Brethren
lies upon the Heads of the Magistrates of New England, and they are guilty of
their cruel Death, for they put them to Death, not for any Evil doing between
man and man, but for their Obedience to God, and for Good Conscience sake
toward him.

Again. The Petitioners say, The Quakers dyed not because of their other
Crimes, how Capital soever, but upon their super-added Presumptions, and
incorrigible Contempt of Authority, breaking in upon us, notwithstanding the
Sentence of Banishment; bad they not been restrained, there was too much cause
to fear, that we our selves should quickly have dyed, or worse; and they would
not be restrained, but by Death: Nay, had they at last but promised to depart
the Jurisdiction, and not to return without leave from Authority, we should
have been glad to have said they should not dye.

In Answer to this, it is considerable;

1. What these other Capital Crimes were, which the Sufferers were guilty of;
here is a secret Charge of Crimes, without Nomination; and this is the part of
Slanderers, to Accuse in general, without particular Proof; but this is still
to extenuate their own horrid Fact, of putting the Innocent to Death, and that
the King may believe better of them than indeed he has cause: and the
super-added Presumption, and incorrigible Contempt of Authority; what was it
any more than that Unjustly and without Reason, they commanded them to depart,
or if they did not, they should be put to Death? whenas no Reason could
possibly be rendered for such Law and Commandment, but because they were called
Quakers, and were different in Matters of Faith and Judgment concerning
spiritual Things; for, as I have said, No Sedition, Evil-dealing, Drunkenness,
Lying, nor any of these thingt could be charged against them; and therefore the
Law and Commandment of Banishment was unjust, and could not be actively obeyed
by our Brethren; but they returned again, not in contempt of Lawful Authority,
but as they were moved, and upon their Occasions, which was lawful and just in
the sight of God and Men, deporting themselves Harmlesly toward all people;
and this is styled, Super-added Presumption, and incorrigible Contempt of
Authority; but they must needs put a Good Name upon their bad Work, and render
the Innocent as high Offenders as Excellency of Speech can demonstrate.

2. There can be no just Cause rendered, wherefore they should fear our
Brethren, except the Guiltiness of their own Consciences; for, as I have said,
They were never seen with any Sword or Staff amongst them, nor any Carnal
Weapon, nor ever held Designs of Mischief; and for them thus wickedly to
suggest unto the King, as if they would have killed them, or worse, this is
Backbiting and Slandering in the highest degree, and punishable by the Law of
God and Men: And its true, Them whom they have killed are restrained, but the
Principles and Practices of the Quakers (so called) have entered into
New England, and passes thorough the Consciences of people without Restraint.
And its a shame for themselves to mention, how all the Pastors, and the whole
Church of Boston overcame Three Innocent Persons, and what Weapons they
overcame them by; not the Weapons of the Spirit of God, but the Weapons of
Cruelty and Hard heartedness; even as Caiu overcame Abel, and as the Jews
overcame Christ, and so did the Church of New England overcome our Brethren:
And this is all the Confession they can make of Restraining our Friends, That
they cruelly put them to Death, and thereby overcame them. And it is not known
to us, that the Court at Boston has such Absolute Power, as that the Free
Subjects of England may not come and return again and again, according to their
lawful Occasions, without leave from the Authority of Boston Court; I say, this
seems to be usurped Authority, rather than lawfully established upon them by
Charles the first; but it is apparent, and the King knows it, that in this
case the Magistrates or Boston have taken too much upon them and proceeded
further than they can justify either before God or the King, in Imprisoning
Whipping, Cutting off Ears, Banishing and Putting to Death the good Subjects of
England, without either President, Example, or any power derived from the
Lawful Authority of England.

And we have cause to say, They were so far from desiring to spare their Lives
(as they would suggest to the King) that they thirsted for their Blood, and
nothing else could satisfy them, but the extinguishment of their Lives by
shameful Torture.

Again, The Petitioners fawn and flatter in these words; (say they) Let not the
King hear men's words; your Servants are true Men, Fearers of God and the King;
and not given to Change; zealous of Government and Order; we are not seditions
to the Inte est of Caesar, etc.

In answer to this, many things are considerable;

1. Why should the Petitioners seem to exhort the King, not to hear men's words?
Shall the Innocent be accused before him, and not heard in their lawful
Defense? Must not the King hear the Accused as well as the Accusers, and in as
much Justice? I hope God has given him more Nobility of Understanding, than to
receive or put in practice such Admonition; and I desire it may be far from the
King ever to condemn any Person or People upon the Accusation of others,
without full hearing of the Accused, as well as their Enemies; for it is
Justice and Equity so to do, and thereby shall his Judgment be the more just.

2. They pretend to be Servants to the King, and that they fear him, and are
not given to change, I shall not seem to intrude into the Matters to which I am
a Stranger; but I leave this Case to the King to consider, what their former
Actings and the current of their spirit has been toward the King: I shall
only instance one Particular, well known to me in a Letter to one Gurden, dated
at Boston, and subscribed by some of these Petitioners, where they say, There
is more Danger in these Quakers (as they call them) to Trouble and Overcome
England, than in the KING of SCOTS, and all the Popish Princes in Germany:
these be the Petitioners own words, whereby it is manifest what the current of
their spirit was against the King then, tho gh now they have changed their
Tale, and call him High and Might^ Prince, and Dread Sovereign, and such like,
and that they are the King's Servants, etc. whenas not long since they have
signified by their words quoted against them, That there was Danger in the King
of Scots (as they called him) and reputed him a Troubler of England; and
numbered him with the Popish Princes of Germany, or amongst them: Let but the
King consider their own words, and he shall plainly read as well the temper of
their spirit against him not long since, as he shall see their Hypocrisies and
fawning Fatteries at this time; and he may fully perceive that these
Petitioners are given to Change, though they would make him believe otherwise.
And this their Address unto the King is like the Approach of the uncircumcised
Gibeonites unto Joshua, cap. 9. who wrought wilily and deceitfully, using the
same words to Joshua, We are thy Servants, as these Petitioners have used to
the King; whose deceitful Address is equally parallel with that mentioned; the
case is worth observing, Josh. 9. verse. 4, 6, 9.

3. As for being zealous of Government and Order, not Seditious nor
Schismatic, as they say; it is to be considered, that their Government, and
the Order thereof, is not only different and contrary to the Government and
Order of the Churches of Christ, but different and contrary also to the wholesome
Constitution of the ^ivil Government of England; who have made Laws, and
executed them to Banishment and Death, without any Power derived from the
Lawful Authority of England, which is absolute contrary to their Patent, by
which they hold their Jurisdiction, which says, They shall make no Laws
contrary to the Laws of England, etc. I shall not Charge them in the King's
Presence further of Sedition and Schism than himself believes concerning them.

Again, The Petitioners say, They could not live without the Public Worship of
God, and they were not permitted the use of Public Worship without such a
Yoke, Subscription and Conformity, as they could not consent unto without sin,
etc.

In Answet to this, this is to be considered;

That these Petitioners have laid heavier Yoaks of Subscription and Conformity
upon others than ever was laid upon themselves, witness their imposing Fines
upon such as cannot conform to their Worship, some Ten Shillings, some Forty
Shillings, and some Five Pounds; if any shall be absent from their Assembly, it
is so much a Day; and if any keep any Meetings different from their Way of
public Worship, it is so much a Time; and these are unjust and illegal
Impositions, and it is a heinous Yoke of Tyranny put upon the Neck of the
King's good Subjects, without any Power derived in this case from the King.
This they themselves do, and yet are complaining of such Impositions and Yoaks
laid upon them by the Bishops; which were not comparable to these; which
discovers their own just Condemnation in the same Matters for which they accuse
others.

And thus these Considerations are presented to the King, in Vindication of
that Innocent People, called Quakers, whom these Petitioners have accused as
guilty of heinous Crimes, that themselves might appear Innocent of the Cruelty,
and Injustice, and shedding of the Blood of Just Men, without Cause; being men
of Guilty Consciences, upon whom the Terror of God, and of the King, seems to
be, because of what they have done: But now let the King rightly consider of
the Case between us and them, and let him not hide his Face from the hearing of
the Cry of Innocent Blood.

And for a further Testimony of the Wickedness and Emnity of these Petitioners,
and to demonstrate how far they had proceeded contrary to the good Laws and
Authority of England, and contrary to their own Pattent, hereunto was annexed,
and presented to the King, a Brief of their Unjust Dealings toward the Quakers
(so called) which the Reader may see at large in the Reccord of Sufferings.

E. B.

To all My DEAR COMPANIONS, In the Travel and Labor of the Gospel of Christ,
And in the Faith and Patience, in the Sufferings for his NAME's SAKE.
DEarly and Well-beloved Brethren, in the Heavenly Relation, and Blessed
Immortal Birth, of which we are born most dearly in our Father's Love; my
Salutation extends unto you all, as one with you perfectly in Sufferings and
in Rejoycings, in Faith and Patience, and even in all things which you do and
suffer for the Name of the Lord our God; and my Soul greets you, and embraces
you, and servently wishes Peace, Love and Unity, and the Increase of every
good Gift unto you all; for I am perfectly one with you; if you receive of our
Father's Fullness, I am refreshed; and if you Rejoice, I am glad; and if you
suffer, and be in Heaviness, I freely partake with you; whatsoever is yours,
whether Liberty or Bonds, whether Life or Death, I partake of the same; and
whatsoever I enjoy, the same also is yours; we are of one Birth, of one Seed,
of one Line, even of the Generation of him who is without Beginning of Days or
End of Life, who is an High Priest, made after the Power of an Endless Life;
and as he was blessed of the Father, so are we, because we are of the same
Birth, and are Partakers of his Nature; and he lives in us, and we in him.

Well, my dear Companions, I need not multiply words unto you, as if you knew
not these things; for, What know I, that you know not? or, What can I say, but
you know the same? Yet bear with me, for my Heart is very full, and my Soul
ready to be poured forth, that I may once more express a little quantity of
what is abounding in my Heart; for Love, even perfect Love, even that Love
wherewith we are beloved of the Father, fills my Heart at this time toward
all of you, from the least to the greatest; and I know nothing but Love toward
you all; and I doubt not but in the same Love you do receive this my
Salutation, which is from the Fountain of Love, which at this time is opened in
my Heart.

Now Dearly Beloved The present Considerations of my Heart are very many
concerning the great Love of the Father, which hitherto has been showed unto
us; we all know, how that he called us by his Grace, and turned our Hearts from
the Vanities and Evil-wayes of this World, and sanctified us by his Word, and
put his Image upon us, and called us by his Name, and redeemed us unto himself,
and gave us the Testimony of his holy Spirit in our own Hearts, That we should
be his People, and he would be our God; he taught us, and instructed us, and
fed us, and gave us Peace and Rest in himself, and freed us from the Bondage of
Sin and Corruption, and from his Terror because of sin, and he removed our
Transgressions, and blotted them out, and ceased to smite us any more; but
brought us into the Land of Rest, flowing with Mercy and Peace, and Knowledge,
and all good Things; this did the Lord our God do for us in the days of our
Infancy, even when we were yet in our sins, he called us forth, and cleansed us
from them; and when we were Strangers to him, he made himself known unto us;
and when we were wholly ignorant, he gave us Knowledge, and when we were not a
People, he raised us up, and made us worthy to be called by his Name; and thus,
and after this manner did the Father love us, and show his Love unto us; this
you know even as I do, and the Consideration of it causes me thus to express
it.

Again, when he had thus wrought for us, and showed Love unto us, he was
pleased to call us out into his Work, to the turning and converting of others
unto the Way of Life; he put his Spirit into us, and gave us Gifts of Knowledge
and Utterance, and armed us with Wisdom, and Strength, and Courage, and every
way fitted us for that work and service in which he has carried us; he, I say,
fitted us for his Work, and called us into it, and carried us on joyfully in
it, and all this of his free Love, and infinite Power; and what we have been,
and what we have done, it has been only of the Lord, and not of our selves,
even of his Love which to us may be admirable; for alas, what were we but
Children, and neither Prophets nor Prophets Sons, and our Education
unanswerable for these things, and to perform this Calling? and therefore it is
the Lord, and only him, that has effected his own Purpose through us, and by
us, as Instruments mean of our selves, but by him very excellent.

Again, he has mightily prospered us in his Work, and a glorious effect we
have beheld of our Labors, and Travels, and Testimony; yea, the Lord has been
with us abundantly, and his Arm has compassed us about, and he has often
given us great victory over the Wise and Prudent of this World; he has made
his own Word often very powerful in our Mouths, to the wounding of the
Consciences of our Enemies; and the Lord has blessed our Testimony, to the
confounding of the Wisdom of this World, and to the gathering of many unto
himself; and he has gone forth before us in his Authority, and been always
with us in his own Work; and our Testimonies, Labors and Travels have been
very precious and pleasant unto the Lord, and all his People; and the effect
thereof causes my soul to rejoice, because the Lord has been with us, and
prospered us unto a great People, who have received our Witness, and accepted
thereof unto their Salvation, and unto the Lord alone the glory of all this
appertains.

And for these eight years and upward, the Hand of the Lord has carried us
thorough great Labors and Travels in his Service; and many Dangers and
Persecutions and Afflictions, have attended us all this time; and ye know that
many a time has the Lord delivered us from the Hands of such, as would have
destroyed us; and we have been delivered again, and again, out of Dangers and
Difficulties; and the Lord has been a present help unto us in the time of our
trouble; for the plotting of the Wicked, and the purpose of ungodly Men, has
often been broken for our sakes, even many a time have we been delivered out of
the Snare that has been laid for us; and we have seen our Enemies fall before
us on the right Hand, and on the Left, even the Wise in their worldly wisdom,
and the Foolish in their brutishness, both Professors and Profane has our God
often cut short in their desires, and endeavors of our destruction: and we
have been wonderfully preserved unto this day, and all this I attribute to the
infinite Love and Power of the Lord God, who is blessed for evermore.

And through all these things we are yet alive, and the Lord does not fail us
unto this hour, but he lives and walks in us and with us, and his Testimony is
with us, even the Seal of his good Spirit in our Hearts, that we are his Sons
and Servants, and we are confirmed by many tokens, that he is our God, and we
are his People; and that great Oppression which we have met withal, has not
restrained us, but thorough it all have we grown, and prospered unto this day:
and concerning the things whereof we have testified these diverse years, I am no
way doubtful but our God will fulfill them, neither can my confidence be shaken
by what is or can come to pass; for Antichrist must fall, false Ministry and
Worship, false Ways and Doctrines God will confound, false Power and false
Church the Lord will lay low; and Truth and Righteousness must reign; and God
will gather his People more and more, and glorious days will appear; God will
exalt his Kingdom upon Earth, and throw down the kingdom of the man of sin; all
Oppression must cease, and the Oppressors shall no more be; and God will free
his People, and they shall be happy in this World, and forever: These things
have we prophesied from day to day; and my faith is constant and unmovable,
that God will effect these things in his season; for the Lord never yet
deceived me, but what he has said will surely come to pass.

And therefore Brethren, let us be in Hope and Patience, and live in the Word
of Patience, and not be faint-hearted, as though the Lord had forgotten us, or
was unmindful of us, or as though he would not perform what he had testified of
by us; for he is not a Man, that he should lie, nor as a Man that is given to
change: But lift up your Heads; for the Lord is with us, even in our greatest
Tribulations and Afflictions, and he will accomplish his Purpose; for he is
mighty to save his People, and to destroy his Enemies.

It is true, the Gates of Hell at this time seem to be open against us, and we
are a People like to be swallowed up of our Enemies, and floods of wickedness
seem to overflow, and the waves of the great Sea seem to be void of mercy, and
the hope of our Adversaries is to extinguish us from being a People, and to
destroy us from the face of the Earth; and the Hands of our Persecutors are
highly exalted at this day, as though all that we have done for the Lord, by
our Labors and Travels should now be made of none effect.

Well, dear Brethren, though it be thus, yet our God can deliver us, and
confound our Adversaries; and we can appeal unto our God, and can spread our
Cause before him; and he knows that our Sufferings and Afflictions are
altogether Unjust, and Unequal, and Unrighteous, and that our Persecutors do
afflict us out of their Envy, and without any just cause administered unto them
by us; our God knows it, Angels and Saints know it, that we are at this day a
Persecuted People for Religions sake; and this our present Affliction is not
any just Punishment, either from the Justice of God, or from the justice of men.

For God has given us the Witness of his eternal Spirit, that Wrath is not in
him toward us; his Wrath be to his Enemies, but unto us is Joy and Peace for
evermore: and the Lord clears us, and he justifies us; who then shall condemn
us? he charge no guilt upon us, as if we were unto our selves the cause, by
our evil deeds, of this our present sufferings, and as if this were come to
pass upon us, as punishment from the Hand of God: I say, it is not so; these
our present Sufferings are not out of God's Anger toward us; for his Love is
to us, let his Wrath be to his Enemies: and as I said, neither is this
suffering in the justice of men; for unto all the World we can say, (and God
himself shall plead our Cause) whom have we wronged or done evil to? What evil
have we done to any Man's Person? Whose Goods have we falsely taken or coveted?
Against whom have we designed Mischief? even the Lord himself be Judge between
us and our Persecutors in this matter; for unto him we are known that we do
desire the good of all, and not the hurt of any, and yet we are dealt with as
Evil doers, whenas the God of Heaven is Witness in our Consciences, that we
neither plot nor contrive, nor agitate in thought or word the hurt of any man's
Person; but we walk justly toward all, being our Principle to do to others as
we would be done unto; and we can plead our cause unto our God, and he shall
plead our cause with our Enemies, and this is the present state of our case;
what we suffer at this time, it is singly in the Cause of God, and for
Righteousness sake, and for the Testimony of Jesus, which we hold; therefore
freely let us commit our Cause unto the God of Heaven, and if we dye, it is for
him, and if we live, it is to him; and we seek not vengeance against our
Enemies, but leave it to the Lord to plead with them.

And dearly Beloved, I hope I need not exhort you to be patient and faithful in
this day of our trial, knowing that the Cause is so excellent in which we are
tried, it is God's Cause, and not our own; and I hope you all have the
Testimony of his Spirit in your Consciences verifying the truth of the Cause
for which we suffer; and having that Evidence, we need not to be doubtful as
toward God, not ashamed before-Men, if so be that every one feels the Evidence
of the Spirit of God bearing witness, that we suffer for Righteousness sake,
and for the Name of Christ Jesus.

And so dear Brethren, lift up your Heads, and be as^d, that we are the Lord's,
and in his Cause we are tried, and he will judge and avenge our Persecutors in
his season; and we shall be a People when the Egyptians lie dead upon the
Seashore, and when the raging Sea is dried up, this sa^e People shall be safe;
for has the Lord done so excellent things for us? has he led us forth and
blessed us unto this day? and has he preserved us hitherto through many
Tribulations and Dangers? has he showed infinite Love and Favor unto us to
this hour? And will he now suffer us to be destroyed from being a People?
surely no; Will he give our Enemies their hearts desire to cut us all off, that
they may blaspheme his Name? surely no; and if it be the Pleasure of the Lord,
that some of us should seal our Testimony with our Blood, good is the Will of
the Lord; not ours, but his Will be done: for the Testimony that we have born
for these diverse years, has been so excellent in it self, and in its Fruits
and Effects, that the finishing of it deserves the best Seal that possibly we
can sign it with, which is indeed our hearts Blood; and this dwells upon my
spirit: and yet, though it should be thus, my confidence is sure, that the Work
of the Lord shall prosper, and our Testimony shall be glorious forever; and
this People shall never be extinguished from being a People.

And I know not any thing that remains upon our part at this day, but that we
commit our selves into the Hand of the Lord, living in the Seed of God, wherein
our Election is sure, before the World was, and forever: and let us remember
one another, and pray one for another; and let us stir up all the Children of
our Father to Faithfulness and Patience, while we have time; I say, let us walk
to the Glory of the Lord, keeping Faith and a good Conscience to our last end;
our Testimony shall never dye, nor our Memories never perish when we are ceased
to be; and though we suffer now the loss of Life, and all we have, yet the
Effects thereof will be glorious in Ages to come, and our present Sufferings
will hasten the Glory of God's Work throughout the World: Receive this as my
Salutation to you all.

It is now eight days since I left Ireland, where my Service has been
precious for the Lord, for full six Months; all which time the Lord carried me
in much Faithfulness and Diligence in his Service, to the confirming of many in
the Truth of God, and to the converting of others; and through, and because of
the Presence of the Lord, which was with me, I had a very precious time, and
was wonderfully preserved through many Dangers and Trials; and I traveled near
two thousand Miles to and fro in that Land, and had very free passage in the
principal Cities and Towns, till my work for present was fully ended there,
having more time then could be expected to clear my Conscience to all People:
and it would be too large to mention every particular Trans-action, wherein I
perceived the Eminent Hand of God with me; and also many things I observed
concerning the present state of things which I shall not now mention; for what
have we to do with the Affairs of worldly Kingdoms? but as for Friends, it was
well with them, they grow and increase in the Blessings and Fullness of the
Father; and when I came thence all was quiet, and very few in Prison, though (I
suppose) the Tidings of things as they are here; will produce the same
Sufferings upon them: But I hope they will be bold and valiant for the Truth,
in giving their Testimony by faithful Sufferings, till these things be finished.

Thus I remain in Life and Death, and when I am no more, in everlasting
remembrance, your dear Brother and Companion, by doing and suffering for the
Name of the Lord and his Truth. I am well, and at liberty as yet, E. B.
11th of the 12th Month, 1160.
A JUST and 1661
RIGHTEOUS PLEA Presented unto the King of England, And his COUNCIL, etc.
Being the true State of the present Case of the People called Quakers, Truly
Demonstrated and Justly Pleaded on their Behalf; for the true Information of
the King and his Council, that they may well understand the Truth and Verity of
doubtful Cases, and may show Just Judgment and Mercy.

And this is laid down in Six Particulars, viz. 1. Concerning Swearing at all,
and particularly of the Oath of Allegiance. 2. Concerning Meeting together to
Worship God. 3. Concerning Tithes among the Jews, and among the Christians, and
why we Refuse to pay them at this day. 4. Concerning giving Security by Bond,
to live Peaceably; or, to answer Accusations then and there, etc. 5. Concerning
Government it self, and particularly of this present Government. 6. Concerning
Persecution, what it is in it self, and how great an Enemy it is to the King
and his Government, laid down in ten Particulars.


All which Cases are truly Stated and pleaded, and the Cause of the Innocent
Vindicated.

And this for the King and his Government, that they may be Just and Righteous,
and perfectly according to God.

The Epistle to the King and his Council.
OH Friends! this is your Day that God has given you, to try you and to prove
you what you will do, and whether you will Rule, and Judge, and Exercise your
Power for God, or against him; and this is the Hour of your trial, and the
living God that made Heaven and Earth beholds you, and his Eye is upon you, and
he waits for Justice, true Judgment, Mercy, Righteousness and Truth, to be
brought forth by you in the Land, that he might bless you and prosper you; but
and if the contrary be abounding, and brought forth and exercised thorough you,
Blessings shall be turned into a Curse, and the Just God will deal with you
after your deserts; for the Reward of the Almighty is Just and Equal unto all
the Sons of men, even according to their ways and works; and the judgment of
you nor of any is determined by him, but according as He is served, obeyed and
feared, or the contrary.

And seeing you have a day to do good, and to forsake all evil, to do Justice,
Mercy and Truth in the Earth, and to subdue the contrary; if that you do the
things you ought not, and leave undone what God requires of you to do, and
trifle away your time in matters of less value, and spend your days in
Pleasures and Vanities, and neglect Mercy and Judgment in the Earth, and have
no regard to the Cry of the Poor and the Oppressed, to deliver them from their
cruel Persecutions; if it be thus with you in this your day, Who shall stand in
the Gap, to prevent the Anger of the Lord from breaking out? or who shall plead
for you in the day of your Reward, when God himself arises unto just Judgment,
to judge all Flesh, and to deliver the Innocent? Oh Friends! is this nothing to
you? Is there no cause unto you of consideration in this matter? Ought you not
to lay these things to heart? Why, surely you are but men, and your Breath is
in your Nostrils, and your Substance but dissolvable clay, and the God of
Heaven and Earth can do what he will with you, and concerning you; if ye please
him, it might be well with you; but if the contrary, he can answer your doings
with an equal Reward, and none can prevent him.

And here is a Cry, and a very great Cry of Persecution under your Authority,
the Prisons filled with Upright and Innocent Persons, to the ruin of Persons,
Wives and Families, if the great Mercy of the Lord did not prevent (...) than
the Justice of men; thousands within these few months have been cast into
Goals, and Dungeons, and nasty Holes; and diverse have finished their Lives, and
dyed in Prisons; many being taken out of their Houses, and from their lawful
Callings; and many taken out of Meetings, where they have been waiting upon
God, and cruel Sufferings inflicted upon them, and all this for Truth and
Righteousness-sake, and for their Profession and Practice in Religion; when as
no plotting or evil-dealing toward the King nor any of his Subjectes, could be
justly charged and proved against them. And thus the Innocent have been made a
Prey to profane Persons, and their Sufferings have been woeful, and all this
has been under and by your Authority; And are these things nothing to you? or
do you judge this is well doing? Is this Justice and true Judgment? Is this for
your Happiness and Prosperity? Let the God of Heaven and Earth judge in this
matter between this People and You, for the Cry of their Sufferings are very
loud in the Ears of God, and they have been laid before you, and you ought to
have relieved them, and eased their heavy Burdens, and showed Justice, Pity
and Love, and this would have made for your Happiness; but if that you always
neglect to hear the Cry of the Poor, and of the Oppressed, yet God hears, and
takes notice; and though this People should have no Helper in the Earth, yet He
is their Helper, and their Cause is committed unto him.

Can these things stand? can you be happy in these Proceedings, while the
Innocent suffer under you? Is it in your Hearts to destroy the Heritage of God?
do you think to extinguish an innocent People from off the Earth? Must none
wait upon God, and worship him, and pray to him, but after your Prescriptions
and Limitations? And will you kill and destroy all such as do not? who cannot
for good Conscience sake conform to every Way of Worship and Religion imposed,
but must wait upon God, and worship him and pray to him according as his Spirit
teaches and guides; will you, I say, destroy all such? Is it in your hearts
to effect it? if it be, the God of Heaven will not prosper you in such
Purposes; Will ye force men to forsake the Way of their God, wherein they have
found his Presence? will ye persecute men for their Religion-sake, while yet
they walk uprightly in their Conversations among men? Oh Friends! it is not
Justice and true Judgment thus to do, it pleases not God, neither does it
unite the hearts of Subjects in true Love and Unity, but it has contrary
Effects, and that you may find.

Indeed, according to my judgment, such Proceedings are not good Policy nor
humane Wisdom, for you to seek to establish one particular Persuasion and kind
of Religion, and impose that by force, and persecute and seek to destroy all
the rest that are otherwise minded, if they will not deny their Principles and
Consciences, and conform: this seems, I say, no good Policy among men; for if
it does gratify one sort of men in their desires, it discontenteth and
dissatisfieth many more, and it breaks Love and Unity amongst Subjects; and
your safety is in the uniting of Peoples hearts to you, and one to another in
Love and Liberty, and not in the Divisions and Distractions of People; surely
this cannot be for your safety. When as if you did give Liberty to all that
were peaceable in their Lives and Conversations, in the exercise of their
Religion in Faith and Worship to Godwards; this would cause all to love you,
and none to be discontented with you in good reason: If one sort of People had
as much Liberty as others (in the ways of their Religion I mean) and none more
than others, this doubtless would increase Content among Subjects, and be
ablessing to you and your Authority; and to proceed in that way which may keep
the People in Love and Unity one with another, and to you-wards, this were good
Policy for your establishment to perpetuity; and there seems to be no otherway,
than in showing Justice, Mercy, and Liberty to all in all right ways, and in
the exercise of their Consciences toward God. And this is my Judgment, the way
for you to prosper, is, to leave the prescribing the Way of Worship unto God,
as his Spirit shall teach and persuade the Conscience, and to leave the
Judgment in all Cases of Conscience about Spiritual Things unto Him, and not to
meddle about imposing Religion, nor persecuting men for that cause, for it is
not your place to do it; but you are to rule well over the outward man, and to
judge in the Cases of wrong between man and man, but not at all in the Cases
between God and men's Consciences.

But you may say, Who art thou, inferior man that seem to advise us that
are high and potent, and wise enough for our selves? Well, though it be thus,
though I am so, and not much acquainted with the State Affairs, nor do I
profess Policy in the Governments of this World, yet this I say, Whatsoever my
Birth or Quality be, and whether I live or dye, yet these things you must find
true one day; (for I speak not as a Politition but as a Servant of God) that
your prosperity and Happiness in this World, and hereafter, stands, in
showing and executing true Justice and Judgment, and Mercy and equal Liberty
toward all, without respect of their Title in the Profession and Practice of
Religion, and in allowing Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Faith, and
Worship, and Duty to Godwards, to all Christian People equally in your
Dominions; and not to persecute or destroy any in their Persons and Estates,
for the Exercise of their Religion to God-wards: This is the Way of your
Prosperity, and the contrary is the Way of your Destruction; if that ye
persecute Men for their Conscience sake, and exercise Lordship and Authority
over men's Consciences in Spiritual Things; and if ye prescribe a Way of
Worship, and seek to destroy all that cannot conform thereunto: if you do thus,
this is not good Policy to establish you. Well, I shall say little further, but
that these things I write not as your Enemy, but as your Friend, who would you
have saved both Soul and Body, and not as in any kind of Harshness in my spirit
toward you do I write, but in Love and Compassionateness to you and these
Kingdoms.

And I have here in brief stated and pleaded the case of the Innocent People
called Quakers, who are at this time under great Afflictions and Tribulations
by your Authority; and it has been in my Heart diverse times to declare the
Substance of these things unto you, but at last I have chosen to write my Mind
to present to you, concerning the Matters very needful for you to be informed
in; and it is for your sakes, as well as theirs, that I have done it, that you
may not run on to act any thing against them upon Suspicions and Accusations of
others, without hearing our Defense: and therefore it is, for the avoiding and
stopping of Persecution in the Land; for this Cause have I taken in hand
Submissively, and not Presumptiously, to state this Plea before you; and I must
leave it to your Considerations, and cannot impose my Faith upon you, to
believe as I believe; but having laid the Truth before you, I shall leave it to
the Lord to work Faith and Love, and Justice, Mercy, and all good things in
your Hearts, that you may bring them forth in the Exercise of them in the World.

London, the 10th day of the second Month, 1661. I am a Lover of Justice and
Mercy, Truth and Righteousness, E. B.

A Just and Righteous PLEA presented unto the KING of England, and his COUNCIL,
etc.
CHAP. 1.
The Case Stated and Pleaded concerning Swearing at all, and particularly
concerning the Oath of Allegiance.

1. WE do acknowledge our selves to be freeborn People of this Kingdom of
England, the Land of our Nativity; and we do assert, That we have just and
lawful Right and Title, as such, to possess and enjoy our Lives, Liberties and
Estates, both by the Laws of God and Man; having never unto this day, since we
were a People, forfeited our Birthright as men, by any Rebellion, Sedition,
Contempt, or otherwise; but have always been and are a People exercised in the
Law of our God, by walking justly toward all men, and doing to others as we
would be done unto, and have been and are a Peaceable People under every
Government and Authority that has been over us since the Lord raised us up.

And I do hereby declare, That we now are and shall be Faithful, Innocent and
Peaceable in our several Stations and Conditions, under this present Government
of King Charles the second, whom we acknowledge supreme Magistrate and
Governor over this Kingdom; and for Conscience sake we are obedient and
submissive to him, as such, in all his Commands, either by doing and performing
of what he justly requires, or by patient suffering under whatsoever is
inflicted upon us, in the Matters for which we cannot be obedient for
Conscience sake, when any thing is required of us different from the just Law
of God: And to this Subjection, to the King and his Government, we are bound by
the Law of Righteousness; and such has ever been our Principle and Practice,
and is unto this day, even to be Quiet, and Peaceable and Patient under every
Authority that is set over us; and not in Unrighteousness, to Plot, or
Contrive, or Rebel against any Government or Governors, nor to seek our own
Deliverance from Injustice and Oppression, in such a way. And we are persuaded
to seek the Preservation of the King's Person and Authority by all just and
lawful Means, and not to Rebel against him with carnal Weapons; and so far as
his Government is in Justice, Mercy and Righteousness, we declare true and
Faithful Subjection and Obedience thereunto; and wherein it is otherwise, we
shall be subject by patient suffering what is unequally imposed upon us, and
yet not Rebel in any Turbulent way of Conspiracies and Insurrections: For, our
Principles are not for War, but for Peace with all men so much as in us lie;
neither may we render Evil for Evil to any, but are to be subject to the King
and his Government, Actively or Passively, upon the Conditions aforementioned.

And we renounce all Foreign Authority, Power and Jurisdiction of the Pope, or
any else, from having any Supremacy whatsoever over the King, o^ any the good
Subjects of England. And this we Declare, Acknowledge and Testify, in the Fear
and Presence of God (to whom we and all Mankind must give an Account) and that
without secret Equivocation, or any deceitful mental Reservation.

2. But as for all Oaths and Swearing, we utterly deny, for Conscience sake
toward God, because Christ Jesus has commanded Not to Swear at all, Mat. 5.
And the Apostle says, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, Jam. 5. And it
was the Principle and Practice of diverse holy Martyrs, even some of the
Protestant Church, since the Apostles days, in all Ages, Not to Swear at all
in any Case: so for Conscience sake, and according to the Example of Saints in
former Ages, we do refuse to Swear, in this Case of Allegiance to the King, and
in all other Cases whatsoever, and we cannot Swear at all: Though the Truth and
Verity of all Things in all Cases, so far as known to us, and as Occasion
requires, we can acknowledge and testify with Yea and Nay, as in the Fear and
Presence of God, and with true Intent and Meaning, to discover the Truth, as is
needful to be known: And in this manner we acknowledge just Allegiance to the
King and his Government (that we shall live Peaceably, and not Plot nor Rebel
against him) according to the Law of God and a safe Conscience, but without any
Oath, or Swearing at all; for we may not break the Command of Christ, nor walk
contrary to the Example of the Apostles and Saints by Swearing, though we
suffer the Loss of all because thereof.

And it is our known Principle and Practice, ever since we were a People, that
in no Case whatsoever, though of great Dependancy often times to our selves, both
in respect of Advantage to us, and also in avoiding of Sufferings, we have not
taken any Oath, nor Sworn at all; whereby it is manifest, that our refusing
chiefly to take the Oath of Allegiance is not because it is that Oath, but
because it is an Oath, and for Conscience sake we cannot Swear at all.

3. And thus the state of our present Case, about this Oath of Allegiance, is
different from some others, from all such who can swear and take Oaths in other
Cases, to whom taking of an Oath in it self is not matter of Conscience; but as
for us, we make Conscience of an Oath in it self, and that upon just Ground, as
we are able to demonstrate: and therefore our Refusal of this Oath of
Allegiance gives no Ground at all of Doubt or Suspicion concerning us, as if we
would not live peaceably and quietly under this Government, or as if we would
Rebel against, or Plot to destroy the King's Person or Authority, and so deny
to take this Oath, as if we would leave our selves clear to proceed in such
ways: this Judgment cannot justly be given of us, because we deny to Swear at
all, in all Cases; which if it were not so, but that we could Swear in other
Cases, and not in this, then we might justly be the more suspected that we had
a reserve against the King's Person and Government, and our living Peaceably
might be the more doubted of: but being our known Principle and Practice
always, Not to Swear at all in any Case whatsoever, this removes all Ground
of Jealousy, or Cause of Suspicion of us in this Case: And also, we being
ready to confess, all just Authority and Power to the King, to declare
Obedience thereunto solemnly and sincerely, and that we shall live Peaceably
and quietly under his Government, and not to Plot or Rebel against him, and
this to confirm by Yea and Nay; our Testimony of this kind may as justly be
taken, and stand as effectual, and be as faithfully performed, as the Oaths of
any others; for we make Conscience to perform what we say in Yea and Nay, as
much as any do to perform what they Swear; and this is known of us in the
Consciences of our Enemies. So that in Good Conscience, and Just Reason, and
Equal Justice, we are excusable from all Penalties and Forfeitures in that
behalf, of denying the OATH of ALLEGIANCE.

4. And the King and his Government is not the less safe and secure, though we
refuse to swear Obedience to them; nor could they be any safer or securer if
we, contrary to our Principles and Consciences, were forced by Penalties to
swear Allegiance; for, by the same Principle which keeps us from Swearing, and
by which we deny it, we must be preserved to live Peaceably, and not to Plot
nor Rebel against the King: and if we renounce our Principle and our good
Conscience, and be induced to swear against our Consciences, what likelihood is
there to perform such a forced Oath, taken contrary to our Consciences and
Principles? For if we swear to the King and his Government, because of the Fear
of Men, and to save our Estates, etc. and this contrary to our Consciences, it
might well be suspected of us, that at Opportunity we would break such Oaths
for fear of Men, or some Self-end: On the other hand, If we had already
renounced our good Consciences, so that it more appears we shall perform good
Obedience to the King and his Government, acknowledg^d by Yea, without an Oath,
and in good Conscience, then by Swearing, forced on us, contrary to our
Consciences; therefore our Yea may better be accepted in this Case, then
Swearing can be demanded of us. And also, If we should Change with the Times,
and Renounce our Principles and Consciences, and Swear, we should make our
selves Ridiculous, and a Scorn to all men, and bring our selves into a capacity
not ever to be trusted in any Case, if we should bow and bend to Times and
Powers, and for Terror of ^en deny our Religion, as other Hypocrites; and I
very well believe, the King would not trust us in our Allegiance any whit the
better, but rather the worse, though we did swear, and fawn and flatter with
him, contrary to our Principles; neither could he reasonably judge himself the
safer, nor more happy, nor that we would be truly subject the more to his
Authority, if we swore and conformed in things by Force, contrary to our
Consciences and Principles; for himself knows, that Oaths and Engagements,
made and taken by Force, and for Fear in Straits, are seldom or never truly
performed, but always broken.

And of the like Case there are large Testimonies in the Kingdom, of many that
have sworn, promised, and engaged, and sometimes by Force and Fear, to this
kind of Government and another; and yet at Oportunities, and for their own
Self Ends, have broken all Oaths and Engagements, and Rebelled against the very
Persons and Authorities to which they have sworn and engaged Fidelity and
Allegiance; so that many are not the more to be trusted, though they swear
Allegiance: For the Proverb says, He that will Swear, will L^e; and he that is
forced to swear against his Conscience, will hardly perform his Oath. And we
are no less to be trusted, though we Swear not; for we never yet engaged our
selves by Oath to any Governors or Government, and yet we never Rebelled, or
Plotted against any; but have lived Peaceably, and in a Patient Suffering
Condition under all that have sitten on the Throne since we were a People. And
therefore our living Peaceably under the King's Government cannot justly be
doubted of, though we cannot engage the same by swearing.

But yet, if we do not live quietly, and in good Obedience, as Peaceable
People; but do Rebel, Plot, etc. then we refuse not to suffer the Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures as such that swear, and do not perform their Oaths: I
say, If we do not live Peaceably, but Plot and Rebel against the King and his
Government; then let us suffer the same in every particular, as if we had
sworn, and not performed our Oath.

5. All these things rightly considered, it does fully appear, 1. That we are
not Enemies neither in present Action, nor future Intent, to the King's Person
or Authority: 2. Nor that we refuse to acknowledge Just Authority to King
Charles the Second, as supreme Magistrate over these Kingdoms: 3. Nor does it
appear, that we are otherwise than Peaceable and Quiet People under the King's
Government: 4. Nor is it manifest, but that we are ready to acknowledge so to
continue, in all Good Conscience and Righteousness. And therefore we do appeal
to the God of Heaven, and to King Charles, and to all people whatsoever, That
our present Sufferings by Imprisonment, and whatsoever else, we may suffer in
this Case, for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance, it is not for Plotting
against the King, nor for refusing to acknowledge Just Authority to the King,
nor for denying just Obedience to him and the good Laws of the Land, nor for
denying to live peaceably in the Kingdom under the King's Authority; because,
to all this we acknowledge solemnly in Yea and Nay: Neither are our Sufferings
in this Case for any Evil-doing, toward God or Men; but our Sufferings are for
keeping the Command of Christ, which to us is Matter of Conscience to perform,
more than to save our own Lives and Estates; and our Sufferings are, because we
cannot Swear at all, and not because we are Rebellious, or that we deny just
Allegiance to the King; and such our Sufferings are not as Evildoers, nor
Justly and Righteously as Offenders, because we are not guilty of Evil in this
Case, toward God nor Man; and our Sufferings are Cruel Persecution for our
Tender Conscience sake, and for the Name of Christ Jesus. And we call God and
just Men to witness between us and our Prosecutors, that as Saints and Servants
of God we suffer in this Case, and for our Faithfulness and Obedience to the
King of Heaven, and not for Evil-doing or Disobedience to King Charles, and his
Authority.

And if any be persecuted on this Case, for Refusing to take the Oath of
Allegiance, to the Ruin of Persons, Wives, and Families in this World; then we
shall have Cause to say, Occasion is Wrongfully taken against us, to destroy
us; and we are proceeded against contrary to the End of Just Government, which
is, To preserve the Peaceable, and not to destroy them: and contrary to the
KING's former Promises, who has said, We should not suffer for Matters of our
Religion and Conscience, living Peaceably in the Land.

And if we suffer because we cannot Swear at all, such our suffering is for our
Conscience sake, and we are therein Persecuted Unrighteously, as Innocent
People, and without just Cause: And we must commit this our Cause to God, who
regards the Oppressions of his People, and will avenge their Cause in his
season.

And for the present this is all I have to say, and present, concerning this
Case of Swearing, and concerning the Oath of Allegiance.

CHAP. II.
The Case Stated and Pleaded concerning our Meeting together to Worship God.

1. WE do Meet together in the Name of Jesus Christ, and in his Power and
Spirit; and we do come together in the Fear of God, to wait upon him, and to
receive the Teachings of his Holy Spirit, and his Council to direct us in all
our Ways, how to walk Righteously toward God and Men: and in our Meetings we
practice our Hearts and Minds in Godliness, and speak of the Things of the
Kingdom of God, in Preaching the Word of God, and in Prayer to Him, according
as his Holy Spirit guides us, which is given us of God, to lead us into all
Truth, according to his Promise, John 16. 13. and that we may edify one
another in the Ways of Holiness and Truth, for the benefit of our souls; and
this is according to the Scriptures; For they that feared the Lord met often
together, and spoke one to another, and edified one another: And this is our
Principle, That it is our Duty to God-wards to meet together, and that he
requires it of us, and for the exercise of our Consciences to him it has been
always and is our Practice to meet together in the Exercise of the worship of
God, as aforesaid; and not for any other End, as in Contempt of Authority, or
to Plot or Contrive, or to Meditate Evil against the King or his Government, or
any of his Subjects; we have no such end (I say) in meeting together: But our
alone, only and absolute End in our Meeting, is to worship the Lord our God,
and to serve him, and to wait upon him in obedience to his Will, and for good
Conscience sake as our Duty toward him.

2. And this our Practice of Meeting together, for the End and Cause mentioned,
if it be in public Houses, or more private in Upper Chambers, or in the open
Fields on what day soever, is Lawful and Just in the sight of God, and is
according to the Example of the Primitive Saints, and provable by the
Scriptures, as in Acts 1. 13, 14. And when the Disciples and Saints returned
from Jerusalem, they went up into an upper Chamber, both Men and Women, and
Waited upon the Lord, and continued with one accord in Prayer and in
Supplication. And in Acts 20. 7. 8. The first day of the ^k the Saints met
together, and Paul preached unto them, and continued his Sermon till Midnight;
holding forth the Matters of the Kingdom of God: And they were met in an upper
Chamber, from whence Eutychus fell down. And Acts 28. 30, 31. And Paul remained
two full Years, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, in his own hired
House in Rome; and he exhorted the Saints, Not to neglect meeting together, as
the manner of some was, whom he reproved, Heb. 10. 25. By which Testimonies,
with diverse others that might be given, it is manifest, that the Saints of God
in former Ages did meet together to worship God, and to wait upon him in Prayer
and Preaching, as the Spirit of the Father taught them, that dwelt in them: And
sometime they met publicly, and sometime more private, and sometime on the day
time, and some in the night season (and they met separate from the Synagogues,
and ways of public Worship among the Jews) according to the Will of God, and
as it was ordered amongst them.

And thus it is manifest, That our Meeting for the Worship of GOD at this Day
(though they are separate from the Way of Public Worship of the Kingdom, and
are in more private Houses) are justifiable, being after the Example of the
Saints, and according to the Scriptures of Truth; and therefore our Meetings
are according to the LAW of GOD Just and Lawful.

3. And forasmuch as by Reason of the late Insurrection of some few Persons in
London, our Lawful Assembling of our selves together in the Worship of God is
under present Restraint and Prohibition, and by Proclamation forbidden, under
the Denomination of Seditious and Unlawful Meetings, and our Friends Imprisoned
and persecuted for that Cause, of Assembling themselves to wait upon God. Now
in this Case, this I plead unto the King, That we are no manner of way guilty
of that Insurrection, upon which the Proclamation of forbidding our Meetings
was grounded; and therefore ought not to suffer with the guilty, being Innocent
from the very Occasion of that Proclamation: And for the King to prohibit our
Meetings, for and because of the ill Use that others made of theirs, this seems
a Condemning of the Innocent with the Guilty, which is no way just in the sight
of God nor men, but altogether unequal that we should suffer for other men's
Fault; though such did abuse their Liberty, and pervert the End of their
Meetings into rising up with Carnal Weapons against the King; so did not we,
neither in Intent nor Action; and therefore our Meetings ought not to be
prohibited for the Cause of other men's Faults and Miscarriages in that Case.

And also, We have the King's Promise diverse times, That we should not suffer
for our Religion, while we acted nothing against the Peace of the Kingdom and
Government; which yet we never have done, nor made any ill use of our Meetings,
nor of the King's Promises, nor forfeited them, and therefore, according to his
own Promises, we ought to have our Meetings, and enjoy them without Restraint,
because we have not forfeited the benefit of his former Promises in that
behalf, nor ever made use of our Meetings to Plot or Conspire against the
Government, to its Harm or Detriment; and because of our Innocence herein, the
Benefit of his former Promises are yet in force unto us, to protect our lawful
Meetings, and not to prohibit them: And though upon Suspicion only our Meetings
have been Restrained, and our Friends Imprisoned by the late Proclamation; yet
we being proved Innocent, and without Guilt of that which occasioned it, the
KING and Council may and ought in Justice and good Reason, to Reverse and
Revoke that part of the Proclamation related to us, as being Innocent, that we
may enjoy our lawful Meetings, according to the Scriptures and Example of
Saints, and according to the King's own former Promises.

4. All these things considered, and rightly understood by the King and his
Council, it will appear unto them in good Reason, 1. That our Meetings are just
and lawful in themselves, because they are for the Worship of the Lord God, and
to wait upon him: 2. They are according to the Example of the Apostles, because
the Scriptures prove the like Meetings: 3. And they are not contrary to his own
Promises and Tolleration, that he gave for Six Months after his coming in,
because he said, We should not suffer for our Religion, if we lived Peaceably;
and we were not disturbed by Authority from him (that we know of) in our
Meetings, till this Occasion: 4. It will appear, That we ought in Justice and
Equity to have our lawful Meetings Protected and Preserved by the King's
Authority, and not prohibited; because we are not guilty of that which
occasioned this present Restraint: but what we have suffered in this Case, it
has been upon Suspicion, and without any just Cause on our part. And for these
Ends and Causes I plead on the behalf of the Innocent, that we may enjoy
peaceably our Meetings for the Exercise of God's Worship, and not be prohibited
in the King's Dominions under his Authority.

5. But and if we are persecuted, and imprisoned, and made to suffer for this
Cause of Meeting together to Worship God, and Wait upon him, in Conscience and
Duty toward him, and for following the Scriptures Example, as the Saints of
old, as aforementioned; we must only commit our Cause to the God of Heaven,
and in Patience suffer under whatsoever is unequally inflicted upon us for this
matter, if men show the height of Oppression toward us; and we must put on the
Spirit of Long-suffering and Forbearance, and leave Vengeance to the Lord, who
will in his season redress our Cause, if that we are Persecuted for meeting
together, and for Worshipping of the Lord, according as his Spirit persuades
our Consciences; and such our Sufferings are not for Evil-doing, nor as
Transgressors against God nor the King; but as Servants of God we suffer, and
fot holding the Testimony of JESUS and a Good Conscience.

And thus I have brought the state of our Case, as concerning our Meetings,
unto the Kings Knowledge, and must leave it to his serious View; and Happy will
he be if he has regard to the Afflicted; but if he stop his Ear from the Cry
of the Poor, and suffer them to be destroyed, who shall plead for him, or
excuse him in the Day of the Lord, when He comes to Judgment, to reward every
man according to his Deeds.

CHAP. III.
The Case Stated and Pleaded concerning Tithes, as paid among the Jews, and
also among the Christians; and the Cause why we Refuse to pay them at this day.

1. WE do acknowledge, That Tithes, as instituted, given, and received in the
Law of Moses, amongst the Jews, and according to the Commandment of God, were
of Heavenly Ordination, and were for that Holy Use and End of maintaining the
Levitical Priesthood, and the Poor, the Widows, and the Strangers in Israel;
and we know, that whilst that Levitical Priesthood of Signs, and Types and
Figures, was yet unfinished and unfulfilled by Christ Jesus the Everlasting
Priest, that Law that gave and received Tithes was in force; and it was sinful
against God, and contrary to his Law, in any of Israel to withold their
Tithes, and not to pay them, and such as did robbed God and the Poor, and the
Prophet complained against them; for then the Ordination of Tithes was of God,
and the Practice and End of them was good and blessed.

But that Law and Priesthood, that gave and received them, is finished and
ended, with all the Types and Shadows of the first Covenant, Heb. 7. 12. and
Christ Jesus the everlasting Priest of God is come, in whom is ended the first
Priesthood that took Tithes, and that Law that gave them; and he has put an
end to Tithes, Temples, Priests-Office under the Law among the Jews, and all
(...) (...) Types and Figures, and First Covenant, and is an High Priest
forever, and the Everlasting Substance of all Shadows pertaining to the first
Covenant, and has finished them, and ended them, even that Law and Ordinance
that gave and received Tithes, and that Priesthood to whom Tithes pertained; so
that though it was Unlawful in the first Covenant, to withold the payment of
Tithes, yet that Covenant being ended, and that Law and Priesthood, and another
Covenant and Priesthood established, to whom the Law of God allows not the
Tithes of men's Estates, it seems now to be unlawful to pay, receive or demand
Tithes, and for good Conscience sake we cannot do it.

2. We cannot now pay Tithes, according to the first Covenant, nor uphold any
part of the first Priesthood, that stood in Types and Shadows, nor submit to
that Law, by any Obedience to it, which once gave and received Tithes; seeing
Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, who has ended all that Covenant, with every
thing that pertains thereunto: and we believe in Jesus Christ as the
Everlasting Substance, and receive the Law, by which we walk in all things unto
him, and not from Abraham nor Moses: For he is with us that is greater then
they, whose Law and Example we must follow in the Administration of the Gospel,
and not the Law and Example of Abraham and Moses in the First Covenant, who did
but Prophecy of Christ, and did not witness him fully come, but dyed in the
Faith. Now if we should pay Tithes according to the First Covenant and so
uphold any part of that Priesthood, which took Tithes, which was but a Type of
Christ the Everlasting PRIEST then we should deny Jesus Christ to be come in
the Flesh, and turn back again to the Law, and to the Jews Ordinances, and
prove our selves Unbelievers and Antichristian; for he that denies Christ to be
come in the Flesh is an Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3. and we may as well turn back
to Circumcision, Sacrifices, and Burnt-Offerings, as to pay Tithes, being all
pertaining to the First Covenant and Priesthood; which whomsoever does uphold,
denies Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, and so are of Antichrist: But we
believe, Christ is come, and we have received him as the End and Finishing of
the first Priesthood; and we believe in him as the Everlasting Substance, who
has put an end to Tithes, Temples, Burnt-Offerings, etc. and we confess unto
him as our Judge and Lawgiver, and have renounced all Shaddows pertaining to
the first Covenant, whereof one was Tithes; and for Conscience sake, and that
we may continue in the Faith of Christ, the Substance, and not deny him;
therefore it is that we refuse and cannot pay Tithes; for, we are Christians;
and Believers, and not Jews, nor Children of the first Covenant.

3. And there is no Example by any of the Apostles or Saints, in all the New
Testament, That ever any of the Christians, that believed in Jesus Christ,
gave, paid, or received Tithes: I say, There is no Example at all, by either
Precept or Practice, le^t us on Record, That any of the Ministers of the
Gospel, in the Apostles days, did pay or receive Tithes for any Ministerial
Office, nor otherwise. But we do ^^^^^ve, That none of the Christians, in the
first nor second Age after Christ, since his Resurrection, did institute, pay
or receive Tithes as Maintenance of Gospel Ministry: But we believe, That the
Ministers of Christ, whom he sent forth to preach the Gospel after his
Ascension, did bear witness to the New Covenant, and to Jesus Christ the
Substance; and against Temple, Sacrifices, Tithes and first Priesthood, and the
Worship of the first Covenant; and said, That Covenant was fa^lty, and none
could attain Perfection, as pertaining to the Conscience, in it; and therefore
God took that Covenant away, that he might establish a better, Heb. 8. 6, 7.
Heb. 6. 19.

And also, Diverse of the holy Martyrs, since the Apostles days, as William
Thor^s, and others, Did preach down Tithes, and denied the Payment of them; and
for Conscience sake to God could neither give nor receive Tithes, but fully
witnessed against them, though they suffered for it in their days. So that,

1st, We have no Example from the Apostles nor Christians in their days, to
pay Tithes, but rather the contrary; for we have Testimony from them, That the
first ^ovenant and Priesthood, with all Shaddows and Ordinances thereunto
belonging (whereof Tithes was one) were disanulled, finished and ended by the
coming of Christ; and a new Covenant established, in which nothing is signified
of paying T^s: From whence it may appear to all, that Tithes are ended, and not
to be paid in the New Covenant.

2d, We have clear Example from the Martyrs, since the Apostles days, not to
pa^ T^thes; for diverse of the Protestant Martyrs (called, the Fathers of their
Church) did (...) against Tithes, and refused to pay any.

3d, We believe in our own Consciences, That Tithes, as received and paid in
(...) (...), are not of any Institution of God, nor exercised to any good Use
and End; (...) ^^^t they are of Antichrist, and Oppression, and Unjust
Exactions, and Impositions upon the poor People of these Kingdoms; and
therefore we do refuse to pay Tithes, and we cannot for good Conscience sake:
And the Exercise of our Consciences herein, in denying to pay Tithes, is well
and lawfully grounded upon the Coming of Christ, and upon the Example of the
Apostles and Martyrs.

And thus in brief I have showed concerning Tithes, and why we refuse to pay
them, and the matter of our Consciences in that Case.

4. As for Tithes, as now demanded, paid and received in these Kingdoms, we
know they are not of heavenly Institution, nor for a good use and end ordained
and practiced, but as they are now paid, both in these Kingdoms, and through
Christendom, they are of Popish Institution, and were first ordained, paid, and
received by the Authority of the Church of Rome, and were unequally imposed
upon the Nations through her Authority, for the use and end to maintain her
Priests, and Clergy, and Church; and the Institution and payment of Tithes
among Christians, was not till near 400. Years after Christ, as Hystorians say;
and for diverse Ages after that, there were no Laws enjoining and forcing the
payment of them, not till about the Year, 786. that Pope Adrian the first, sent
two Legates into England, to make a Decree, that the People of two Kingdoms (to
wit) Merce-land and Northumberland, should pay Tithes. By these and other
Testimonies it is manifest, that the payment of Tithes amongst Christians, had
their first Original from the Church of Rome, and by Succession from thence,
and not from the Apostles, are Tithes paid, given and received at this day in
these Kingdoms; and the Institution, payment, and use, and end of them, is not
according to the Law of Moses at all: for Tithes, as then amongst the Jews
ordained and paid, were for the happy use, to feed the Poor, the Widows and
the Fatherless in Israel, that there should not be a Beggar amongst them: But
the use and end of the payment of them now in these days, is for the
maintaining a company of Priests, in their Pride and Fullness, and the Poor and
the Strangers may starve, and lie begging up and down at the corners of the
Streets; so that we cannot for Conscience sake at this day pay Tithes.

1. Because the first Institution of them among Christians, was not from
Heaven, nor from Christ Jesus, nor his Apostles, but from the Pope and Church
of Rome.

2. Because the use and end of Tithes is not according to God, nor
Righteousness; but for the maintaining the Priests in Pride and Fullness, and
their Families; and in the mean time the Poor want.

3. Because the continued payment of them, is Exaction and Imposition, contrary
to the Gospel of Liberty and Peace, upon the Persons, Estates, and Consciences,
of many good People in these Kingdoms.

5. All these things rightly and justly considered, it is manifest, and plainly
apparent to all good men, that this matter of denying to pay Tithes, is a clear
case of Conscience with us, and that we have sufficient ground to make
Conscience hereof, and for good Conscience sake we may justly refuse and deny
to pay Tithes; and the exercise of our Consciente herein is bottomed upon a
right Foundation, as I have made appear; and it is not for Covetousness to our
selves, nor in contempt of Authority, nor in wilfulness to wrong any man of his
just Right, nor for any other evil end, that we do refuse to pay Tithes; but it
is for Conscience sake, only and alone for that end, that we may keep our
Consciences clear in the sight of God, by our Faithfulness, in denying of what
we are convinced of to be evil and not of God, as I have showed we are in this
case of Tithes; and we dare not sin against God by disobedience to him, nor
uphold the payment of Tithes in these Kingdoms, which are so evil, both in
their Ordination, and in their Use and End, as paid in these days, as I have
showed; for if we should, we might offend his Spirit, and our own Consciences,
and bring anguish upon our Souls, and be guilty of denying of Christ and his
coming, and of making void the New Covenant; and of walking contrary to the
Examples of the Apostles and holy Martyrs, and of upholding Antichrist and his
Kingdom: These, with many other Evils, we run our selves into, if we should pay
Tithes in these days, and after the Romish Institution; and therefore it is for
Conscience sake that we do refuse to pay Tithes: And whatsoever we do suffer
because thereof, it is Persecution, and for, and because we cannot sin against
our God: and it is not for Evil doing, for Rebellion, nor for Transgression
against the Law of God, nor the just Laws of men; but it is for holding the
Testimony of Jesus and a good Conscience; and in such our Sufferings, we commit
our Cause to the God of Heaven, patiently bearing what is unequally inflicted
upon us for this matter, and our Cause is Just and Innocent for which we
suffer, and we have more respect to keep our Faith and Conscience toward God,
than to save our Estates or Liberties; for could we transgress against God, and
pay Tithes, we might preserve our Liberties and Estates, which we have
endangered and lost often, because we could not; which may show that it is not
for Covetousness nor self ends, that we refuse to do it: And this our Case
about Tithes, and the reason why we cannot pay them, is in brief stated and
pleaded, before the King and his Council, and I leave it to their
Considerations in the sight of God, only to warn them, that they persecute not
any for the Cases of Conscience, neither in this nor in any other thing, lest
the Effect of it be sad upon them in a day when God visits them with Judgments.

CHAP. IV.
The Case stated and pleaded, concerning giving Security by Bond, to live
peaceably, or to answer Cases then and there, etc. as is often required of us.

1. FOrasmuch as we are often demanded, to give Bond of one or two hundred
Pounds (or the like) for security (so called) That we will live peaceably; or,
that we will appear and answer such Cases objected against us, or supposed of
us. Now we cannot give such kind of formal Engagements out of the Council of
God, to be or do, or appear, or answer, that, or the other Case, when as we are
no Transg^^ssors in the things objected against us, and supposed of us; and
when we are ^cted by prejudiced minds of such and such matters, of which we are
no (...) guilty in the sight of God nor men; and then it is demanded of us, To
bind our selve^, to find Sureties, and to answer this and the other Objection
and Supp^, only falsely supposed and suspected against us, by men that seek
occasion against u^ This Demand we cannot fulfill for Conscience sake; because
we are clear, and not g^ilty of such Suspicions; nor can we bind our selves
(out of the Counsel of G^d) ^^^n Penalties and Forfeitures, to appear and
answer such and such groundless Objections; for if we should in that manner
bind and engage our selves not to d^ (...), o^ answer this and the other
Objection against us, when we know our selves innocent of that Accusation to
which we are to answer, and that it is not in our H^arts to do the thing
whereof we are doubted, but contrary to our Faith and Principles; then this
were a betraying of our own Innocence in that behalf, and a rendering of us
guilty to all men, when as we are clear; and by binding our selves, as
aforementioned, we should be reputed, Transgressors: For Bonds and Engagements
by Forfeitures and Sums of Money, are for the Guilty, and not for the Innocent;
and we may not betray our guiltless Cause, and bring it under false reputation
amongst men, by giving such binding Engagements.

And Again, when as we are clear of any such Suspicions as are made against us,
if we should bind our selves, as aforesaid; it many times does appear, that
occasion is more taken against us, in answering or appearing, and we made to be
greater Offenders than before; and there again our Innocence is betrayed, when
as innocent of the Fact supposed against us, yet made Offenders in answering,
through Formalities and Tricks in the course of Law, practiced at the time of
Answering; and therefore we do in good Reason and Equity, deny to bind our
selves in that manner, and to give such Security (so called) lest we should
betray our own Innocence, and render our Cause to false Reputations in that
behalf; and lest we should fall into a Remedy, to clear us of false Suspicions,
worse than the Suspicions themselves, by laying our selves liable to greater
Sufferings in answering to our Accusations, falsely objected, than our suffering
can be by the Accusations themselves; and evil-minded men do often take greater
occasion against us in answering false Charges and groundless Suspicions laid
against us, than they can take by the false Charges and Suspicions themselves:
and so we cannot bind our selves, as aforesaid, to fulfill the wills of men, and
thereby expose our selves to a far greater Suffering (to be taken in it) for to
escape a less.

2. But as for living peaceably in the Land, and being subject in all just and
good things to the King and his Government; and not to plot against them, n^^
to harm any Person whatsoever, but to be in love with all, and in good
behavior toward all, and to answer to any thing justly required of us: This
is our Principle to do, and has ever been our Practice, and we are bound by
the Law of God to perform this in every particular; and we can fully make
confession hereof, and testify it in Yea and Nay, according to the New
Covenant and Christ's Command, who has said, Let your Yea, be Yea, and your
Nay, Nay, but not by an Oath, nor binding our selves upon such Penalties and
Forfeitures in Engagements by Sums of Money, out of the Counsel of God; and our
Yea and Nay, in this and all other Cases, is more binding to us, than all the
Formal Engagements of others; and we make as much Conscience to perform our Yea
and Nay, as any others do their Oaths, or Bonds; and if we do not, but do plot
and rebel, and be of evil behavior toward any, then let us suffer the same,
as if we had bound our selves in Forfeitures o^ great Sums of Money, and broken
such our Engagements: and no man need in any case bind himself upon such Pains
and Forfeitures, not to break the Laws of the Land; when as the Justice of the
Law will be executed upon him if he transgress it, whether he bind himself, or
not beforehand, not to break it; and this is the thing we always offer: Here
we are, if we have broken any Law, let us suffer according to the Law; and if
at any time we are found guilty of transgressing the Law, let us then suffer
accordingly, whether Death or Bonds; we crave no favor, but the Execution of
just Law: And in the mean time, being we are clear of Rebellion and other
Transgressions; Who shall accuse us? or who can reasonably require such or such
Engagements of us to do, or not to do, or answer so, or so; seeing we must in
Justice suffer the Punishment of the Law when we transgress it; which we must
do, if we are at any time guilty, whether we beforehand bind our selves to the
contrary or not? And also, if we should bind our selves, by the Engagements of
such and such Sums of Money, to live quietly and not to rebel: yet we should be
no better trusted because hereof, for that would not slay the Principle of
Strife and War in us, but rather cause us to murmer because of our Bondage, and
strive for Liberty; and also if we were men of disposions to war and plot, etc.
it cannot be supposed by reasonable men, that any Engagement by any Sum of
Money, would bind us from it, upon occasion, seeing we might hope in such
attempts to save our Sums of Money, and to gain far more advantage, or else we
hazarded to loose all; and to gain a greater advantage (if we were men of
strife) we would not doubt to attempt to lose a less, and we being not men of
strife, we cannot bind our selves as aforesaid, in this or any case; neither
can any in good reason desire the same of us, if they rightly consider the case.

3. These things considered, it is fully manifest, That upon good Reason and a
clear Conscience, we do refuse and deny to give Bond, and make such and such
Engagements by Forfeitures of Sums of Money; it is I say, In good Reason and
Conscience, and not in any wilfulness or stubbornness, or contempt of Authority
that we do it, nor as though we were guilty in such matter suspected, and durst
not answer the Law; but we do it to keep our Innocence clear, and not to betray
it into real cause of doubt that we are guilty. 2. That we may not lay
ourselves liable to a greater Suffering, by answering false Suspicions and
Accusations, as it often happens in the Proceedings in course of Law. 3. That
we may not come under men of evil prejudiced minds, that seek more occasion
against us than they have; and we may not fulfill their wills, and to give them
occasion against us, when as in the Accusations they have justly none. 4. That
we may not expose our selves to be intrapped and ensnared into greater
Sufferings, to avoid a less. 5. That we may walk in the Doctrine and Command of
Christ Jesus, who has commanded to let our Yea be Yea, and our Nay be Nay; and
whatsoever Oath or Engagement (out of the Counsel of God) is more, comes of
Evil, which we may not do.

These, with some others, are the Reasons and Causes why we cannot for
Conscience sake bind our selves in such kind of Formal Engagements (out of the
Will of God) to do, or not to do; to answer this false Suspicion or the other;
but we do deny it out of good Reason and Conscience. And also there is no
Example for it, that we know, among the Saints in former Ages, that any of them
ever bound themselves to any Kings or Rulers in any such kind of Engagements,
neither can we at this day; but as I said, If we Transgress the Law, let us
suffer by it; if we are already, or hereafter be found guilty, we desire
nothing but the just Execution of Just Laws, and in Patience we shall bear it;
but beforehand we may not bind our selves in Formal Engagements out of the
Will of God, to promise upon Forfeitures and Penalties what we will do or say,
or what we will not do or say, for at the Will and Disposure of the Almighty we
are, in all Things and Cases; and it is our Principle and Belief, That we
abiding in the Fear and Counsel of God, can be no ^ther than Peaceable, Just,
Righteous and Innocent in the Land; So that whatsoever we may do or suffer for
this Case, of denying to give Bond, or Engage our selves so and so, as
aforesaid, it is for Truth's sake, and such our Sufferings are Persecution and
Unequal; and we must commit our Cause to God, who will plead it in his season,
if that we are persecuted for the Cause of groundless Suspicion, and because we
cannot Engage to answer causless Objections.

And thus I have sought out this matter, and laid it before the King, and I
leave it to him to consider; and to show Justice, Equity, Mercy and
Longsuffering, and in so doing he will be blessed; but if the cortrary be
brought forth, the Effect thereof will be more miserable.

CHAP. V.
The Case stated and pleaded, concerning Government it self; and particularly
of this present Authority, and our Obedience to it.

1. WE do acknowledge Government, and Rule, and Magistracy to be an Ordinance of
God, ordained and instituted of him, to be exercised among the Children of Men,
For to be a Praise and a Defense to all that do well, and to be a Terror and
Corrector to all that do Evil. And we believe there ought to be Rule and
Government and Authority, exercised and executed, in every Kingdom, Nation,
City and Country, for the end aforesaid (to wit) That Evildoers may be made
afraid and corrected, limited, restrained, and subdued; and that Sin and
Transgression may be suppressed; and Truth and Righteousness promoted; and them
that do Well, praised and strengthened: And this is the very end of outward
Government of Kings, Princes, or other, amongst Men upon the Earth, even that
the outward Man may be kept in good order and subjection in his Conversation in
the World, and may be limited and restrained from all wrong doing o^ speaking
against his Neighbors Person or Estate; and if he do, he is punishable by such
Just Authority. This is the very end of outward Government in the Kingdoms of
the World; but it extends not over the Inward Man, to rule, govern, or exercise
Authority over the Consciences of any in spiritual Matters and Cases between
God and Man's Conscience; This Dominion and Authority only partains to the
Inward Government and Rule of Jesus Christ by his Eternal Spirit, but not to
any Outward Government of Kings, Princes, Parliaments, or any others; They, I
say, ought only to exercise Authority over the Persons and Estates of People in
all just and lawful Things and Matters, but not over the Consciences of any in
the exercise of Duty toward God, or in the Cases and Matters of Worship and
Religion.

2. The Exercise and Execution of this Just Government over the outward Man, as
before described, ought to be committed into the Hands of faithful, just and
upright men, such as fear the Lord and hate Covetousness, and every evil Way,
in all Kingdoms of the World; The Execution of the Government in all just Laws,
ought (I say) to be committed to such men, and not to Drunkards, Liars,
Covetous or Evil-minded Persons, Ambitious or Vain glorious Persons in any
Nation; such as these ought not to be entrusted with the Execution of the
Government, and the good Laws of any Kingdom; for such will not be a Blessing
unto the Land, nor unto any People, but a Curse, and the cause of provoking God
to Vengeance and Wrath against themselves, the People and the Government, if
such men, whom God chooses not, be chosen to make Laws and execute them, and
to exercise Governments in any Kingdoms of this World; But Men that fear God,
and delight in Justice, Mercy and Truth, that are humble and meek and lowly
Persons, ought to be called to the place of Government, and only such are fit
to exercise Rule and Authority, and to make and execute Laws in these Kingdoms,
and in all the Kingdoms of the World; and such would be a Blessing in the
Earth, and the Governments under such, and in the Execution of their Hands,
would be Blessed and Prosperous; and all good Men would have cause to rejoice
therein, and all Evildoers and Transgressors would be limited and made
afraid, if so be the Laws be Just, Holy and Righteous, and according to Equity
and the Holy Law of God in all things, and the due Execution of such Laws
committed to Just and Righteous and Meek Men, that love Judgment, Mercy and
Truth, and would execute them in the Earth; Then the happy and blessed
Government will be exalted, and Truth and Righteousness would reign as Judge on
the Throne; and in this shall all Nations and Kingdoms be prosperous and
blessed when it comes to pass.

3. And as for this present Authority and Government now in being, under the
Name of King Charles the Second, we do believe and acknowledge, That according
to the Purpose and Will of God, and of his bringing to pass, this present
Government and Authority is set up, and into its present being established; The
Lord, I say, has suffered it to be effected, for the Cause, and End, and Time,
and Purpose, known to himself, and not to mortal man: And thus this Government
and Authority is of God, being brought in and set up, in opposition to, and for
the reproof and correction of such as went before, who had neglected Mercy,
Truth, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, till it was time for the Lord
to cast them out, and reprove them, and make them a Desolation before their
Enemies; and this Authority was judged of the Lord fit for that use and end,
and reserved to be brought in, as a Rod of God in his Hand, to correct and
smite many People; And it is right in the sight of the Lord, that this
Authority should have this time and season to be exercised in these Kingdoms,
to try and prove, both it self, and all under it, if so be that Truth, Justice
and Righteousness, Mercy and Peace, may be brought forth it these Kingdoms
through it, that God may establish it for long continuance; and it is now a
trying and proving, to make it self happy and blessed, or otherwise to bring it
self into contempt and dishonor; and accordingly as Truth, Justice, Mercy,
Judgment and Peace is brought forth by it, or the contrary brought forth by it,
so must the Just and Equal Effects and Reward of it be from the Hand of God;
and it is only just Judgment, Mercy and Truth, Righteousness, Relieving the
Oppressed, and the doing thereof; that can alone make the Person and Government
of the King Happy, Blessed and Honorable in this World, and hereafter; and the
contrary, if it be brought forth, must needs bring Confusion, Discontents, and
all miserable Judgments; and to say no more of it, this is my present Judgment
of the King and his Authority, both in respect of their coming in, and the
Cause thereof, and the Fruits and Effects that must follow, which is not
otherwise Determined of God, but according to Desert and Merit, of walking in
Truth, Justice, and Righteousness, or in walking otherwise.

4. Our Obedience to this Authority, must be according, as before declared, in
the Plea of the first Case concerning Allegiance (to wit) For Conscience sake
to God, we are bound by his Just Law in our Hearts to yield Obedience to it, in
all Matters and Cases actively or passively; that is to say, in all just and
good Commands of the King, and the good Laws of the Land, relating to our
outward Man, we must be obedient by doing, and not withhold our Just Obedience;
but in the Cases of Conscience (to wit) in the Matters of Duty to God, and of
Worship, Faith and Religion toward him, we must only be obedient to God; for
it is he that teaches and requires Obedience in all those things: and if any
thing be commanded of us by the present Authority, which is not according to
Equity, Justice and a good Conscience toward God, to be done by us, we must in
such Cases, obey God only, and deny active Obedience for Conscience sake, and
patiently suffer what is inflicted upon us for such our Disobedience to Men;
and we must choose Obedience to God rather than man, though we suffer because
thereof: And this is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, to obey
Authority, by doing, or suffering, not disputing whether the Authority in it
self be absolute of God, or not; yet being an Authority over us, we are to obey
it, either by doing, or suffering, because it is an Authority; and not to plot,
rebel, or rise up with carnal Weapons against it: and thus must our Obedience
be to the King and his Government. And if that in any thing of the Commands of
the King, we cannot be obedient for Conscience sake, in the Cases of
Conscience, and when ought is required different or contrary to the Law of God;
we have Example hereof in the Scriptures, of many of the Servants of God that
could not in all things, yield Obedience to the Laws of Nations and Commands of
Kings, when they required ought to be obeyed, contrary to their pure
Consciences; as in the Case of the three Children, Dan. 3. they could not obey
the Law and Command of the King, though it was absolute, but refused Obedience,
and suffered for it; and Daniel also himself disobeyed the King's Law and
Commands, Dan. 6. and the Apostles the same, when they were commanded by the
Authority of that City and County, To preach no more in the Name of JESUS, Act.
4. 17, 18. They did not obey the Command of the Rulers in that Case, but went
on and preached Jesus, in disobedience and contrary to the Command of the
Rulers. And by these, and many other Examples, it is apparent, that it is
justifiable in the sight of God, and that it was practiced by the Servants of
God in former Ages, even Disobedience to Kings and Authority, in the Matters
and Cases commanded contrary to the Law of God and a good Conscience; and their
Example may justify such now in the same Practice, in the same Case, if they
walk therein by the same Principle.

5. And thus it is manifest, That if we at any time be found not in full
obedience by doing, in all Cases and Things, to the Laws and Authority of this
Kingdom; it is not out of contempt unto, or Rebellion against the King's Person
or Government; it is not I say, on that account, but for good Conscience sake,
and because we must obey God rather than man, when and where their Com mands
stand in opposition the one to the other; and this is, that we may keep our
Consciences clear in the sight of God, from disobedience against him, which is
our care and endeavor by all means: and when any thing is required of us to be
done, which we cannot do with a clear Conscience in the sight of God, such
Commands we cannot yield Obedience unto; and yet it is not out of Wilfulness,
Stubbornness, Contempt, or Rebellion against the Authority; but it is for this
End and Cause, that we may not sin against God, nor against our own
Consciences, by doing any thing that is contrary thereunto, lest we should
bring the Wrath of God upon our own Consciences: so that all these things
rightly considered, it does appear. 1. That we acknowledge Magistracy and
Authority to be the Ordinance of God, to be exercised and executed in the
Kingdoms of the World among men. 2. That Just and Righteous men, are the only
Persons fit to execute Just Laws and Authorities in the Earth. 3. That we
acknowledge this present Government of King Charles, and that according to the
Purp^se of God it is now set up. 4. That we are to be obedient by doing or
su^^eri^g in all things, to the Authority of the King, as the Supreme
Authority. 5. That if in any case we are disobedient thereunto, and cannot
wholly perform every Command, by doing, yet it is for Conscience sake to God,
and that we may not sin against him, and not out of Rebellion or Contempt of
the King or his Power. And all these things truly considered, if we do suffer
Tribulations, Afflictions and Imprisonments, under and by this present
Authority, for and because of our Profession and Practice of Religion, without
evil or wrong doing to our Neighbors Persons or Estates, though we do not in
the things contrary to our Consciences obey actively this present Authority,
yet we are persecuted for the Name of Christ; and as so, we receive our
Sufferings, and not as for Contempt or Denial of Authority, or as Rebellion
against it; but for Conscience sake to God our Sufferings are, and our unjust
Persecution will be upon our Enemies in the effect and reward thereof, with
great Indignation and Wrath from the Lord God, that rewards all according to
their works. Thus much about Government.

And now I shall show what Persecution is in it self.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning Persecution; what it is in it self, and how great an Enemy it is to
the King's Person and Authority.

1. PErsecution is, when a Person, or a People, do suffer Tribulation,
Affliction, Imprisonment, Bonds, or Death, whether by a Law or without the Law,
for, and because of his or their Principle and Practice in Religion; As when a
Person or a People are reproached, falsely accused, imprisoned or put to death,
only for and because of their Religions sake; when as no evil-dealing in the
things between man and man, can be justly charged and proved against them, but
only because they are righteous, and walk in the Ways of the Lord, and cannot
conform to the Ways and Vanities of this World, but are separated from it in
its Profaneness, and in its formal Profession also of Religion; and because
thereof Sufferings are imposed upon them, while yet they walk justly,
innocently and harmlesly toward all men.

This is Persecution for Conscience sake, and such are persecuted, if so be
they suffer for and because of Righteousness sake, and because they will not
deny their Principles nor Profession of Re^ligion, nor conform to Times nor
Laws contrary to a good Conscience, and yet suffer because hereof; this is
Persecution.

2. Persecution is, when a Person or a People is afflicted, and any kind of
sufferings imposed upon them, whether by any Authority, or without Authority,
and only because they are of such a Profession and Practice in Religion; though
yet their Profession and Practice in their Religion is not perfectly according
to God, nor by the Exercise of that Spirit of God ruling in their Consciences
in such their Religion; yet if they suffer only for their Religion sake, while
yet they walk uprightly as men, in all outward Affairs relating to the outward
Man, this also is Persecution. and such are persecuted for their Religions
sake, though not wholly for Righteousness sake; and none ought to suffer as such
under the Authority of any King, Prince or Power: but if such do suffer, as I
have said, and that for their Religions sake, only so, though yet their
Religion is not perfectly according to God, yet they are persecuted, and this
is Persecution. And thus I have in short described and defined what Persecution
is in it self, and who it is that are persecuted; and I shall now show how
great an Enemy Persecution for Conscience and Religions sake is unto the King's
Person and Authority.

Persecution for Conscience sake, and for Difference in Matters of Religion, is
a great Enemy to the Person and Government of the King; it is, I say, a
destroying and devouring Enemy, and the Fruits and Effects thereof may work
terrible Destruction; yea, this Enemy [Persecution] has often wrought
Overthrow in Kingdoms: Let the King strive to be delivered speedily from this
great Enemy, which is fierce and cruel, and may work woeful Effects in this
Kingdom also; and the King may be more blessed in his Person and Government if
he remove far from him this Enemy, Persecution.

1. It is his Enemy because its Effect is, To eat out the Affections of many
good and sober People from the King, and may make their Love and Affections dye
to the King's Government, when they behold and consider the Persecution of many
good and peaceable People for Righteousness and good Conscience sake, whenas no
Evil-doing between man and man can justly be laid to their Charge, but only for
the matter of their Religion, and the exercise of their Consciences toward
God; and if such suffer cruel Imprisonment, unjust Fines and grievous Vexations
for such Cause, it may weaken and eat out the Affections of good People, and
divert their Love and good Desires from the King and his Government, in which
such Persecution is brought forth: and that which diverts the Peoples Love from
the King is his great Enemy, and such is Persecution.

2. Persecution is the King's great Enemy, Because it may kindle
Heart-burnings, Envyings, Strifes and Murmurings among his Subjects, while some
are tolerated in the Profession and Practice of their Religion, and others
persecuted and imprisoned for the same Cause; and this kind of dealing
exercises the King's Subjects in harsh dealing one toward another, and gives
great Occasion for Quarrelling, Envies, Debate and Malice one against another;
even when some execute Persecution upon others, hailing them to Prison,
spoiling their Goods, and the like: And this kind of dealing, I say, whilst the
Authority of the Land persecutes one sort of the King's Subjects by the hands
of others, it tends much to great Division and Distractions amongst the
people; and it is not for the King's safety, but for his great Dishonor and
Disadvantage every way, to have the people divided into Heart-burnings and
Quarrellings against one another: and therefore Persecution is the King's great
Enemy, because it works such evil Effects.

3. It is his great Enemy, Because it is contrary to the Trust which God has
reposed in him, in promoting him to be King over these People; for God has not
committed Power to him to judge in the Cases of men's Consciences, and to
persecute any because of the Exercise thereof, whether they be of this
Profession and Practice in Religion, or the other, yet living peaceably and
uprightly as men, he ought not to persecute us, nor to suffer them to be
persecuted by nor under his Authority; but he ought to defend and preserve all
men's Persons and Estates in their Just Rights, from the Violence each of
others, without respect to what their Profession and Practice of Religion is;
but if the contrary be brought forth, it is contrary, and not answerable to the
End of God's Restauring him to these Kingdoms; and if he does not what God has
justly called him unto, but otherwise, this is his Enemy; and such is
Persecution for Conscience sake, it is contrary to the End of Just Government,
and wherefore God has restored him; and therefore this Persecution is an utter
Enemy both to the King's Person and Authority.

4. It is his Enemy, Because it provokes the God of Heaven and Earth over all
to be offended with him; for he is provoked and vexed because of the
Persecution of his People in this Age, as ever he was in all Ages; and if the
King be guilty thereof, it incurreth God's great Displeasure against him: For
God was ever offended with Kings, Rulers, and whomsoever, that were
Persecutors, and he is the same at this day; and whatsoever it is that provokes
God to Anger against the King, that is his Enemy: And such is Persecution of
People for the Profession and Practice of their Religion, whenas no Evil can be
charged upon them in things between man and man; and therefore let the KING
beware of this Woeful ENEMY that waits to wound him; for if the God of Heaven be
provoked against him, how great is that Enemy which brings it to pass.

5. It is the King's Enemy, Because it not only provokes the Lord to Anger, but
to Judgment; Persecution is the Cause wherefore God brings grievous Judgments
and Vengeance upon whomsoever are guilty thereof; and the Effect of Persecution
is Plagues and Misery; and it incenseth God to Anger, and also to Destroy: and
therefore let the King beware of such a deadly Enemy, as should Cause God to
destroy him. And such an Enemy is Persecution of God's People for Conscience
sake, it draws down the Wrath of God upon Kings and Kingdoms, upon Rich and
Poor, upon High and Low, that are guilty of it; for it is the fulfilling of all
other Sins, and it hasteneth to bring Destruction upon all that are guilty; and
this Effect it will work upon the King, even this his Enemy [Persecution] if he
turn not from it, and overcome it, and Banish it from him, for it is the Cause
of both Inward and Outward, Internal and External Plagues and Judgments of God.

6. Persecution, it is an Enemy to the King, Because it will work to weaken the
Hands of Just, and Sober, and Righteous Men; it will weaken their Love and
Affections, and it makes their Hearts sad; And Woe is unto them that make sad
their Hearts, whom God does not make sad; and this does Persecution: And it
does not only weaken the Hearts and Hands of the Righteous and Sober Persons,
but it strengthens the Hands of the Rude, Ungodly and Profane through the
Land; and that which strengthens the Wicked and the Rude Multitude in
Wantonness, Scorning and Prophanness, that is the King's Enemy; but such is
Persecution for a good Conscience sake: And because it weakens the Righteous in
their Good and Upright Ways, and strengthens the Wicked in their Evil Ways,
therefore it is an Enemy unto the King.

7. Persecution is an Enemy unto him, Because it tends to render him
dishonorable, both in the sight of God, and all good men through the World;
for it will show, that he is cruel, and bitter and perverse, and that he
wants Humility, Meekness, Forbearance and Patience, if he be guilty; and this
is dishonorable, to have and profess Evil Qualities and Properties, and to be
without the Good; and by persecution this will be made manifest to all the
World, and ever was in all Ages, that the Persecutors of good Conscience gained
unto themselves, Dishonor and Reproach of all good men in all Ages after them;
for they were men full of Rage, and Malice, and Passionateness, and wanted
Patience and Humility, and this made them Dishonorable: And the Case will be
the same with the King, if he be a Persecutor for Conscience sake, and he will
be Dishonorable both in this present Time, and in Ages to come, and this by
Persecution, and therefore it is his Enemy, that will work many Mischiefs and
Evils upon him, if he be not wholly delivered from it.

8. Persecution is an Enemy to the King's Person and Authority, because
Persecution for Conscience sake is of the Devil, it is of his spirit, and not
of the Spirit of God, to Persecute, Imprison, Kill and Destroy men's Persons and
Estates, because of their Religions sake, whenas no unjust Dealing nor
Unrighteous Conversation can be justly laid to their charge, but only for and
because of such Profession and Practice in Religion, to persecute any because
hereof, this is of the Devil; and that which is of the Devil is the King's
Enemy, and an Enemy to all Mankind, and such is Persecution; and therefore it
is a deadly mortal Enemy, which wounds Kings, Princes and Rulers, that ever
have had friendship with it; and therefore let the King avoid this great Enemy,
lest its Effects prove miserable.

9. It is the King's Enemy, Because it is according to the Example of all the
wicked King's and Rulers that ever have been through Ages and Generations; as
of Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, Nero, and many more, who were Persecutors of People
for Conscience sake, who gained unto themselves thereby Reproach, Infamy and
Misery from God and men; and to follow their Example is the King's Enemy, and
such is Persecution: If he should persecute for Conscience sake, and about
Religion, and the Worship of God, then he follows the Example of wicked Kings,
and this will be his Enemy, and will work woeful effects, if so be he walk in
the steps of the Persecutors of old, and love that which is his Enemy.

10. Persecution is the King's Enemy, Because the End and Effects thereof is
Misery and Destruction upon all that persecute the Heritage of God: What was
Pharaoh's end, and Herod's end, and Nero's end? was not their end woeful and
miserable to God, and shameful to men? And Persecution for Conscience sake will
bring the same Effects at this day: The End of all Persecutors will be Misery
and Shame, even in the day of the Lord, when he comes with Judgment and
Vengeance, and to reward every man according to his deeds, then will He reward
Persecution and Persecutors with his fierce Wrath, and they shall know the
Justice of God's Judgments executed upon them. And therefore happy will the
King be, if he keep himself clear, and put far from him this Enomy, Persecution

Three Considerations I have to present unto the King for Conclusion.
1. THe Strength, and Safety and Prosperity of the King and his Government,
stands in the Union, good Affection and Love of his Subjects, and the People of
these Kingdoms, one to another, and to the King; and the more that the People
of the Kingdoms are in Love, and Union, and good Affection one with another,
and to the King, the more strong, and safe, and prosporous thereby is the King
and his Government, and the more like for a long and happy Continuance and
Establishment: And it is the Love, and Union and Affection of the Sober, and
Grave, and Just and Upright People, and of the Meek of the Land, that is the
King's Strength and Safty, and will much tend to his Prosperity, and to the
Establishment of his Government and Authority; and the King's Safety and
Strength, and Prosperity does not depend upon the Affections and Acclamations
of the Ruder Sort, and of the Wild Multitude, though such profess great
Subjection, and cry up the King and his Government, and drink his Healths, and
Swear the Destruction of all his Enemies, and have much Love and great Union
for the King, and are for him, to serve him, and Swear Fidelity, and Engage
themselves very highly in Words and Gestures for the King; yet the King and his
Government is no whit the safer, nor more strong, nor prosperous because
hereof: For his Prosperity and Establishment depends upon the Love and good
Affection of the Just, and Upright, and Temperate and Meek Men of the Kingdoms,
and not upon the Love of the Rude Multitude; such cannot be a Blessing to him
in their Vaunting, and Boasting and Rudeness, nor can he stand by them; but
must stand in the Establishment of his Government by the Love of such as fear
the Lord, and depart from all Iniquity; by the good Affection of such, and
their Faithfulness and Love, may the King be happy and blessed: Therefore let
him strive to please such, and to gain their good Affections to be united to
him, and this may add to his long Continuance.

2. It is the doing of Justice and Truth, and allowing all Just and Equal
Liberty to all People under his Authority, that will gain upon the Hearts of
all Just and Good People: And as Righteousness. Mercy, True Judgment and Truth
is brought forth in the Land, and all the contrary limited in the King's
Government; this will gain much upon the Hearts and Affections of all good
People, to be united in Love one to another, and to the KING: And this is the
way of the King's Prosperity, and to make his Government established, if so be
that he exercise his Rule and Authority in Love and Meekness, and Equal Justice
and Mercy, and love Righteousness and Truth, and hate and deny all the
contrary, and limit it; then the spirits of all People in the Kingdoms would be
subjected and subdued under his Power, and he should Rule over them, and his
Kingdoms be Established prosperously; and this is the Way of an Happy
Government. But if so be the KING put on Rigor, and be Fierce and Cruel, and
think to subdue all under him by Will and Force, without showing Justice and
Reason to answer the Consciences of his Subjects in all his Proceedings; this
way can never be prosperous, nor Establish him in his Authority; but it will
work the contrary Effect: For, if Oppression be brought forth, and Heavy Yoaks
laid upon the Back of the Poor; then will the Wrath of God and of Men be
kindleed against him, and Murmurings, Strifs and Contentions will arise in the
Minds of Men against him; and the Oppressions of the Poor will reach unto
Heaven, and God will hear and Revenge their Cause. So that it is Ruling and
exercising Authority in these Kingdoms in Justice, Righteousness, Love and Good
Reason that must gain the Hearts of People unto right Subjection, to make the
King and his Government Happy and Established; and Rigor, Force and Cruelty
will never make the King happy, but will work contrary: For the People are
Wise, and Understanding will not long bear any degree of the Yoke of Slavery.

3. Inasmuch as the People of these Kingdoms are diverse, and divided, and
contrary in Judgment one to another in many things, and so are dis-united into
several Opinions and Parties; the King ought to Rule in Wisdom and Love over
them all, and to show Equal Justice and Liberty, and to ea^rcise Righteousness
toward them all alike, notwithstanding their Difference in Religion and
Judgments; for if he shall give Liberty to some, and Oppress others; if he do
join with one Way, and promote that; and the men of one Judgment be tolerated,
and all other Ways, and all others that are different in Judgment, be
persecuted and oppressed, and sought to be destroyed; this is not the way for
the King to prosper, nor to be established to perpetuity: for there seems to be
no one Way so strong, or any one sort of People so many, for the King to cleave
to and allow, and seek to destroy all the rest, because there is of other sors
of people that balance that sort in opposition; and so the King and his
Government seems not secure, if he take hold of any one sort of People, only to
stand thereby, in opposition to all the rest, persecuting of them; because
there are many of other Sects that will be discontented and murmur, if not
more: So that the King's Safety is, and the Prosperity of his Government, and
the Establishment of it seems to be, By giving Equal Liberty and Justice, and
showing Love and Tenderness to all of all Judgments, and then he may stand by
all, and none will oppose him, but all will be ready to defend and preserve
him: For he may stand established, and be happy in his Government, by engaging
all sorts to him through Love, and Righteousness, and Liberty toward all; but
he cannot (according to my Judgment) be established nor prosperous, if he
choose only the Men of one Judgment to stand by, and cleave only to that, and
persecute and seek to destroy all the rest that are different; and so only make
one Party his Friends, and dis-engage all others in Love and Affection; this
seems, I say, not the Way of Prosperity. Let the King consider it, and the Lord
give him a Right Understanding.

By a Friend to Just Authority, E. B.

PERSECUTION IMPEACHED, As a Traitor against God, HIS LAWS and GOVERNMENT; And
the CAUSE of the Ancient MARTYRS Vindicated, against the Cruelty inflicted upon
them by the Papists in former Days.
Being a Brief ANSWER to a Book called, Semper Iidem; Or, A Parallel of
PHANATICKS, etc. lately published by a Nameless Author:

Wherein is contained a Relation of the Martyrdom of many such as Dissented and
Opposed the Church of ROME; who are in the said Book Villified and Reproached,
by the Name and Term of Ancient Phanaticks.

And this is sent forth as an Answer thereunto, to Pursue it, Apprehend it, and
Condemn it, as a Pamphlet of Calumnies and Slanders against the Protestants,
both of former and present Days; who are all of them Scorned in the said Book,
the one as Ancient, the other as Modern PHANATICKS.

Which is sent abroad as a Warning to ENGLAND, to beware of the spirit of the
Church of ROME, lest it Exalt it self in Cruel Persecution against the
PROTESTANTS, and all that differ from it.

HOW Great and Miserable has been that Darkness and Ignorance, which has
overspread the Nations and Kingdoms of the World, since the Apostles days?
And how manifold is that Error into which many have been fallen, even as into a
Snare of Destruction? And how woeful is that Strife, Division and Contention
about Religion, that has highly abounded among the Christian People? (so
called) For the whole Christendom have been divided, and in Opposition one part
against another, about the True God, and his Worship, and concerning the
knowledge of Salvation by Jesus Christ: And diverse kinds of Religion,
Church Government, and Practices of Ordinances of Faith and Worship have been
extant in the World; and Nations and Countries have been all in Division,
Strife and Contention about these Matters, and have been also persecuting one
another violently unto Bonds and Death, for and because difference in Judgment
and Practices concerning Spiritual Things, Papists against Protestants; and
Protestants against Papists, and one sort of Christians (so called) against
another, and the men of such a Judgment, and Fai^^, and Way of Religion have
been persecuting and seeking to destroy all that have been contrary minded to
them; And thus have been the woeful Divisions and evil Effects thereof in the
World among Christians, about Faith, and Worship, and Religious matters, and
this has come to pass because of the spirit of Error and Darkness that has
possessed the minds of men, since the falling away from the Truth, as it was
once manifest among the Apostles: And thus its come to pass, because of the
erring from the Spirit of God, and because that has been wanting amongst men,
therefore have People been diverse and divided about Matters of Religion, each
one sort following their own Invention and Traditions of men, and also
persecuting one another, and killing and imprisoning one another because of the
same; and all this, because the Spirit of Truth has not dwelt in the Hearts of
Christians, as it did in the Apostles, not led, guided and taught them in true
Unity and Fellowship, as it did the true Christians in the days of old: And
while the Spirit of Christ has been wanting, and is not received into the
Heart, to mortify, guide, rule and teach in all the Ways of God, and the
whole exercise of Religion and Duty toward Him; and while there is any kind of
imposing and forceing of Religion by Laws of men, upon Penalties and
Forfeitures, and setting up Worship and Church Government by that means, and in
that way, without the imm^ Teaching of the Spirit of Christ in the Conscience;
I say, while this has been and is continued, nothing but Division, Strife,
Contention, Persecution, and Nations and Peoples destroying one another about
Religion, has been, is, or can be in the World amongst Christians.

And of this same (to wit) of Division and Contention about Religion, with the
Enmity of such as are so divided one against another, to the persecuting and
killing one of another, that are contrary minded, as it has been brought forth
in the World for Generations past, we have here a sufficient large Testimony,
lately published in a Book called, Semper Iidem, or, A Parallel of Phanaticks,
etc. wherein is made mention of what Strife and Contention there has been in
former days among the false Christians; and how they have cruelly Persecuted,
Burned and Destroyed one another in this Cause, only for and because of the
difference in Matters of Judgment and Religious Things; and these Persecutions
and Cruelties, effected contrary to the Example of Christ and his Doctrine, who
has exhorted to Love and Peace, and not to Kill and Destroy; and that a man
should love his Enemies, and not Kill and Destroy them; contrary to which
Doctrine the false Christians of all kinds have walked and acted since the
days of the Apo^, who have been Apostatized, and fallen from the very Life and
Power of Godliness, as held amongst the primitive Saints, into Forms and empty
Shadows, being all in strife one with another about such things, and have
wanted the Spirit of Christ, which should have led and guided into all Truth,
and exercised them in the true Worship of the true and living God, who is a
Spirit, and is only truly worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; but out of this
Spirit and spiritual Worship the false Christians have been erred, and so all
divided and in Centention, a^ aforesaid, and persecuting one another because
thereof, each one sort justifying their own Way (...) Right, and condemning
that which has differed as the Wrong, and all as Heretics that have been
otherwise minded.

But as (...) (...) (...) Book, Semper Iidem, etc. I would gladly animad^ (...)
con^ing it, and do intend to write a few things by way of an^^er thereunto, and
this is the present Occasion of my present work; for having met with the said
Pamphlet, and perusing of it, I found diverse Considerations on my spirit to
send forth in Answer, to pursue the said Semper Iidem up and down the World,
till it returns again unto the place from whence it came (to wit) Unto the
bottomless Pit, out of which it lately arose: and in reading the same Book, I
have principally observed the Mischievout End and secret Evil Intents of the
Nameless Author, more than the Matter it self contained: and though the Author
be Nameless, yet is his nature and spirit known by his Book; and for what end
he has concealed his Name, I know not, except he was ashamed of his Work, and
durst not Authorize his Matter by his Name; but however, the spirit, end and
intent of the said Nameless Person is perceived and known, as much as any Tree
can be distinguished by its Fruit; and he is of an Envious Disposition of
Heart, and of Malicious Countenance, and in nature and stock of the descent of
Cain; for his spirit is of an evil constitution, hot and fiery, and enclinable
to destroy all that are not like-minded with himself in the Judgment of
Religious Matters; and his proceedings and the end of his work is of an Intent
and Purpose wicked enough, if every Effect answers the Cause appearing, and be
not diverted from the End proposed by the Author; and this I find by
Calculation of his Birth, and the Temper of his spirit, and of the Time wherein
his Book is published, and by the Cause, and End and Intent of the Matter and
Manner of it, and by the Effect that would follow, if the Author's Aim and
Purpose were fulfilled: By all which I must in true Judgment conclude from the
Appearance, Disposition, Temper and Constitution of the spirit of the man, and
from all Causes and Effects pertaining to the said Semper Iidem, That the
Author thereof is indeed chiefly a Member of the Church of Rome (to wit) mostly
a downright Papist, holding forth the Principles of Antichrist in perfect form
and manner, for the perfect End and Cause of Persecution, even Burning again in
Smithfield, and elsewhere, and killing and destroying even all sorts of people
under the scurrilous reproachful name of Phanaticks, that are in Judgment and
practice of Profession contrary to this man's Way, and differing from the
Papists Religion: This, I say, I truly find to be the current and disposition
of the Nameless Author, and his Proceedings in his Method and Matter of his
Semper Iidem, etc. and I have taken in hand at this time to answer him a
little, and to unfold some of the dangerous Intents toward England, which may
inhabit and secretly lodge in that spirit of the Church of Rome, according to
the current of the said Book, and from which I have just cause to suppose the
thing that I partly assert, even that the spirit which has Indicted the said
Book, waits its Opportunity to effect its end, and to revive and renew Fire and
Faggot again, to the extinquishing and destruction of all that differ, and are
contrary minded in Principles and Practices of Religion and Worship from
themselves; for the Fury and Reproach of the said spirit that indicted and
published Semper Iidem, reaches not only to others, whom they call more
Phanatical, as Quakers, Anabaptists, etc. but to the very Protestants
themselves, even to all whatsoever that differ from the Church of Rome; for
such by the Nameless Author are no less termed and vilified by that scornful
term PHANATICKS, distinguished by the Name of Ancient and Modern, as hereafter
I shall make it appear.

And First, I shall show a little concerning the Signification of the Term
Phanatick, as of late used; and the first use of it in these late Days; and
the exchange of the word from one Sort to another; and in whose mouths it now
remains; and who are now so accounted.
1. NOt to discuss the Etimology and signification of the word Phanatick in it
self, and what its Original is, and from whence derived, this I shall not now
proceed to do, as being not needful to my Occasion, though there is difference
of Judgment amongst some in this matter; and some say, the original and root of
the word is from Phanos, a false Godd; and some say otherwise: and they are not
in unity among themselves that do most of all use the word, concerning the
Derivation and Signification of the word in it self: Neither shall I spend time
to seek out a Judgment, and to give it in this case, as counting the recompense
that can be obtained not answerable to such a work; but the signification of
it, as now used at this day among People, is this, All that differ in Judgment
and Practice of Religion and Worship from the generality of People, and cannot
conform unto such Way of Religion as generally practiced in the Land, such are
called PHANATICKS: and this Signification the word bears among People, as now
practiced, Such as meet together to Preach and Pray out of Public Places, and
cannot either out of Knowledge or Conscience conform to the Public Way of
Worship held forth; such are called Phanaticks, and Reproached by that Name
from the Mouths of Scorners and Revilers of the Ways of God (Numbers of whom
do now abound) and also, Such who make Conscience of their Ways, and cannot
run on in the Ways of Iniquity, in Lying and Drunkenness, and such like, but
have been and are more sober, and do walk more in Meekness and the Fear of God,
and have separated themselves from the Evil Company of men, and from all Evil
Ways, and could not run into the same excess of Riot with the Multitude, such
have been called of these late days Phanaticks by the Scorners Generation.

And thus much in brief of the signification of the word, as used of these late
days.

2. As for the first use of the word Phanatick in this Age, it is but of very
late use; for till within these two Years, or less, we had very little or no
use of the word Phanatick, until about the time of then General Monk's Army
coming out of Scotland to London, when the Army was new modeled, and many of
the Sectaries (so called) were turned out of Places, about the Eleaventh
Month, 1659. then began the common use of this word Phanatick; and the
Anabaptists, and such as were turned out of the Army, and called all by the
Name of Sectaries, that were different from the public Way of Worship, then
held out (which was for the most part of it Presbyterians) these were called
Phanaticks; and then the use of the word so common began about this time (as I
have said) as now practiced in our days: For the Rage and Indignation of the
then Presbyterians (so called) and that Party, was such against the
Anabaptists, and such as differed in Judgment and Practice from them, that
scornfully they called them in Derision Phanaticks.

And, so far as I know, this was the Time and Occasion of the first use of this
word, as of late Practiced; or at least, it was the first Time and Occasion of
my Observation of the common use of the word Phanatick.

3. And now as concerning the exchange of the word, from one sort of People to
another, and how it has been used by diverse sorts of People against others
that have differed from themselves, this is also observable, That the word
Phanatick has not so much proper relation to any one sort of People, as that
it is only perfectly true to one sort of People more than to others; but the
properness of the word Phanatick, is only as Scorners and Revilers will
wickedly use it, and as they will turn it to this sort of People, or to the
other, to scorn them by it, whom they have an Emnity against, and whom they
list to abuseby reproaching: And this is the end of the use of the word to this
day, and not of any truth or verity in it to any People, but only its used as a
Term of Reproach and Scorning, by the Mouths of ungodly men against such as
differ from them and their Ways, though they are better in Practice of Life
and Conversation than themselves: And the Term has been changed diverse times,
and diverse sorts of People reproached by it by others, since its first use: as
first, The People called Presbyterians (as aforesaid) they used it toward such
as were otherwise-minded than themselves, and reproached the Anabaptists, and
others that differed from them in Judgment and Practice of Religion, by the
Name of Phanaticks, and then they reproached many by that Name that differed
from them, and did not conform to their Way of Worship and Religion; but this
continued not long, for when others came over them, and they grew under
Reproach, then they themselves were reproached by that Name Phanatick, by which
they had reproached others not long before; and many that are for the
Government of the Church under Episcopacy, they now reproach the Presbyterians
(so called) by the Name of Phanaticks; so the word is used in scorn to them by
Scorners, as they used it to others that differed from them in the like
scornful spirit: And thus the word is made use of only in derision and reproach
to any that differ from the public way of Religion in the Land: For when the
public was generally Presbyterians, then they that would not conform to that,
but opposed it, were called Phanaticks; and now when the public is Episcopal,
even the Presbyterians themselves, and all that differ from that way, and
cannot conform to it, are reproached by the scornful Name of Phanatick. And
thus the word has been exchanged from one sort of Scorners to another, and
used reproachfully toward diverse Persons; so that as I have said, the word
Phanatick is truly proper to none of the Sects more than others, but only
proper to be used by Scoffers and Scorners against any whom they have a mind to
villifie; and its exchanged from one to another, and used by diverse sorts of
People, according as Times and Religion do change by the Powers of the Earth.
So the Term Phanatick is changed into the Mouths of Scorners, to reproach all
that differ from the Common General Way of Profession and Practice of Religion.

4. Now, last of all, it is changed yet once more into the Mouths of the
Papists, as by Semper Iidem does appear, now under my explanation: and now the
Papists have gotten the word Phanatick both from the Presbyterians and
Episcopals, and all must now be reproached by that Name, that differ from them
and their Way and Religion; and they have already begun to cry Phanatick to the
Protestants, that differ from them in Principles and Practices. And thus its
manifest, that the word Phanatick is truly proper to none, but only used by
Scorners, to all whom they will revile and hold in derision, as different from
them in Religion, such they villifie by the Name of Phanaticks: First, the
Presbyterians used it to such as differed from them; then Episcopal men (so
called) used it toward all that differed from them; and now last of all, the
Papists have got it from both, and use it to all in derision that differ from
them. And thus I have showed, First, the beginning of the use of the word
Phanatick, and upon what occasion, and its true signification, as used at this
day. Secondly, concerning the exchanging of the word from one to another, and
how that its truly proper to no People, but Scorners only use it, to deride and
reproach such as differ from them, and cannot run in the same excess of Vanity.
Thirdly. How the Papists now last of all have got it, and use it against the
Protestants; and in their Mouths now it remains: and the Protestants (so
called) are now the Persons and People that are accounted Phanaticks, because
they differ from the Papists in Principles and Practices of Faith, Worship and
Religion: and this is manifest by the scope of Semper Iidem.

Secondly, I shall now show how maliciously the nameless Author of Semper Iidem
has slandred the Martyrs and Sufferers for Righteousness sake in former Ages;
and how he has accused the Protestants (now living) and what effect this would
work in England, if the Author's Intent were fulfilled.
1. HE has slandered, accused and rendered the Martyrs of old, as Infamous as
he possibly can, even termed them by the scornful Name of Phanaticks, even the
Protestant Martyrs (so called) who are said to be the very Fathers of the
Protestant Church; as Bishop Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, and many others, who
have been accounted honorable in England for their faithfulness against the
Church of Rome, who because thereof, were martyred and burned by the Cruelty of
the Papists; yet these Persons, with Robert Woodman, Thomas Hawks, and many
more of the Ancient Protestant Martyrs, are slandered by the villifying Term of
Phanaticks; and that they were men of mischief, and licentious Tongues, and
seditious behaviors and they were erroneous and obstinate, as in the ninth
Page of Semper Iidem does appear; and in page 16. Latimer is again called one
of the Ancient Phanatick. And thus the main work of this nameless Author
throughout his Book, is to accuse the Protestant Martyrs that suffered in Queen
Mary's days, to be rebellious seditious Heretics, and he villifies them by
the very Title of Ancient Phanaticks; and this is apparent through the whole
Pamphlet, even by his Calumnies, Reproaches and Accusations against the
Protestant Martyrs, who suffered for bearing Witness against the Church of
Rome. And thus the very Fathers of the Protestant Church (so called) stand now
in reputation to be Heretics, seditious, rebellious, and j^dged Phanatick; and
this is for the Protestants (so called) even the very Bishops themselves in
England to consider of.

2. The Auther of Pemper Iidem has accused some of the Protestants, even of
the King's Friends now living, and villifieth them by the Name of Phanatick, as
William Prin, etc. whom he calls one of the modern Phanaticks: And no doubt but
the Intent of this Man, with whom I am now in contest, reputes even all the
Protestants of this present Age to be Phanaticks, and such as the Ancient
Phanaticks, to wit, the Protestant Martyrs, as beforementioned; for he having
accused Ridly and Cranmer, and many more, being such who were some of the first
Promoters of the Protestant Religion in England, and the very Instituters of
that Book, called the Divine-service-Book; it must needs follow consequently,
and may be concluded from his words, and by his meaning, That all the
Protestants now are such, even the present Prelates of England; and durst the
Author have spoken plain, it is likely he would have said the same, but that he
has minced the matter a little, as well as concealed his Name, though his work
be cried up and down London; which all sober People may indeed well take notice
of, seeing that the Martyrs of old, who have to this day been of good report
and fame for their Piety and Faithfulness in London, and through these Lands,
are now accused, slandered and reproached up and down the Streets of London by
the Name of Rebels and Seditious, and by the Term of Ancient Phanaticks. Is
London so blind that cannot see what is in the Bottom and Intent of such a
Work, as renders the very Fathers of their Church Heretics, and no better than
Phanaticks? And as for William Pryn, who is also accounted one of the chief
modern Phanaticks, I shall leave him to answer for himself, not doubting but he
is sufficient to say something in the Case; only may mind him, with many others
of his Principles and Familiarity, how they have cried out Phanaticks against
such as have differed from them, and this not long since; and now themselves
are under the same Reproach by others, as they have reproached others; and now
he and they are reckoned the Modern Phanaticks and no better.

3. What can possibly be the Author's Intent in his proceedings? First, in
relating of the burning, destroying and martyring of the Martyrs, whom he
wickedly calls A^^ions Phanaticks. And then, Secondly, in intimating the
Protestants now living to be Phanaticks by this Parallel, the purpose and end of
the man must needs be, That he would have Fire and Faggots up again, Burning
and Martyring up again in England; and all that shall differ from that Man's
Way (whom we find by Calculation to be chiefly a Papist) should be burnt,
martyred and destroyed now again, as in the days of Queen Mary; this effect
would follow: and this Semper Iidem is but a little Item or Intimation
beforehand, cried up and down London, to prepare its own spirit, where it
shall meet with it, into Fary and Rage even to the destroying of all the
Protestants: And as this (...) ^^dem may possibly work such an effect among the
People of that spirit, (...) love to murder and burn for difference in
Religion, It may also and ought (...) (...) an effect in the other Party, to be
considerate and diligent, and to re^d the signs of the Times, even the sign of
Semper Iidem, which seems to be ^tle Black-stur predicting a bad Effect, if the
course of Heaven alter it not again. And Semper Iidem is indeed to be taken
notice of in London, because the (...) (...) not (...) for above an hundred
Years, nor any one ever durst to appear (...) such a publication of villifying
the Protestant Martyrs with Reproaches and (...) of Rebels, Seditious men and
Phanaticks, as this Nameless Author (...) done: which gives us cause to say,
The Times are changed, and may yet (...) further, if the Effects of Semper
Iidem be not diverted; for the Effects of his work, is, to bring all to the
Fire, Faggot, and Martyrdom that shall differ from the Church of Rome, of whom
the Author is a Member, as by all signs ^^d tokens does appear.

Thirdly, I shall now show how this spirit in the Papists, that burnt the
Martyrs, (which is the same spirit that endited Semper Iidem, that is again
moving its Countenance now adays) I shall show how that spirit was not, nor is
of Christ, but of Antichrist and the Devil.
1. IT was not the way of Christ and his Apostles, neither did they give
Command or President for it, to kill, burn, or destroy their Enemiec, and such
(...) (...) Heretics, as the false Christians (...), and as the Papists did in
Queen (...) (...) who burned and destroyed many hundreds of the Protestants who
(...) them in their Profession and Practices of Religion: and this was not
(...) way, for he commanded To love Enemies, and not to kill them, and it was
(...) He did Good for them them did Evil (...) him; and so did his Apostles;
(...) (...) was no such thing in the Churches of Christ in the Apostles days,
as (...) (...) burning of Heretics, and putting them (...) (...) by Cr^^^
Torments; (...) (...) and his Apostles did convince (...) s^rs by Love and
(...) Doctrine, (...) (...) walk peaceably toward all their Enemies, and did
not s^^k their (...), not to be revenged (...) their Persecutors: but the
Papists and (...), contrary to Christ's Doctrine and Example, do burn and kill,
and destroy their Enemies, such whom they judge to be in Error, though yet
their Judgment be utterly false, and their killing and burning grounded upon
such Judgment: and this has been the Papists way of proceeding as is related
in Semper Iidem; wherein is mentioned the burning and destroying of a great
number of such as they then called Heretics, whom Semper Iidem now calls
Ancient Phanaticks: and he has justified their Martyrdom to be Right, and
condemned the Martyred as Phanaticks; and this is published in London.

2. All Persecution about Religion, and killing and burning for difference in
matters of spiritual things, has been and is of the Devil and Antichrist, both
in the Papists and other false Christians, though it has long been practiced
in the World, for to destroy the Workmanship of God, the Persons and Creatures,
by Fires and Cruel Torments: This is not of God, but of the Devil, especially
when it is done upon such an unjust occasion, as to destroy men's Persons by
cruel tortures for the Error of their Minds; This is of the Beast and Dragon,
spoken of in the Revelations: For the Beast killed all that would not worship
him, Revel. 13. for it was the Dragon that persecuted the Woman, the true
Church, and made War with the Remnant of her Seed, and cast floods out of his
Mouth, after the Woman had brought forth the Man-Child; and he persued her into
the Wilderness, and then he gave power to the Beast, his Seat, and his great
Authority, as you may read; and then that Beast, to whom the Dragon gave
Authority, forced all to worship him, and killed all that would not worship
him, and made War against them, and overcame them: And so it is manifest that
this Practice, which the Papists and false Christians have used, of burning and
killing all such as will not worship after their manner, is of the Devil the
Dragon and Antichrist, and has no foundation in God, but is of the wicked One
to all Intents and Purposes. And thus I have showed the Papists Practices in
Queen Mary's days, (and at all times before and since, of burning and
destroying of such as differ from them in religious Matters) are of the Devil
and Antichrist, though the Author of Semper Iidem seems to justify the Death
of the Martyrs, and has reproachfully villified them, about an hundred years
after they are dead, by the scornful Name of Phanaticks.

Fourthly, I shall now show something concerning the Cause of the Publication
of Semper Iidem, which the Author says, is from the late Insurrection in
London, and comparing them with their Predecessors, he thought fit to publish
the same; as in his Epistle.
NOw in answer to this. As for the Insurrection in London, I shall not justify
it, nor speak a word in vindication of the said Persons Proceedings, but shall
leave them without giving my Judgment upon them further than this, That it was
an Evil Occasion, administered against such as were no way guilty thereof, who
are deeply suffering this day Imprisonment and Persecution, and their Peaceable
Meetings broken up, and they violently dealt withal in many particulars, and
only upon the occasion of that Insurrection aforesaid; And how Unjust it is,
let all the World judge, that any should suffer for the Faults of others? And
how Unequal it is that many should be Imprisoned, Fined, and taken out of their
own Houses and Meetings, to Goals and Prisons, as it is at this day, upon the
Occasion of that Insurrection, whereof they were clear and inno^ent both to God
and Men, though they are dealt withal as Plotters Conspirors and Rebellious,
when as hereof they are not guilty?And this is all that I shall say at present
as about that Insurrection, and the Occasion of Semper Iidem its Publication.

And whereas Sir John Oldcastle, and Sir Roger Acton, with diverse others are
mentioned, and their Deaths related, whom this Author says, were put to death
for Treason and Rebellion, and making Insurrection. Concerning the Carriages
and Death of such I shall say little, nor can I justify any in so doing,
neither in Ages past, nor in this present Time, if they were put to death only
upon that Account, for rebelling with Carnal Weapons, and rising up in
Conspiracies against the Authorities which they were under, or for Evil-doing
to their Neighbors; I say, such neither in this Age, nor in Ages past, do I
justify, nor will vindicate their Practices, nor condemn their Death, but
shall leave them to be justified or condemned of God according to their doings,
and according to the end and intent of their Hearts in their Proceedings; but
many others are mentioned in Semper Iidem, who suffered and were put to Death,
burned and killed, only for and because of their Principles and Practices in
Religion, while yet they lived peaceably, and were of a harmless Conversation
amongst Men; the Persecution and Death of such, upon that account, I do
condemn, and do charge it to be Murder in the sight of God, of such who were
burned and destroyed because of their difference in Religion from the Church of
Rome when as no Unrighteousness nor Double-dealing, as to men, could be charged
and proved against them; such (I say) as died and suffered for that Cause, have
been murdered by the Power of Antichrist among the Apostate Christians, and the
Blood of such will the God of Heaven avenge one time or other.

Now I come to search some Particulars, which are stated, page 3. which its
said John Wickliff held; which Doctrines the Author of Semper Iidem seems to
say are Errors, by his condemning such for Heretics as held them for Truths.
THe First, That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing but a piece of Bread.
This the Lollards (so called) are said to affirm, for which the Papists condemn
them as Heretics.

Answ. As for the Sacrament of the Altar, so termed by the Papists, we find
nothing of it in all the Scriptures, not Sacrament of the Altar nominated; only
we find, That Christ took Bread and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples; not
as Himself, for He only gave it them to eat in remembrance of Himself; As often
as ye do it (says Christ) do it in remembrance of Me. Where it is manifest,
that there is a distinction to be made, and a separation in expression to be
put between that Bread which Christ gave his Disciples to eat, and his own
Body; for they were to eat the Bread, not as Him, but in remembrance of Him:
and this shows that the Bread which Christ gave his Disciples, was Bread to be
eaten in Remembrance of Him; and so it is no Error, but sound Truth to affirm,
That the Bread called the Sacrament of the Altar by the Papists, is but indeed
a piece of Bread, and may safely so be called: But suppose it were Error in men
so to believe and say; yet it is Murder, Cruelty, and not of Christ, but of the
Wicked One, so to deal with them for their Error sake, as beforementioned.

Doct. 2. That Priests have no more Authority to administer Sacraments then
Laymen; Held by the Lollards; Condemned as a great Error by the Papists.

Answ. As for the Name and Order of Priests, we find none such among the
Apostles in the Christian-Churches in their days; Pastors, and Ministers, and
Prophets, and Teachers we find, but not Priests by that Name, as a particular
Order of Men in the Church, saving that all the Saints are called Kings and
Priests unto God; neither do we find such a thing, As consecrating a piece of
Bread into a more holy quality then it was in it self before; nor any Commision
given by Christ to a particular Order of Men, to administer Bread to the People
as his Body; we read that the Saints brake Bread when they were met together,
and some time from House to House, but that there were particular Persons by an
Office among them, that did administer the Bread in the Form and Manner as
among Papists, we read not of this in all the Scriptures; And as for Laymen as
Papists term them, this word we have not in all the Scriptures, but Saints we
have of diverse growths; but the Papists have made many Inventions of Offices,
Titles, and Names in their Church, for which they have no Example at all in the
Scriptures.

Doct. 3. That all things ought to be in Common; Opposed by Papists as a great
Error.

Answ. It is a great question what signification may be put upon the Word
Common; so I shall not vindicate for Truth the Doctrine as it lies, and leave
the Interpretation of the Word Common to my Adversaries, and so I pass it; only
do mind that it is said in the Acts, That they that believed, had all things
Common; Though the Word Common there, I understand not Absolute but with
Restriction.

Doct. 4. That it is as lawful to Christen a Child in a Tub of Water at home,
or in a Ditch by the Way, as in a Font-stone in the Church; Opposed by the
Papists as a great Error.

Answ. As for the Baptizing of Infants, by dipping or sprinkling, and calling
it the Baptism into the Faith, and into the Church, as practiced and held by
the Papists, we have cause to question the Lawfulness of the Thing in it self
at any Place; For we find no Command or President of Christ, nor among his
Apostles in the pimitive Churches, for this thing of Christening Infants; and
therefore we question, whether the Thing in it self is lawful at any Time or
Place? suppose the Papists could prove the Thing lawful, and that it ought to
be done by virtue of any Command or Example of Christ or his Apostles, then
again we question, why not as lawful to be done at any other Place, as in a
Font-stone? (so called) Of what holiness or purity is that, more than other
Places? and of whose invention is it of all the Christians since the Apostles
days, seeing we find nothing at all of it in the Scriptures? But suppose the
Principle to hold indeed absolute Error, the Papists yet do still wickedly in
racking men, and burning them because thereof.

Doct. 5. That it is as lawful at all times to confess unto a Layman as to a
Priest; Opposed by the Papists as great Error.

Answ. As for that manner and form of Auricular Confession, (so called)
practiced among the Papists, we have no Command or Example for it in all the
Scriptures; only the Apostle exhorted to confess your faults one to another;
but no mention of distinction of persons, as if there was an Order of men among
the Saints, Ordained for Confession to be made unto, as is among the Papists
practiced: But such kind of Inventions are among them, and all that gainsay
them in their Ways must be burned as Heretics; and this is the way that the
Papists do uphold their Religion, not by sound Arguments, and by the Spirit and
Power of God, but by killing such as will not Believe, and Practice as they do.

Doct. 6. That it is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or Chapel
to pray or perform Divine Service in; Opposed by the Papists as a great Error.

Answ. As for the Church, it is in God, 1 These. 1. and the Body of Christ is
the Church, Ephesians. 1. 23. the Saints of Christ, that have Believed in the
Church of Christ; for the Church was in Aquilla's House, as may be read: and in
this Church of Christ, wheresoever come together, is the Divine, Holy,
Acceptable Service of God, performed in the Spirit, and in the Truth: And as
for Houses of Wood and Stone, builded and called Churches and Chapels, which
Papists have builded to perform their Service in, these are Idolatrous Places,
and not true Churches; God dwells not in Temples made with Hands, as it is
written: And though a man affirm, That God may be worshipped and served as well
in any Place, as in your Churches and Chapels, and that such Places are not
necessary, but God may be served in other Places; This is no Error, deserving
Fire and Faggot, as the Papists do affirm and Practice.

Doctrines 7. and 8. That burying in the Churchyard is unprofitable and vain.
That Holy Days, Instituted by the Church, are not to be observed and kept in
reverence, in as much as all Days are alike; Opposed by the Papists as Errors.

Answ. There is no respect of Places with God, neither are the Dead more or
less acceptable to him, notwithstanding the Place of Burial, whether it be on
the Land, or cast into the Sea, if occasion so happen, as some times it does;
The Patriarchs of old had Places appointed and purchased for Burial of their
Dead, as it is at this day among the Lord's People; but that the Churchyard
(so called) is more Holy than another Place, as the Papists do account, This we
believe not, nor can it be proved to us, by Scripture or sound Reason. And as
for Holy Days instituted and observed, is but a mere Invention of the Romish
Church, without any ground from the Apostles, and it is no sin against God not
to observe them, and all days are as to God alike holy in His sight, without
respect of one or another; And for the Papists to invent Practices, without
Example in the Scriptures, as Religious, and then to impose them by force upon
all People, and to kill and burn such as Heretics, as cannot conform
thereunto; How Impious, Oppressive, and Antichristian this manner of work is,
let all sober, People judge? And this is but a mocking of God, for the Papists
to profess Holy Days, and with a pretense of God's Worship to observe them as
Holy, when as more Rudeness, Drunkenness, Wantonness, and Ungodliness is
usually committed that Day, which they profess to keep Holy, than is on the
other days beside; And this is manifest to all People, that thus the Papists
do mock God in their exercise of keeping Holy Days.

Doctrines 9. and 10. That it is sufficient to Believe, though a man do no good
Works at all. That no Humane Lawt or Constitutions do oblige a Christian;
Opposed by the Papists as Errors.

Answ. It is sufficient to believe in Jesus Christ, and that Believing is a
good Work, and if a man truly believes, he cannot but bring forth by that Faith
good Works; and it is impossible for a true Believer in Christ, but to do good
Works; if a Man do no good Works, he is not a Believer; For Faith without Works
is dead; and that is no true Belief, which is without good Works; and a
Christian, one that is truly so, is obliged and bound by the Law of God, To do
all Good, and to forsake all Evil; and the Laws of men, they are subject to
them all for Conscience sake, by performing them, or suffering under them. And
as for Humane Inventions of the Papists, which they bind on the Consciences of
Men, upon loss of Life, or Estate, or Damnation; These things we say, do not
oblige the Conscience, nor any Laws or Constitutions of men do oblige
Christians to Obedience, which are not truly grounded upon the Law of God.

Doct. 11. That God never gave Grace or Knowledge to a great Person, or Rich
Man, and that they in no wise follow the same.

Answ. This is a false Doctrine, for God gave Grace to all; The Grace of God
which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, as it is written, which
Grace teaches the Saints to deny all Ungodliness; and the Wicked turn the
Grace of God into Wantonness: but the true Knowledge of God is given but to a
few; and not many Wise men after the flesh are called, but God chooses the
Poor and Contemptible (as says Paul) to confound the Wise and Mighty of this
World; and yet God gives Knowledge to Rich and Poor without respect of Persons,
as it pleases Him.

Doct. 12. That any Layman may preach by his own Authority, without License of
the Ordinary; Opposed by the Papists as a great Error.

Answ. All in the true Church, and that are of the Church may Prophecy and
Speak in the Church one by one (as Paul says, without distinction of Titles,
such as the Papists use, Clergy, and Laymen, and such like Terms of their own
Inventions, without Example from the Churches of Christ in the Apostles days)
for the Apostle says, If any thing be revealed to another that stands by,
let the first hold his Peace; for ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may
be edified: And again, Peter says, As every man has received of the Gift of
the Spirit, let him administer the same one to another. Thus it is manifest by
the Scriptures, That every Member of the true Church of Christ may Preach by
the Authority of the Spirit of God, as that moves and leads; and this was
the Example of the holy men of God, declared in Scriptures: Elisha, that was a
Plowman, and Amos, that was a Herds-man, and Peter, that was a Fisherman;
these, and such as these, whom the Papists would have called Laymen, did
Preach and Teach without any License from men, but as the Lord Commanded them,
who said, Ier. 23. He that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully; and
this without respect of Persons, and without distinction of Names of Laymen,
or otherwise; though contrary to this, the Papists would limit the Holy One to
such and such kind of Persons, whom they name Clergymen, as if they knew all
Religion, and might only Preach, and all besides themselves might be in
Ignorance, and know nothing, nor can be fit to speak of the Matters of God's
Kingdom; which is contrary to the Scriptures, and Example of Saints in former
Ages.

As for the 13th and 14th Doctrines, about Baptism of Infants, I have spoken
somewhat to it in my Answer to the fourth Doctrine; so here I pass them.

Then Semper Iidem goes on, and says, Who sees not among these the principal
Tenets of our Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Levellers and Quakers, etc?

Answ. As for the Anabaptists, Fifth-monarchy-men and Levellers (so called) I
shall not now plead their Cause, but shall leave it to themselves, to do it
against Semper Iidem; neither shall I condemn them with him, or justify them
against him. But as for the Quakers (so called) I have a few word to plead for
them, against their Adversaries, though I shall be brief at this time; They are
neither Rebellious, Seditious, Heretics, nor Phanaticks, though accused at
this time of these things, and accounted by the Author of Semper Iidem as such;
though neither he, nor any of their false and envious Accusers, that have ever
risen against them, can prove any such matter, nor ought against them, saving
That they are an Innocent and Harmless People toward all people; and though
Sufferers by Injustice and Cruel Imprisonments under all Authorities, yet not
Rebellious nor Seditions against any, but Peaceable and Quiet under all; this
is their Practice since they were a People. And as for their Principles of
Faith, and Worship, and Doctrine and Religion, they are according to the
Scriptures, and Example of the Saints in former Ages, and not ever yet
convicted by any, either Protestants or Papists, of Error, False Judgment, or
Heresy; though all manner of Evil has been spoken against them in that Case,
yet never to this day truly detected, or reprehended concerning the same: And
they desire no better way to be made manifest in their Doctrines, and to be
approved or disproved therein through the World, than to have free Egress and
Regress among the Papists and Protestants, and all others in the Way of sober
Arguments and Disputations, and Reasoning out the Truth of what they hold and
profess; and if they can possibly be convicted, that their Way, and Doctrines
and Religion are not found Verities, but Errors, then it is time to forsake
them: But all the Persecution, that is already, or can be acted upon them, will
never make them change their Minds till Death, nor renounce the things which
the Spirit of God in their own Hearts does bear witness to the truth of. And
therefore let the Church of Rome lay down her Cruel Weapons of Persecution, by
Burning and Destroying of such as differ from them in Religion, and let her
admit of Disputations and sound Arguments, to uphold her self thereby if she be
able, and to Confute and Convince such as are contrary minded to her, even the
Quakers (so called) if she can; and let her cease her Fire and Faggot, and
Inquisition-Disputation of Murders and Cruel Tortures against such whom she
calls Heretics; and let her appear in the soundest Arguments of Reason, and
Scripture, and Antiquity, that she can adorn her self withal; and the Quakers
(so called) will not doubt nor fear to advance toward her, and meet her, and
answer her in the same, for the true and legal Trial of both; that all the
World may see and understand the difference between these two, and whether the
Papists Religion or the Quakers Religion is of more Reason, Verity and
Antiquity; and the Quakers are willing to try this Case with the Papists,
engaging upon the adventure of certain Proof or Disproof of their Religion, in
the view of the whole World. And this is the most I shall say at present on
their behalf, and in the mean time, till this be performed, let the Church of
Rome, and all her Members, cease to persecute and accuse such, whom they know
not, but by the Evil Reports of others; and the Tenets and Principles of the
Quakers (so called) will be justified, where the false Christians cannot stand
nor appear in Judgment.

Then Page 7. The Author of Semper Iidem complains of some Phanaticks, as he
calls them, that nickname what they dislike; says he, They call the Church, a
Steeple-House; the Surplice, a Rag of Popery; the Organs, Grumbling-Pipes, etc.

Answ. As for the True Church, it is in God, 1 These. 1. The People of God, that
are regenerated and sanctified, wheresoever come together, are the true Church
of Christ; for the Church was in Aquilla's House, as it is written: So that it
is the People that are the Members of Christ, the true Church, and not the
House or Place wherein they assemble at any time. And as for calling the
public Meeting Places (which some call Churches) Steeple Houses, this is no
Error; for the Form, Fashion and Service of the Place prove it to be so; A
great House, made of Wood and Stone, and a Steeple with Bells in it erected at
the End of the House, may properly be called a Steeple-House, without Error;
and cannot at all be called a Church, but in Error. And as for the Surplice,
which the Priests put on, this is without Question an Invention of the Church
of Rome, because there is no such thing in the New Testament, nor was there any
Surplices worn by any of the Ministers of Christ in the Apostles days; but is
an Invention, introduced into the World by the Church of Rome; and so is, and
may be called A Piece or Rag (if you will) of Popery. And as for Organs, and
the Practice of them, as held forth for the Worship of God, there was no such
thing among the Apostles, neither did the Saints of the Primitive Church hold
forth the Worship of God by playing on the Organs; but the true spiritual
Gospel Worship is more heavenly and spiritual, even in the Spirit and in the
Truth is God worshipped, as Christ said; and not by outward Music, on Organs,
and such like; but this is also an Invention of the Church of Rome, since the
Apostles days: And Organs having Pipes of different sounds, may be called
Grumbling-Pipes without Offense.

Again, Page 11. It is charged as a great Error in some, that held, It was not
lawful for a Christian to take an Oath.

Answ. To deny all Swearing, and taking of Oaths, is according to the Doctrine
and Command of Christ Jesus, who has said, Swear not at all; so its manifest,
that the false Christians accuse and condemn such for Heretics as abide in the
Doctrine of Christ, and keep his Commands: And thus both Papists and
Protestants are found in Error and Heresy themselves, and breaking the Command
of Christ, and walking contrary to his Doctrine, in Swearing and taking Oaths,
and condemning such as Heretics as cannot take an Oath for Conscience sake;
and so such as refused to take any Oath, walked in the Doctrine of Christ; and
such walked contrary to his Doctrine as did condemn them. And thus it is
manifest, that Papists and false Christians are fallen from the Doctrine of
Christ, and are calling Good Evil, and Evil Good, and putting Light for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light; for they account such as will take Oaths, and
Swear, good Christians, who are Breakers of the Commands of Christ; and such as
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and cannot take any Oath, but keep the
Commands of the Gospel, they are accounted Erroneous, and Heretics, and such
like.

And whereas the Author of Semper Iidem has censured, judged and condemned in
his work, John Wickliff and John Lambert, Thomas Evison and John Waddow,
William White, Cornelius Bunge, John Maundrel, John Trankerfield, George
Eagles, Hugh Latimer, Bishop Granmer, and Bishop Ridley, Thomas Hawks, Richard
Woodman; all of whom were Martyred and put to Death, because they dissented
from, and denied the Papists Religion: these by name, with a great many more,
this nameless Author, with whom I am now dealing, has condemned for Heretics
and Erroneous Persons, and made void, as much as in him lies, their Blood, and
justified the Papists in putting of them to Death.

Now every particular Case of these particular Men, that he has named and
accused as Phanaticks and Heretics, I shall not seek to show or demonstrate,
so as to justify every man's particular Case against this nameless Author of
Semper Iidem: but this is evident, That these men are reputed by Fox, in his
Monuments, as MARTYRS of JESUS; and they have been reputed in England, for many
years as such; and have been held of great Estimation, and have been accounted
as the Fathers of the Protestant-Church: and my Judgment of them is this, That
their Death generally was for the Testimony of Jesus, and because of their
Faithfulness in denying the Church of Rome; for I do believe, That God did
awaken these men, with many more, and stir up their Hearts in their Day against
the Idolatries and Superstitions of the Times they lived in, and many of them
were sincere men, according to their Light and Knowledge in their Day; though I
shall not justify every particular man in every particular Part and Act of his
Faith and Conversation, but shall leave that at this time reserved in mine own
Heart: And still I say, for the most part they suffered Innocently on their
part, and without Cause, and Cruelly, Inhumanely and Unjustly on their Enemies
part; and they Martyred them, and put them to Death by Fires and Tortures
unrighteously, and as cruel Murderers on their part that Executed them. And in
as much as their Sufferings were only and because of denying the Church of Rome,
dissenting from her, and denying of her; and wherein only and alone their
Sufferings were in this Cause, and for this End, they suffered as Servants of
God; though, as I have said, I shall not justify every particular man of them
in his whole Faith and Conversation.

And for a further Relation of these Persons, who were put to Death, mentioned
by my Nameless Author, whom he accuses for Phanaticks, and Heretics, and such
like, I leave it to be read in Fox's Acts and Monuments, where it may be read
concerning the Martyrdom of every one of these particular men, with their
Examinations, Trials and Executions, as they are reported by Fox, who has
always been reputed, A Faithful Chronologer of the Protestants Cause, till
this Semper Iidem seems to accuse him for a Liar, and false Reporter, and such
like. And whether the People of England have not better cause to believe his
Relation of these Persons, than they have to believe they know not whom, viz.
the Author of Semper Iidem; a Nameless Author, who has reviled the Protestants
Cause, and accounted the Martyrs and faithful Witnesses thereof Phanaticks and
Heretics? let themselves be Judges. But I shall leave this, only with desire,
that these men whom he has named, their particular Cases may be read in Fox's
Acts and Monuments, which, if you look in the Table at the end of the second
Volumn, ^ou shall find the men's names, with the Pages disciphered, where their
Cases (...) be read; and when you have read them, then judge whether Semper
Iidem has not falsified their Cases, and wickedly reviled them by the name of
Ancient Phanaticks; thereby seeking to supplant the whole Protestant Religion,
and all that dissent from the Church of Rome.

And thus much in brief concerning the Martyrs, whom in the 14th Page, Semper
Iidem says, That a notable part of the Sufferers, whom Fox makes relation of,
were Phanaticks, and Sectaries and Mad Saints; and such like naughty words, by
which he accuses a notable part (these be his words) which is the chiefest part
of the Martyrs, related of by Fox; and accuses Fox himself of double Injuries
in his Relation, in that he has Canonized Phanaticks, and Sectaries and Mad
Saints, for Saints and Martyrs; and in that he Reviled and Accused Queen Mary,
and the Papists in those days, of greater Persecutions than they were guilty
of; and says, They did no more than Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth,
and Queen Elizabeth did to the Papists: Thus it is manifest, That that well
reputed of, and credited Historian, Fox, is reputed a Liar, and false Reporter
and so the Book of Martyrs made worth nothing, and Queen Mary and the Papists
justified in what they did, in martyring and putting to Death the Protestants
in their days; and also, Queen Elizabeth is secretly condemned in what she did
against the Papists: Oh that these days should ever appear in England, which
once were not thought of! These things are published and suffered in this Old
Government, newly revived; Let the Protestants of England take notice of it,
and see how the Records of their Martyrs are made null, and of none effect, and
the Martyrs themselves slandered as Phanaticks, and the Martyrers justified as
Righteous in what they did; and these things published and proclaimed up and
down London.

These things I cannot but observe, as full occasion is given me by Semper
Iidem, How that the Papists Cause seems to revive, and to lift up its Head
again in England, in vilifying and reproaching the Cause of all the Protestants
of all sorts, who seemingly begin to be crow'd over again, and the Death of
their Martyrs made of none Effects (as aforesaid) And this is only in Love
toward the People of England, to make them consider what attends them, and
what Invasion is coming upon them, if it be not prevented; not that I wholly
justify the Protestants Cause against the Papists, though Semper Iidem pleads,
That Queen Mary did no more to the Protestants, than Henry the Eighth, Edward
the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth did to the Papists: as the one Persecuted,
Burned and Martyred the Protestants, so the other did Persecute and Destroy the
Papists; by which he would reason a justification of Queen Mary and the
Papists, by the Example of others against them: Now I say, The Wickedness of
one will not justify the Wickedness and Cruelty of the other; for neither
Party of them are justifiable in the sight of God, but condemnable in such
Proceedings; and it was doubtless of Antichrist and the Devil in both Papists
and Protestants, to Destroy and Burn one another only for and because of
Difference in Religion; and wherein the Protestants did put any of the Papists
to Death, only for and because of Difference in Profession and Practice in
Religion, and because they were Papists, herein the Protestants were acted by
the same persecuting spirit of the Devil, as the Papists were acted by against
them: so that I am not an absolute party with the Protestants, against the
Papists; for I know that there is Error of Judgment amongst them, both in
Faith, Worship and their whole Religion; only my End is at present in pursuing
Semper Iidem, to confound his Bloody spirit of Persecution and Cruelty, which I
find him possessed withal, as by his Discourse is apparent; and also, to put
the Protestants in mind how their cause begins to be Reproached, Vilified and
Despised, even in their own Land, publicly in the Streets of their chief City,
which has not been the like for above an Hundred Years; And this is the End of
my pursuing Semper Iidem with this Answer, and I shall not much enlarge
further, only in the 11th Page there is one Passage worth observing.

There is instanced one Richard Woodman of Sussex, who affirmed, That he had
the Spirit of God; and can prove, said he, by the Scriptures, that Paul had the
Spirit of God, as I my self, and all God's Elect have. Now, says Semper Iidem,
No Arguments nor Reasons could reclaim him from his Errors; and so he was Burnt
at Lewis, because he said, He had the Spirit of God, and could prove that Paul
had it.

Answ. There its manifest, that this Martyr suffered for Truth and
Righteousness sake, as a Saint and Servant of God, and for witnessing the Truth
according to the Scripture, which says, If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his; which is manifest in the Scriptures, that all that
are Christ's, and Members of his Church have: and it is also manifest, That the
Papists have not the Spirit of God, because they Burn such as do witness and
testify that they have it, as here Semper Iidem has given us an Instance,
that they Burn and Destroy such for Heretics as say, they have the Spirit of
God; he not believing that Paul had it, but says, It is an Error to affirm it:
and yet this work seems now to be justified up and down London streets, which
is the double Iniquity, and that which once many looked not to have seen, that
any being condemned and burned as Heretics, for saying, They had the Spirit of
God, that this should be justified now in these Glorious Days of Light; this
seems almost incredible, but that our Eyes behold it; and causes wonder in
many what will be the Effect of such a bad sign appearing, as a Justification
of putting to Death the Innocent for no other Cause, but in that he affirmed.
He had the Spirit of God. And by this we learn to know, how great the
Ignorance, Darkness and Blindness of the Church of Rome is, and deserves not
the name of a Church, if they be all of this mind, to condemn men, and Burn
them for Heretics, for saying, They have the Spirit of God, and then an
Hundred Years after justify the doing of it; to their shame and confusion let
this be rehearsed, who have themselves denied that they have the Spirit of God,
and Condemning and Destroying others for saying they have it. And this I leave
to the Consideration of all the Protestants, who must either deny that they
have the Spirit of God, or be Condemned, and [may be] Killed as Heretics for
affirming it, if so be the Church of Rome recover her desired Power and Pupose
in England. Its worthy to be minded while it may be (...), lest the time come
when it cannot be prevented.

And thus I have run through the main part of Semper Iidem, and chiefly hinted
at the principal Matters worthy to be taken notice of (though much more might
be said) but that it is my property in all Cases to be as brief as may be; for
that is the best for the Understanding to contain what is spoken or written:
only shall not forget William Pryn, who is stated in page 18. as one of our
Modern Phanaticks; I would not forget to mind him, I say, to answer his part,
and to clear himself if he can of the Aspertion of a Phanatick, by which term
he stands reviled, though Semper Iidem fawneth upon him, and flattereth with
him, and tells him, He is the only Person in this unhappy Parallel, who has
given Testimony of his Reconcilement: But what better is William Pryn for this
Flattery? I hope he is not yet reconciled to the Papists, and become one of
them; if he be, I desire he would let us know it; and if he be not, then Semper
Iidem accounts him a Phanatick: I shall say no further, but shall leave him to
answer for himself.

And now, last of all, for Conclusion, I have some CONSIDERATIONS to present to
the People of ENGLAND, and particularly to the People of LONDON, occasioned by
the Publication of Semper Iidem.
1. COnsider how the Ancient Martyrs, as Wickliff, Hawks and Cranmer, Latimer,
Ridley, with many more, who have been accounted by the Protestants themselves,
Famous for Piety and Faithfulness, and Honorably esteemed Innocent Martyrs,
for their Witness-bearing against the Romish Idolatries, and this for many
years in these Kingdoms; how, I say, they are now rendered Odious and
Contemptible, and Scorned and Slandered as Heretics, seditious factious
Blasphemers, and Phanaticks, by the Author of Semper Iidem; and this published
openly through the Nation, and up and down the Streets of London, and this
without rebuke from any in Authority, that we know of: I say, this deserves
serious Consideration, That the Faithful Martyrs in their Day, according to
their Knowledge, who were as the first Fathers of the Protestants-Church (so
called) and did lay down their Lives, and seal their Testimony with their Blood
against the Idolatry of the then present Times; and the Lives and Blood of
these Men now to be made void, and they that Martyred them justified, as doing
of Justice, and they now reputed Heretics and Phanaticks publicly; this ought
to be considered, both in the Cause why it is thus, and in the Effect of it, if
it be not restrained.

2. Consider, How that the generality of the People of England and London are
reputed, and stand under the present Reproach of being Phanaticks, even all the
People of England, I say, except the Papists, not only the Separatists from the
Church of England as Quakers, Anabaptists, Independents (so called) and the
rest, but the Presbyterians and Episcopals, and all of that way; and these
Professions stand in Reputation, and are accounted Phanaticks and Heretics,
even William Pryn himself; and this is manifest by the Author of Semper Iidem,
who has reviled and reproached all the People of England publicly and openly:
For, seeing the Ancient Martyrs, the Fathers (so accounted) of the Church of
England are villified as Phanaticks, Then must needs follow, that the Church of
England, even in the way of Episcopacy (as being in their own account the
Successors of the Martyrs in some things at least) are also Phanaticks and such
as Semper Iidem says, the Old Phanaticks were: for the men being reputed
Phanaticks, who were as the Fathers, then needs must the Children be the same;
and this deserves serious Consideration by the Protestants of England.

3. Consider how the very Cause it self of Protestants in this their long
Contest for these many years, with, and against the Church of Rome, is now
weakened, and even, as it seems, in a way of loss and decay, being now
reproached and held under public scorn in England by Semper Iidem; I say, the
very Cause of the Protestants is new struck at and beat against, and sought to
be destroyed, being already defamed and reviled, as appears by the discourse of
the nameless Author, who has rendered the Ancient Martyrs (that promoted as
much as they could the Protestants Cause against the Church of Rome, and dyed
for it, many of them sealing the Cause with their Blood (as Heretics,
Erroneous Rebels and Phanaticks, and has also rendered Fox, and his Acts and
Monuments, who has hitherto in England been counted a true Reporter and
Historian of the PROTESTANTS Sufferings, as invalid as possible, even that he
is a Liar, and his Chronology Untruths; and has justified Queen Mary and the
Papists, who put the Martyrs to Death. And these things considered duly and
justly, how is the Protestants Cause it self struck at, and weakened, and as it
were, the very Victory given to the Papists against the Protestants, in this
long Quarrel between them, ever since Henry the Eighth's days, and long before?

4. Consider, How the Papists Cause seems to be reviving in England, and how
bold the Members of the Church of ROME are of late days growing, as to appear
so publicly in Print, justifying their own Cause as good; as Queen Mary, and
the Papists in her days, in Martyring and Burning the Protestants, and
condemning the Martyrs of the Protestants as Heretics and Phanaticks: This, I
say, is great Boldness in the Papists, more than has been for this Hundred of
Years, and a Sign of a Reviving and Recovering of their Cause more than has
been for many Years, who durst not any of them appear so public, as the Author
of Semper Iidem has done, with that Boldness and Courage, to justify the
Papists Cause, and condemn the Protestants: For, if such a Discouse as Semper
Iidem had been brought forth and published in the days of Queen ELIZABETH,
which were Darker Days then these are, it is possible it would not have been
suffered to be cried up and down LONDON, but Restrained and Condemned for the
Fire: But now the Papists have taken Confidence to themselves, and are of
better Hopes than formerly, even that they shall have Fire and Faggot again,
and to Burn and Destroy such as differ and dissent from them, whom they may
call Heretics and Phanaticks. And this I observe from the spirit of Semper
Iidem.

3. Consider, The Nature, and Constitution, and Disposition of the spirit of
the Church of ROME, how that it is not Changed, but the self-same that ever it
was, viz. A spirit of Murder and Cruelty, that has Killed and Martyred such as
have Differed from them, and been Contrary-Minded in Religious Matters; and it
would work and bring to pass the same still, if it had its Power without
Limitation in ENGLAND; The Papists, I say, would Burn, Kill, and Torture such
as they judge Heretics, and all that cannot Bow, and Bend, and Conform to
their Ways, and Injunctions and Religion; this they would be at again in
England, if it were in their Power, as it was heretofore. I say, This ought to
be considered, even the Cruelty of that spirit, and what Danger there is in it
to give way to the Exaltation of that spirit, and to embrace it in the least,
whereby to give it occasion to get into the Power and Judgment Seat: for if it
does, then Fire and Faggot, and Killing and Burning about Religion, will openly
appear again; and this seems to be manifest by the Constitution of the spirit
of Semper Iidem, which may give Good and Wholesome Cautions, that the spirit of
the Papists is still a Cruel Spirit, and would Destroy all that Differ from
their Way, if they had Power; and that that spirit is not to be Hugged and
Embraced, nor set highest, lest the Effect of it proves Woeful to England, by
bringing forth again what it once did, in Renewing Fire and Faggot; for this is
the Disposition of the spirit of the Romish Church, as is apparent by Semper
Iidem.

6. Consider how Careful and Vigilant the People of England ought to be, to
wait and attend the Motions of the Spirit of the Church of Rome, lest it
insinuate it self into Authority, and get its intended Advantage and Purpose
against the Protestants and their Cause, and advance it self against them, and
promote its own Interest, and Destroy and overturn theirs: For, without all
Controversy, that same spirit is now at work to agitate its Desires, and
according to its old course, its Hatching and Contriving how to promote it
self, and destroy all that is contrary; it is Undermining and secretly Surmizing
its Opponents Overthrow, that it self may be exalted: For that spirit is
diligent in its way, to take the least Occasion for its Self-advantage, as is
manifest by Semper Iidem; and therefore the People of England ought also to be
Careful and Diligent in their Cause, to Preserve themselves and their Interest
from the defeat of the Church of ROME; and they ought to watch against that
spirit, to keep it in subjection under Authority and Command, and not to exalt
it into Command over them, lest they be subjected to the Idolatries, and
Oppressions and Persecutions of that spirit to their own Destruction, both of
Persons, Estates, and Religion; for that spirit will attempt always to Rule,
and if it Rule, then will follow consequently, An Utter Overthrow of the
Protestants PERSONS and CAUSE that will be the Effect of the Authority of it,
though it bear hand in hand in seeming Love and good Agreement with the
Protestants, till it has gained its desired end over them, which is, To
promote it self, and subdue by Burning and Cruel Tortures all that which is
contrary to it. Let the People of ENGLAND consider this Matter, now while it is
time, and be Watchful over the Motions of that spirit, and not put Confidence
in it too far, nor to commit too much Credit upon it, even as they love their
own Safety and Peace, which are concerned in this Case.

7. Consider, Into what a great Danger the Protestants and People of England
have run themselves, by ^^ecing from a less; for, by avoiding the Secta^^es (so
called) they have run themselves into the very Borders of Popery; and to escape
a Less Danger, they have exposed themselves to a far Greater: For the
Protestants cried out of the Sectaries, and were afraid their Church and
Religion should be overthrown by them, and made haste to Escape and flee from
the Danger, and in so doing they have (as it appears by Semper Iidem) run
themselves into a Danger far greater, Even to have their Religion, and Persons
and Estates Destroyed by Fire and Faggot, if the spirit that indicted Semper
Iidem has its desired End, which is grown Bold and Confident, more than
formerly: Thus, while the Protestants have sought to destroy the Sectaries, an
Enemy is appearing to Destroy them; and they have exposed themselves (if Popery
prevails) to an Enemy far more Cruel and Dectructive to both their Persons,
Estates and Religion, than ever the Sectaries would have been, had they
prevailed? And this is considerable to the Protestants, that they may lament
their case, who have run themseles into a far greater Danger of their own
Destruction to escape a less, and are in present Reproach by the Papists, and
exposed to Destruction if they prevail.

8. Consider, How Favorable the Church of ROME seems to grow of these late
days in these Kingdoms; and what Dignity she seems to have attained to,
besides of Times past; and what Liberty she enjoyes, more than many of the good
Subjects of England, which may as justly have the Privilege of Liberty in
their Exercise of Faith, and Worship, and Religion, as she can have: As for
instance, In Ireland, where the Papists have the Enjoyment of their Liberty to
Meet to hear Mass very frequently, and are not Restrained nor Prohibited; and
many of the English Inhabitants, known Faithful Protestants, are not admitted
the like Liberty, but their Meeting broken up, and they sent to Prison, and
Cruelly Persecuted for Meeting together, when the Papists are not meddled
withal for the same Cause; and thus their Cause seems more to be favored than
the Protestants, and they more Liberty in their Worship than many of the
English Protestants. And also, In and about London, upon search, you will find
Meetings of the Papists, large ones too, consisting of very many Foreigners of
other Lands, which have their Liberty of Worship and Profession of Religion;
and diverse of the Inhabitants of the City, who have been and are Known;
Upright, Honest and Just Persons, and are true Protestants, and faithful
Subjects of the Land, are not admitted to have their Meetings, but are haled
out of Meetings, Persecuted, and sent to Prison, and cruel Sufferings inflicted
upon them, for the Exercise of their Faith and Worship; whenas the Papists are
admitted their Liberty, without Persecution, in the same Cause for which many
good Protestants are Perfecuted, and not suffered to have their Liberty, even
in the Exercise of their Faith and Worship, and this is manifest to all People;
by which it is plain, how the Papists Cause is advancing, and the Protestants
Cause decaying in LONDON, and through ENGLAND; whenas the Papists, and that
Foreigners, have more Liberty in the Exercise of their Religion, then some
Protestants have that are Natives, and known to be good Subjects: And these
things deserve true and serious Confideration by all good Protestants; Alas
that this day should be seen! Many more Considerations might be asserted in
this Case, of the Papists Cause being as it were reviving; but these for
present are presented to the public View of all People: And blessed are they
that have an Ear to hear.

E. B.

THE CASE OF Free Liberty OF CONSCIENCE In the Exercise of FAITH and RELIGION,
Presented unto the KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT: And also Proved absolute
Needful and Requisite for them to Grant and Allow in these Kingdoms; by many
Considerations and Reasons unfolding the Woeful Effects and Ill Consequence
which will infallibly follow upon the contrary, to the Misery and Destruction
of these Nations, if the Free Exercise of Conscience to Godward be Limited
and Violently Restrained.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Lord God of Heaven and Earth (who is Mighty
and Powerful, and brings to pass whatsoever he will in the Kingdoms of this
World) so to suffer it to be accomplished, that Power and Authority is given
unto you, to exercise over these Kingdoms; And whereas the People of these
Nations (over whom your Authority is extended) are divided in their Judgments
in Matters Spiritual, and are of different Principles and Ways in relation to
Faith, and Worship, and Practices of Religion; and yet are all of them
Freeborn People, and Natives of these Kingdoms; and as such ought to possess
and enjoy their Lives, Liberties and Estates by the Just Laws of God and man;
And may not justly any of them be Destroyed by you, nor one sort of another, in
their Persons and Estates, by Death, Banishment, or other Persecutions, for and
because only of their Differences in Matters of Opinion and Judgment; nor
though they are contrary minded in Profession of Faith and Worship and
Religion, while they do walk Peaceably and Justly in their Conversations, under
the King's Authority, and do not make practice of their Religion to the
violating of the Government, nor to the Injury of other men's Persons or
Estates; but ought rather to be Defended and Protected by you in all their
Rights, both as Men and Christians, both in things Civil and Spiritual,
Notwithstanding their difference in matters Religious as aforesaid, they giving
proof of their peaceable and honest deportment toward the King and his
Government, and the people of these Kingdoms.

And therefore that due care may be had, as justly it ought to be by you, for
the peace and Prosperity and happiness of these Kingdoms, and that the just
Liberties both civil and Spiritual of all people therein, may be allowed and
maintained in all the Kings Dominions, and that unity and peace may be fully
established, and justice and Righteousness only brought forth in the Land, and
all persecution, Hatred, Contention and Rebellions may die and perish and never
more appear; And that all Christian people (though different in Judgment and
practices in matters of Faith and worship) may be protected to live a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty under this Government and that
indignation and vengeance may be diverted from these Lan^^, which seems to
threaten because of the contrary, and that blessings and peace man come, and
rest upon this people forever.

Therefore for these ends and causes, and in the Name of the Lord I do propound
unto you, and lay before you on the behalf of all the divided people of these
Kingdoms, That free Liberty of conscience in the exercise of Faith, Worship and
Religion to God-wards, may be allowed and maintained unto all, without any
imposition, violence or persecution exercised about the same, on the persons,
Estates, or Consciences of any in any relation to Religion, the Worship of God,
Church Government and Ministry; But that all Christian People may be left free
in all these Kingdoms, in the exercise of Conscience without being restrained
from, or compelled to any way of worship and practice of Religion, upon any
pains and penalties, and that every one may be admitted to worship God in that
way as his spirit persuades the heart, and may be defended in such their
profession of Religion, while they make not use of their Liberty to the
detrement of any other men's persons or Estates as aforesaid.

And let it not seem strange to you, why I appear in this manner and matter, at
such a season as this; for your very Happiness, prosperity and establishment,
or the contrary, depends hereupon, even in allowing and maintaining liberty
of Conscience in the exercise of Religion, or in limitting and forcing and
persecuting about the same, and this may appear if you justly consider these
things following.

1. The Lordship in and over conscience, and the exercise thereof in all
matters of Faith, and Worship, and duty to God-wards, is Gods alone only and
proper right and privilege, and he has reserved this power and Authority in
himself, and not committed the Lordship over Conscience, nor the exercise
thereof, in the cases of faith and worship, to any upon Earth, not to perscribe
and impose principles and practices of Faith and worship and Religion, by force
and violence on the persons and Consciences of men, but this belongs only to
God, even to work faith in the heart, and to convert to holiness, and to lead
and teach people by his Spirit in his worship, and to exercise their
Consciences in all his ways; For the Apostles themselves said, they had not
Dominion over the Faith of the Saints, 2 Cor. 1. 24. but the Lord alone. And
King Charles the first, said in his Meditations, page 91. of that Edition
Printed for R. Royston; I have often declared, how little I desire my Laws and
Scepter should entrench on God's Soveraignity, which is the only King of men's
Consciences, etc. So that to be Lord in CONSCIENCE, and Exerciser thereof in
all the Matters of God's Kingdom, is his Only Proper Right, and to him alone it
appertains.

2. And therefore consider, If ye do not allow Free Liberty of Conscience, and
give unto God the Lordship and Exercise thereof, in all Matters of Faith and
Worship to Him-wards; but do impose by Violence in forcing to, and restraining
from such and such Ways of Religion; than ye take Dominion over men's Faith,
which ye ought not to do; and ye entrench on God's Soveraignity, and usurp his
Authority, in exercising Lordship over the Conscience, in and over which Christ
is only King, as before recited; and ye ought not to take his right from him,
nor to exercise that Authority over ruens Faith and Consciences which only
appertains unto him, as his proper privilege; for in so doing how dangerous
effects may it bring forth? even ye may easily provoke the Lord to wrath
against you, and bring upon your selves sorrow and misery, if ye exercise
violence upon men's Consciences in and concerning Religious matters, contrary to
the Scriptures and the example of Primitive Christians who were persecuted for
their Conscience sake, but did never persecute nor punish any for that cause,
nor ever used violence about their Religion, as Charles the I. in his
meditations page 82. Nothing (said he) violent nor injurious can be religious,
etc.

3. Consider, if ye allow not the free exercise of Conscience in Spiritual
matters, but do take Dommion over men's faith, and impose by violence in the
cases of Conscience about Religion, and do not suffer the Lord to enjoy his
only right to be King, in the matters of his own Kingdom, then ye divert the
end of just rule and government among men, and pervert the end of Gods great
love and favor showed unto you in restoring of you to the place of Authority
and Judgment; for the end of just Government upon earth by Kings and Rulers
is, To exercise Justice, Truth, and Righteousness among men, and over the
outward man, and to be a praise to all that do well^ and walk uprightly, and to
be a terror to all transgressors, and them that do evil in their outward man,
and to keep the outward man in good order by just Judgment in all cases between
man and man; This is only the extent of your Authority over the outward man,
and to your Jurisdiction only this belongs, to judge in Truth and Righteousness
to make Laws and execute them between man and man, to preserve men's persons and
estates from the wrong one of another, but not at all to make Laws and execute
them between God and men's Consciences in the cases of his Spiritual Kingdom,
this power belongs to God, and he has not committed it to you to exercise; and
therefore, let justice, equity and mercy be exercised by you among men, and
over the outward man, and in all cases between man and man, but meddle not in
the Cases of men's faith to God, and their Consciences to him, but leave that
unto him alone whose right it is, for it is dangerous, and will bring woeful
effects if ye entrench on Gods Soveraignity, and if ye divert the proper end of
just Government, and of the Love of God in restoring you into Authority and
power.

4. Consider if ye allow not free Liberty of Conscience in the profession and
practice of spiritual things, but will compel by violence about Religion, then
this will inavoidably produce and bring forth cruel persecution in the
Kingdoms, imprisonment, banishment, and death, and all the evil effects of
persecution will fill the Nations; for though never so forceable impositions be
laid on the persons, estates, and consciences of men, for the cause of
difference in Judgment, and practices of Religion, and tocompel into
Conformity, yet it cannot be supposed that all will bow and conform to the
denying of that way which they are persuaded in Conscience to be right, and to
the embracing of what they cannot in Conscience believe is of God, but will
rather suffer the cruelest death, then conform to any thing contrary to light
and knowledge; and if free Liberty of Conscience be denied, many such must
needs be exposed to Persecution even to Death, though they may be Peaceable
People, and profitable Inhabitants of the Kingdoms, and in the things between
man and man, and in all matters Temporal pertaining to the King, may be Just,
and Righteous and Unreprovable; yet because of Difference in Judgment and
Opinion, exposed to be destroyed in person and estate; and such effects will
not be of honor nor saftey to these Nations if innocent and just men be
destroyed, and their relations ruined, only for their Conscience and Religion
sake, by persecution.

5. Consider, if ye do impose one way of worship by force, and persecute all
that are contrary-minded to prison and death, then how shall your Names and
memorial be left a reproach to Generations after you, in days to come; who
shall repute you cruel men and persecutors, and such as destroyed your people
for difference in Matters of Religion, and without just Cause; and thus will
your Names be a Curse, and not a Blessing, to your Children, and their Children
to all Ages, if that ye make Laws, and execute them to the Persecution and
Destruction of People for Conscience sake, and for difference in Religion; for
Persecution was never of God, nor ever justified in succeeding Ages; but
Persecutors always were rendered Tyrants, and Cruel in the Ages succeeding
them: For do not you condemn the Papists as Oppressors and Cruel Persecutors in
Queen Mary's days, for the Persecuting your Forefathers? And K. James said,
it was usually the Condition of Christians to be persecuted, but never to
Persecute, etc. in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, page 4. And indeed,
they are no true Christians that persecute for Matters of Conscience, and
Difference in Opinion; but the False Christians, that have a Form of Godliness,
but are without the Power, and out of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, who say,
Love your Enemies, and render not Evil for Evil; but overcome evil with good.

6. Consider, If ye do impose upon the Conscience, and persecute about
Religion, ye can never effect your End thereby, as to force all into a
Conformity and Uniformity to your Church and Religion; but though Death, and
Banishment, and the Loss of all be inflicted, yet such a thing cannot be
effected, neither is it the Way of Christ to promote his Church, and to convert
the Contrary-minded, by such means as Force and Violence exercised on men's
Persons and Estates; as King James said in his Speech in Parliament, 1609. That
it is a sure Rule in Divinity, That God never loves to plant his Church with
Violence and Blood: And if ye do persecute to the height in the Case of
Religion, ye will weaken your selves, and cause the Love and good Affection of
the People to die toward you, and the Persecuted will grow, and their Cause be
made Honorable, and many will be increased unto it; for it is usual in Ages,
That the Way and Religion which has been most persecuted, has most grown; and
thus it must infallibly be at this day, and ye can never effect your End-by
Persecution, nor promote your own Church, nor destroy all the Contrary-minded;
as a Privy-Counsellor to K. James the 5th of Scotland, advised in Counsel about
the year 1539. upon the Occasion of diversities of Opinions then in that
Kingdom, said he, It is an Error of State in a Prince, for an Opinion of Piety
to condemn to Death the Adherers to new Doctrines; for the Constancy and
Patience of those who voluntarily suffer all Temporal Miseries for Matters of
Faith, stir up Numbers, who at first, and before they had suffered were
ignorant of their Faith and Doctrine, not only to favor their Cause, but to
embrace their Opinions, Pity and Commiseration opening the Gates, and thus
their Faith is spread, and their Number daily increases, etc.

7. Consider, If that ye do not allow Liberty of Conscience, but do Impose, and
Persecute, as aforesaid; though some for your Fear, and Terror, and Force
against their Consciences should deny their Principle, and conform to your
Church, such ye cause to sin; For whatsoever is performed by Force, and not of
Faith is sin, as it is written, and such their sin will be laid to your Charge;
and such who cannot deny their Principles, and Conform, will be destroyed, and
their Death will be accounted against you in the Day of the Lord: And
therefore, if ye do not allow Liberty of Conscience, many grievous Evils will
infallibly follow, both to your selves and your People: And what Advantage of
Honor will such be to God and your Church, that are against their Consciences
and Light forced into a Conformity for Fear and Terror of men; it makes them
manifold more the Children of the Devil, and Time-Servers, and Hypocrites, and
destroys their Souls; and such can be no true Members of the true Church of
Christ, but are Reprobates, and a Dishonor to God and your Church.

8. Consider, if ye constrain and compel in matters of Religion, and do not
^low liberty of Conscience, it is unreasonable and unequal, and downright
contrary (...) the Holy and pure Law of God, which says, ye shall do into all
men, as ye would that men should do unto you, and thou shall love they
neighbor as thy self, and this is the fulfilling of the Law; But to be imposed
upon and persecuted for the case of Consciences, and for the matters of Worship
of God, your selves would not willingly be against your Light and Knowledge,
and then it is unequal and unjust, and contrary to the Law of God, for ye to do
the same to others, which your selves would not be done unto; And do not you to
this day cry out against the Papists in Queen Mary's days, and at this day in
other Nations, and condemn them as Tyrants and Oppressors, for Persecuting,
Killing, and Destroying the Protestants, for the matters of their Conscience
and difference in Opinion and Judgment? And will you do the same at this day as
they do to others, and follow their example of cruelty and Persecution, and
break the Law of God, and walk contrary to it, in doing to others what you
would not be done unto? And seeing you condemn the late foregoing Powers in
these Kingdoms for Tyrants and Usurpers, and Oppressors, for prohibiting your
way of Worship, and commanding the contrary, and disanulling so much as they
could your service Book and Ministry; how can you justly do the like to others,
as to force Ways of RELIGION upon them, and prohibit theirs, and command the
contrary? if you do it, ye condemn your selves by judging of others in the like
case.

9. Consider if ye do not allow liberty of Conscience, but impose Church
Government and Religion by pains and penalties, then ye will fill the Land with
Hypocrites, and force people into time-serving obedience, and into formal ways
of worship, some against their Consciences, and some in the ignorance thereof,
which is great abomination unto the Lord, and such will neither be true and
faithful in Church nor State, but will seek advantages against you (if they
are forced by violence in the cases of their Consciences) and it will beget
great contentions and hatred in the minds of men, and divide the^ into
heart-burnings one against another, and against you and your Government; for if
men become Hypocrites for your fear and terror and deny their professed
Principles and conform, they will be false-hearted, and Envious, and Malicious,
and attempt any thing to be freed from Bondage and Impositions of Conscience,
and their Hearts will be dis-engaged in Love and Affection to you-wards; and
this will be infallibly the Effect of Persecution for Conscience sake, as King
Charles the first says in his Meditations, A charitable Connivance and
Christian Toleration often dissipates their Strength when rougher Opposition
fortifies, and puts the Despised and Oppressed Party into such combinations, as
may most enable them to get a full revenge on those they count their
persecutors, etc.

10. Consider, if ye force Worship, and Religion, and cause men to conform
against their Judgments, how dangerous is this to destroy men's souls, and to
lead (...) even to destruction; For seeing ye affirm not the Infallibility of
your Worship and Religion, and yet will impose them, and so engage men's Souls
in depandancy for Salvation upon things and ways uncertain, and which GOD
gives not the Faith to believe in; I say how dangerous is this to ruin souls;
for in no way can the soul be secure but in the faith which God works in the
heart, in the Obedience of Infallible TRUTH; So ye (...) men's souls upon a
Rock, and it is unreasonable as before mentioned, that men should be forced
into the profession and Practice of uncertain and fallible Religion, and that
they should be forced by you into that which may be evil, for which not you
altogether, but themselves must bear the punishment in the Day of the Lord; and
except ye could affirm and prove the infallibility of your Church (which is
impossible) there is no Equity nor Right Reason for it, That you should impose
upon others any more than others should impose upon you; For, as King Charles
the First said in his Meditation, He desired not any should be further Subjects
unto him, then he and all of them might be subject unto God, etc.

11. Consider, if ye allow not liberty of Conscience, but persecute about the
same, ye walk in the way and after the example of some of the Heathen Rulers,
and of the false Christians, and shows that ye allow of the cruel persecutions
by the Church of Rome, and ye follow their example, who persecute unto death
such as they call Heretics, and if ye do persecute for matters of Conscience,
then ye allow the very deeds of the Heathens, who persecuted the Christians for
their Religion sake, and ye justify Papists in persecuting the Protestants;
and ye plainly demonstrate unto all the World by your works and fruits, that ye
are of Antichrist, if ye impose on men's Consciences by force in the matters of
Religion, and persecute good Conscience about the same; for it was the
Antichrist and the Beast, that first forced all to worship, and violently
engaged all into a conformity, and killed and persecuted all that would not
worship according to the Image, Rev. 13. as ye may read. And it was not Christ's
way, nor the practice of any of his primitive Churches to impose and force on
the persons and Consciences of men concerning their Church and Religion, to
cause all into a conformity thereunto, and destroy and persecute all that would
not; This was not the way of Christ and his Apostles in their days, but they
left Religion free, and said they were not lords over men's faith, nor lords
over Gods Heritage, neither did impose upon any in doubtful cases of
conscience, much less compel against men's Conciences; for the Apostle left the
practice of doubtful things, as every one was persuaded in his own mind, to do
or not to do, without imposing by force or directions of persecution about the
same; Therefore if ye do not allow free liberty of Conscience, ye are out of
the Doctrine Example of Christ and his Apostles, and follows the way and
example of Antichrist, Heathen Rulers, and cruel Papists, to your great
dishonor.

12. Consider, if ye allow not liberty of Conscience in the exercise of
Religion, but impose and persecute about the same; It must inavoidably tend to
destroy and expel Trading, Husbandry, and Merchandise in these Kingdoms, for a
great part of Trading and Husbandry depends upon such kind of persons whose
principles are for toleration in Religion, and hates persecution and violence
in that case, this ye will find true on examination; and if liberty of
Conscience be not allowed, such will be exposed to great afflictions, some to
imprisonment, and some to poverty, and some to flee into other Countries, to
the destruction of their Callings and Trading, and the hands and industriousnes
of such people will be weakened in these Kingdoms, if they cannot enjoy their
just liberty in temporal and spiritual cases, and the effects thereof will work
woefully in this very respect, even to dis-enable both the hearts and hands of
Husbandmen and Trades, and expose these Nations to want and poverty, and to
enrich their enemies.

13. Consider, If Liberty of Conscience be denied, and Persecution be
introduced about the same; all these, and many more woeful Consequences and
Effects will follow infallibly, to the ruin of these Kingdoms; even Wars, and
Bloodsheds, and Discontents, and Murmurings, and all evil things will be the
Product of the aforesaid Cause (viz.) Of denying Liberty of Conscience in
Religious Matters; for, in a word, it will tend to, and may effect the
Overthrow of you, and Ruin your Government and Authority; for the great and
mighty God of Heaven and Earth will be provoked against you, and his Wrath will
go out like a Devouring Flame upon you, if that ye limit the Holy One, and will
not suffer him to exercise his proper Right, in being King in men's Consciences,
to exercise them in all the Ways of his Worship, and Matters of his Kingdom,
but do oppress, impose and persecute about the same; this, I say, will
infallibly work the Kingdoms ruin, and expose you and your Government to the
Indignation of the Holy Lord God, who is tender of his Honor, and will not
give it to another; and he loves and effects the Cause of such, whose
Consciences are truly tender toward him; and though ye persecute such, and
seek to destroy them, and for a time exercise great Afflictio: and ^^^ressions
upon them, for the matters of their Conscience, yet the God of Heaven will
appear for such in his season, and deliver them, and avenge their ^ersecu^ors;
And therefore all ye Rulers consider, and lay these things to heart, lest ye
provoke the Lord against you, by destroying the People whom he regards, and
that not for evil doing, but for the Ca^es of Conscience, and because they
cannot relinquish their profession and principles of their Religion, and how
and conform in things against their Light and Knowledge.

14. Consider, If ye allow not Liberty of Conscience, what exceeding danger
(...) run your selves into, even to destroy just men and righteous, as
Heretics and erroneous, and may promote Heretics as Church Members, both
which are great Abominations in the Sight of God, and this Danger ye bring upon
your selves, for ye are not infallible Judges, who are Heretics, and who are
not; and therefore may easily proceed in that way to punish such as Heretics
that are not truly so, and except ye could affirm and Prove your possession of
the infallible spirit, ye can no way proceed justly and reasonably to deny
Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of Religion, nor punish and persecute any
in that case: but if ye do, ye do it in ignorance, and know not what ye do, and
may as soon destroy true Christians and Saints, as Heretics, for want of
infallible judgment to discern who are, and who are not; and this is a danger
ye ought to avoid by allowing the free exercise of Conscience, as the Lord
persuades every man's heart.

15. And lastly, also consider what a reproach you are under, If such whom ye
call Heretic, (and yet does not infallibly know that they are such) be
punished, and persecuted, and destroyed for their Religion sake, who are just
and upright men, in their Conversing between man and man, and unreprovable in
their dealings among men; (whether they err in judgment in spiritual knowledge,
or not err) and such as are Drunkards propha^e persons go at liberty, in their
stage-playing and gaming, and the like, even tolerated, and unpunished, and not
prohibited, whom all do know and can distinguish who such are when they appear,
this will render your Government to evil reputation, both in this present time
and in ages to come; and therefore consider it, if Drunkards, Gamesters, and
profane persons have more toleration and liberty in their ways of open
vanity, then sober temperate persons in the exercise of their Consciences in
Religion, which if any such do err in principle (which is not infallibly known
to you) it is only to their own hurt in the sight of God, and he only and not
you ought to punish them in that case; but profane persons as a forementioned
are easily judged by all to be such, and their error inpractise is hurtful to
the whole Kingdoms and pertains to you to punish; as Dr. Tailor now a Bishop in
Ireland has said, his words in this ^ase are worth observing, why are we so
zealous, says he, against those we call Heretics, and yet great friends, with
D^unkards, and Swearers, and Fornicators, and intemperate, and idle persons; I
am certain a Drunkard is as contr^oy to God, and lives as contrary to the Laws
of Christianity as a Heretic, and I am also sure that I Know what Drunkenness
is, but I am not sure that such an opinion is heresy, etc.

And these things I do in all meekness and due respect both to your places and
persons, present to your serious considerations, that ye may prevent these evil
effects that are so destructive unto you and these Kingdoms, which absolutely
must follow, upon not allowing free Liberty of Conscience in the Exercise of
Religion; if any shall object, That to tolerate and allow Liberty of Conscience
in Religion is inconsistent with the safety and peace of the King and these
Kingdoms; I shall be desirous to hear from wise men what such objections are,
stated by them, and wherein they say it is not Congruous with the Happiness and
Peace of these Nations, to grant and allow the Premises: And on such Occasion,
I should make clearly to appea^ the contrary; and that it is only consistant
with the Peace and Prosperity of these Kingdoms (considering them in their
present Estate) To grant and allow Free Liberty of Conscience, as aforesaid, in
the Exercise of Religion unto all Christian People.

O! Remember, ye Mighty Men of the Kingdom, That the Great and Mighty GOD takes
notice of all your Doings, and accordingly will he reward you in his Dreadful
Day, which is near to come upon all the World; and Woe unto the Wicked in that
Day. O! Remember that ye your selves not long since were a Suffering People,
and now you are raised up again; and therefore be not too zealous to afflict
others, especially for the Cases of their Consciences, in reference to their
Faith and Persuasions about Religion; but be Gentle, Meek and Long-suffering
toward all; for that is the way to make Peace, and preserve it with all men,
that will gain the Affections of the Contrary-minded; but Force and Rigor will
exasperate the more, and never truly reconcile differences among men: And make
no Laws contrary or different to the pure Law of God; but let pure Consciences
go free, without Force or Restraint in the Exercises of Religion, and let God
have his Prerogative and Lordship in the Exercise of Conscience; but let your
Authority be extended over the outward man, in the matters between man and man,
to preserve Peace and Right in all outward relation: And be Wise and Learned,
ye Rulers of the Earth, and kiss the Son, lest he be Angry, and ye perish; and
if his Wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are they that trust in him. This
is your Time and Day, happy are ye if it be given to you to do the Work that
God requires of you only.

The 26th of the third Month, 1661. By a Lover of Truth and Just Government,
E. B.

A DISCOVERY OF Divine Mysteries; Wherein is Unfolded Secret THINGS of the
KINGDOM of GOD:
Being a TESTIMONY 1. Concerning Life and Death, with their several Fruits and
^cts Distinguished. 2. Concerning the Mystery of God, and Godliness; and
concerning the Mystery of the Devil and Iniquity. 3. Concerning True Liberty of
Conscience, what it is in it self, and how obtained, And what the* True Guide
and Rule is of the Exercise of Conscience. 4. Concerning the Diversity of
Judgments in Religion, the Cause and Effect thereof, and the Means to bring to
Unity.


All which are Published for the Edification of such as desire to know the
TRUTH.

The PREFACE.
THE Light of the Day of GOD Almighty is arisen upon us in our Day, and the
Shinings-forth thereof is with great Clearness and Force, even as the Sun at
Noonday; and many are come to the Glorious Appearance thereof, and to walk in
its Light with much Ioyfulness; for, as the Wiseman said, The Light is Sweet,
and a Pleasant Thing it is for the Eye to behold the Son.

And so fully is our Morning-Son now appeared, that the Upright in Heart may
Walk, and not stumble; and the Poor in Spirit may Run in the Path of Life, and
not fall, For, indeed we may say; The NIGHT is spent, and the DAY is come;
therefore let us Walk in the Day, and put on the Armor of Light, as many as
are made the Children thereof.

And where the Light of this Son is arisen, and in whose Hearts it shines, it
cannot but give some Testimony through such an one, of its own Glory, Virtues,
and Excellency, to them that sit yet in Darkness, and in the (...) of
Corruption, that they also may (...) the same Light and Glory arise on their
Tabernacles: For it is the Property of this Spiritual Heavenly Light, to shine
forth out of Darkness, and to give Light to such as have long sat in Darkness,
that their Souls may live, and be refreshed with the Light of the Living. And
for this Cause do we Labor, and Spend, and ^re Spent; accounting nothing too
dear for us, that the Light of Truth may shine abroad, and guide the Upright in
the perfect Way, till the Elect be gathered into the Pasture of Eternal Life,
and the Son so elivated on the Firmament of Joy and Praises never to go down;
but the Saying fulfilled, There shall be no Night, but the Light of the Son
shall be as the Light of seven days.

These following Testimonies were written at diverse Times, as the Lord drew
forth my Spirit through the Motions of his Life in me; some of them some years
since; and being cast by among Bundles of Manuscripts, and now lately coming to
my sight, and looking them over, I have thought good to send them abroad, as
being of service to many: And this is the Occasion and End of my present
publishing these things. And to the Judgment of the Spirit of God in all the
Saints, do I commend my Labors, and myself to be approved.

Westmoreland the 25th of the 7th Month, 1661. Who am a Friend to all Men, E.
B.

A DISCOVERY of DIVINE MYSTERIES, etc.
CHAP. I.
A Testimony concerning Life and Death, and their several Fruits and Effects
Distinguished.

THere is only Life and Death, and there is but only Life and Death in the
whole Creation, that Rules and Reigns in, and among, and over all the
Children of Men; and all the Children of Men upon the Face of the Earth are
under the Government and Dominion of LIFE or of DEATH, in whatsoever they are,
and in whatsoever they do; and Life or Death has the Rule and Government in
every Creature in every Exercise, whether of Works or Words; and all people
upon the Earth are subject to the Government of one or the other, and bring
forth the Fruits and Works in obedience to Life or to Death, and shows them
forth in visible appearance.

Now these two (to wit) Life and Death, are contrary one to the other in
Being, in Nature, in Works and Fruits; and each of these are known and
distinguished the one from the other in Being, in Nature, in Fruits and
Effects, which diversely they bring forth in this World; and each of them has a
Kingdom and Government in himself, distinct from and contrary each to other;
and each of them have their several Subjects, which also are contrary in Birth
and Generation, in quality and kind, over which they Rule and Govern, and to
whom they give distinct Portions and Heirships in this World, and hereafter:
and where Life Rules and reigns, Death is held in Captivity and Bondage; and
where Death lives, the Life dies; and where one of these brings forth Fruit,
the other is Barren; for they agree not in one, but are in all things contrary;
and the Subjects of the one are always opposing and striving against the
Subjects of the other: And between Life and Death there is continual War and
Strife among the Creatures, who are the Subject of the one of them, in
whatsoever man is, and in what he does.

First, Concerning Life I will speak; Life was in the Beginning with God, and
is without descent; and God is Life in himself, without beginning or ending of
Time, Place, or Matter; and Life put forth it self out of its invisible Being
into Work and Action in the beginning of the World, and appeared in visible
Operations and Works, and brought forth all Creatures, and all things into
visible Appearances; and Life was the Author of all, the Beginning and
Foundation of all; and Life was and is that Being and Virtue of all things
that are, and it was the Joy and Delight of all things that it self brought
forth; for all Things and Creatures subsisted through it, and it gave Breath
and Life to all Creatures, and Life blessed them all, and in it were all
Creatures at Unity, being framed and brought into Visibility, and for the
Pleasure of Life, which was all in all in the Beginning; and there was a sweet
Concurrance and Harmony in the whole Creation, through the Power and Being of
Life in the midst of all Creatures, through which the whole Creation was made
and framed by the Eternal Word of Life, and through which they stood and did
remain (...) ^^^^sedness; and Life ruled and reigned in every Creature that was
brought forth, and was the Glory and Substance thereof: For Life was and is
that only begotten of the Father, the Son and Heir of the Everlasting Father,
his express Image and Brightness; being one with the Father, not separated or
divided from him.

And as for Death, it was not yet known, nor had it any place in the Creation;
it had yet received no Power, nor Kingdom, nor Government, neither was it in
being: But Life was all, over all, through all, and in all in the Beginning,
before Disobedience and Transgression entered to war against Life: But Life was
Prince, Ruler and, Governor, in and over all the Works of the Creator. And
Life in its being is God, and God is Life; and in its Government, and Fruits
and Effects is Purity, Righteousness, Truth, Holiness, Meekness, and all the
Works that are Just and Equal according to God, and like him, and which shows
him forth in the Creation; and this was, and it was thus in the Beginning,
before Death entered into the World, or had a kingdom. But it is written, The
Devil abode not in the Truth, but went out of the Truth; and he is the King of
Death, and has the Power of it; he went out of the Power of God, and out of
the Life, by which all things was made and created, and abode not in the Truth,
nor in the Life, to live, and act, and speak in that; but desired to be, and
became to be something of himself without God; and he spoke of himself, and
acted of himself, without the Power and Life, and also contrary to the Power
and Life of the Creator, being separated from it, and become a distinct Being
of himself; and then, having lost his State and first Condition, thus became an
Enemy to Life and Truth, and became the King of Death; and he was the first of
Death's Race, and he holds the Power of it unto this Day; he being gone out of
the Truth, and out of the Power and Life of God, and become a distinct Being
of himself, having a kingdom of his own to promote in Opposition to the Kingdom
of God: Then he drew Mankind out of the Power, and Truth, and Life, and
beguiled Eve and Adam, as you may read in the Scriptures; and they lost the
Life and Power, (even all Feeling of it, and Comfort in it) by which they were
Created and made, and they also transgressed and acted contrary to the Life and
Power, and acted of themselves, and spoke of themselves, without the Power and
Life of their Creator, being separated from it; and were, and did something of
themselves, without God, the Creator: and then the Power and Life cast them out
of all Peace, Joy and Happiness into the Earth, and into Death; and Death
became the King and Prince over Mankind: and they had no more possession of
Life, nor. Blessedness by it in their separated Estate, neither did it any
longer reign in them; but they having transgressed against the Life, and acted
of themselves, and spoken of themselves, without the Leadings and Movings of
the Life, this was their Transgression; They went out of the Power and Life in
all Motions and Actions, and then Life drove them forth of its good Pleasure
into the Earth, separate from its Virtues and Peace, and into Death, which is
contrary to it self, to live in Anguish and Sorrow: And so, when the Devil was
gone out of the Truth, and had led Mankind out of the Truth, and out of Life,
and thereby they were all separated from Life, and drove out from God, out of
his Pleasure into his Wrath: Then became Death to have a Being in Mankind, and
great Authority, and not before; and then Death began his Kingdom in the World,
and over it, and he set up his Rule and Government in, and among, and over all
the Children of Men.

And so, from Transgression came Death, that was its Beginning, Man having
Transgressed against the Life that brought him forth; and being separated from
Life, then Death took place, and its kingdom was established over the World,
and in all the Children of Men, in opposition to Life, and its Government and
Kingdom; and Death reigns from Adam, (so says the Scripture) and the Life was
transgressed against, and so provoked into an absence, and to withdraw it self
into invisibility from the enjoyment of Mankind, that it should not be felt nor
perceived of Him to comfort him; and then the whole body of Death came upon
Man, to load his Conscience and vex his Soul: and Death and only Death has a
pre-eminence over all in Transgression, and is established into a Kingdom, over
sinful Subjects, who are under its Command; and has its Rule and Government,
and brings forth its Works and Fruits in Mankind, contrary to Life, and in
opposition to it, and to its Kingdom and Power, and opposes the Kingdom and
Power of Life (the Creature) and in its Nature, and all its Fruits and Works,
it is contrary and opposite to Life and its Works and Fruits; and through Death
is the whole Creation in its exercise by man perverted from the right use and
end ordained of God; and out of Death proceeds all evil, as Lying, Swearing,
Drunkenness and Whoredom, Pride, Strife, and every evil work and word: These
things are the Fruits and Works of Death; and Death governs the Children of men
in the practice of all these things; and in transgression Death lives, and
acts, and speaks through Men and Women; and Death rules in them, and has
perverted them in all their ways; for they have given their Power to it, and
it wholly Captivates them, and is established over them, and has the dominion
in them, and Life is swallowed up of it: And this Kingdom of Death opposes
God, and the Kingdom of Life, and exalts it self against Life, and has its
operation in the Creature, in all manner of unrighteousness, bringing forth
daily such words, works, fruits and effects, as does oppress and is a burden
unto the Life, and unto the God of Life; and Death and its Kingdom does
continually war and strive against Life and its Kingdom, and the one opposes
the other through all Generation since the beginning: for the Devil is the King
of Death, and has the Power of i^, and he is King in its Government, and Ruler
in its Dominion; and this is the state of all the Children of men in
Transgression, Death rules, and the Kingdom of Death reigns in them, and it
brings forth cursed fruits through them, and they are subjects thereof, and in
obedience thereunto in all things: And through Death, which has Power over
them, are they separated from Life, and have no part nor portion therein,
because of Death that has separated them, and veiled and clouded them, and
loads their Consciences.

But now the Promise of the God of Life, is to restore Mankind out of Death and
Darkness, and that Life shall reign again, and subdue Death, and destroy it and
its Kingdom, and swallow it up; and this is the Promise of the Father: For in
Transgression Death has subdued Life, and overcome it in Mankind; But in the
Restoration, Life shall swallow up Death, and subdue it, and overcome it: and
this comes to pass through the rising again of Life from under Death which has
held it in bondage; and Life that made the World in the beginning, and gave to
all things Life and substance, as I have said; which Life, in its measure in
Mankind has been overcome and swallowed up in Transgression: That Life shall
appear, though in another manner of appearance than it did in the beginning;
for then it appeared freely of it self without opposition, and brought forth
the first Creation; But now it does appear, through great opposition, and
through all that does oppose it in this second Creation, when Life comes again
to reign over Death, and swallow up and overcome and subdue it; and who comes
to witness this (the new Creation) they know Life appearing through opposition,
and through the destroying of Death, and all its works and fruits: for CHRIST
is the Life, and he is the Seed of the W^, which bruiseth the Serpents head,
who has the Power of Death; Life bruiseth his Head, breaks his Government,
and destroys his Works, as it appears and rises in the Creature; and Death
and its Works opposes Life and its manifestation and appearance, and gainsayes
it, and often quenches it i^ its app^.

Now the first Appearance of Life in the Creature, it convinces and reproves
the works of Death, and the words that proceed from Death, which are
unrighteous words, and unrighteous works; and Life when it rises, it reproves
them and condemns them: and though Death does oppose and gainsay the Operation
of Life; yet Life works through, and overcomes, subdueth, and swalloweth up
Death, and destroys all its works in the second Creation; and Life again comes
to take possession of the Creature, which it made in the beginning; and Life
comes to reign again, whose Right it is to reign; for, by it the Creature,
Mankind, and all Creatures were in the beginning formed and brought forth, and
therefore it is its Right to reign, and to have the dominion over the works of
its own hands, whom since the beginning in Transgression, the Devil and Death,
and his seat of Government has had the possession of; and CHRIST the Power of
God, and the Life, has been as it were dispossessed: and thus the first
Creation has been defaced, and lost its Glory; and it has been corrupted and
degenerated quite from the perfect state as it was created in; and Mankind has
been servant to another Power, and led captive by another Power than the Power
that made him, and another Government has been established over him, and
another Law has exercised him than the Government and Law of the Creator, (to
wit) the Power, and Government and Law of Death have had the Rule, Government
and Exercise of Man, and of the old Creation, and hereby all things have been
diverted from their proper and perfect place and service, to which they were
ordained in the beginning, by reason of Transgression and the reigning of
Death; and Man has been held in Captivity, and in sore bondage, and subject to
all misery and distress, deprived of unity with his Maker, and deprived of the
comfortable use and benefit of the Creation; so that of all Creatures he has
been the most miserable, being held in Bondage and Captivity under the power of
Death, which has ruled and reigned over him, and in him, being always subject
to Death, and subject to the Curse and Anger of the LORD: and subject to
doubtings and fears, and subject to continual misery and sorrow; and all this
is, because Death has reigned, and had dominion; even that which at first in
the beginning of Transgression betrayed him of the Life and Fellowship with
God, that got possession it self to reign, and to have the Power, which ever
since has reigned, and always does till the appearance of the Life again,
which does appear in the Creature for this end, to overcome and subdue Death,
and destroy his works, that it self may reign, and free the Creation from its
degeneration and corruption, and free Mankind from his bondage and captivity,
and from his misery and all his trouble, which is come upon him by reason of
Death.

And this came to pass in the New Creation when Life is born again, to rule and
reign again, and to swallow up Death, and to subdue it wholly, and its Kingdom
and Government. And then Man again is become a Son of GOD, an Heir of
Salvation, and no more Death reigns in him, nor has Power over him, when he is
restored out of Transgression; then as Death has reigned and had power in
Transgression, Life shall so reign in and over the Creature, in the New
Creation, when that is brought forth, as Death has reigned in the Old Creation
in Transgression and Disobedience: And Life will arise to reign and rule over
all, and in all, though it be through great opposition; the Body of Death shall
be put off, and the Government of Death shall be subdued, and all the Works
Fruits and Effects of Death shall be destroyed and done away, and its place
shall no more be found, so as to bring forth Fruit; for its sting shall be
taken away, and shall no more wound, nor pierce, nor hurt the Creature: For the
sting of Death is Sin, and that has wounded and hurt the Creature; and when
this comes to pass, then there is glory and rejoicing over all, for Life has
swallowed up Death, and overcome it, and the cause of Sorrow is removed and
taken away, and the Kingdom of Life is established in the Creature, and is set
upon the top of Death's Kingdom, and keeps it under; and if there be but a
Motion of Death, that would spring up, or appear in the Creature, Life judges
it down, and condemns it. And this Kingd^^ is Righteousness, Joy and Peace,
full of Justice, Righteousness and Equity, and there is nothing in it that does
defile or destroy, or bring Sorrow or Misery; but Life rules over all that, and
subdues the Cause thereof, and removes every thing that would imbondage or
captivate the Creature in Evil. And this Kingdom is not of this World, but from
Heaven, and Heavenly; and the Birth Immortal is Heir thereof, which receives
the Crown, and the Kingdom of Eternal Life.

Now the Kingdom of Death is of this World, which is defiled and degenerated;
Gain was a Subject of this kingdom; and Esau, that was a Reprobate; and Judas,
that betrayed the Life; and all the Ungodly, and Generation of the Wicked since
the beginning, they were all of the kingdom of Death, and the kingdom of Death
ruled in them, and brought forth its works through them, and its exercise in
their hearts and in their lives: and through its power they opposed and
gainsay'd the Life, and they fought against the Kingdom of Life and
Righteousness; and such were the Pharisees, who put Christ to death, who is the
Life. Death reigned over all these, and they were of the stock of Death, and
they were of this World, and had their Conversation below, in the earthly
things; and knew not the Life, nor its Government, but were Strangers to it,
and Enemies to it, as all are at this day, who are Transgressors against the
Life; and all such are subject to the Curse, to Sorrow and Misery, and the
Anger of the Lord; but who come to feel the Life, and the Obedience to it
again, Death is destroyed through Death; for, through the death of Death, Death
comes to be destroyed, and no other way, which the Life works; and the Life
works through Death, and overcomes it, and swallows it up; and this is the
second Creation, and the new Creation, where Life raigns over all, and does
possess the Creature, as it did before transgression. The Life is the Light,
and the Life is the Law, and Life lives, moves and acts the Creature; and
Christ, who is the Life, becomes all in all; and Blessed are they who wait for
this, and do witness it, to such am I known in these things, where the kingdom
of Death is overcome and swallowed up of Life.

CHAP. II.
A Testimony concerning the Mystery of God, and Godliness; and concerning the
Mystery of the Devil, and Iniquity.

THere are two great Mysteries in their invisible Being, and in manifestation
to us in the world (that is to say). The Mystery of God, and Godliness; and,
The Mystery of the Devil, and Iniquity: These are two great Mysteries, which do
discover and act themselves forth in, and among, and through the Children of
men in this Creation; and these two Mysteries are contrary one to the other, in
Being, in Nature, in Works, in Fruits and effects; and they are in strife one
against the other, the one continually opposing the other, and striving for the
Creature, Mankind, to be the Instrument to display themselves through in
visible Appearance; for the Creature, Man and Woman is a Vessel wherein these
Mysteries are contained, and whereby these Mysteries do show themselves forth
in the world; and all the Sons of Adam upon the Face of the Earth are possessed
with and of one of these (that is to say) The Mystory of God, or the Mystery of
the Devil, do manifest themselves forth through every Man and Woman, and
through all the Sons of Adam upon the Face of the Earth the Works, Fruits and
Effects of one of these are brought forth.

And as for the Mystery of God, it is Infinite and Eternal in Being, and which
was, and is, and is to come, without Beginning or End; and this Mystery
reaches it self forth more or less in every Creature upon the Face of the
whole Earth, and is the Life, and Being and Substance of all things; and all
Creatures upon the face of the earth, whether movable or inmovable, is a
Partaker of this Mystery, and this Mystery is veiled and hidden secretly in and
under all things that have a Being; and whatsoever the Creature brought forth
even in the greatest appearance thereof; and its goodness and virtue, in what
form or appearance foever, is but the Production, or the, manifestation of the
Mystery [God] for the life of every Creature, and the virtue of every Creature
is a Mystery and proceeds out of the great Mystery of God, who is Life it
self, Virtue it self, Goodness it self, and Being it self; and is the Goodness,
and the Virtue, and the Life and Being of all Things and Creatures upon the
face of the Earth; so that every thing that has a being, even the Wicked and
Ungodly, are not without this Mystery in some manner or other; for by Him every
Creature is, and has its first being.

But now more perfectly does the Mystery of God appear in his Servants, and in
his Children who are born of Him, and begotten by Him, and they have the sense
and feeling, and understanding of this Mystery more than any other Creatures;
and this is their Glory and Crown above all other Creatures upon the face of
the whole Earth; for they only, I say, who are redeemed to God, and born of the
Spirit, they are them that have the sense, and feeling, and understanding of
this Mystery, even of the Mystery of God, infinite, endless and eternal. And
though this Mystery he hid in all other Creatures, and manifesting it self
through them, yet this Mystery is not known to them, nor understood of them,
nor of any other Creature (I say) besides the Children of the Lord, in whom
this Mystery is only revealed; for they are them through whom more manifestly
and plainly this Mystery is made manifest, and to them revealed, and known, and
felt in their Understandings; and they have the enjoyment thereof who know God,
and are known of him, and are entered into Covenant with him, into Everlasting
Covenant of Joy and Peace; and through them does this Mystery display it self,
even in the sight of all Creatures, in works of Righteousness, of Purity, of
Goodness, of Mercy, of Truth, of Peace, and of Wisdom, in their exercise of all
things: and in this manner, and by these fruits and effects does the Mystery of
God show itself forth through his Children, in whom the Mystery is opened, that
is hid in all other Creatures: And this is the Crown of the Children of the
Lord, that are born from Heaven, and from above, that the Mystery of God is
felt and enjoyed by them, and more manifest to them than in any other
Creatures: And to know this Mystery of God is Life Eternal; and to have the
understanding of his Leadings, of his Judgment, of his Mercy, and of his
Counsel, and of the operation of his Power; to feel this in the Understanding,
this is Joy and a Crown of Glory, where the Mystery of God is revealed in
Spirit.

And as for the Mystery of the Devil, it is darkness, and in darkness; and it
shows it self forth in the Ungodly, and in the sons of Adam in transgression;
and in such only does this Mystery of Iniquity, and of Sin, and of the Devil
display it self forth in all unrighteousness and sin, and that which is
contrary to the Creator in works, words and thoughts; All these things are the
manifestation of the Mystery of the Devil, and its fruits and effects, who is
out of the Truth, who is veiled and covered, and hidden in the hearts of the
Ungodly, and in the hearts of the sons of Adam in the Fall: This Mystery was
not from the beginning, as the other, but when the Devil went out of the Truth,
and had led Man's mind out of the Truth and taken possession of the heart of
Man, and become Ruler and Lord there, having gained Authority over Man, through
Man's obedience to him, then began this Mystery to discover it self, and act it
self through the Creature; and this was since the beginning: And though no
other Creature be an Agent to manifest forth this Mystery but Man, yet Man in
his exercise of all Creatures, or all Creatures through the exercise of Man in
transgression, there is showed forth this Mystery of Iniquity, that secretly
lurks in the spirits of ungodly men; which spirit of unrighteousness, the
Mystery of the Devil, leads Man into all sinfulness, of drunkenness and
uncleanness, and such like, and has polluted the Earth, and defiled all
Creatures through Man's exercise in them: and this is truly an appearance of
the Mystery of the Devil; yet he has other Appearances, and other makings-out
of his Mystery (to wit) in a way of seeming Righteousness, and seeming
Holiness, and seeming Purity; and these show the Mystery of Unrighteousness,
the Mystery of the Devil, who deceives the Soul that is Immortal of the
enjoyment of the Creator, who is the desire of the Immortal Soul; and so
through a form; and likeness, and appearance of a thing is the Soul Immortal
deceived and beguiled with that which has appearances in it, but no Life nor
Substance.

And though the Mystery of Iniquity be but one in it self, yet it manifests it
self diverse ways; sometimes in open Profaneness and Wickedness, and sometimes
in seeming Righteousness and Holiness, and in a form of Religion without power:
But the Lord is arisen to confound the Mystery of the Devil and Iniquity, and
will discover it, and destroy it; for it is the Mystery of Iniquity that
works in the Children of Disobedience, that are Strangers to God; and through
the operation of this Mystery are People kept at a distance from the Lord, and
out of Unity and Covenant with him: and this Mystery of Iniquity works
hiddenly, not known but in the Eternal Eye, which sees through the spirit of
Creatures, and comprehends and fathometh over the nature of things, and can
judge beyond the appearance, even in the ground, before the action appears:
for while people are professing and acting Holiness and Righteousness visibly,
and yet not changed by the Power of the Lord, nor renewed in nature, mind and
spirit, from the first Adam to the second, the Righteousness and Holiness,
brought forth in that state, is but the acting of the Mystery of Iniquity, and
the Woolf putting on the Sheep's-Clothing; and this God will judge, and all
Appearances without Life, and all Shows without Substance; all this will the
Lord judge and confound, and bring to naught; for it is but the working of the
Mystery of the Devil, who is out of the Truth.

And this Mystery has more abounded since the days of the Apostles, then in
Ages since the Beginning, inasmuch as this Mystery has operated and displayed
it self forth in a higher appearance and fairer show than ever it did before;
for this Mystery has sat in the Temple of God, and showed it self to be God,
and been worshipped above all that is called God; this Mystery of Iniquity, the
Man of Sin, which has put on the Sheep's-Clothing, and shows it self as the
Sheep of Christ, and as Christians, and Churches; all which has been for many
Ages the Manifestation of this Mystery, while that the Mystery of the Devil
has not been destroyed: but now is the Lord arisen, who will discover and
destroy this Mystery, and save the Creature; and in the destruction of this
Mystery, is the other Mystery revealed, (to wit) The Mystery of God and of
Christ; and that is the Mystery of Christ, that destroys the Mystery of
Antichrist and of the Devil: And now the Sons and Daughters of the Lord
Almighty are coming into this Mystery of God Eternal, who is blessed for ever;
and all that is coming to be overthrown which does oppose it, and gainsay it;
and there is nothing that can destroy or discover this Mystery, but the
appearance of Christ the Son of God; for it is he that does discover and
destroy the Mystery of Iniquity by the Spirit of his Mouth, and by the
Brightness of his Coming; and this are people coming to. The Man of Sin is to
be thrown down, and the Man of Righteousness, the Manof God is revealed, and
Sons and Daughters shall show him forth in the World; and the Mystery of God
shall show it self forth over the World, and in Nations; and blessed are all
they that come to the opening of this Mystery of God, which is the Mystery of
Life and Eternal Salvation.

CHAP. III.
A Testimony Concerning true Liberty of Conscience, what it is in itself, and
how it is obtained; and what the true Guide and Rule is of the Exercise of
Conscience.

THis is my Testimony, as I have received from the Lord; true Liberty of
Conscience is, Liberty and Freedom of the Conscience from the Bondage of Sin,
and all Transgression past and present; and from whatsoever has been or is a
Burden or Oppression upon the Conscience, whether inward or outward; the
Conscience, I say, is at Liberty when it is freed from the Burden of the Guilt
of Sin past, and from the present Temptation unto Sin: And till this is
witnessed, there is no true Liberty of Conscience; for every thing whatsoever,
which is Sin and Transgression against God, in Works or Words, brought forth by
the Creature, is Bondage and a Burden, and oppresses the pure Conscience: and
therefore perfect Freedom from all Sin and Transgression is, Where the Body of
Sin and Death is put off, and where the Evil is crucified, and the guilt of it
taken away, and where the Conscience is truly exercised by the Spirit of
Christ, which leads into all Truth, and preserves from all Evil; then is the
Conscience at Liberty, and this is true Liberty of Conscience, when this is
brought forth in the Creature: For, where Sin is brought forth, and
Transgression lived in, there the Conscience is bound, and the Cord of Iniquity
imbondageth the Conscience, and it has not its Liberty in the Service of God,
nor from the Service of the Devil, because the Spirit of God does not exercise
it; but the spirit of Unrighteousness leads the Mind into the Lusts of this
World, into Lying, Swearing, Pride, Drunkenness, Hypocrisy and Idolatry; and
the guilt of these things burdeneth and presses down, and is a Bondage upon
the Conscience: And where the Conscience is bound by Unrighteousness within,
and by the spirit of the World, which leads contrary to the Lord; there is no
Power of Man without can set that Conscience free, or give Liberty to it;
because the Cord of Iniquity has bound it within, and the Burden of guilt is
upon it, and Conscience lies under Bondage, unexercised with the Spirit of God,
which is free, and sets free the Conscience in the practice of all Good, and
from the Power and Captivity of all Evil.

Therefore, before true Liberty of Conscience be witnessed, or any have true
Liberty in Conscience, Iniquity must be purged out, and Sin crucified, and the
Body of Death put off, and guilt washed away, and the Anointing received that
leads into all Truth, and the Blood of Christ (the Seed) felt, that
sprinkleeth the Conscience from all Sin and Works of the Flesh, and washes
away all that which staineth and defiles the Conscience; and then the pure
Conscience has its true Liberty from the Bondage of all Evil, and from the
guilt thereof, and in the Exercise of all good; and this is true Liberty of
Conscience, and thus it is attained, and by no other Way nor Means, than by the
Sword of the Spirit of God, which cutteth down the contrary: And where
Conscience is thus freed within by the Power of the Lord, and delivered from
the bondage of Evil, and from the burden of all guilt, and exercised in all
good by the Spirit of God; Then nothing without, nor any Power of Man, which
may work against such by Persecution, and act in opposition to such whose
Consciences are thus freed, can imbondage the Conscience to God-wards, or bring
it under a burden to God-wards, I say for it is not altogether Bondage of
Conscience, or the Burden or Oppression upon his Conscience, that is set free,
as aforesaid, though he is outwardly persecuted by men; for that does but
hinder the Exercise of his Conscience to Manwards, but not to God-wards; for
there his Conscience is free, in Joy and Peace, though, by reason of
Persecution, he cannot have the Exercise of it to men: I say, Though such be
put in Prison, Banished, or whatsoever Suffering be laid upon them, by any Men,
or Laws without, yet their pure Conscience is Free, and at Liberty in it self
to God-wards, through all this, and over it all; for the Lord has set them
free from all that Bondage and Guilt of Iniquity, which has been a Bondage
upon their Consciences within: And whether they do Suffer, or have Freedom or
Captivity in their Persons from men, yet is their pure Conscience at Liberty to
God-wards, and in perfect freedom in it self, and to themselves, though for the
Name of Christ and his Truth they be persecuted, and all Evil done against them
by evil men, and the exercise of their pure Consciences prevented, as to
Man-wards.

For that which defiles the Conscience, does bring it under Bondage; but that
which keeps it pure and free from pollution, that keeps it in Liberty, and in
perfect freedom to God, over all Persecution, and Evil Men, and Unjust Laws,
which would exercise dominion in and over the Consciences of the Saints, and
bring them into Captivity, as sometimes their Persons are by Evil Laws and
Persecutors.

But who stand in the Power of the Lord, and in the exercise of the Spirit of
God, which freeth the Conscience in their own particulars (as I have said) does
not come into Bondage in Conscience to God-wards by Laws or Men, but enjoys
Freedom and Liberty therein, as much in Sufferings and in Persecutions under
all the Cruelty of Men, as in doing and practices when they are not persecuted;
for in Sufferings the Conscience is exercised, and has its Liberty in Patience
and Forbearance; and at Liberty of Persons in practice it is exercised, and
has its Liberty in doing and performing whatsoever the Spirit of the Father
moves and leads unto.

And thus, where God has freed the Conscience, and it is Free and at Liberty
in him and to him, nothing without can bring it into Bondage or Captivity; but
in all Conditions and in all Exercises, whether doing or suffering, the pure
Conscience is in Liberty in it self, and in perfect Freedom in God, through
all, over all, and beyond all.

But now there has been a great Cry among many (that have professed
Righteousness and Religion) For Freedom of Conscience, and begging and craving
from the Powers of the Earth to Tolerate Liberty of Conscience, and that they
might have the Liberty of their Conscience in Religion: And thus some have been
looking too much without for Liberty of Conscience from Men, and from Powers
without them, before their Consciences were set free by the Lord within, and
the Bond of Iniquity broken, and that Burden of Iniquity and Guilt done away,
which has been a Burden and Bondage upon the Conscience: For, as I have said,
No Man nor Powers of the Earth can truly Free or give Liberty to the
Conscience, which is bound by the Cord of Iniquity within. But it is evident,
The Cry for Liberty has not been so much for the Exercise of Conscience, truly
so, as for the freedom each one of their Sect, and for their Liberty in the
practice of their own Worship and Conformity; and thereupon have diverse men of
diverse Sects sought to the Powers of Men and of the Earth, to grant them
Liberty of their Consciences; whenas it has been rather for the Freedom to and
Defense of their Sect, and of their Practices in their Worship, than for
Liberty of Conscience, truly so; for while they have cried for Liberty from
without, yet Sin, and Iniquity, and Transgression have lain upon their
Conscience within; and they have sought from Men for the Liberty of their Sect,
to practice their own Worship, which they have called Liberty of Conscience:
And to this Intent by some has been the Cry for Liberty of Conscience, that
their Sect and their own Ways of Worship might be defended from the Violence
of others, who have opposed their Practices and Worships: for People of diverse
Ways of Worship, and of diverse Sects, have all been at Strife one with
another, and divided one against another, and yet all professed good
Conscience, and cried for Liberty thereof from the Powers of the Earth; not but
that the Powers of the Earth ought to grant free Liberty of Conscience in the
Exercise of every Sect of Religion, and to suffer all to profess and practice
their Religion, while they walk justly and Peaceably in a Land: But here has
lodged the Deceit and Deceivableness of the spirit of Satan in the Hearts of
men, from the least to the greatest of all those diverse false Sects and
Worshippers; they have therein zealously gone on, and pleaded for their Sects
and Worship, though never so gross or dark, and contrary to Truth, under the
denomination of Freedom and Liberty of good Conscience; and the very Title and
Name has been the Color, and deceived many, while a false Worship and false
Sects have gone under the Name of Liberty of good Conscience; and Thousands
have been deceived, and blindly led into such a false Sect, and into such a
Profession, to act and perform with great Zeal false Practices in a false
Worship, falsely supposing it to be out of a good Conscience, and that they have
acted in the Liberty thereof; yea, and many may suffer great and grievous
things, and some the loss of their Lives, for the very Practice of false things
and false worships in a false Sect, and yet under the name of good Conscience,
and for Liberty of Conscience, as they may profess and believe.

But this may seem strange to be spoken to some, who may enquire how it comes
to pass, and how this may be, That many may suffer great and grievous
Cruelties, and some the loss of their Lives, for the Practice of false Things,
and the Exercise of false Worships, which they may suppose to be out of good
Conscience, and for good Conscience sake; whereas it is not truly so, nor
rightly so: But how happens this, may some say?

I Answer. This comes to pass after this manner; Because Conscience is made of
that, and of the Things and Performances which God requires not; and so there
is a great Zeal in the doing and performing of such a Practice and such a
Worship, whenas the Lord does not require these things at their Hands; and this
is, because the Mind, and Heart, and Conscience is dark, and not truly informed
nor guided with the Spirit of Truth, and of the Father; but a false spirit
rules and leads the Conscience, and it is not exercised with the Spirit of
the Father, that leads into all Truth. So I do acknowledge, that Conscience
may be misled, and mis-guided, and misinformed; and Conscience may be made of
doing such and such things which the Lord does not require; and there may be a
Fear not taught of the Lord, nor received by the sense of his Presence, but
only received into the Heart by the Precepts of men, Example of others, Custom
of Times, or the like: and here the Conscience being not truly informed, nor
guided by the Spirit of the Lord, there is a false Fear and Zealousness in the
performing of such things which the Lord does not require, nor his Spirit lead
into the practice of; but only the Traditions and Precepts of men, has placed
a false Law and Commandment, which requires a false Obedience; which many,
whose Understandings are blinded, and being without true Knowledge, they
zealously perform and practice as the Worship of God, thinking themselves bound
in Conscience to practice such things, and not to leave them undone; whenas the
Lord and his Righteous Spirit leads not to them, nor yet his Just Law does
require the doing thereof; but only a false Law and Commandment is received by
Precepts and Traditions of men, or from looking upon the Practice of others: By
such means as this there is a false Fear in a blind mis-guided Conscience, and
a Zeal without true Knowledge.

And thus it was amongst the Jews in the Prophets days, They Sacrificed their
Children, and cut themselves, and caused their Children to pass through the
Fire, and did many things zealously; whenas says the Lord, Who has required
these things at your hands? for they come not into my heart. And Paul
witnesses the same of the Jews in his days, and bore them record, that they
had a Zeal, but it was not according to True Knowledge. And thus the Jews were
zealously performing that, as their Duty, and as out of a Good Conscience,
which the Lord required not at their hands; and so they made Conscience to do
that, which the Lord required not, and their Consciences were misled, and not
righly informed; and as it was amongst the Jews in this case in the days of
old, so now is it amongst the Christians in the Apostasy, their Consciences
being mis-guided by a false spirit, they are doing and performing the things in
great Zeal, and for the exercise of their Consciences, which the Lord does not
require of them: Thus do the Papists; they do and practice the things in great
Zeal, and through a false Fear in their blind Consciences, which things are in
themselves Idolatry, and not commanded nor required of the Lord; as in many
particulars I might show, even in many parts of their Worship and Religion,
which out of a Fear, and blind Zeal, and mis-guided Conscience they practice;
which is in it self but Idolatry, and not required nor accepted of the Lord.
And many things in relation to the Protestants Worship, and amongst all the
several false Sects upon Earth, which are done and practiced in great Zeal, and
out of a false Fear, and as in pretense of a good Conscience, and yet are
things in themselves Idolatrous, as done and practiced by them: And this comes
to pass, as I have said because, the Conscience is misinformed, and a false
spirit guides and rules in the exercise of Conscience, and the understanding of
the People is blinded, and they know not but they do well, though their minds
are captivated, and their minds and judgments in error; and though there be a
sincerity to God-wards, and a desire of Him in the bottom, among some People of
all Forms and Sects, and some of all are zealous toward God in their
practices, in their Religion and Worship; yet among all People, and the
Churches that have been for many Generations there has been great Error in
Judgment, and much blindness in mind, and the Conscience falsely exercised
toward God, and the Superscription has been, To the Unknown God; and He has
been ignorantly worshipped, and the Spirit of the Lord has not truly exercised
Peoples Consciences, nor guided their Zeal, nor been Ruler in the Judgment; And
by this means the sincerity and humility toward God has been eaten out, and
always quenched, and the bare practice of things and profession of Religion in
the outward appearance, has been more looked at, than the presence of God felt
in the Practices: and the Zeal has been more for the performance of such
things, than for God purely enjoyed through them: And thus it has been through
Christendom in the Apostasy since the days of the Apostles and true Churches;
Many have erred in their Judgments, and the Zeal for God has proceeded out of
the error of Judgments, and out of misinformation of Conscience, some other
things, than only the Spirit of God, has ruled in the Judgment, and been the
exercise of Peoples Consciences. And this is a hint of things, about true
Liberty of Conscience; and about the Error in Judgment; and the blind Zeal in
captivated sincerity.

Now it may be objected, What is the only absolute Rule of the right Exercise
of Conscience; and when are Men's Consciences truly guided?

To this I answer, The only chief and perfect Rule of the right Exercise of
Conscience, both to God and all men, is The Spirit of Christ: for it is only
that which can truly guide the Conscience, in Faith, Doctrine and Worship, and
in all things toward God; even the Spirit of Christ, which is the gift of the
Father, it only leads into all Truth, as it is written; and all, whose
Consciences are guided and exercised by it, are in unity and Peace in their
Worship, Doctrine, and Religion; for the Spirit of Christ is but one in it
self, and guides the Conscience into the exercise of one Truth and Faith; and
in this same Spirit is true ^nion and Communion of SAINTS in Religion and
Worship, and this is manifest through the Scriptures; for the Apostle exhorted,
To walk in the Spirit, and by it; and as many as walked by the Rule of the
Spirit Peace be upon them; and it is the Spirit of Christ, the Everlasting
Comforter, that teaches all Truth; and the Holy Anointing of the Spirit that
dwelt in the Saints, taught them all things; and they need no man to teach
them, but as the Anointing that dwelt in them. And then are men's Consciences
truly guided in all the Ways of Righteousness, when the Spirit of God guides
the Conscience, and is the Rule of all Faith, Doctrine and Practices.

So that Traditions of Men, Prescriptions of Councils, Antiquity of Time,
Commandments of Men, nor Example of others, without the Spirit of Christ,
cannot be the only true Rule of the Exercise of Conscience; for all these
things are changeable, alterable and subject to variations, and therefore
cannot infallibly guide the Conscience in the Duty toward God, nor rightly
exercise the Conscience in Unity and Peace; but while a Nation, or Kingdom or
People walk by the Rule of Traditions, Prescriptions, Commandments of Men,
Example of others, or the like, they err in Judgment, in Faith, Doctrine and
Worship, and are all divided, and in Contention about these matters, because
their Rule of Conscience and Judgment is doubtful and alterable, and not
infallible; and therefore they have no perfect assurance of Gods acceptance to
them in their Faith and Religion, nor perfect Peace and Unity in their Faith
and Worship: But as the Rule of their Consciences in their Duty toward God is
diverse, some make one thing, and some another their Rule; so are they diverse
and divided in what they hold, profess and practice, and are but of great
Babylon in their Religion: And because that something besides the Spirit of God
exercises the Conscience, therefore it is that here are so many Ways and Sects
of Religigion, and kinds of Worship in Christendom and amongst Christians,
while the Spirit of Christ only is not the Rule of Judgment and Exercise of
Conscience to God and Man; for the only perfect Rule of Conscience in the
Exercise to God, is the Spirit of Christ, and not any other thing.

And now, Whosoever shall persecute the Exercise of Conscience, when guided by
the Spirit of Christ, such persecute Christ Jesus: And this is Persecution for
the Name of Christ, when Sufferings are inflicted, as Reproaches, Imprisonment,
or whatsoever, for the Exercise of Conscience toward God by his Spirit: but
and if any are persecuted for Religion-sake, only so; if that in such their
Exercise of Religion they are not guided by the Spirit of Christ, yet that
suffering is a kind of Persecution also: if, I say, the Suffering be only for
and because of their Religions-sake, and they walk Justly and Righteously, as
men; so that (as is signified about the middle of this Chapter) though some may
profess good Conscience, and cry for Liberty thereof in their false Sect and
Religion, not taught them by the Spirit of Christ; yet the Civil Magistrate
ought not to punish and use Violence to such for their Religion; but if they
do, they persecute, and the Lord will lay it to their charge. But yet, this is
safe for all, first to obtain true Liberty of Conscience to God-wards, and to
receive the Spirit of Christ, to be taught only by it in the Exercise of
Conscience and Religion that they may not err in Conscience and Judgment in
spiritual Matters, nor suffer Wrongfully under pretense of Righteousness sake,
whenas it is not truly so.

CHAP IV.
Concerning the Diversity of Judgments in Religion.

TO all ye that are of diverse Judgments and Opinions in and concerning
Spiritual Matters, who are divided about Faith, Doctrine, Worship and Church
Government; some of you holding one thing, and some another different and
contrary to that, being diversely divided in mind and heart concerning the
matters that are one in themselves, and to which you all assent, as to the
things in themselves, and yet are different and contrary minded about the
self-same things: To you all I am moved to write, that so ye may be informed
perfectly; First, What the Cause is of your Divisions, and why it is thus
amongst you: And Secondly, Of the bad Effects and Fruits such Divisions have
brought forth: And Lastly, The Meant and Way of Reconciliation, that ye may
come into Love, and Peace and Unity with God, and one with another, in all
things pertaining to his Kingdom.

First, The Cause of your Divisions, and of the Diversities of Judgments and
Opinions that are amongst you concerning the Things and Matters of God's
Kingdom is, Because you want the Spirit of God to guide you, and it is not the
Rule of your Knowledge and Judgment; and you wanting the Spirit of God, in
which is Unity among Saints, therefore is it you are so divided, and diverse,
and different, and contrary one to another in these things; it is, because ye
want the Spirit of God, I say, which only teaches the true Knowledge of God,
and gives an Understanding in all his Ways and Matters: It is the Spirit of
God that teaches true Faith, true Doctrine and true Worship, and all things
about Church, Ministry and Religion; and if that you had the Spirit of God in
you, and were taught and guided by it, it would teach you into one Faith, and
one Truth, and into the true Worship, and into the true Church Government, and
you would be in Unity and Peace: And if you all had the Spirit of God that gave
forth the Scriptures, and by which Spirit the Saints of God were guided in
days past, it would teach you into Unity, and to be of one Mind, one Heart,
and one Soul, in all the Matters pertaining to God's Kingdom, in Faith,
Worship, Doctrine, and all things else: If you had the Spirit of God, I say,
and were taught by it, then you would have Unity with God, and one with another
in all his Ways, and there would have been no Division nor Contention amongst
you about spiritual Matters; but because you want that, therefore you have
Strife and Division amongst you, even throughout all Christendom; Here Is a
Nation and a Kingdom holding such a Faith and Worship, and there is another
People holding Faith and Worship contrary to that; and here is one Sect of
People, and there is another different in Faith, Judgment and Opinion; and this
is a Shame to whole Christendom, That all should profess Christ Jesus, and
Faith in him, and Salvation by him, and his Doctrine and Worship, and yet be in
strife and division, and in great contentions concerning the same; some holding
and practizing one manner of Faith, Worship and Doctrine, and others holding
contrary and different; and this shows, that ye are all fallen from the Life of
Christianity, as it was held in the Apostles days amongst the true Churches;
for, they were of one heart, mind, soul and spirit, as it is written; they were
of one Faith, of one Worship, of one Doctrine, and had one way of
Church Government; and this continued amongst the Churches of Christ, till
there were some that had Erred from the Spirit of God in their own Consciences,
and then they also Erred in Faith, in Doctrine, and in all other things
relating to God: and these were the Apostate Christians, that had erred from
the Spirit, and divided themselves from the true Church, and differed in
Judgment amongst themselves; and this was, because they had erred from the
Spirit of God, which would have kept them in Unity with God, and one with
another; for the Spirit is the Bond of Peace, and the Seal of the Covenant of
Love amongst the Saints. So now, All ye who are divided in your Knowledge and
Judgment, and are in contention one with another, about the matters pertaining
to God's Kingdom, you are the apostate Christians, and you are without the
Spirit of Christ: The first apostate Christians erred from the Spirit, and so
became divided from the true Faith, and from the true Worship, and also among
themselves; and you never yet received the Spirit of Christ, that you might
come into Unity and Fellowship with God, and one with another; and that is the
Reason of all your Divisions in Religious matters, because you have not
received the Spirit of Christ, to teach you, and to unite your Hearts to God,
and one to another: but you having the Scriptures traditionally, by descent
through Ages, which do describe and declare of that Faith and Doctrine, and of
the Worship and Church Government, which were among the Saints of old, which
they held and practiced, and from the Scriptures which declare of the things,
from thence you take up a Conceit and false Judgment, and an Imitation, and a
false Conformity; and then each sort of you call that your Faith, and
Church Government, and some after one manner of form, and some after another;
and thus you are divided, because you want the Spirit of God that gave forth
the Scriptures; which Spirit did work true Faith in the hearts of them that
gave them forth in days of old, and it taught them Worship, Faith, Doctrine,
and all things concerning Gods Kingdom, for the Spirit led them into all Truth;
and now you wanting the same Spirit that wrought in them, and taught them; and
you having but their words (to wit, the Scriptures) from thence, in the Wisdom
which is below, and in the carnal Reason, and in the first man's understanding,
each Nation takes up a conceit, that it is so and so, and takes up an Imitation
of Worship and Church Government according to their own sensual wisdom, and
according to the breadth and depth of their Conceits; and then imitates, and
that severally and diversely, and in a divided manner; and this is amongst
Kingdoms, and amongst Neighbors and Brethren, this Division in matters of
Faith, Worship and Doctrine, and Church Government; and yet all these have had
the name of Christians, and Church Members, and Worshippers of God, but yet are
of many ways of Worship, holding different and contrary Principles of Faith
and Doctrine, and also of Worship and Church Government, and thus have Nations
Cities and Countries been for many Ages; and thus has it been, and is at this
day amongst the Apostate Christians, that want the Spirit of Christ to be their
Rule of Knowledge, of Judgment, and Worship, and of their Faith and Practices
in Religion. And this is a shame to whole Christendom, amongst whom the spirit
of Antichrist has entered, which has thus divided Nations Cities Neighbors
and Brothers; for all these Divisions about Religion amongst the Apostate
Christians, are of Antichrist, and not of God; it is that spirit of Antichrist
that has wrought all these Divisions, and planted them in the minds of People.

2dly, Concerning the bad Effects of these Divisions in matters of Faith and
Worship, as I have said, This Division in Religion has begotten and brought
forth very much Evil throughout the World, much heart burning, envy, hard
heartedness, strife and contention between Kings and Rulers, and between
Nations, between Cities, between Neighbors, and between Brothers; this
Division has bad Effects amongst all these; so that it has brought forth much
War and bloodshed between Kings, and great Persecution between Rulers and their
People, and great Debate and Strife amongst Neighbors and Friends; so that
great Murders and loss of many Lives have been produced and brought forth upon
this Quarrel, about Difference in matters of Faith and Religion; and Antichrist
has not only divided People in Judgment, but has also Provoked People into
rage and envy, to the killing and destroying of one another; and even that
Division about Spiritual things, begotten by Antichrist amongst false
Christians, has been turned into personal enmity, and brought forth in the end
murdering and killing the bodies of Thousands, when the original debate has
arisen about Church Government, or Points of Religion; and this is the woeful
Effect that Division of Religion, has brought forth in all Christendom; And
all this Fruit and Effects, as well as the Cause of it, has been of
Antichrist, and of the Dragon and the Devil throughout the World; all this
Persecution and spoiling of Goods, Imprisoning of Persons, taking away of
Lives, and Banishment, and whatsoever Persecution otherwise that has risen and
been inflicted upon any, for and because of Differences in Religion, and about
Faith and Worship, all this has been of Antichrist; and even all Laws made for
that end, and all Executors of such Laws, and all Penalties of such Laws, and
all Wars and Bloodshed whatsoever that have ensued only and upon the account of
Differences in Religion, that being the first, and the only ground of the
Quarrel; All this has been of Antichrist, and it came out of the bottomless
Pit, and never rose from the Spirit of God, but from the Antichristian spirit
of Envy and Wickedness, that has first divided People about matters of Faith
and Religion, and then Provoked them to envy and malice, stirring up Kings to
fight one against another, that was not of their Religion, but different and
contrary to it: And so the hearts of Rulers have been stirred up to persecute
all under them, that were different and contrary in matters of Faith, Worship,
and Religion; and this the spirit of Antichrist has effected throughout
Christendom: and so each King that has been strongest, would maintain the
Principles of his Faith, and the Practice of Religion, according to his own
Conceit, in his Dominions: And thus has Religion, Worships, and
Church Government been set up and stood amongst Apostate Christians throughout
the World, by Force and Power, and by violent Laws, and through Persecutions
and Murders; and all this has been by the spirit of Antichrist, and the Spirit
of God has had no hand in those matters, for setting up and contriving of false
Faith, false Worship, and false Church-Governments; all this has depended upon
the Powers and Authorities of the Earth, through many Ages: and what Religion,
and Church Government, or Way of Worship, that Kings or Queens have set up,
that only has been promoted; but all the rest Persecuted and restrained by
force and violence; and all this has been of Antichrist. And now to all ye
that are of diverse Judgments in matters of Faith and Worship in Religion, this
is a Caution to you all; and I do warn you all in the presence of the living
God, that though ye be divided in the belief and practice of Spiritual things,
yet live in peace and unity with all men, in all outward relations, and do not
envy nor hurt one another Persons; though you are in difference about
Religion; yet suffer not that Difference to grow into persecuting or envying
one another persons, but seek to inform one another, and instruct one another
in the Spirit of Meekness, and persuade one another out of that which is evil,
to that which is good, by patience, gentleness, and long-suffering, and do not
force one another by violence, nor persecute one another, neither by words,
evil-deeds, nor actions, but live in love to the persons every one of another;
and fight not with Persons, nor kill one another Persons with carnal weapons
about Religion, but take the spiritual weapons, and war with the spirit against
the evil one in one another; and love persons though they are enemies, and this
is Christ's Doctrine, and never hereafter let your divisions about Spiritual
things grow into personal quarrels, to the envying or killing one another: And
this is a Charge to you all in the presence of the living God.

Lastly, The Means and Way to be reconciled and to come out of all Division and
Strife, and to come into Peace with God and one with another, about Faith and
Church Government, is by the Spirit of God; and every one of you in particular
must receive the Spirit of Christ, that it may work in every one of your
hearts, true Faith, and teach every one of you the true Worship of God, and the
way of Doctrine and true Church Government; it is the Spirit of Christ in every
one both male and female, that must reconcile and bring into unity with God,
and one with another in all Spiritual things; for it is that which is the bond
of peace and love among true Christians; and it is that which reconciles
Peoples hearts into oneness: And if you receive that Spirit every particular
person of you, it will bring you to be of on^ Faith of one Worship, and then
your Doctrine and Church Government will agree: if you receive the Spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures, it will work in you the same Faith, and lead you in
the same way of Worship which the Scriptures speak of, and then you will cease
taking up Conceits, and making Imitations of Church-Governments from the
Letter, but the same Spirit will work in your hearts Faith and Knowledge in the
fulfilling of the Scriptures; and this is true Christianity, and the other is
the way of all Apostate Christians, all Imitations from the Letter without the
Spirit as gave it forth: for there is a great deal of difference between making
a Conformity in the Imitation of a Worship, and Church Government, from the
Scriptures without the Spirit, and between the Spirits teaching and leading
into the same Truth, and same Worship and Church Government which the
Scriptures speak of; the one is of Christ, and is in unity, peace, and
everlasting fellowship; the other is of Antichrist, and is in division, strife
and contention: so you must all wait for the Spirit of Truth, that you may
receive it, to work in your hearts, to teach you, and lead you, or else you
will never come to true Union and everlasting Fellowship with God, and one with
another; neither can you be of one true Faith, in one true way of Worship, nor
in one way of Church Government, except you receive the Spirit, and walk in the
Spirit, And these be the words of the Lord God unto you all

Now as concerning the Way of Uniformity in Faith and Church Government,
imposed upon Nations, and Countries and Cities, by cruel Laws of Kings and
Rulers, as has been the practice through Christendom, to cause a whole Nation
and Kingdom to bow and conform to such Principles of Faith, and Worship and
Church Government, according to the Will and Pleasure of a King or a Ruler,
such Uniformity, and Union and Fellowship among Christians has not been of
Christ, where people have walked by Imitation and conformed to the Commands of
Men in such a Faith, or to such a Worship, or Church Government; this has not
been of God, neither could this Unity stand or remain forever; but it has
perished, and will perish wherever it is: and that Faith, and Worship, and
Church Government, which is so set up, and so held, will never save the Soul,
nor comfort it; but it is blasted of God: Whilst a Nation, or a Kingdom, or a
People have Uniformity, or hold Faith, Worship or Religion, either in the
ignorance of their Consciences, or contrary to their Consciences, by the force
of men's commandments, and not by the persuasion of the Spirit of God in their
own Consciences; such Conformity, I say, is of Antichrist, and not of the
Father, neither can it stand in the Day of the Lord; but the Fire of his Wrath
will consume it: All the apostate Christians, in their uniformity of Faith,
Worship and Church Government, which is some other way, or by some other means,
than only by the Spirit of God, is of Antichrist, and will be confounded; for
there is no true Unity and Fellowship in the ways of God and his Truth and
Worship, but what is in the spirit, and that Unity will stand forever; for it
is in God, not feigned, neither because of the Love and Fear of this World, as
the other is. That Uniformity in Faith and Worship which is forced upon people,
is all but Hypocrisy and Deceit, both to God and man, and God will judge it in
the Imposers and Imposed: Therefore no true Unity in Faith, nor Worship, nor in
Religion, but what is in and by the Spirit of God; for as Christians come to
divide themselves into many Ways, and into diverse Sects, when they went from
the Spirit of God, and lost it, and whilst they have been without the Spirit,
they have remained in Division, Strife and Contention about Religion; so now
the means and way to come into Union, and Fellowship and Faith is, by receiving
the Spirit of God again, and not any otherwise; and as Christians are brought
again to receive this Spirit, and walk therein, all Division and Strife about
Religion will cease, and the cursed Fruits and Effects thereof will also
wither, and be no more, but then Unity, Peace, Blessedness, Everlasting
Fellowship and Comfort with the Lord, and one with another, in all his Ways,
will be witnessed amongst all People.

By a Servant of Truth, E. B.

The FIFTH GENERAL EPISTLE: Being A Tender Salutation OF PERFECT LOVE, Unto the
Elect of God, the Royal Seed, the Saints of the Most High; who have Believed
the Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Walk in the Light that has
enlightened every man that comes into the World.
IN the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ blessed forever, the Tender
Salutation of my Immortal Life is daily abounding toward you, who are the true
Flock of the Father's Love and Care, who has begotten you to himself by his
Word that lives forever in us and with us, that ye should be a People Chosen
and Elected of him unto Eternal Blessings, and to be a Praise and an Honor to
him throughout the World, by and through the virtue of his Life and Power, and
in the Fruits of his Spirit brought forth by you all, who are the only Children
of that Birth which is only the Lord's.

Well, Dearly Beloved, My Heart at this time is filled in the Father's Love,
with the dear Remembrance of you, whom the Lord has gathered with his Arm of
Power; and in his Spirit do I desire the increase of all Mercies, and Peace and
Blessings unto you, that you may be Rich, and Strong, and Wise, and Mighty
through the Lord Jesus Christ, and receiving daily of his Grace may ever be
preserved constant and faithful in the Heavenly Calling unto the End. And
forasmuch as the Lord has began his Glorious Work in the midst of you, and
gathered you out of the Darkness, and Ignorance and Unbelief of this World,
where some time your Converse has been, while ye knew not the Lord, and raised
you up into the Light, and Power and Wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; having
largely tasted of the same in the Experience of his Leadings through diverse
Operations and Manifestations of his Spirit, so that many of you have attained
to a good measure of Peace and Rest with the Lord in your inward Man: Dearly
Beloved, seeing it is thus, these things the Spirit of the Father in me
travelleth to bring forth unto you, for the End to Comfort you, and to Confirm
you; and to Edify you in the saving Truths of the Gospel of Peace.

1. Consider what your former Estate has been, an Estate scattered like Sheep
without a Shepherd; some of you dispersed into one false kind of Profession of
Religion, and some into another, walking in such Ways as the Lord led you not
in; but ye were Driven from God, into the paths of Death and Darkness, and
were led by blind Watchmen in the Hypocrisy and false pretenses toward God;
Honoring Him with the Lips, while the Heart was far away: this was the
Condition of some of you; and others of you were wallowing in the open
Profaneness of the Sinful World; and such was your Estate, wherein you were
all Strangers to God, and were without him in the World, and served the spirit
which leads Captive to Destruction, and in that Way you were strayed, even in
the Separation from GOD, being in the State of Enmity against Him; till the
Lord Jesus Christ, the good Shepherd of ISRAEL, found you out in the Estate of
Darkness, and brought you Home from your strayed Condition, even unto the Sense
and Feeling of his Power and Spirit in you, which called you out of the Ways
of Sin and Death, and also changed you and regenerated you into the Inheritance
of a better Kingdom and Glory, than that which is of this World: And ye now
know Christ Jesus to be your Shepherd, his Spirit to teach you, his Wisdom, and
Righteousness and Sanctification to dwell in you, being Partakers of the same
through the Eternal LIGHT, which once shined in Darkness, and the Darkness
could not comprehend it; but now it is risen in much Glory and Power, and Death
and darkness is swallowed up of Life and Light, and the Fruits thereof subdued.

These things are True and Faithful unto many; let all such Rejoice and be Glad
in the Lord, who have thus seen his Day, and tasted of his Power, and are
Witnesses, That the Kingdom is come which never fades away.

2. Consider what the Tender Dealings of God toward you, and his Gentle
Leadings have been since he has called you out of your forme^ strayed Estate:
Has not his Light shined upon your Tabernacles with much Clearness, persuading
your Hearts fully of his WAY and TRUTH? Have not your Hearts often been
Refreshed, and Souls truly Comforted by the Refreshing Presence of the Lord?
Has not the Way of Life been made so clear unto you, and the way of your Peace
so perfectly discovered, that no Occasion has been left of Unbelief or
Stumbling unto the Upright in Heart? Surely the Lord has not been wanting to
you in any of these things; but he has so reached Home by his Word and Spirit
to your Hearts and Consciences with such full Convictions and persuasions in
the Ways of Salvation, that no sincere Heart can doubt or waver concerning the
Things pertaining to his Soul's Peace and Comfort (...) For, so Large and
Evident has God's Testimony been unto you, even since he first called you by
his Grace, that no Man, having Sense and Experience thereof, but must bear
witness, That the Lord has been Good, Long Suffering, full of Mercy and
Righteousness toward all that fears him.

I am persuaded ye know these things, and that the Taste and Virtue of the
Lord's Mercies and Power remains stedfest in your Remembrance and Enjoyment,
even his Mercies and Loving Kindness that have been made manifest to you since
ye have known the Lord, who has ^^d you by the Hand, as a Father does his
Children, and carried you in his Arms of Preservation, and born you on his
shoulders in all your Afflictions; insomuch that through his Power and Wisdom
only we are yet alive, and the Adversary has not prevailed against us, though
his Attempts have often been great to Destroy us.

3. Consider what i^ now your present state and standing; How is it with your
inward Man? In what Life, and Strength and Dominion is he? Is he ^^^ong over
all the Corruptible, or is he Weak under Corruption? Is he in ^^e growth of a
Perfect Man, of the Stature of Christ Jesus? Is he so begotten and born in you,
that Life has swallowed up Death? Has he Victory over the Grave? And does he
Reign in you, even the New Man, the Spiritual Man, the Immortal Man, Christ i^
you? Is he come in Power and Dominion to dwell with you? De^rly ^^loved, mind
each particu^ in what state you are, and what is your present standing to God
(...)? (...) ye had Faith in God, and Love to God, and Boldness for God? And
are ye fir^ly continued therein? Or, Is any such Weakened and Decreased in
these things? Is your Love grown cold, and your Zeal lost, and your Confidence
decayed? If, it be thus with any, their present state is not ^^ght before the
Lord; but they must Repent, and return to their first Love, and return again to
the Witness of the Spirit of Christ (...) in them, that their Strength may be
renewed, for they only that dwell with the Lord in Faithfulness, and abide in
Covenant with him, (...) see his Glory, and be fed daily with the Bread that
comes down from Heaven, and refre^ with the Fountain of endless Mercies; if so
be ye be perfect with the Lord after your inward Man, Strong, and Lively, and
Zealous, Faithful, and constant, having a clean Heart and a pure Conscience,
guiltless and undefiled before God, this is to be perfect with the Lord; and if
ye are thus, blessed are you, if ye be increased daily in the Love and Life of
the Father; if your inward Man grow in the Wisdom, and Power, and Knowledge of
the Creator; if ye receive the assurance of Eternal Life in your selves; if
this be your present State, Oh happy People! Who is like unto you, because ye
are saved of the Lord?

4. What is the present work of God in your own hearts? Ye must always feel
the Word of God abiding in you, even the Word in the heart; hear that Word and
do it always, and your souls shall live by the Word of God; that Word beats
down whatsoever tempts and draws from God which would defile you, and load your
Consciences, and vex the Spirit; for if any obey the Temptations; they become
darkened, unbelief enters, and the fruits of it grows, and then there is a
falling from the Lord; and a departing from his way of Salvation; therefore
mind the Power and Spirit of Christ in you, and be constant and faithful
therein, that you may be Preserved unto the finishing of the WORK of the Lord
in you, that at last ye may sit down in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in
places of Peace, and Comfort, and Assurance for ever, where the Lord is enjoyed
all in all, which you must wait for to be accomplished in you according to the
promise, and you must wit^^^s the work of Christ in you, he must work in you by
his Spirit Regeneration, Recon^on, Sanctification, Justification, and all good
things; (...) it is not sufficient to profess, that Christ in his Person has
(...) the works of God, but every one in particular must witness at th^^ day
the work of the Spirit of Christ in his own heart, even the Work of
Reconciliation and Salvation, that ye may in each man's particular receive the
Knowledge and Experience of the Lords Work, of his Love, and Life, and
Salvation, and Redemption in particular; for though never so large Testimonies
in general should be given to you, or received by you concerning Christ Jesus,
and his Salvation, yet the particular feeling of (...) Love and Power of the
Lord God in your own hearts must you sta^^ by, in the Day o^ Trial, for that
alone can uphold in the Day of Trou^, even the Testimony of the Spirit of
Christ unto Salvation, felt in each particular heart.

And seeing the Lord has brought you to the knowledge of his truth, so in
conversion and regeneration, that many can say, the Way of the Lord is so made
manifest, that we look not for another, nor are doubtful of the Way of Eternal
Life; therefore be established steadfast and constant in that way, not easily
moved nor tossed too and fro with men, nor new Doctrines, nor changeable
things, but approve your hearts in uprightness before the Lord by being
faithful to the end, faithful I say to be and do according to the measure of
Light and Grace and Knowledge that God has already committed to you, that ye
may not offend against the Grace of God, but may glorify the Lord in your
Souls and Spirits, being joined in your hearts, and married to the Living God,
and the Lord becomes Your Husband according to the Promise; but if any be of a
changeable Spirit, such will receive Temptations, and go out of the Covenant of
God, and abuse the gift of God, if their heart be not meek, and lowly, and
humble, and perfect in the sight of God, though there may be a taste of the
Love of God, yet there can be no assurance of it if the heart be not aright
before the Lord, and faithful and constant in his Truth; and therefore all must
wait to receive the assurance of Eternal Life in themselves, even such an
assurance of Life, and Peace, and Joy, and Comfort, that there can be no
departing away, being established in the Heir-ship never to loose the Crown,
Heirs of the power of God, of his Wisdom, of his Righteousness inheriters and
Possessors of the Eternal Life, that ye may dwell in the house forever, not
only as Servants, but as Sons; not only as such that have tasted of the Love
of God, but as such as are born Heirs thereof, and must inherit the same
forever.

Now dear Friends, if this were my last unto You, more then this the Lord has
not to say by me; and last of all in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, I charge all
the Saints to be faithful to the Principles and Doctrines which Ye have heard
and received, and been taught of Christ through his Gospel. Oh be not
inconstant and unfaithful in those Principles and Doctrines which the Spirit of
God has persuaded your Consciences of the truth of; for if any are unfaithful,
they deny the Lord of Life before men, and must be denied of him before the
Father; therefore let us put on strength and courage to be faithful and
constant in life or death, to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, and if we
must suffer for our profession and practice of those truths which God has
persuaded our Consciences of the verity of, we shall never be ashamed nor
confounded before the Adversary, though we gaom Tribulations, Persecutions, yea
death it self for the Name of the Lord and his Truth, yet we shall obtain the
Crown of Glory which never fades away; and verily all the Suffering; and
afflictions of this Present time, are not worthy to be compared to that weight
of Peace and comfort, which is and shall be revealed amongst us.

And as concerning our Obedience to Government, ever since we were a People, Ye
know what our Principle and Practice in that case has been, even to obey all
men in all things, either by doing or suffering, if at any time ye are required
to do any thing by any in Authority which is not agreeing, but contrary to the
Scriptures example of the Saints, and the Spirit of Christ in your own
consciences, then ye are to suffer whatsoever, if it be death it self rather
then to obey and submit to the doing of that which is contrary to a good
conscience, this has ever been our Principle and Practice since we were a
People, agreeing with the practice of the holy Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs
in all ages, who rather did suffer grievous oppressions and persecutions, then
to obey any command of men in power, by doing any thing contrary to the
testimony of the Spirit of God in their own particulars; let us all be
like-minded this day, not to do, nor bend, nor be in any wise contrary to the
Spirit of Christ that dwells in us, but rather suffer whatsoever may be imposed,
then to sin against that Light and knowledge of the Spirit of Christ which he
has given us, but let us keep a clean heart and a pure Conscience to Godwards,
and therein we shall triumph over all in our inward Man, though our outward man
be afflicted, and in this we shall have peace and comfort in God over all our
Adversaries.

And as concerning your meetings, the Lord has given you the testimony of his
Spirit in you for the verity and righteousness thereof; though ye should suffer
persecution for the same, yet ye have the Spirit of Christ testifying in your
hearts that this Way and Practice of meeting together (as our practice has
been) is of God, and he Justifies us in the same, and we have sufficient of
assurance by the holy Spirit to stand faithful in that practice of assembling
together to Worship God.

First, we have the testimony of Scriptures and example of Saints in the
Apostles days, to prove this practice of Meeting together; The first
Christians they met together in this manner and way as we do now, they met in
private houses, and from house to house separate and apart from the Public
Synagogues and all other Sects; and it is clear that we have the example of
Saints and Scripture Proof for this our practice of meeting together.

2. We have our own experience for these diverse years, how that the Spirit of
the Lord has moved our hearts to assemble together, and the presence and power
of the Lord Jesus Christ has been amongst us, and we have tasted of the
goodness and love of the Lord, being so met together: how often has the Lord
met with us and his countenance shined upon us, and our souls have been
refreshed, strengthened and comforted in this practice of meeting together?
these things are true, and may confirm us in this practice of meeting together,
and to be faithful to the end.

3. We have the full persuasions of the Spirit of God lively and fervent in our
hearts at this moment, that we ought not to neglect the Assembling of our
selves together, but that God requires it of us, and it is his will that his
People meet together to worship him in Spirit and Truth, separate from all the
world even in one Spirit, and in the Name and power of Jesus, I hope ye are all
like-minded herein, and that the Spirit of Christ persuades your Consciences in
the Truth of that practice; therefore be faithful unto God herein, and sin not
against the testimony of Scriptures, and example of the first Christians, nor
against your own experience, nor against the admonitions of the Servants of the
Lord, who are the first fruits unto God since the Apostasy, and have again and
again in the Name and Spirit of Christ exhorted you to meet together; wherefore
be faithful to perform your duty to God in that particular, whatsoever
sufferings should be infflicted upon you by the men of this World.

And as concerning refusing to take any Oath, ye know it has been our
Principle and practice so to do since the Lord has given us knowledge of his
ways, and the spirit of the Lord that dwells in us, persuades our hearts to
deny all swearing, both as it was practiced under the Law, according to the
command of God, and in the Types and Figures, and as it is practiced among the
Christians since the Apostles days, which is, as now practiced, Idolatry and
Superstition; And I say the Spirit of Christ does confirm our hearts in this
trut^, even to deny all swearing; and also we have the express command of
Christ, and of the Apostle James forbdiding all swearing by Heaven, and Earth,
and all other Oaths, which bears witness to the truth of our refusing to swear
at this day; likewise we have the Testimony of many holy Martyrs and Prophets
since the Apostles days, who denied to swear on any wise, who suffered for
such their Testimony. All which evidences may justly confirm the hearts of Gods
people at this day faithfully to hold out their Testimonies of refusing to
swear at all, seeing we have a cloud of witnesses that testify with us, the
express Command of Christ, and the Apostle the Test^^^^^ of (...)diverse ^ges,
who suffered for the same and the present (...)Spirit of Christ in our own
Hearts* All which are suffici^^t to give Courage and Boldness under all
Sufferings and Afflictions that we may (...) withal for refusing to Swear.

Well Friends, Be faithful to God in these and all other things which God has
given you Light and Knowledge in, and I do (...)Conscience, and not to sin
against the Light and Knowledge that God has given you, either by denying to
profess and practice that Truth which the Lord has persuaded your Heart of or
by conforming to anything which ye know is not of the Truth, and this is the
Way of Eternal Peace with God: But if any shall, through the Temptations of the
Adversary, and for the (...) (...) (...) of this World, deny the Lord, and
renounce good Conscience ^, such must bear the Burden of the Lord's Anger
because (...)Revoltings from the Ways of God. True it is* This is a Day of
great Trial, yet the Lord is strong, and gives Strength unto all his People
that (...) upon (...)

And let us be mindful what our Controversy is, and ^, this Day our
Controversy is for the Lord, and his Truth, to Do Faithfully, and Suffer
Patiently whatsoever the Will of the Lord is unto us, and not to renounce and
deny the exercise of our pure Consciences in those things that God has
persuaded our Hearts of the Truth of: For, if any this Day should be
Unfaithful, either by doing what they should not, or leaving undone what they
know they should do: If any deny the Lord and his Truth, and conform to the
false Ways and Worships of men, such lose the Controversy, and give the Cause
of God into the hand of your Enemies, which is a fearful Abomination; and the
Controversy is with that spirit, which opposes us in these things, which we
know are of the Lord. It is with that spirit that we must contend, contend (I
say) by the Spirit of the Father, in Long-Suffering, and Patience and Good Will
toward all men, and not with the Weapons of this World in envy to any, even
with that spirit which does oppose our meeting together to worship God, and
would impose Oaths and Things upon us contrary to our Consciences: And these
things are the main Matters of Controversy this day, which the Spirit of
Christ in us must oppose, being imposed on us by the spirit of the World. So
all Friends are to mind to be Faithful to the Spirit of Christ, and its
persuasions; and against that spirit which is not of him; For the Opposition is
between the two spirits; and none must say, the things required to be forborne,
or to be done, are but small matters in themselves, and may be done or not done
without Offense; this kind of Reasoning may be dangerous, and may easily divert
from the Obedience of Christ; for we are not to look so much at the things in
themselves* which are required to be done or to be forborne, as at the spirit
which does impose upon us in such cases against pure Conscience; if the spirit
be not of God, we must not obey it in the least things; for this is indeed the
matter of Conscience, not so much particular things or actions, as the spirit
that is not of God, where it requires things against good Conscience; for
whatsoever that spirit requires, be it little or much in respect of the
Action, it must not be obeyed, and that for Conscience sake; for this is a good
Conscience, that cannot do nor conform to any thing which the spirit that is
not of God enjoyes, though therefore suffering be inflicted on the outward man.

And last of all, I do advise and exhort, That ye have Love and Unity in the
Spirit of the Lord and one with another, that oneness of Heart and Soul and
Spirit may be amongst us, being bound up in the holy Covenant of the Father,
even willing to do or suffer one for another; and in this Spirit of Unity the
Lord will bless us, and make us strong and able to go through joyfully all our
Afflictions; but if any Strife or Division be in the Body, it weakens the
whole; if one Member vex another through discord, this is not of the Father,
but contrary to him; this is not for the safety of the Body, but bruises it and
wounds it, and man (...) (...) ^fflict the S^ (...) the Righte^ (...) (...)
out^d Enemies, and St^ ^d (...) (...) (...) o^ (...) (...) may sooner work
(...) ^throw, than (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) from men.

O^ (...) theref^ (...) Brother to (...), and (...) (...) (...) to many, and
(...) Servant to all, let me entreat and beseech. That (...) (...) those (...)
(...) (...) for (...), the (...) (...) (...) (...) Christ ^ed you, and that
(...) (...) ^minded in all things, even one (...) (...) ^^ther (...) the Son
are one, and so shall (...) Blessings o^ (...) (...) (...) (...) fr^^ y^^:
(...), de^r (...) The Lord ha^^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) always
(...) (...) (...) to ^ll (...) with his Riches and Treasure, and are no^ we
Ve^s of Honor? is not his Name in ou^ (...) heads? (...) not we the Flock of
^is For therefore let us Honor him by the Works of Tr^^h, (...) Love, of
Mercy, and all the Works of Righteousness, (...) (...) bring (...) (...) u^o
the (...), thereby proving that we are true ^^^ches in Christ the (...), and
let (...) give up to suffer all things Patiently, for the Testimony of his
Truth (...) (...) our Hearts, if we Live, let it be to him only; and if we Dye
let it be for hi^, h^g the S^ of ^^is Good Spirit in u^. That whether we Live
or Dye we are the Lord*

E. B.

Antichrists Government JUSTLY DETECTED, OF Unrighteousness, Injustice,
Unreasonableness, Oppression and Cruelty, throughout the Kingdoms of this,
WORLD; Wherein Antichrist has had his Seat and great Authority for many
Generations, in the Apostasy from the Spirit and Life of True Christianity:
Showed and Declared, First, In the Case of Imposing upon Conscience in Matters
Religious, by Force of outward Violence, or Pains and Penalties on the Persons
and Estates of Men; which is proved Unrighteous, and Dangerous, and of
Antichrist, etc. Secondly, In the Case of Heresy; showing what it is in it
self, who a Herteick is, who are the true Judges of it, and what Punishment
pertains to such as are truly convicted thereof; and that, To Kill, Burn,
Bannish, or to punish Heretics (as such) corporally, is of Antichrist, etc.
Thirdly, Concerning Antichrist, and his Mystery of Deceivableness; what he is
in himself, and how he appears in the World; what his Works are, and what his
Government is; and where it is, and who are the Subjects of his Kingdom.

The EPISTLE; Dedicated to all the Rulers (of what degree soever) in the (so
called) Christian World.
O Friends! in the perfect Love of God Almighty toward your Souls and Bodies,
and toward all Mankind; which Love is as a Fountain opened in my Heart, and
kindly issues forth in Soul-breathing-desires of Good unto the whole Creation:
In this Love (joined with an Humble, Meek, and Lowly Temper of Spirit) do I
present this little quantity of Substance unto you; not so much for your
approof of my Work, as if I craved your License and Approbation for this small
Piece to pass under your Justification (as is usually the manner of such
Epistles thus directed) but much more for your serious and weighty
Considerations of the Cases (though Briefly, yet Truly) unfolded, which are
things of very great moment to you, and wherein all of you, from the Least to
the Greatest, are less or more concerned.

And I do present this Work unto you, as Wholesome Advice and Good Council for
you (which ye ought verily to read and receive as such) rather then to Flatter
you, by begging a Passport from you, that this may be read and received where
it shall come; for, the Truth and Verity of it, the Weight of the Matter
contained, and the Soundness and Substance demonstrated, shall plead its own
Worth for acceptance in the Hearts and Consciences of all sincere Men. The
Truth and Verity, Weight and Substance of Matter; I say, these Terms I may
justly present this small piece under the denomination of, unto you, and all
the World.

True it is, I do not study pleasing Style, nor have I endeavored to clothe
and trim the Matter with Flattery, Curious Terms, Words of Man's Wisdom, or
some Rare Method, that it might appear more in Show than in real Substance, (as
the way of too many Writers have been in such Cases) Nor do I promise to please
the Wordly Wisdom in Men, by a Delightful Sound, so much as to answer the
sincere Consciences of Men by Sound Truths; declared more in Homely broken
Terms of Speech, than in the rarity of Phrase, or well-compacted Rhetoric: For
I have always desired to be known and approved of God, and those that fear him
in Sincerity, Humility, and downright Truth; and for this I study daily and
labor always, even to have Praise, Peace and Comfort of God, rather than men,
in what I am, and in what I do: And therefore it is my desire, that ye would
look beyond the Method containing, to the Matter contained; and that your Eye
may be fixed on the Substance intended, which is verily and in Truth, That ye
may be informed the Way of your Peace and Happiness in this World, and in that
which is to come; and may never hereafter Impose by Force and Violence, in the
Matters of Faith and the Worship of God, upon the Consciences of any, through
Penalties and Punishments upon Men's Persons and Estates; but that ye may allow
and tolerate freely Liberty of Conscience in all Religious Matters; and may
not by Cruelty Destroy Men in their Persons or Estates, upon the account of
their being supposed to be, or if really Heretics, and because of difference
in Judgment and Practice in Spiritual Matters.

These are the Particulars (for substance) held forth unto you, and all the
World; and I have judged it most proper to direct these Cases to your View and
Consideration, as being the Persons most chiefly (though not wholly) concerned:
Therefore blame me not, but rather receive my Love, though but little in
Quantity, yet real in Quality, and that ye will find one day, when ye have
truly tried the Effects of the two Cases plainly laid before you; which are,
Imposition upon Conscience; and Free Liberty of Conscience: These are the two
Causes, which will have their different and contrary Effects upon all the
Rulers in the World; Peace, Blessings, Prosperity and Happiness are the Effects
of the one Cause; and Wars, Tribulations, Contentions, Misery, Sorrow and the
Curse are the Effects which have and will unavoidably follow the other Cause;
and this ye will all find in the Experience of Time and Transactions coming to
pass in the World.

And therefore I cannot but (in homely plain words, as my manner is) assert the
Causes, and the Effects of the Causes unto you again and again, for the very
End, to Inform you, Advise you, and Warn you to follow the Good, and to forsake
the Evil; to do the Right, and hate the Wrong; that the Effects of
Righteousness and Liberty of Conscience, even Peace, Love, Mercy and Prosperity
may ever be with you; and the Effects of Cruelty, and Oppression, and
Imposition upon Conscience, which will be your Misery, Downfall and Destruction
(if ye continue in the Cause which works this Effect) may be turned away, and
ye delivered.

Wherefore O ye Men, Be Advised, be Warned; this is the Day of the Lord's
Dawnings; we have seen his Power and Glory; he has wounded us, and healed us;
he has killed, and made alive; he has Proclaimed Liberty in eur Squls and
Consciences from Death and Darkness, from the Grave and Hell; and he has set
his People free from Bondage, to serve Him with a pure and perfect Heart; And
if ye (Mortal Men, made of the Dust of the Ground, whose little measure of
Breath is in your Nostrils) will not approve of, and join with this Blessed
Work of the Lord; but shall gainsay his Doings, and set your Power against his
Power, and will not let the People go free in the Exercise of their Consciences
in Holy Performances, whose Consciences God has made free; then shall the Most
High reward your Opposition with his Cup of Vengeance; and he will make you
know, He is the Lord, against whom ye thus raise Contention; and he will
dissolve your Substance, and bring down your Glory, and subdue your Power, if
that (I say) ye oppose his Work, and will seek to bind and limit his Spirit in
his People, and will yet force and impose upon Conscience by outward Violence,
and Kill and Persecute unto Death and Banishment for matter of Conscience, and
because of difference in Judgment in Spiritual Things; then thus it shall be
done unto you, Ye shall Fall, and Perish, and be Troubled, and Blessings and
Prosperity shall not be unto you. If it be not thus, the Lord has not spoken
by me.

Well Friends, even all ye that have Authority and Power in the Government of
this World, are nearly concerned to take special notice of these things
presented unto you; seeing the Effects of these two Causes are both very
weighty, and infallibly certain, even to you-wards particularly: Very weighty,
because Peace, Prosperity and Happiness; or Misery, Distractions, and Downfall
to you is depending upon the Effects of the Causes; infallibly certain, because
the Justice of God Almighty is such, that he must bring Reward upon all
according to their Deeds, and his Justice cannot be diverted.

But if ye permit Free Liberty of Conscience in the Exercise of Godliness in
Faith and Worship unto all People under your Power, then shall Peace and
Prosperity be unto you, according to the Purpose of God: But if ye impose upon
Conscience in any wise, by Force in Religious Matters, and will not be
instructed and advised, to the contrary, Then shall Misery and Destruction
certainly be unto you, according to the Justice of God's Vengeance.

These things are so; as a Servant of God I present them to you, and not upon
Fiction or Fancy, but as I have received them from the Lord God, by his Spirit,
which signifies the Verity and Certainty of those Things in my Soul.

Friends, Doubt not of these things; for verily the Time is at hand, and it
must surely come to pass, my Spirit shall see it, and rejoice therein, if in
this Body I may not behold it, That imposing and forcing of Conscience, by Laws
and Ordinances of Men, upon Penalties on Men's Persons and Estates, in Religious
Matters, shall be expunged, subdued, and abandoned in these Nations and
Kingdoms of the World, and it shall be no more: But Liberty, Liberty shall be
Re-planted, Embraced and Renowned amongst Men; and Truth and Righteousness,
Mercy and Peace, True Liberty and Freedom, Justice and True Judgment, with all
the Causes and Effects thereof shall flourish, and grow, and prosper on the
Earth; and the contrary shall fall, and rise no more. This Day is dawning nigh,
its at the Door; Blessed are they that are prepared for it.

Wherefore let all Flesh Hear and Fear, Bow and Tremble, and let the Hearts of
the Righteous rejoice and be exceeding glad; let all the Upright in Heart put
on the Garment of Praises and Deliverance: For the Day is at hand, that
Antichrist (with all his Strength and Power, Force and Policy) shall be a
Hissing, and Reproach, and Shame, Contempt unto the Saints of the Most High,
and amongst whom the Lord God Omnipotent does and must Reign and Rule in
Dominion, and Glory, and Power over all, forever, and evermore.

E. B.
London, this 12th Month, 1661.
Antichrist's Government Justly Detected, etc.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning Imposing Religion, the Case stated, and the Unrighteousness thereof
showed, with the Danger thereof also made appear by manifest Proofs.

Presented unto the Rulers and People of our Age, throughout the World.

TO Impose any Kind of Religion, any Way of Worship, or Form of Faith, and
outward Conformity, in any Practices of Duty to Godwards, by an External
Authority of men, through force of Laws, commanding and requiring such
Conformity in Faith and Worship upon Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures on men's
Persons and Estates, as has been practiced in the World since the days of the
Apostles, amongst the Nations professing Christianity: This thing is not of the
Lord, nor according to Commands of Christ, and Example of the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, declared of in the Scriptures; but is of Antichrist, and
Unrighteous, Unequal, and Dangerous, to the Destruction of the Souls and Bodies
of both the Imposers and the Imposed.

1. Such kind of Forcing and compelling by force of outward Laws into such
outward Conformity of Religion, Faith and Worship, Church Government and
Ministry, was never in being, nor ever practiced in the true Christian
Churches, amongst the Apostles in their days; nor ever was such a thing known
among the Primitive Christians: There was no such kind of Laws made nor
executed amongst them, nor such Force exercised on men's Persons and Estates in
such Cases; there was no outward Violence used in the Primitive Times, to
compel any to Conformity to Christian Faith, Worship and Practice of Christian
Religion: None of the first Christians were made truly Religious, and converted
from the Way of Error to the Way of true Christianity by such means of outward
Force, and Commandments of Men put upon them; They were not I say converted
themselves to the Christian-Faith and Religion, nor made Conformable
Worshippers of God in his Spirit by that Way and Means; nor did they seek to
convert others into Conformity to Church Government and Christian-Worship by
force of outward Laws upon Pains and Forfeitures: These things were not in the
true Church of Christ, in the Apostles days, amongst the Primitive Christians.

2. But the true Way of Conversion among them, to the Christian-Faith, and
Worship, and true Church Government, whereby people were made rightly
conformable to the true Christian Religion, as it was amongst the Apostles, was
by and through the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, preached amongst
them in the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit of God, of such as were truly
called and sent of him, which did turn People to the Spirit of God; and that
Ministry wrought in them to receive it, by which their Consciences were
convinced, and their Hearts persuaded in the Love of christ to believe in him,
and receive him, and follow him; and thus were they drawn, and begotten, and
converted into the Faith, and Worship and Practice of the true
Christi^-Religion, and made conformable to the Government and Order of the true
Church of Christ in all things, by this Means and Way only; and not at all by
any outward Force and Compulsion exercised upon them they were converted to the
true Christian-Religion, and to the true Worship of God; and by the same Way
did they convert and turn others to the same, and this only is the Perfect Way
of Christian-Conformity to the true Christian-Worship and Church-G^ment; it
ever was since the beginning of Christianity in the World, and i^ unto this
day, even to persuade the Heart and to convince the Conscience inwardly by the
sound Doctrine of the Gospel, through the Operation of the Spirit of Christ,
and by Love, and Meekness, and Patience, and all the Fruits of Righteousness,
held forth in Doctrine and Conversation, which may answer the Testimony of God
in all men's Consciences. Hereby, and in this Way is true Conversion wrought in
the heart, to the turning men from all Error, unto the Truth, and from all
false Worships, and Heresies and Evil Way^s, unto the true Christian-Worship,
and Conformity to holy Church and Religion.

This (I say) was the Way among the primitive Christians ^d Apostles of old,
and is the same among the true Christians in this Age; and they that would
conform others, and are conformed themselves otherwise in this Case of Religion
and Worship to God-wards, are not in the Example of Christ and his Saints; but
out of the Life, and contrary to the first Christians, and President of the
Holy Scriptures, as hereafter is manifested.

The Way and Practice of Imposing Religion, and Conformity in Worship and
Church Government, by Force (as aforesaid) is so far from being according to
the Practice and Example of the Apostles and the primitive Churches of
Christians, that they are even contrary to the Commands and Exhortations of
CHRIST and his Apostles, and Example of the Scriptures.

1. As in the Parable of the Wheat and the Tares, Mat. 13. when it was desired
of the Servants, that they might go and gather out the Tares, that the Enemy
had sown, from among the Wheat, it was commanded to the contrary by the
Husbandman, even that they should suffer the Tares to grow among the Wheat till
the Harvest, and not pluck them up, lest they hurt the Wheat thereby.

Now though there be an invisible Mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven secretly
signified in this Parable, more then may here be said; yet it is also clearly
signified, That Christ would have no Imposition nor Violence used upon the
Tares, nor that they should pluck them up by Force; but that the good Corn and
the bad (...) grow together in one Field till the Harvest.

And thus much this Parable bears the Proof of; Suppose there be Heresies, and
Heretics, and Profane Persons, that are not in the Truth, but in Errors, who
are bad Corn, even as the Tares to the Wheat; in that Kingdom, City or Family,
where there is also converted Saints, and holy Persons, and true Members of
Christ, who are as the Wheat to the Tares; yet such Heretics and Profane
Persons, that are in Error, ought not to be plucked up violently, to wit,
Imprisoned, Bannished, and put to Death, Burned and Destroyed from amongst the
Righteous, though they grow amongst them, even in the s^ Field: The converted
Saints ought not (I say) to destroy by ^^nnishment or Death the Heretics, and
Unconverted and Unconformable Persons from amongst them; but they are to let
them live, even grow amongst them in the same Field, in the same Kingdom, City
or Family, till Harvest. And thus much the Parable may truly signify, Even a
Liberty to live for the Tares, the bad Corn, the evil Persons, among the Wheat,
the Righteous Pers^, without being imposed upon by Cruel Force and Outward
Violence, to compel into Conformity.

2. As in the Case among the Saints and true Believers; where some believed,
(...) might (...) all (...), others did (...) H^s, and some esteemed one day
above (...), and othe^^ esteemed every day alike, Rom* 14. Here was some
difference in Judgment and Practices amongst the Believers, about M^^ts and
D^^es (abou^^ which thi^ there has been much Imposition and Force used in the
World since the Apostle days) Well, But what does the Apostle Paul (...), and
advise in this Case? Does (...) threaten Violence toward any of them, or
signify any forcible Commands or Impositions to be used to bring them into
Conformity and Unity in the things and Matters about which they were divided?
No, no; but this is his advice to the Church of Christ (of which he was a true
and able Minister) Judge not one another about such things, nor do not impose
any Practice upon thy Brother; for to Christ Jesus ^is Master every Believer
stands or falls. And says the Apostle, L^^ every Man be fully persuaded in his
own Mind, verse 5.

And hereby it is manifestly proved, That in the Churches of Primitive
Christians, the Saints and true Christians were not imposed upon by
Commandments of M^n, or outward Laws, in the matters of their Religion and
Practice of Conscience; there was no signification of force to be used for
Conformity; but wh^^y contrary, even every Believe^ had the Liberty of the
Spirit of Christ, and as he was by that persuaded in his own mind to do, or
leave undone in such cases; and every one was to mind the Teachings of the
Spirit of Christ in himself; for to that he was to stand or fall, and not to
impose upon another, no, not so much as to judge his Brother in any case of
difference in Judgment or Practice; but they were to leave one another to the
Persuasions of the Spirit of Christ in their own minds.

3. As in the Case where the Apostle exhorted the Saints to be Like-minded.
^^il. 3. But says he, If any (...) Otherwise-minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you: By which Saying it is m^nifest, That the Unity and Conformity of
Saints in Mind and Practice was not by Imposition, or any outward Force
threatened or exercised upon their Persons or Estates; but contrary-wise, if
there was any Difference in Mind and Practice amongst any of them, that was to
be amended; and Unity made up, when God revealed the same Truth in all, as he
had done in some: if any were not so minded in any thing as others were, they
were not to be imposed upon; but let God reveal the same, and bring into
Conformity; this was the Apostle's Counsel. And verse. 16. Nevertheless,
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule; that is to
^^y, so far as the Rule of the Spirit of Christ is made manifest, or in wh^^
measure the perfection thereof is attained unto, let every one walk in the same
measure, and by the same Rule; and if any have not the self-same measure of the
Spirit, and know the self-same things, let such alone, without imposing upon
them, leave them to walk in the measure of Light and knowledge that they have
received, though it be not the self-same measure that others have received, and
if they want any Knowledge, or be in any thing otherwise-minded, God shall
reveal the same unto them, even the same thing, as they grow in the same
measure of Grace and Knowledge: And here is the perfect Way of Unity and
Conformity, as the Primitive Christians were exercised in the true Faith and
Worship, and true Christian Religion in their days. And so to impose by Force
upon Paint and Forfeitures in Religious Matters, is clearly contrary to all
these Scriptures, and to many more in the New Testament.

4. In that Case, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. where the Apostle exhorts the Elders, To take
^^e Over^^ght of God's Flock, not by Constraint or Force, but Willingly; not
for (...) by Luc^^, but of a ready Mind; neither (...) being Lords ^ver God's
Heritage: which c^ly signifies against Imposing upon the Flock of God, or
forcing in Religious Matters; for ye see the Elders might not be constrained or
forced to take the Oversight of the Flock; neither (having the Oversight of it)
might they be ^ (...)^y, no^^ (...)(...) Heritage, nor use any (...)(...) the
Apostle; and the con^ (...)(says he). (...) Lov^, (...) g^ El^ ^or (...)upon
them in ^igor or (...)Elders and Ministers, overseeing (...)oversee God's
Heritage, (...)self-denial, and in all the (...)hereby with the Word of
(...)wards; and not ruling over them as (...)Lordship; by forcing and
(...)imprisoning and (...)as has been (...)^ver the Heritage of God,
(...)Lords over the Flock, (...)example of Scriptures; and (...)Gentleness, and
good Example (...) Peter's Instructions.

Thus it is clearly manifest throughout (...)the way of imposing Religi^^, and
(...)Worship and Church Government, in the dispens^ of (...) Gospel, as
aforesaid, is contrary to the commands of Chri^ (...)example of Scriptures, and
is not of God, nor according unto him; And now I shall ^^^w in the fourth
place, of whom ^it is (...) ^y whose Example this violence used, and prsecution
unto (...)on, and also the beginning of impo^ (...) force ^^ongst Christians.

4. All this persecution (...)been in the world, as impriso^ments, (...)unto
death, and grievous Afflic^, has been of (...)through the (...) (...) Envy of
the Devil, against God (...)that Persecution (...)before the (...) (...) Christ
in the (...), it (...)the particulars of it, as it is signified
(...)Transactions in (...)^^^wledged by all, that such cruel Persecutions were
of the D^^il.

And again in the days of Christ and his Apostles, (...) was the force and
(...) by (...) practiced ^^on the true (...) Christians by ^^e Je^^ and
(...)which was in ^licted upon Chri^ Apostles, and the Christians, was
imposi^ion and (...)Religion; (...)so much for comp^ing them to any thing, as
from that way of Ri^ and (...)which they walked; they were ^ded (...)in the
Name of Jesus, and were ^^pris^n^^ ^anished, and greatly (...) by the I^^^s,
(that (...) pro^ People) (...)Religion, (...)for the ^: I need (...) m^ntion
the particular pro^fs for this thing, it is so clear (...)and elsewhere, how the
Primitive Christians were forced and impo^^^ upon by cruel Laws, and violent
Persecutions for their Christian Religion sake; all (...)out of (...) and
(...)in the heart (...) wicked (...), (...) Go^ by all. ^^t

5. This Way and Practice of imposing upon (...)(...) Pesecution (...) the same
was^ ^gst Chr^, nor ^cticed by any called Christians, (...) (...) Faith, which
some did (...)afterterwards: For even in the Apo^ (...) some were gone ou^ from
them into the Way of C^i^, that killed (...) (...); and into the Way of Balaam;
that went for Gift and Rewards, (...) these were Apostates (...) the true
Church; and they were (...) and ^uch li^^, as Paul to (...) (...); such as
these were al^^^dy sprung up in the first Age, and they grew (...) (...) in the
second Ages And these were the Antichrist^ and ^^lse Pro^ whith John (...) were
gone out from the true Church into the World, in his (...), and these deceived
the World by the Form of Godliness, and (...) (...) (...), (...) the Power and
Spirit of Christ: And the Apostates from the (...) (...), which were over
spread in many Nations, and grown (...), were (...) Sea, and the Earth, out of
which the Beast arose. Rev. 13. And it was (...)War with the Saints, and to
overco^^ (...)worship him; and he should CAUSE the ^^rth, and (...) that dwell
therein, to worship; and (...) should CAUSE (...) should be killed; and (...)
should CAUSE all, (...) (...) (...) (...)^, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, to
receive ^^s Mark, etc. And this Beast was the Authority of Antichrist, that
arose among the Aposta^^^ and the false Prophets, that thus Caused and
Compelled all to worship the Beast and his Image: Mark how often the word
CAUSED is used in that Chapter, which is, Compelled, or Forced; and it was the
Antichrist, the Beast, that did it, the Authority that arose among the Apos^
Christians, that were gone from the true Church: and this was the first that we
read of any Forcing or Compelling to Worship, or persecuting about Worship, and
Imposing about the same, since the days of the Apostles, through Ages, amongst
them called Christians: and here was the beginning of Imposing by (...), and
Violent Laws, in the matters of Worship and Religion, amongst the People called
Christians, and one Sect and Sort, according to its Authority, imposed by Laws
and Force upon another, causing and compelling one another to worship and
believe according to his Form and Image; and as any Sect of Christians gained
outward Authority over others, that same has caused and forced all others by
outward violence into Conformity to its Way and Worship; and this has been
amongst the People called Christians in the Apostasy, ever since Antichrist and
his power rose up amongst them: and thus, and at this time beg^n first the
imposing of Worship, and persecuting about the same amongst Christian^: And
thus it is manifest to be of Antichrist, and of the Wicked one, and not of the
Lord.

6. By what is said, it is plain, That all in this present Age who impose by
force of Laws, and compel to worship, and persecute about the same, are not in
the Example of Christ, or his Apostles, or any the good Primitive Christians;
but in so doing are in the Example of the Persecutors of the holy Prophets, and
in the Example of the cruel Jews that killed Christ, and persecuted the Saints;
and in the Example of the cruel Heathens, that violently persecuted the
Christians in diver^ Ages and Countries, and are indeed of Antichrist, and of
the Beast, that arose up against the Saints, and made War against them; and
such are all they that do impose upon the Persons, Esta^^s and Conscien^^s of
^n at this day upon the account afores^: And this is worthy of ^ll me^^ serious
Consideration.

And now, in the next place I shall proceed to show, how (...) and Unreasonable
it is, for any called Christians to impose upon the Consciences of others, and
to force them by Laws and Commandments in the Matters of (...), and to
persecute ^^out the s^^e.

1. I^ it unrighteous, because it is an intruding upon the (...) and Privilege
of God, and seems to be a derogating from his Honor Power and Domi^ which
properly is in himself and pertains to him alone, and not unto mortal man,
which is to give Laws to Conscience, and to exercise it in all (...) of
Religion respecting his Worship Duty and Service, and to persuade (...) (...)
Conscienc^^ by his Spirit to follow him, and observe all things which he
^quires in Faith and Worship: This Power is only proper to God alone, and to
him pertains, and to no other: And therefore for any man, or earthly Powers
of man, to give Laws and Rules to Conscience, and to impose upon men in the
matters of God's Worship, forcing, Conformity in Spiritual Exercis^^ by violent
Commands, upon Forfeitures and Punishments, seems to be, and really is an
assuming and presuming upon God's Authority, which belongs only to him, and
tends to rob him of the same, and is an entrenching upon his Soveraignity, and
is wholly Unrighteous; and inasmuch as it is a ^g in the Seat of God, and
forcing the Exercise of Worship, and intruding upon his Blessed Privilege, and
a presuming into his Authority, which he commits to no man, a robbing him of
his Honor and Spiritual Dominion; therefore to Impose, in Matters Religious,
is Unrighteous on their parts that do practice it. And.

2. It is Unrighteous, because it is contrary to the Command of God, D^ (...)
(...) others (...) (...) would be done unto; but this Imposing in matters of
Worship, is a Practice done by others, which others would not be done unto by
any* and therefore it is Unrighteous: For no one Sect or sort of Christians
would be imp^sed upon in that case by any others, not forced and compelled by
outward Violence against their judgments and Consciences unto such a Conformity
of ^th and Worship; to do thus is not to love a man^ Neighbor as himself, nor
to do to all men as men would be done unto: For if at any time and place, the
Papists (so called) impose upon the Protestants (so called) in this case of
^orcing them unto Conformity, or Persecuting them about Religion, it is cried
out against by such as are so imposed upon, to be Tyranny, Oppression, and
Exacting Unrighteously; and thus every Sect of Christians cry out against
others, that do impose upon them by Force in things Religious, contrary to
their Judgments and Consciences, each sort when they suffer says of others,
They are Unrighteous in such Impositions; though many cannot see it to be
Unrighteous in themselves, when they have the Opportunity to do it, and do
impose upon other; but this is where Self-advantage kills and choaketh the
Witness of (...), though however in it self imposing, as aforesaid, in
Religious Ma^rs is contrary to the Holy Law of God, and a doing to others as
men would not be done unto by others: And therefore it is Unrighteous, both
before God and all just Men.

3. It is Unrighteous to impose Worship by Force, because it is an exercising
Dominion over men's Faith by Force of outward Power, which the Apo^^le
renounces, and seems to forbid, saying, They had not dominion over men's Faith:
^^d if the Apostles themselves had not power and dominion over men's Faith,
that is to say, To Command men's Faith, to believe or do this, or the other, but
(...) the holy Spirit of Christ persuaded their Consciences inwardly; then no
outward Power of Kings or Rulers whatsoever can Justly or Righteously challenge
^h privilege as to have dominion over men's faith, by imposing upon them
through force, which is to take dominion over men's faith, which is unrigh^,
because it is contrary to the Scripture, and to the example of the Apost^
(...), inasmuch as it is exercising dominion and Lord^^ip over the stock of
Christ, and not leaving them to Christ the true Shepherd, who only ought to
teach his people by his Spirit into all truth both of Doctrine, Faith and
(...), (...) has not given power or authority to any Rulers of this World, to
impose by force upon the consciences of his tender stock, nor to rule them in
^y (...), exercising outward force upon them; but whosoever does this, it is
unrighteous.

4. It is Unrighteous, in respect of the Fruits, and Effects which always have
and ever will be produced by such Imposition upon Conscience in Religious
Matters, as aforesaid (to wit) Persecution and Cruelty of Men exercised in that
Case, which ever has been, and will be brought forth in Nations and Kingdoms,
where such Impositions are: For if we look into Ages past, what Strife and
Contention, what Enmity and Bitterness, what Wars and Bloodsheds, what Dangers
and Mischiefs, what Persecutions and Cruelties have been brought forth among
men, between Kingdom and Kingdom, between City and City, between Kings and
their Subjects, between Neighbors and Neighbors, between Brother and Brother,
upon this very Unrighteous Account of Imposing upon Conscience by Force in
respect of Worship? and every Nation and City at this day is in the same Danger
of the same Mischiefs, where such impositions are in Force; and therefore needs
must the Occasion of these so unjust and unrighteous Effects, which does
administer the Reason of such Contentions Wars, Persecutions and Cruelties be
Unrighteous, and such is imposing in Matters Religious, as aforesaid: and this
is partly manifest, and will be more and more through the World, That that
Kingdom, City and Country will not be free from these Dangers and Mischiefs,
but will always be liable unto them while this kind of Imposition by Force on
the Conscience is unremoved; and that which is the Occasion of such continual
present Dangers, to destroy Kingdoms, Cities and Peoples is Unrighteous; and
such is Imposition in the Matters of Worship and Religion.

5. It is unrighteous in any King, Prince, or Authority of this World to
Impose, as aforesaid, because it diverteth, confounds and destroys the End
of Just Rule and Government amongst men one over another, which is only to Rule
well in outward Affair, and over the outward Man, to keep that in Peace and
Good Order, and to be a Praise to them that do Well, and a Terror to all that
do Evil in the Outward Man; this is the only End of Government and Rule amongst
men in this World, To Rule well over the Outward Man, in things between man and
man; but not to Rule over men's Consciences, and to exercise Lordship over men
in the Spiritual Matters of Christ's Kingdom, this pertains not to the outward
Worldly Government of Men; and therefore whosoever do take it upon them, and
thereby do oppress the Conscience of any, by forcing in Spiritual Mattters,
does Unrighteously, inasmuch as they do diver^ the End of their Authority, and
use their Power to another End then God has appointed them: and while they
should only preserve and defend the outward man by good and wholesome Laws,
made for that purpose, they vex and oppress the Inward Man, even the
Conscience, by forcing upon it, and Imposing through Violence in the Matters
Religious, which is contrary to the End of Just Rule and Government in the
World; and therefore is wholly Unrighteous.

6. It is Unrighteous, because it effects no Good End, nor begets people into
the true Faith and Worship of God; but on the contrary, makes many Hypocrites,
even through fear and terror; such Laws forcing Conformity, do make many
hypocritically conform to such or such way of worship, which the Spirit of
Christ does not persuade their Consciences of the truth of; nay, it may be
against their Conscience; and that (Imposition as aforesaid) which is the cause
of this, is surely Unrighteous; unrighteous, because the End propounded by the
Imposers (which is, to make people true Worshippers of God) is utterly
frustrate and void; and none are made true Worshippers of God by such
Imposition and Force, but many are made Hypocrites thereby, and sinners against
God; for what any performs to God-wards by Force, and not of Faith (given into
the heart by God) it is sin; For whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, as says
the Scriptures; and that which is the occasion of hypocrisy and sin, is
unrighteous, and temptation; but such is imposing on Conscience by force in
religious Matters.

7. It is Unrighteous and Unreasonable to Impose by Force upon Conscience,
because it is the Occasion of absolute E^remity put upon many that are Dear and
Precious to the Lord, even such a^ Extremity as may force (unavoidably) the
ruin of either Soul or Body (or both) in this World, and hereafter, For,
suppose such Laws be made for the forcing of Confor^ity, to comm^ men to
Worship upon the Forfeiture of whole Estate, Banishment o^ Death, which is
contrary to the Spirit of Christ, and good Conscience: And if such Laws be not
obeyed, and such Conformity made, but the Conscience kept clear to God, then
the outward Man in his Person, Estate and Family is ruined in this World: and
if such Laws be obeyed, and such Conformity yielded, contrary to good
Conscience, then the Inward Man is ruined, and the Soul and Conscience wounded
and grieved, because God is Offended, and Christ is Denied, and the Law of Men
obeyed rather then the Law of God; and this is by an Extremity occasioned,
through imposed force in the Cases of Conscience, by Authority and Laws of Men.
And that which is the Occasion of such Ruin and Destruction to the Souls and
Bodies of such as fear the Lord, is an Unrighteous Thing, which administers
that woeful Extremity, To deny God, and so to be liable to his Wrath and
Judgments; or, to deny the Authority of Men, and so to be liable to Destruction
of Person and Estate in this World; and such is Imposing of Worship.

8. It is Unrighteous and Unreasonable, because it may destroy the Faith of
some, even of such upon whom Imposition is laid, against their pure
Consciences: For, Suppose a Person (or People) being truly persuaded by the
Spirit of Christ in the true Way of Religion and Worship of God, having therein
true Peace with God in a clean Conscience, and by force of Law, and through
cruel Imposition, should be forced from that Way of Worship which they have had
Peace with God in, and which the Spirit of Christ persuaded them of the truth
of, unto such a Way of Worship which they could not have Peace with God in, nor
the Comfort of his Presence in such Conformity forced upon them; this were
certainly Unrighteous and Unreasonable, that a People (or a Person) should be
forced by Laws from that way wherein they have Peace and Blessings with God, to
that Way wherein their Souls are famished for want of the Presence of the Lord:
Like as if a Person of such a Calling, following the same in a certain City or
Town, whereby he maintained himself in all good things, and wanted nothing; and
yet the chief Magistrate of the said City or Town should forcibly compel (by
Violence) the said Person of so good a Calling, from that his Calling, (whereby
he so well maintained himself in the World) and should force upon him to follow
another Calling, of which he could not live in the World, but by it he might
Perish and Starve; Would not all reasonable men conclude, the same Imposition
of the said Magistrate upon the said poor Man were Oppression, Cruelty,
Unrighteous, and Unreasonable: And the case of imposing Religion, as aforesaid,
is the greater Oppression and Cruelty, inasmuch as it respects the Immortal
Soul, which is more worth then the Body; and the other respects but the Body,
which is of less worth (with all that concerns it) then is the Soul, which is
Immortal.

Lastly, It Is Unrighteous, inasmuch as it is contrary to the Scriptures (of the
New Testament in the Dispensation of the Gospel) which are before cited, and
contrary to Christ and his Apostles Example in the Primitive Churches of
Christians: And thus it is manifest, That Imposing by Force upon Conscience in
Religious Matters is Unrighteous and Unreasonable, and is not of Christ, but of
Antichrist, as is by plain Reasons demonstrated.

And now I shall in a few words show, The Danger of Imposing Worship, (...)
aforesaid, and how Dangerous it is to any King, Prince or outward Authority,
that are or may be the Imposers on the Consciences of Men, by Force, in the
Case of Worship and Religion.

1. It is Dangerous to cause the People to sin, to cause them to conform in
Appearance, when the Heart is not devout to God; and this makes them
Hypocrites: Dangerous to cause People to perform Duty to God-wards, without
Faith in God; and this makes them Sinners against him; For whatsoever is not of
Faith is Sin: Dangerous to cause some to deny Christ before men, for the Fear
of this World, and Terrors of Violent Men, and to forsake that Way which they
know is of the Lord, and to follow that Way which they know is not of him; and
this denying the Lord of Life, and a great Abomination against him: And the
Cause of that cause is, Imposing by Force upon Conscience in Matters Religious;
and the Reason of all this is, The Imposers, such as make and Execute such
Force; and this Danger all such are involved in, even the Danger of causing
People to sin against God, of Denying Christ, of making Hypocrites, and so even
in the Danger of Destroying Souls, which is a desperate Danger: Oh! that all
the Imposers of Religion by Force would consider it, and look upon the Danger
which they are deeply fallen into, and involved in, by reason of such their
Imposing upon Conscience; Alas! they are in the Danger of destroying Souls, of
causing a Nation and People to sin against God, and to deny the Lord of Life.
And how great is such a Danger! even to be avoided of all, if they love their
own Souls, and not to be the Occasions and Cause of destroying Souls by causing
People to sin; and this Danger all the Imposers upon Conscience are captivated
in. And

2. It is Dangerous to be a Means to destroy that Kingdom, City or Country, and
the Rulers thereof, by begetting and nourishing Discontents, Heartburnings, and
Envying among the People, one against another, and against their Rulers,
because of such Unrighteous Force and Violence, exercised by Imposition upon
their Consciences. Dangerous, I say, to raise into Contentions, Strifes,
Broils, and Bloodshed it self, in a Kingdom amongst People. And this is a
Danger violently impending upon such Rulers or do impose, as aforesaid; even a
Danger to ruin their own Power and Authority, and to ruin the People under
their Dominion, by raising the People into Discontents and Broils, through the
Cruelty of the Oppression of Imposing Religion; and the Example hereof may be
read in Nations and Countries at this day; what Discontents and Contentions
have arisen dangerously among people one toward another, and toward their
Rulers, upon this Cause and Occasion of Imposing Religion by Force
Unrighteously; and it is a Danger this day that all the Rulers of the World are
exposed unto, and deeply involved in, where this Cause of Imposing Religion is
ext^nt in Force.

3. It is Dangerous to Impose Religion by Force, because it must needs produce
Oppression, Persecution, Violence and Hatred in the prosecution thereof; and
this is dangerous to any Kings, Rulers or Governors, to be reputed Oppressors,
Persecutors and Violent Men; this is Infamous, and of bad Report amongst men,
and Abomination and Wickedness in the sight of God, for any Rulers upon Earth
to be Oppressors, Persecutors and Cruel Men; and such consequently must they
be, that are Imposers upon men's Consciences in Matters Religious. And this
Danger all the Rulers of the World are in, that do Impose Religion by Force,
even to render themselves Infamous by Oppression in the sight of men, and to
render themselves Sinners against God; and this Danger falls upon the Imposers
of Religion, because of such their Impositions by Force upon the Consciences of
men.

Lastly, It Is Dangerous, because it is of Antichrist, and not of Christ, as
before proved; and all that do Impose by Violence on the Consciences of Men in
Religious Cases, are of Antichrist in so doing, and because thereof, liable to
God's Indignation and Heavy Wrath in this World and hereafter; and it is
Dangerous to bring the Wrath and Judgments of God upon Men that are guilty
thereof; for God will be avenged upon such his Enemies, that exercise Violence
and Persecution upon Men for their Conscience sake: And this is a Danger
unavoidable, which all that impose Religion are liable unto, even to be Cut Off
in the Wrath of the Lord, and to undergo his Indignation for all the Reasons
before showed.

These, with many other Dangers are they involved in that are Imposers in
Religious Matters; Therefore, Oh that the Rulers of this World would be Wise
now in their last day; and would consider the Unjustness and Unreasonableness
of their Imposing Religion, and the many Dangers that attend the same! Oh that
they would learn God's Counsel, and Rule only for him in Justice, Mercy, Truth,
Equity and true Judgment, exercising the same in the Meek and Lowly Spirit of
Jesus among men, and over whom they are set to Rule in this World, and would
give to God Almighty his Due, and Right, and Privilege, in exercising the
Consciences of Men by his Spirit in all Cases of Christ's Kingdom; for it only
belongs to him to be Ruler in the Inward Man: Oh! that the Rulers of this World
would give this Power and Dominion unto God, and would from henceforth never
more exercise Lordship over Conscience by Imposing Religion through Force; but
would only Rule well over the Outward Man, in the things pertaining to Man, and
would leave to God the Rule and Exercise of Conscience: Oh! then would it go
well with them, and Happy and Blessed should they be in such their Authority;
and Peace should be unto them if that they only took the Government (as
appointed of God) over the outward Man, and did not impose upon the inward man
by Force in Religious Matters, but committed that Authority to God; Then, I
say, should Peace and Blessings be unto them: But while it is otherwise, even
while they exercise Dominion and Lordship over Conscience, as aforesaid, they
do unjustly and Unreasonably, and bring upon themselves many Dangers, and are
liable to Contentions, Oppositions, Wars, and many Mischiefs in this World, and
to the Anger and Wrath of God in the World that is to come.

CHAP. II.
Concerning Heresy, the Case Stated, What it is in it self, and who a Heretic
is, and who are the absolute true Judges of it; and what Punishment pertains to
such as are truly convicted of Heresy.

1. THere is such a thing as Heresy in it self, even many Heresies and Errors
abounding amongst the Sons of Men in the World at this day; and there was
Heresy in the days of the Aposties, and amongst them, brought in by such as
erred from the Truth, after they had once known the Truth, and received it, as
ye may read; the Jews they cried out of Heresy in their time, which caused the
Apostle to say to them, Acts 24. 14. After that Way which ye call Heresy do we
worship the God of our Fathers: And the Apostle said (1 Cor. 11.) to the
Church, There must be also Heresies amongst you, that they that are approved of
God may be made manifest: And (2 Pet. 2. 1.) it is spoken of some who should
privily bring in Damnable Heresies into the Church: By all which it is
manifest, there was in the Apostles days Heresy and Heresies, as there is at
this day, even many Heresies and Errors in the World, held, professed and
maintained by the Apostate Christians, that are gone into the Form of Godliness
without the Power, and are turned from the Spirit of Christ, and the soundness
of his Doctrine, into the formal Profession of Religion, and of the words of
Christ and his Apostles, and among such are the Heresies and Errors.

2. Heresy is somewhat believed and professed in Practice of Worship, and in
Point of Faith and Doctrine, that is either contrary to, or different from the
perfect Truth of the Gospel of Christ; something (I say) held and practiced in
Point of Worship, Faith and Doctrine, which is not justly according to the pure
Truth of Jesus, but either in whole, or in part different from, and contrary
thereunto; and whatsoever Practice of Worship or Point of Doctrine, as is so
held, professed, believed or practiced is Heresy and Error, because it is
different from and contrary to (in whole or in part) the perfect Truth of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, and because thereof it is Heresy; and such is Heresy
in it self, different from and contrary unto the Gospel of the Kingdom of
Christ; though as for the particular Parts and Points of Heresy, in Worship,
Doctrine and Practice, which are at this day held, professed and believed among
Apostate Christians are so very many, that they would be too large here to
ennumerate; but my present Intention is only this, To show at large what
Heresy is in it self, and who is a Heretic.

3. A Heretic (one that is properly so) is such a Person as has sometime
believed in the Truth, and made Profession and Acknowledgment of the Way of
true Christianity, and has received and held the true Faith of the Gospel of
Christ, and been in some measure united to Christ, and a Member of his Church,
but is fallen and degenerated in whole or in part from the said Faith and
Acknowledgment of Christ Jesus, and the Way of Christianity, and has erred
from the Truth of the Gospel once believed and received, and so is divided (in
whole or in part) from the true Church of Jesus Christ, and from being a Member
of the same; and not only so, but has received also, and does hold some False
Principles, Opinions, and Practices, either different from, or contrary to the
Truth of the Gospel before believed in, known, and professed; such a man is a
Heretic (though generally, yet) truly described: Not such as are Heathens,
Unconverted, who never believed yet in the Gospel, such who have always
resisted the Truth, and never yet were convinced of the Way of the Lord, nor
ever tasted of his Word and Power; but have always been Strangers to the
Israel of God, and Enemies to the Church of Christ; such are not properly
called Heretics, though they do err in Mind, Heart, and Practice; but such
only as have believed in Christ, and Professed his Truth, and been of the
Church, and yet are fallen away from the perfect Truth, into some false
Principles and Practices, and are become unsound in Judgment, and erroneous in
their Understandings, and have forsaken the Way of Truth (in whole, or in part)
and are corrupted, and lost their Love to God and his Ways, and are obstinate,
and hardened against the Truth (which once they believed) and with False
Doctrines, Principles and Practices do gainsay and oppose the Truth, and them
that are steadfast in it: These are Heretics, and truly so called; Men that
have erred from the Faith, that have made ship-rack of it, and of a good
Conscience, that are turned against the Lord and his People, and gainsay the
Truth that once themselves have believed and professed. These are Erroneous
Men, and Heretics; and such Heretics there were in the Church, and among the
Corinthians; and there were such who did creep into the Church, and privily
brought in Heresies amongst them, as before is proved. And these Heretics were
such as had once been amongst the true Members of the true Church, and been
convinced of the true Jesus, and had sometimes walked with them, but were
departed from them, and had forsaken the Truth, and received false Principles
and Opinions, and therefore they were truly nominated Heretics, and all such
at this day are truly so called. And this is the Description in general of a
Heretic.

4. Now I come to declare who are the true Judges of Heresy and Heretics; Not
every man can judge in this case, in his own Thoughts, Imaginations, and
Suppositions, who are Heretics, and who are guilty of Heresy; though it has
been the practice for many Generations amongst the Apostate Christians to
reproach, traduce and accuse one another to be Heretics, and each sort and
sect of false Christians, to judge, censure and condemn others that are not of
their Judgment and Opinion, but different from them, to be Heretics and
Erroneous; and this has been usual among many; but this is not the true
Judgment, not the way to try and judge truly who Heretics are, by one Sect
and sort slandering and accusing others to be such, because they have not
conformed to their Way and Principles, but been different from them; true
Judgment has not been brought forth in this case, on this wise, but rather
Envy and Enmity has judged, and men's thoughts, imaginations and jealousies
have falsely judged in this matter, and no sound judgment determined who have
been Heretics; for men have judged of one another by their private jealousies
and evil conceivings, and censured one another to be Heretics, without the
Spirit of sound discerning, and just Judgment; and all that Judgment brought
forth in that case, without the infallible Spirit of Christ Jesus, which is
only true Discerner and Judge in the matter, has been false Judgment, and
men have judged one another falsely upon envy and evil suppositions, and without
the Spirit of the Lord; and it has often happened by reason hereof, That such
so judged for Heretics, have been more righteous, and more in the truth, then
they that have so judged them; and the Judges have been more out of the truth,
and more Heretics themselves, then they whom they have falsely Judged: And this
might be made appear through several Times and Ages since the Apostles days,
among the false Christians.

5. None are able to dilcern of Heresy, nor to try and judge justly who are
Heretics, none but they (I say) that have the infallible Spirit of God in
them, to guide them, and have infallibility and perfect certainty of Judgment
and Knowledge in that case of Heresy; none else are rightly able to judge who
are Heretics, but such (I say) as have the infallible Spirit of Christ, and
are infallible and certain in their Judgments; these only, and none else, are
able to judge, they only are competent Judges in this case of Heresy, and who
are Heretics; and if any judge in that Case, it is but out of Envy and Enmity,
and in the evil Suppositions and Conceivings, as aforesaid, and must needs be
false and unjust Judgment, if they have not the infallible Spirit of God, and
infallibility of Judgment to discern by, and determine with in that Case; for
no man nor men, may, or can justly judge another in the matter of Heresy, as a
Heretic, by their own thoughts or suppositions, out of their enmity, and for
their self-Interests; but the Judgment in that matter must be just, equal,
holy and true, and only by the Spirit of Christ Jesus which is infallible, and
gives infallibility of Judgment and discerning into all cases and things; for
it was Christ Jesus and his Apostles, and the Saints that had the infallible
Spirit of God, and infallibility of judgment, that could only judge justly of
such things, who were Heretics, and who were not; and it was not the Jews nor
Pharisees that could justly discern or judge in God's Spiritual matters; but
they always judged of Christ and his Apostles, and of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God falsely and unjustly in their evil suppositions and envy; and
this was because they had not the infallible Spirit of Judgment, nor the
certain, infallible knowledge and discerning of different things in Spiritual
Cases; and so it is now at this day amongst them called Christians; there is
none can discern truly, nor judge justly what Heresy is, nor who is a
Heretic, but such as are guided by the infallible Spirit of God, and have
infallibility of Judgment; nor none can make Laws whereby justly to judge of
Heresy and Heretics, but them who have the same infallible spirit of God
guiding them, and have received infallibility of Judgment: So both the
Lawmakers, and the Judges of the Law, must be infallible in knowledge and
judgment in this case of Heresy, otherwise the Law made for that purpose, and
the Judgment given by that Law are both False and Unjust, and not according to
God and his Truth, but are to be justly judged and condemned of the Lord God in
his day and season.

6. Now it remains to be enquired into, Whether there is any Punishment
pertaining to Heretics, as such, for such Heresies held by them: Being first
convicted truly thereof, as aforesaid, by the true Church of Christ, in whom
there is infallibility of Judgment, Knowledge and discerning in that case; for
in the true Church of Christ does infallibility of true Judgment and Knowledge
dwell, and every true Member of the true Church has its particular Measure of
the infallible Spirit of Christ, whereby he is certainly persuaded of the Way
of Truth in which he walks, and knows and believes the infallibility of the
Truth he professes, and is certain and secure of the Way of his Peace and
Assurance in God, which he has received and believed; and also, has certainty
and infallibility of Judgment, and Discerning who are out of the Truth, and in
the Way of Error, and are Heretics; such are infallibly known and discerned by
the Spirit of God in the true Church of Christ, and by every Member of the
same, according to his measure of the same Spirit, and Gift of Knowledge and
Discerning by it. And to such as are so convicted by the infallible Spirit of
Christ, for such their Heresies, there is a Punishment pertaining; for
Heretics were to be punished in the Apostles days, according to Paul's
Instructions, 1 Cor. 5. 5. which was, That such a one as had erred from the
Truth which once he knew, should be delivered up unto Satan for the Destruction
of his Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord: Here was a
Punishment described by the Apostle for this Heretic, that had erred and gone
from the Truth, and acted against it, though once he believed in it, and knew
it. And again, Tit. 3. 10. he exhorts and advises, That a man that is a
Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, should be wholly rejected, and
turned away from, and judged with the Holy Spirit of God.

And thus it is clear, there is such a thing as dealing with men that are
Heretics, and punishing them for such their Heresy, according to the
Apostle's Doctrines and Instructions: And without all controversy, such as do
err from the Faith which once they have received, and turn from the Truth in
principle or practice, must not escape unpunished, but must receive the
sentence of just Judgment from God, and from his Saints that continue faithful.

7. But what kind or nature this punishment is of, in what way and manner such
as are Heretics, may be, and ought to be punished, is doubtful to many, and is
a case at this time to be inquired into; for that way and practice of punishing
such as have been supposed to be Heretics, as among the Christians (so called)
for many generations; (to wit) the way and practice of burning, banishing,
killing, imprisoning and afflicting corporally the persons of them that have
been called Heretics, for their heresies, and laying forfeitures and penalties
on their bodies and estates, as has been the practice of Papists and
Protestants toward one another since the Apostles days; this way and practice
has not been of God, nor by any example or precept of the Apostles, or first
Christian Churches established in their days; they did not practice or
prescribe such dealing toward them that were truly Heretics, and were erred
from the Faith and Truth of Jesus Christ; not Killing, Burning, Banishing and
Prosecuting the Persons of Heretics, this was not the way of the Spirit of God
among the Primitive Christians, they did it not, nor gave institution for the
doing of it at any time; but this way of dealing toward Heretics, in such
cruel proceedings as has been in practice for many Ages, is of Satan and
Antichrist, and is downright Murder, Robbery, and Wickedness in the Eye of the
just God; while one Sect or Sort of Christians (so called) have punished and
enviously persecuted another Sort different from them as Heretics, with
grievous Afflictions in Body and Estate, even unto Death and Banishment; this
has not been of God, nor true Christian-like, but of the wicked one, and
Cruelties and Murders before the Lord; neither are the same proceedings at this
day, in any part of the World, where they are extant, any just legal Righteous,
Christian-like way of proceeding according to Apostolical example; but are of
Antichrist, and of the Wicked one, as I have said: And this Way and Practice of
proceeding toward Heretics, has been so far from effecting the return of any
to the Way of the Lord, that have been erred from it, (as the end of proceeding
toward Heretics should effect) that the way and practice of Killing,
Banishment, and Persecuting by violence Heretics (so called) has hardened men
in their evil way, and made such as have been Heretics more bold, confident,
and obstinate in their Way, Heresy and Errors and many that have been more
righteous, and clearer from Heresy then such as have so judged them, have been
destroyed by cruel dealing, and many others have been destroyed in their
Iniquities and Errors, by being so proceeded against: And thus true Judgment
and Justice in this case have been perverted, and turned backwards, and because
of Ignorance and Cruelty the Righteous have suffered unjustly, as the Wicked,
and the Wicked have suffered by unjust proceedings; and thus the Way of
Righteousness has not been known in the Earth, but Error upon Error, one evil
upon another has come, onesin added to another among the Sons of men in the
Apostasy, amongst the false Christians.

8. But the perfect Way of the Lord in proceeding toward such as are truly
Heretics, so discerned and infallibly judged to be by the true Church of
Christ, is this; Let such first be admonished, advised, instructed and warned
again and again; to beware, return from, and renounce such false Principles,
Doctrines and practices held by them, and this in the spirit of Christ Jesus in
perfect love, and in meekness, and in the wisdom of the Lord God; such, I say,
as are erred from the way of the Lord, and from the faith of Christ once
received, into error, ought thus in the first place to be dealt withal, by the
Way of Admonishing, Instructing, Warning and Reproving, that there may be a
Returning and Repentance toward the Lord, and his Truth again, from whence
they have erred; and if such shall not receive the Instructions, Reproofs and
Admonitions of the true Church of Christ, then such Heretics shall be rejected
and cast out, according to Titus the 3. 10, 11. says the Apostle, A man that
is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject, knowing that he
that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself; here is
the Description of the punishing of an Heretic; if he will not receive
Admonition, after being given him again, and again, but does harden his heart
against the Church, and against the truth of Christ, and will not repent, but
persicts in his errors and heresies, and that after reproof and admonition,
then he is to be rejected; rejected, what is that? but a casting out from the
unity of Saints, a departing and absenting from such an one, and a depriving of
him of the peace and comfort, joy and felicity of the Assembly of God's People
and Servants; a turnning from such in Converse and Fellowship, and a separating
from them, and judging them by the Spirit of Christ Jesus; and this is
rejecting an Heretic, and delivering him to Satan, according to 1 Cor. 5. 4,
5, 6. When the Church (The Saints) were met together, with the Spirit of God,
and the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, such a one as had erred from the Truth,
and sinned against it, and was truly an Heretic, should be delivered unto
Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved;
Delivering unto Satan, what is that? but to let him be cast out into the wicked
World, reputing him as such an one, and that he partake not of the sweet,
heavenly and blessed Union and Fellowship of Saints in their Assemblios and
converse with the God of Heaven, in his Spirit and Life; not to be numbered
among the righteous, nor a partaker with them in the holy Union of the Elect;
to pass judgment upon him eternally, in the estate he is now in, having both
erred from the Truth and rejected and despised the reproofs and Admonitions of
the Church of Christ, and as such to give him up to Satan, to give him up to
that Spirit that has led him aside from the Truth, and hardened his heart
against it; to deliver him up to it, seeing he refuses to be reclaimed from
it, and has chosen to follow it rather then the Truth, let him be left unto,
delivered up unto that Spirit, even unto Satan in the wicked World, let him be
cast out thither among the unclean; and not reckoned among the record and line
of the faithful People; and separated from, and cast out so, as he expresses
it, verse. 11. If any man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous,
a Railer, a Drunkard, etc. with such a one not to accompany, no not to eat: and
this is to deliver a Heritick to Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, and
is the proper punishment of Heresies and Heretics, according to the Apostles
Advice and Precept; but not to kill or punish the persons of men by corporal
Afflictions and Penalties on the Bodies and Estates, for their Error sake, this
the Apostle gave no Commission for; but that such as erred from the Truth, and
walked contrary in Principle or Practice, should be rejected, and delivered up
unto Satan, in the way and manner before declared.

Again, in Matthew. 18. 16, 17, 18. it is signified by Jesus Christ to the
selfsame purpose, in these words, If thy Brother trespass, go and tell him
alone; if he repent, forgive him; if not, take one or two, or more with thee,
and tell him again: if (...) still neglect to hear, tell it to the Church; but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let such a one be unto thee (as has offended
and rejected Reproof and Admonition again and again) as an Heathen man and
Publican: In which words of Christ is truly signified the right and proper way
of proceeding toward Heretics and Offenders, even that they be first again
and again admonished and reproved; and if they resist the same, then to be cast
out, separated from, and not enjoy the union and comfort of the Saints amongst
them, but as an Heathen man and Publican; but here is not a word signified of
laying corporal Punishments, and Burning or Banishing persons for their Errors
sake; and though they may offend, no proceedings of this kind are authorized by
Jesus Christ or his Apostles in their day, but in another way and manner, as I
have showed, is the proper way ordained of God to deal with Heretics,
according to the Testimony of holy Scriptures, signified by Christ and his
Apostles in the Primitive Churches.

9. This is Punishment according to the nature of the Offense; for as the
Offense is Spiritual, erring in the mind from the Truth, and a going astray
from the Spirit of Christ in a man's own particular; so the Punishment is
answerable thereunto, even to be separated from the Truth, and not to enjoy the
Virtue, Peace and Comfort of it, nor to be partakers thereof amongst the
faithful People: And this is truly according to the Justice of God, whose
Ways are just and equal altogether, and has appointed just Rewards for
Transgressors, according to the nature and merit of the Fact and Deed that is
evil; and it is righteous and just, that men that sin against their own Souls,
should be deprived of the Peace and Comfort thereof; that all that do depart
from the Truth once known, and sin against the knowledge thereof, should be no
more a partaker of the Virtue and Felicity of the same; and that they who
offend the Lord's People, and revolt from the union thereof, should be cast out
from them, rejected of them, and not enjoy the Blessings and Peace with them;
even that all they that will not hear the Repooofs of the Spirit of God, nor be
drawn with the gentle movings thereof, should be judged and condemned with the
same, and not inherit the Assurance of the Saints: And this is God's Justice,
That all that love Evil, and walk in Iniquity, and despise the Lord, should be
cast out into the sinful World, to have their Portion with the Ungodly, and
all the Workers of Iniquity; and this is just Punishment according to the
nature of the Offense of Error aad Heresy: for in my Judgment, (and I have the
Spirit of just Judgment in this Case) it is great Punishment, and sufficient
for a man that has once tasted of the Virtue of God's Presence among his
People, to be cast out from the Feeling and Enjoyment of that Life, Virtue and
Assembly where it is enjoyed; this is Punishment, and a Wound to the Soul and
Conscience, for a Person that has been turned from Iniquity, and witnessed the
Peace of Christ in the Church, to be left in Iniquity, and to witness the Wrath
and Anger of God daily smiting him in his spirit, and upon his heart; this is
indeed great Punishment: And to have the holy Spirit of Christ in his People
(now) to judge and condemn him, whom sometimes it has comforted and refreshed;
and to be dis-united and separated from that Spirit and Power amongst the
Saints, which once gave Life and Joy amongst them: This man thus judged and
condemned by, and thus separated and dis-united from the Spirit and Power of
Christ, and his People, is punished and afflicted sufficiently for his Error
and Heresy; even in his Conscience, Soul and Spirit he is wounded, grieved,
pierced, vexed and punished, though yet his outward-man, and his person be not
corporally afflicted by Punishments; but he is afflicted within, he is dealt
withal by the Anger of God in his Conscience, he is separated into Darkness,
and from the Light and Glory of God in the Assemblies of his People; he is at a
distance from the Lord God, and the Spirit which should comfort him, does daily
vex and judge him; and the people among whom he should be saved, he is
separated from, and cast out to Satan; is now among the Sons of Belial, the
Children of Wickedness and Ignorance that must be condemned: And this man is
now rejected of the Saints, that once was embraced of them, and thus he is
punished; for it is the greatest Punishment and Vexation for a man that has
once tasted of God's Love, Mercy, Peace and Blessings, amongst God's People,
and to be forsaken of God, and without his Love, in his Anger, in his Judgment,
and in the Curse, amongst the Wicked, without Peace and Blessings amongst the
Saints, this is Punishment indeed, from which the Lord deliver all his People
that fear him.

Yet notwithstanding this kind and manner of Punishment pertains to Heretics
as such, most properly, and not to be destroyed in Person or Estate by outward
Penalties; this I only mean and intend, where the Error of a man, and his
Heresy in his Mind and Judgment does only extend to the hurt of his own Soul,
and against God, and not to the harm of his Neigbours Person or Estate; in that
Case he ought only to suffer as beforementioned, To be delivered up to Satan,
and to be rejected, etc. But if his Error and Heresy do extend further then
only against God, and his own Soul, even to the wronging, injuring and
defrauding of his neighbors person and estate, and outward wrongs, or evils,
or violence, or visible mischiefs be committed, as Murders, or other the like
visible crimes against men, to the injuring of others, then I forbid not
outward external punishments to be corporally inflicted upon the person and
estate of such a man; but it ought to be done, and that by Laws of men,
provided for the same end; even such a man's Error in such his wrong dealing,
may justly and lawfully be punished with death banishment, or penalties,
according to the desert of the crime, if his sin and error be against men, let
men deal with him, and punish him accordingly: If his offense and error be
only against God, and his own soul, let God deal with him, and punish him by
his wrath in his Conscience, which one day will be executed upon all that err
from the Truth, and tribulation and anguish shall be upon his soul that does
evil, as it is written: But it is utterly unlawful, and sin against God, for
men to kill, burn, or banish men for the error of their minds and judgments in
Spiritual matters, while they do walk justly and truly (as men) in the things
pertaining to men, and are not injurious to the Persons or Estates of any, by
reason of such their Error, but they only sin and err against God, and their
own Souls, to the hurt thereof, and not man by any outward Punishments or
Violence executed upon their Persons, but God and his People in the way and
manner of the Spirit of Christ, as before declared, ought for such their Errors
and Heresies to deal with them, and proceed toward them in respect of
Punishment for the same.

Lastly, These things are but said in general concerning Error and Heresy, how
they are to be judged and Punished, and by whom, and to manifest that there is
Error and Heresy, Heretics and Erroneous Persons in the World; for (as I have
said before) it was not now my work to ennumerate the particular parts of
Errors and Heresies, that are held in Principle, Doctrine and Practice, in the
World at this day, they are so many and large; but yet more particularly, thus
I would in brief define Heretics and Heresy: That man (whatsoever he be) is
in Error in all parts of his Principles, and practices, held and maintained by
him in point of Religion and Worship of God, especially that is not Persuaded
of the Truth and verity of his Way by the holy Spirit of God, and led, guided,
and taught in the performance and practice thereof, by the same Spirit of
Jesus; if the holy Spirit of God dwell not in him, and does not preswade the
heart in the belief of the Truth, and teach and lead the man in the practice of
it; such a man, even that man Errs, and is in Error in all what he is, and what
he does, in point of Religion and Duty to God-wards, and that because the
Spirit of Truth and Righteousness is not the only Leader and Teacher in the
things professed and practiced, but either Traditions, Example of others, or
Custom of Places and Times, or something else besides the Spirit of God, which
only persuades into the belief of Truth, and teaches into the performance of
the same, and thus is distinguished and known: A man that is Erroneous in his
Faith and Practice, not taught and persuaded by the Spirit of Christ in what he
is, and in what he does, he is in Error, and in a degree of Heresy, erring in
Mind, and Judgment and Conscience, in Principle and practice, and subject to
err in all things: Now as for the Case of Error and Heresy, as the matter has
stood (in distinguishing of Heretics and Heresies, in judging of the same, and
in proceeding with Heretics in the manner aforesaid) for many Generations in
the Apostasy, since the Apostles days, all this has been wrong, and not in
the Spirit and Power of Christ Jesus, but Men, Cases and Proceedings all have
been perverted from Truth in that matter, because the spirit of darkness and
ignorance has ruled (and not the Spirit of God) in the Hearts of men; and the
spirit that is not of the Father (which Spirit of the Father is only pure,
perfect and infallible, because it is of God, and can truly judge and determine
in these Cases) has been Lord and Judge in this matter; and men out of their
Envy and Hatred one toward another, have judged one another to be erroneous
and Heretics, and proceeded against them thereupon; and such as have differed
in Judgment or Opinion, one Sect and Sort from another, and would not conform
to one another in their Ways, Practices and Religion; it has been common for
all different sorts of men to cry out one upon another, and against each other,
Heresy, Heresy, Heretics, Erroneous Persons, and the like; and proceeded
against one another, men against men differing from them, and sect against sect
contrary to it self, and especially that sect or sort of People that has had
the Government of Nations and Countries in their Power, could, and has easily
proceeded against all others dissenting, upon the account of Error, to the
destroying of many, absolutely through envy, hatred and prejudice, and not upon
the Truth, Soundness and Verity of Judgment in that matter; and this has been
common for many Ages; Sometimes (according to the occasion offered) Papists
have destroyed Protestants, and sometimes Protestants have destroyed the
Papists on this account of Heresy and Error: All which proceedings have been
in the Enmity and Ignorance, and not in the Power and Life of Jesus; whereby it
has come to pass, that many men has been destroyed for the cause, of which
they have been more innocent then they that have destroyed them: And thus by
false Judgment and cruel proceedings in the matter of Heresy and Error, many
have been destroyed unjustly, and the World filled with Enmity about difference
in Religious matters, and with Murders and Cruelties, upon the false Judgments
of men about Heresy; and this is weighty, to be truly considered, a Case to be
lamented and grieved for, by the Righteous: Oh! what strife (in the Christian
World) has been for Ages on this occasion, each sort of People exclaiming
against, and persecuting others as Heretics and seditious persons, only for
difference in Judgment in Spiritual Cases, and each particular person (almost)
raging with fury, and intending his Neighbors destruction, and only for being
contraryminded in point of Doctrine and Worship. Oh! the view of these things,
and woeful effects produced in the World for Ages in these occasions, makes my
heart grieve, because of the destructions of men, yea, of the destruction of
many upon wrongful judgments and proceedings on these occasions: I am troubled,
I am troubled; and ever since I have known the Right hand from the Left (in
God's matters) my Soul often in the deep search of these things has cried out,
How woeful are they! And when shall it once be, that these things shall be no
more in the World, but that every man may sit at rest and quiet with his God in
the Way, Faith and Practices of Righteousness, as his heart is persuaded of,
and not be tossed with false Judgments, cruel Afflictions, and hard dealing,
because of his Judgment and Conscience in the belief and Knowledge of Heavenly
Matters? Thus has my Spirit been framed with zeal against these things; this
imposing of Religion by force, these procedings of killing and destroying men
upon the account of Heresy; these things my soul has loathed, and I am weary
of them, and my zeal is kindled against them: Oh I when will the Rulers of this
World learn Wisdom, and forsake false Judgment and Oppression! And when will it
be that they will only rule and judge for the Lord in their state and compass
of Worldly affairs between man and man, in the matters of outward wrongs and
injuries! And when will they leave it to the Lord to be Judge, King and Ruler
only, in all the Cases of his spiritual Kingdom! Then should it be happy and
blessed unto men, unto Kings, and their Subjects, to Rulers and their People,
and to all sorts of Persons, if Judgment were only ascribed unto God, that he
only might judge and determine of these Cases, and punish men according to the
desert of their Offenses of Error; then should it be well with them: But in the
mean time, whilst men are judged and supposed to be Herericks, and thereupon
sentenced to Death, Banishment, or corporal Punishment for their (supposed)
Errors sake in matters of Judgment and Conscience: Tribulation, Misery,
Distractions, and woeful Consequence will follow upon that work, to Kings,
Rulers and People, in every Nation and Country, and no Peace, true Comfort nor
Happiness, shall be in the midst of men. And this is the Judgment of the Spirit
of God in him who has obtained favor from God, to receive Knowledge and
Understanding in these matters. He that can receive this, let him.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Antichrist and his Mystery of Deceiveableness; What he is in
himself, and how he appears in the World; what his Works are, and What his
Government is, and where it is, and who are the Subjects of his Kingdom.

1. THese things are great Mysteries; and though in the World they are very
much abounding, and extant throughout all Nations, yet for the most part
unknown unto the World, and not discovered among the sons of men, but secretly
hidden, and veiled under false covers, and in much deceivableness dwelling and
working upon Earth, in the deep Mysteries of Iniquity, to the deceiving of
multitudes of People, who are indeed of Antichrist, among whom he dwells,
appears, rules, reigns, and has his Authority and Government, and yet they
know it not, nor do they discern him in his Ways and Works, though they are
under his Power, and subjects of his Kingdom; such indeed is the Mystery of
Antichrist, his hidden, false covered paths, in which he works, and walks
amongst the Sons of men in the World, that he easily beguiles and betrays men,
and deceives them unto perdition, while yet they know not that they are
beguiled and deceived, but think they are altogether well, and do well, and are
in the way of Salvation, being led of that wicked one, and blinded by him, and
are bewitched into the false faith, and deceivable pretense of goodness,
righteousness, holiness and sanctity, as if they were indeed Members of the
true Church, and Saints of the Most High, and had a right to Eternal Life, and
were the very Sons and Servants of the Almighty, where indeed and in Truth they
are yet in the estate of Enmity against God, in the Degeneration and Bondage of
Corruption, unconverted, and unsanctified, and Sinners and Ungodly, the very
Children of the Devil, and Servants of unrighteousness, and have no assurance
nor right unto the Kingdom of God, to rest in his Peace and Glory: Such (I say)
is the working of Antichrist, that he appears to be in the World, contrary to
what he truly is in his own being and nature, and deceives men and People into
the apprehensions and conceits of what they are not, even contrary to what they
are in their present State and Standing; even so deep and Mysterious is
Antichrist in himself, and in his working among the Children of men.

2. That there is such a Man or Spirit in the World as Antichrist, this is not
doubtful, but confessed by all, and proved by the Scriptures; for the Apostle
wrote to the Church, They had heard that Antichrist should come, and even now
(says he) are there many Antichrists come into the World, 1 John 2. 18. and
also 2 John verse 7. says he, For many Deceivers are entered into the World,
and this is a Deceiver, and an Antichrist, etc. and 2 These. 2. the Apostle
speaks of the Man of Sin, and of the Son of Perdition, that should be revealed
in the World, and should exalt himself above all that is called God: These with
many other Scriptures, do prove that there is such a thing in the World,
already come into the World, and now dwelling and walking in the World as
Antichrist, Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition; and as I said, it is confessed by
all that there is an Antichrist, such a Man, or Spirit now extant in the World;
though there are great Debates and Contentions amongst many called Christians,
what this Antichrist is, and who he is, some holding one thing, and some
another about him, and also there is much Difference amongst men concerning
this Matter; and it is the general way of People, one sort to accuse another,
that are different from them in Profession and Religion, That ye and ye are of
Antichrist; but this has been for the most part in Enmity, and in the Spirit
of Wrath and Contention, and is not from true Judgment and Knowledge: now
therefore it remains to be made manifest, according to the Gift of Grace,
Knowledge and Understanding, what Antichrist is in himself, and how he appears
in the World; seeing we have proved, That there is such a thing as Antichrist
now Ruling and Reigning somewhere amongst men, throughout the Nations of the
Earth.

3. Antichrist is not (as some suppose) a particular visible Person upon Earth,
Distinct and Divided from all other Persons, as if none besides such an one
were Antichrist; but Antichrist is rather an Invisible Spirit, a spirit, I say,
dwelling in Persons, even in many Persons throughout the World, which makes
them all of Antichrist, or to be many Antichrists, according to 1 John 2. 18.
There are many Antichrists (says John) whereby we know it is the Last Time: So
that it is plain, There are in the World many Antichrists, many Men of Sin, or
many Sinful Men, many Sons of Perdition and Ungodliness; not only one man that
is such, but many men in the World, even all such in whom the spirit of
Antichrist, or Antichrist that spirit dwells and walks, they are all
Antichrists, or of Antichrist, because of that spirit of Antichrist which does
possess them, and rule them in the Ways of Sin and Death, in Idolatry and
false Ways, and in opposition to and against Christ Jesus the Lord of Life;
even all the Deceivers in the World, all that are erred from the Spirit and
Power of CHRIST, and are not of the true Church, Gathered into his Name and
Power, but brings another Doctrine than that of Christ and his Saints, and
truly confesses not in Word and Practice unto JESUS come in the Flesh; all
such are Antichrists, and of Antichrist, according to 2 John 7. even all the
Apostates, who profess Christ, and his Truth, and his Church, and are not in
the Spirit and Power of Christ, but in the Form of Godliness, without the
Power, professing God in Words, but in Works denying him, all such are
Antichrists, by reason of that spirit of Antichrist which dwells in them, and
into which spirit they are leavened and molded, and are one with it, and bring
forth the Fruits of it in the World; and therefore they are Antichrists, more
than one, even many Antichrists, as I have said.

4. Antichrist in himself is the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, which is
indeed and in Truth the very Devil in his Nature and Kind, and in his Power and
Spirit, and of him; and yet not divided, nor distinct from him, but is him (to
wit, the DEVIL) as he is in himself: And he is against Christ, and wholly
contrary to Christ, and brings forth Fruits and Works to the Dishonor of
Christ, and opposes Christ, and is in all things of a contrary Nature and
Quality to Jesus Christ. And he is called Antichrist, to wit, before, or
against, and contrary to Christ. And this is Antichrist in himself, An
Adversary to God, an Enemy to all Righteousness, a Perverter of the Ways of
God, a Hater of all Good, a Despiser and Persecutor of God's People; and indeed
a certain Spirit and Power Distinct, Divided, and Separated from the Living
God, and his Son Jesus Christ; and contrary in Nature and Quality, in Fruits
and Effects: And there is no Fellowship in any thing between Christ and
Antichrist; but they are divided and separated one from the other, contrary and
opposite one to the other in all their Ways and Works, and in their Kinds and
Natures: For, as I have said, Antichrist in himself, in his nature and kind, is
the Devil, and no other; he is the Man of Sin, the Sinful Man, that conceives
and works all Evil, the Son of Perdition, the Son that is lost from God, and
Reprobate forever; he that is fallen, diverted and cast out from the Presence,
Glory and Power of the Creator; he that is sealed unto Vengeance in the Wrath
and Enmity against God and Christ Jesus, as being contrary irreconcilably to
the Nature and Works of Christ.

This is said of Antichrist, as what he is in himself, as that particular
spirit, and not of the many Antichrists, which are only Vessels retaining this
one spirit, and Members of him, through his Power dwelling in them, and by
which they are one with this spirit, and one in Action, and bring forth the
Works and Fruits of it: For it is possible, some that are such in their present
standing, even under the power of Antichrist, may be converted and turned from
him, and changed into another Nature, and so saved: But as for the Antichrist
in himself, as such, he is the Devil, and sealed up in the Anger of God, never
to be redeemed, nor saved, nor changed into another Nature.

5. Though Antichrist in himself be the Devil, yet his Appearances in the World
are diverse and many; and he appears in outward and visible Actions amongst men
diversely; sometimes he appears in the way and form of open Profaneness, by the
Works of Men, in all manner of Unrighteousness and Iniquity; for all Sin, of
what kind soever, in every appearance of it, is of the Devil and Antichrist,
even all profane Ways and Works of Evil Men; Lying, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Double-dealing, Envy, Malice, and every Evil Work and Word brought forth by the
Sons of Adam in the Fall, are all of Antichrist and the Devil, and is his
visible Appearance in the World; though sometimes his Appearance is in another
way and manner, even in a way of seeming Righteousness and Holiness, and in the
Profession of Christ and Christianity, and pretense of Faith toward God, and
Worship of God, and crying up Church and Fellowship in the same, and Forms of
Godliness; as if Antichrist were a Saint and Servant of God: thus, and after
this manner does Antichrist appear in the World amongst men now in these latter
days, since the Apostles time, in the Apostasy of Christianity. Antichrist (I
say) though the Devil in himself, yet has he often appeared as a Saint upon
Earth, in the pretense of Holiness, Righteousness, Worship and Religion; such
has been his Policy and Deceivableness, that he has put on the Appearance of
Gospel, Doctrine, Ministry and Ordinances, and covered himself thereby, that he
might the better beguile, entangle, and deceive Mankind in the Form and
Profession of a Saint, and Member of the true Church; he has put on the
Sheep's-Clothing, has made use of the Saints words and Practices, and has
exalted himself in the Temple of God, as if he were God, showing himself to be
God, and has been lifted up above all that is called God, according to 2 These.
2. 4. and Christ himself said to his Disciples, That there should arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and should show Signs and Wonders, if it were
possible to deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24. 24, which does signify, that the
Antichrists and false Prophets should come into the World after his Prophecy,
which are already come since that time: They should pretend to be Christ's, and
should show Signs, and should deceive many with the Profession of Christ, and
Signs of Godliness; and they should have upon them and be covered with
Sheep's-Clothing, that is, with the Saints words and practices in outward
appearance; but inwardly, that is, in their own proper Nature, Fruits and
Works, should be ravening Wolves; that is, Destroyers of the Flock, Mat. 7. 15.
and the Antichrists which John speaks (1 John 2. 19.) they were such as went
from the Saints that were in the Power of Godliness, they went out of the true
Church, and carried with them the Form of Righteousness and Truth, and the
Profession of Christianity, but without the Power, and had lost it, and were
departed from the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of Antichrist had possessed
them, and now led them and ruled them, and they were Antichrists (to wit)
against him, and contrary to him: And these were the false Prophets and
Deceivers, that went out into the World, and deceived it, and led many aside
into Error, and many followed their pernicious and hurtful ways, as Peter
says, 2 Pet. 2. 2, 3. And Paul speaks of such as had the Form of Godliness,
but denied the Power; and in Words professed God, but in Works denied him: Such
were the Antichrists and Deceivers in the Apostles days, and such they are
this day in the World; whereby it is manifest that Antichrist often appears in
the World as a Saint, as a Righteous one; and the many Antichrists they have
gotten the Form and Appearance of Church, Ministry, Worship and Ordinances; and
thus they appear deceiving the World, and them that dwell therein, with the
Appearance and Vain-shew of Faith, Worship and Religion, without the Power of
Godliness; for unto that Antichrist is an Enemy, even a Destroyer, a
Persecutor, and Gainsayer of Christ and his Works, and the Power of Godliness
and true Faith brought forth by the Spirit of Christ, though to deceive the
World he can transform himself into, and appear as an Angel of Light.

6. Again, So Deceivable and Mysterious is, and has the Appearance and Working
of Antichrist been in the World, that he has not always dwelt in one kind of
Form and Profession of Religion and Righteousness; but he has dwelt in many
Appearances, and removed out of one false Form into another, according to his
Opportunity and Advantage, whereby he could deceive; and sometimes dwelling in
one Form, with pretense of Zeal, and performance of Duty to God, he has
envyed, Persecuted and destroyed many others in other Ways of Profession, more
Zealous, Upright and Sincere to God than themselves have been in the other
Form; and by the color of Zeal and Performance of Duty has Antichrist clothed
himself in his Envies, Persecutions and Murders of others, as if he did not
persecute nor impose upon the Conscience of any, nor exercise that Rigor (or
Justice, as he has named his Proceedings, though never so Cruel and Unjust)
toward any, upon any terms or account of Wrath, Bitterness, Envy, or Cruelty,
but Zeal, Duty, and Love to Religion, and to entinguish Heresy, etc. This has
been the Pretense and Cloak of Antichrist in his cruel and hard Dealing with
many men that have differed in Principle and Practice of Religion; he has
often showed himself in his present Form of Godliness, so zealous and dutiful
for the truth of his Way (though never so Idolatrous) against all that have
opposed it, and gainsayed his Form and Vain Show, that he has killed, slain,
and exercised Cruelty toward all that have been contrary or different-minded:
and though this has been brought forth by Antichrist, as he is the Devil in
himself, and in downright Envy, Malice, Persecution and Wickedness; yet it
has been acted and effected under the Cloak of Zeal, Duty, and Sincerity, and
out of Pretense of Love to Christ and his Church, and out of Pretense of Hatred
against the contrary. Thus has Antichrist (though the Devil, that Wicked One,
as he is in himself, in his own Nature, Kind and proper Sphere) appeared in the
World as a Zealous Churchmember, as a Saint, as a Promoter of Righteousness,
and a Destroyer of the contrary: With these false Covers has Antichrist been
clothed and hidden from men, and appeared to be in his Works and Transactions,
as a Good Man, as a Lover of God, and Hater of Iniquity, while in the mean time
he has been deceiving Men, and destroying the Innocent, and leading the World
to perpetual Misery and Destruction.

7. Again, So Deceivable has the spirit of Antichrist been in the World, that
he has always put the Name of Christ, and the Name of his Church, and the
Pretense of Duty to God, and the Name of Gospel, Doctrine, Ordinances, Ministry
and Worship upon whatsoever False Way, Feigned Worship and Deceitful
Profession, that he has gone about to set up and promote in the World among
men: I say, Upon the Worst and most Idolatrous Ways of Superstition, and the
most false, Feigned Formal Worship that ever has been in the World, Antichrist
has put the Name of Christ, his Church and Worship upon them; and Imposed and
forced the Belief and Practice of much false Worship, false Doctrine and formal
Ways, under the Name and Title of the true Christ, his Doctrine and Worship;
and upon Pains and Penalties has enjoined and commanded the Belief and
Practice of such things, not as if they were of Antichrist, Superstitious,
Evil, False or Feigned; but as if they were of Christ altogether, and must be
believed and practiced, as by his Name, and under his Authority: Thus has been
the working of the Mystery of Iniquity of that Man of Sin, the Antichrist; all
the Evil Ways he has conceived and brought forth in the World; all the
Idolatrous Worship, and false Faith, and Doctrine, and all the Cruelties
Murders and Unjust Dealing, to the very destroying of the Saints, and all the
Unrighteousness and Deceivableness exercised by Antichrist in the World, has
put all this on the Name of Christ, and pretended Christ for it, as if it were
indeed and in Truth of him and from him, when indeed and in Truth it has been
contrary to the true Christ, and tended to kill and destroy him: Thus has
Antichrist the Devil been cloaked with false Covers and deceitful Pretenses in
his working among men; that wicked spirit has falsely called the greatest of
Pride and Ambition, Decency and true Honor; Covetousness and Deceitful Dealing
has he styled, Good -- Husbandry and Prudent-Walking; and the most Cruel and
Unjust Judgment, the Oppression of the Poor, and the Grinding of the Face of
the Innocent, has that spirit falsely titled Equal Proceedings, Justice, and
according to Law, and the like: Yea, and the Persecutions and Murders that ever
have been acted against the Saints of God in all Generations, though Cruel and
Unrighteous, and of the Devil, yet all this has Antichrist titled to be in
Honor to Christ, and for the destroying Heretics, and out of Justice and Zeal
for God, and such like: yea, and the most Gross Idolatries, and most Deceitful
Ways of Worship that ever has been set up in the World, have been named after
Christ, and pretended to be done in Honor to him, and for his Glory, and so
forth; so deceivable has Antichrist been in the World, and walked and wrought
among the Sons of Men in deceiving of them, that he has used and taken upon
him the very Name of Christ; and all his Evil Works of Iniquity of all kinds,
has he put the Name and Honor of Christ upon them, and so deceived the World
by his false Ways, Worships, Doctrines and Persecutions, through covering
these things with the Name of Christ, and pretending his Honor and Exaltation,
whenas his own true Nature and Property is to kill Christ, and gainsay him. And
this indeed is Antichrist, who under color and pretense of Worshipping and
Honoring Christ does seek to Slay him: This is that Crafty and Deceitful Fox,
that Man of Sin that has been exalted, that Antichrist that Wicked One, that
has deceived the World for many Ages; But the Lord is now discovering him, and
destroying him by the Breath of his Mouth, and by the Brightness of his Coming,
according to the Faithful Promise of God in his Servants; and Antichrist shall
be discovered and destroyed; the Day of the Lord is at hand upon him.

8. Again, It has been the way of Antichrist, that he might the better deceive
the World, to transform himself into the likeness of the best Way, and
strictest Profession of Religion, and so to remove from one Way and Form unto
another, as I said before, that he might the better deceive men, according as
Paul writ, 2 Cor. 11. verse 13, 14. for such are false Apostles, deceitful
Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel,
for Satan himself is transformed into an ANGEL of LIGHT; by which it is plain,
That Antichrist did change and transform himself, and remove from one Way to
another, even till he appeared as an Angel of Light, and in the very Way and
Form of the Ministry of Righteousness; Thus did Antichrist work and transform
himself in the days of the Apostles, and ever since unto this day in all Times
and Ages; for it has been his manner and way, when he could no longer cover
himself, nor be hid in such a Way of Worship and Religion, in which he has
sometimes dwelt and walked, but that his Wickedness, Cruelties, Persecutions
and Deceits must needs be seen, and made appear unto men by the Light of the
Lord shining amongst them, then he has transformed into another likeness, and
removed his cruelties and persecutions into another form and appearance; it may
be into the very way (in the outward prosession and practice of it) in which
sometime the Lord has dwelt and walked, and there has he dwelt deceiving the
World by his new form and appearance, and exercised his wickedness, cruelties
and persecutions, in some new way, having quitted the Last Form in which he
dwelt, because he was there too publikly seen and discovered: And now in his
new likeness into which he is Transformed, he can plead the example of Saints;
they did such things, and held such Doctrines, and Performed such Practices as
now he is found in; and this did the Devil sometime to Christ, he pleaded
Scripture against him: And thus Antichrist can Change himself into diverse
appearances, that he may deceive men: Well, but and if he be again discovered,
and his cruelties and wickedness made appear in his Last and Newest Form, he
can transform again into a more strict Way and zealous Performance, even into
an Angel of Light, as if he were indeed the true Christ, and were in the Truth
altogether, and no man needed to doubt of the Truth of his Way; and then under
that Form, being covered with more Zeal then ever, with more pretense of Duty
to God then before, he blinds the World, and deceives them, and leads men to
Perdition; and though changeable in his Appearance, yet is he in himself
Antichrist still, in his own proper nature a Murderer, Destroyer, and a
Fountain of Mischief and Evil.

The Truth of this is plain, if it be considered through the course of
Scriptures in Generations past, and Transactions of Time, as in the Prophets
days of old, this spirit (which is no other but the Devil) sometimes opposed,
gainsayed, and persecuted the Prophets, reproached them, and with-stood them,
and imprisoned them, and killed them. And sometimes we find the same spirit
transformed it self into the way of the Prophets, and acted by some deceivers
and false Prophets, in the same words and practices which the true Prophets had
said and done; and as the true Prophets used their Tongues, and said, The Lord
says it; so the false Prophets (in whom the Devil was transformed) they used
their Tongues, and said, The Lord says it (also) when God had not spoken to
them: So here was this spirit of Antichrist changing and transforming himself,
that he might the better deceive.

Also, in the days of Christ and his Apostles the Devil and Antichrist apeared
against them, and persecuted them, and killed them, and used Cruelty and
Injustice toward them; and (as before I said) this was done to Christ and his
Apostles by the wicked Jews, under color and pretense of Love to their God,
and Zeal for their Law, and for the Honor of their Ordinances and Priesthood,
which they supposed Christ and his Apostles made void: which shows, That the
Devil and Antichrist appears in the World as a good Man; as a Lover of God, and
his Laws, and the like.

Well, But though the Envious Men and Wicked Persons (through the spirit of the
Devil) did for some time oppose, gainsay and persecute Christ and his Apostles,
yet the same spirit (possibly some of the same Persons) transformed into the
Profession of Christ, and into the Profession of the Words and Works of Him and
his Apostles: For we find Envious men, and Wicked men, such as had persecuted
Christ, and killed him, were gotten to preach him in words, and had gotten and
taken upon them the Form of Christ's Doctrine, and preached him out of Envy,
and for Self Ends, and the like: So that it is plain, The same spirit that
sometime opposed and persecuted the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, other
times was transformed into the Profession of the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles words: And this is the way of Antichrist to deceive men upon Earth,
and to lead them to Perdition; For when the Devil and Antichrist perceives that
his Envy, Malice and Cruelty cannot prevail to subdue and keep under the Way
and Truth of Christ Jesus, as it appears in the World, then he transforms into
the Likeness and formal appearance of the Way of the Lord and his Truth; and
when the Devil cannot kill Christ so, but that Christ will rise again, appear,
and live for ever, contrary to all the malice and enmity of the Devil; then,
(rather then he will submit to be no more) he will transform himself, and take
upon him the Name of Christ, of his Honor and Glory, and profess him in words,
and seem a Friend to Christ and his Kingdom: And this he does, that he may live
still in the World, and by deceiveableness beguile the sons of men into
perpetual destruction.

9. And the very work of Antichrist this day in the World, is to deceive,
beguile, seduce and betray the World and all mankind; it is his only work and
calling, as I may say, to deceive; it is his nature and property to work
deceitfully; and thus it ever was with him, it has been his Property and his
Work in all Ages, and in every Age since the beginning of the World, to deceive
and beguile, to lead men from God, and to lead them into Perdition: this I say
has ever been his work in the World, and by the means aforesaid, (to wit) by
transforming and changing himself into the likeness of Righteousness and
Verity, and putting the pretense of Goodness, Virtue and Holiness upon his
Actions and Doings, though never so evil and unrighteous, he has always, I
say, by this means, and in this way deceived the World, by appearing as a
Saint, as a Well-doer; as an Angel of Light, pretending Wisdom, Righteousness
and Virtue, and coloring his Deeds thereby, as is proved in the Case of the
first deceiving of Eve; What said Satan to the Woman? Not that I am such a one,
and do intend to deceive thee with Falsity; but, Thou shall be as God; Thou
shall be wise of thy self, and know, and be, and do as God: Here was a fair
pretense, by which he deceived the Woman.

And the false Prophets and false Apostles in the days of old, did not deceive
the World into an absolute denial of God, and Christ, and Truth, but did
deceive them into the false Profession of the same, holding out the Form of
Godliness without the Power; and by feigned words, and good Speeches, did
deceive the hearts of the Simple; and by false Doctrine, and Ordinances, and
Form of Religion, did the Antichrist deceive the World, in days past, as he
does at this day: For if he did appear to be as he is in his own nature and
property, a Devil, Deceiver, and wicked one, a Leader to Perdition and
Destruction, and should vindicate himself as such, and entice and tempt People
as such; then none would believe him, nor follow his Ways, for none would
willingly be destroyed. But he appears not as such in the World, but always
transforms himself into the Likeness of God and Goodness, still pretending the
same: And by this means is he more capable to deceive mankind; for he cannot so
readily deceive and lead men to Perdition, in his own proper Nature, if he
appear as he is such; but therefore he appears contrary to what his own nature
is, and transforms himself.

And thus does Antichrist deceive the Christian World (so called) at this day,
even by his false Ways of Religion, false Worship, false Doctrine, false
Humility, false Faith, and false Church, pretending Zeal and Sanctity, and such
like: Herein, and hereby (generally) does Antichrist that Man of Sin, deceive
and beguile the World unto Perdition and Destruction. Oh! how many thousands of
Peoples, of Nations and Countries are at this day deceived on this wise,
thinking they are in the Truth, and true Way of Religion, Faith and Worship,
professing and performing these things with much Zeal, as if they were indeed
the ways and Ordinances of Christ, when as they are but false, feigned,
formal, and of Antichrist, and deceivable to the souls of men, even Shows
without Substance; Forms without Life and Power; of Antichrist, and not of the
true Christ. And thus, and after this manner, with the very likeness of
Righteousness, and appearance of Godliness, and profession of Faith and duty to
God, has Antichrist deceived the World, and does at this day delude Nations,
to the perdition of thousands: And Antichrist does not generally deceive men in
his works and appearance as he is in his own Proper Nature; but in his
appearance and works transformed and changed into another likeness, even into
the likeness of Truth and Righteousness: By this means and way Satan,
Antichrist, and that Man of Sin, does delude and deceive the Nations of the
World.

10. What the Works of Antichrist are, by what is said, does partly appear: His
Works are all deceivableness, to deceive and delude the World, to lead mankind
captive in the ways of sin and death, unto the destruction of their souls, and
to be cruel and hard-hearted, envious, malicious and perverse, a hater and
persecutor of goodness and good men, and to murder and work wickedness, to do
all evil, and to oppose, gainsay and deny all good: This in general is the
work of Antichrist; though as to particulars I now intend not to mention,
saving as I have before showed, to impose upon Conscience in Religious matters,
by outward force and violence, is a main principle work of Antichrist; and to
kill and destroy Persons on the account of Heresy and Error, and to use
violence, and cruel impositions in Spiritual Cases, contrary to the Spirit of
Christ Jesus. These are works and ways of Antichrist, which he brings forth in
the World, as also the promoting of all the false and Idolatrous Worships, and
false Church-Governments in the World; and in short, every evil work and word
brought forth amongst the sons of men, are the Works of the Devil and
Antichrist, which he seduceth the World into the working and doing of; and to
consider the state of the World as it is at this day, and how it is deceived in
many grievous and abominable ways of Error, Superstitions, Idolatries and
Wickedness, it makes the hearts of the Righteous sad and mournful, because of
the deceivableness of the working of the Mystery of Iniquity, of Antichrist,
that Man of Sin in the World, who deceives Mankind with the appearance and
show of godliness, and leads the Children of Men in the ways of Ignorance,
Death, Blindness and Error, yet holds them under a false pwerswasion of safety
and security, as if they were in the right way, and walked in the paths of
Happiness, when indeed and in Truth they are beguiled and deceived, and nigh
unto the paths of perdition.

Oh! how has Antichrist prevailed in these latter Days, since the days of
the Apostles, and deceived the World with the very Formal Profession and
practice of such Doctrines and Things as the Apostles held and Practiced in the
Power of God in their days: But now Antichrist he holds the Form in his False
Spirit, and has the appearance and likeness of Righteousness, Truth, Faith and
Worship, without the Power of God, even likeness of the things that the
Apostles and Saints held in the Power of God: And hereby is the World deceived,
though Antichrist has taught them to Plead Scriptures, and Prove by
Scriptures, ^t the Apostles did the same things, and held the same Profession;
yet being now held and professed out of the Power of God, and not in the same
Spirit that the Apostles were in, it is but of Antichrist, and deceivable, and
leads captive the souls of men into destruction. Oh therefore that the World,
and all that dwell therein, would consider the danger of that deceivable Spirit
of Antichrist, and how he deceives mankind, and would turn from him, and
forsake the ways and works of Antichrist, that they may be saved, and not
destroyed. Oh! all ye called Christians, it is time to consider what Spirit ye
are of, and what Spirit leads you, and how ye may escape his delusions; for the
Day of the Lord is come, and he is gathering People out of the ways of
Antichrist, and setting them free from his cruel Bonds, to serve the Lord in
Liberty and Freedom of the Spirit of Christ Jesus; and blessed are all they
that witness this, where Christ reigns, and Antichrist is subdued with his
works and fruits, and discovered and destroyed by the Spirit of the Lord, and
the brightness of his Coming, who comes to judge the World in Righteousness and
Truth.

11. These things are said in general of Antichrist; Now it remains to be
showed, What the Government of Antichrist is in it self, and where it is in
being, and who the Subjects of his Kingdom are.

That Antichrist the Man of Sin has a Government, a Kingdom, a Power, an
Authority, a Rule and a Dominion (which is indeed his Government) this is not
doubtful to any, but acknowledged by all; but what this Kingdom and Government
is many are Ignorant. Now the Kingdom and Government of Antichrist is not the
Government and Authority of some particular man, in some particular Country
and Nation upon Earth, distinct from all other persons and Nations, as if such
a particular visible Kingdom and Authority, were Antichrist's Government, and
none besides: But the Authority, Kingdom and Government of Antichrist is more
invisible, more hidden, as it were more spiritual and undiscernable unto the
sons of men, then any visible, outward Kingdom is: And indeed, the Kingdom of
Antichrist is the Authority and Power of Spiritual Wickedness, of Spiritual
invisible Iniquity, or the Rule and Dominion of the Son of Perdition, of the
Man of Sin, exercised in the hearts and Spirits of all ungodly men: This is the
Kingdom and Government of Antichrist, an Authority of Spiritual Wickedness, a
Power of the Mystery of Iniquity, and of invisible prevailing of the Son of
Perdition in, and over the hearts of the Sons of men; not only of one person,
or in one Nation or Kingdom of the World, but in all sinful persons, and over
all Nations of the Earth; Antichrist's Government is such throughout Kingdoms
of this World, even a Spiritual Power of Wickedness, a Dominion and Authority
of the Mystery of Iniquity, ruling and reigning in the hearts of many men, even
of all sinful men, of all unjust men of all unconverted men through all Nations
in the World: So that it may not truly be said, that Antichrist's Kingdom and
Government is only the particular Authority of any particular man, in a
particular Nation of the Earth, and all others (Men and Nations) are free; but
it is (as I have said) the Authority, Power and Rule of the Spirit of
Wickedness, of the Mystery of Iniquity, in the hearts of all evil men, in all
Nations through the World. And this is truly the Kingdom of Antichrist in it
self.

12. This Government is placed and set up, and chiefly the place and being of
it, is (not only in all Nations at large, but) in the Hearts, even in
particular Hearts of the Sons of men, in the Heart and Inward Parts of man, is
the place where Antichrist's Government is; his Authority, Power and Dominion
is in the Hearts of the Ungodly, in the inward Parts of Transgressors; in the
Heart Antichrist (that Man of Sin) dwells and works, according as it is
written, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. speaking of the Man of Sin, Whose coming is after
the working of Satan with all lying Wonders, and with all Deceivableness of
Uurighteousness in them that perish: His dwelling and working is in them that
perish, in the Ungodly, in the Hypocrites, in all ^aters, in all false
Worshippers: Thus it is manifest, That the Government of Antichrist is in the
Heart, not only to one man in some Nations, but in the Hearts of all such men
mentioned in all the Kingdoms of the World, even the Mystery of Iniquity, the
spiritual Wickedness, the authority and power of that spirit that is against
Christ, and contrary to him (which is the Rule, Kingdom and Government of
Antichrist) dwells and works in the hearts of the Sons of men, even like as
Christ Jesus dwells and walks in his Saints, as it is written, so
accordingly does Antichrist dwell and walk in all that are the Subjects of his
Kingdom: Yet notwithstanding, the Government of Antichrist is in the hearts of
men, originally there, as having got dominion and Power over the seed of God,
and placed it self in the heart, which is its seat, and where Christ should
reign, yet the Government of Antichrist is not so spiritual, so hidden and
invisible in the heart, but that it appears outwardly and visibly in the
actions and fruits of men; so that the outward actions and works of men are
(...) and sinted with the spirit of Antichrist, and his government apaears
visible in Antichristian Ways and Works brought forth by men; the Sinfulness of
men, the Hypocrisies of men, the Idolatries of men, and the false Principles
and Doctrines of men, which appear visibly, are the Works of Antichrist, and
his Government stands in these things, in these Works he Governs men; and to
the doing of them, he leads and rules men by his authority and power, which is
in the Hearts of men. And thus Antichrist's Government appears visible and
outward, and is in the outward Actions and Works of men to be seen in the
World, as well as the working of his Power and Authority is in the Heart
inwardly.

And also, Antichrist's Government is extended not only, as first, dwelling and
working in the Hearts of the Ungodly; nor secondly, as over the Works of men
particularly; but over the Governments of many Nations and Countries in general
is Antichrist's Power and Rule extended, so that the Governments of the World
are leavened and tasted with Antichristian-power and authority in many Nations;
even the spirit of Antichrist has possessed many hearts, many Works, and not
only so, but many Governments amongst men; and this has appeared and broken
forth visible in all the works of Unrighteousness, Injustice, Oppressions and
Persecutions brought forth in Worldly Government; for so much as has been
brought forth in any Government, in any Nation, at any time of Unrighteousness,
Injustice, Oppression, Idolatry, false Worship and Persecutions, and of any
othor Evils, even so much of Antichrist's kingdom, government and power has
been in that Kingdom and Government: and that Kingdom and Government
wheresoever, in what Nation and Country soever, has been Antichristian, even
in so much and by so much as Injustice, Wickedness, Cruelty, Persecution, or
any Acts of Sin and Wickedness have been, or are brought forth into action in
that Government. And thus it is manifest, what, and where Antichrist's
Government is; Now I shall briefly show, Who the Subjects of his kingdom are.

1. All the ungodly unrighteous and unconverted Persons in general throughout
the World are the Subjects of Antichrist's kingdom; all the Sons of fallen Adam
in Transgression, all that are in the first Birth, in degeneration, in the
alienation and separation from God, even all that are wicked, and do wickedly,
that are in the Enmity against Christ, and unholy, unsanctified and
unregenerate, these are a^^ of Antichrist's kingdom, Subjects of it, and
Servants to it, and it rules in them, and over them, and Antichrist is their
Ruler in all these their wicked ways, and in this their present state and
condition.

2. All Hypocrites, that profess God in words, and in Works deny him; that make
a show of Religion and Worship, when their Hearts are far from the Lord; that
with their Mouths profess much Love to God, and with their Lips honor him,
but are departed from his Fear, and stand not in his Counsel; all such are
Subjects of the Goverments of Antichrist, even all false-hearted and
dissembling Hypocrites, that profess more of God then they know of him by the
operation of his Spirit; that have an outward conformity in appearance of
Worship and duty to God-wards, and their hearts are not conformed to the Power
of God, by his Spirit, all such are of the government of Antichrist, and his
kingdom and power dwells in them, and they are under the dominion thereof.

3. All Idolaters, false Worshippers, Heretics and erroneous Persons; such as
cry up Church and Ministry, and profess Faith and Godliness, and yet are not
guided by the Spirit of Christ, nor led of it into all Truth, these are
Subjects of the aforesaid Government of Antichrist, even all they that are
sensually-minded, and have not the Spirit of Christ guiding them in the Way of
Righteousness and Truth, who are not converted, and born again, and renewed
into the Image and Likeness of Christ Jesus; and yet practice Holiness, and
Duty to God-wards in outward appearance; and are in the profession of the words
of Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles, but have not the same Spirit and
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Prophes and Apostles had; these are
covered with Sheep's-Clothing, and profess Christ and his words, but are
against Christ, and contrary to him in kind and nature; and all such are of the
government of Antichrist, and he governs them, and rules over them.

4. All Backsliders, and them that have forsaken the right Way of the Lord; all
that are turned against the Truth of God, which once they knew and believed,
and were convinced of, and sometimes professed, these are all Subjects of
Antichrist's reign and authority, even all the Unfaithful and False-hearted,
who are treacherous to God and men, and unconstant and unchangeable,
Time-servers and Hypocrites, who have denied Christ before men, and turned
against him, and his Saints, such are under Satan's power, and he works in their
hearts, and Antichrist deceives them, and they are under his power and
dominion, and are Subjects of his government.

5. All Persecutors of the Saints, all violent and cruel Men, all that
persecute such as are contrary-minded to themselves, are of Antichrist, and
Subjects of his kingdom; even all that kill, and burn and destroy for
difference of Faith and Religion, who themselves profess Love to God and his
Way, and yet will persecute others, and destroy them by cruel dealing, and that
would not suffer any to live but themselves, and will not do to others as they
would be done unto; but hate the Neighbor, and persecute Brother, and impose
upon his Conscience in things against good Conscience, and are violent Doers;
all such men are Subjects to Antichrist's kingdom in all Nations throughout the
World. Therefore let all consider, This is the Day of the Lord, God will
discover and destroy Antichrist and his kingdom; let the Wicked and Ungodly
turn from his evil way, lest God destroy him with perpetual Destruction.

Lastly, It Is the Property of such who are Subjects of Antichrist's kingdom, to
profess and cry up much of Christ in words, of what he said and did, of his
Life, of his Death, of what he has been, and what he shall be, and do deny the
present enjoyment of Christ, to that Antichrist is an Enemy; he can well away
with it to speak of Christ at a distance, but he cannot bear it if any hold
forth a present enjoyment of Christ; That Christ takes away sin, and forgives
it, and that his Blood cleanses from it, and that he is the Iustifier, and
Redeemer and Savior; the Profession of all this in words from the Letter
without, and that they are things true in themselves Antichrist can bear and
make a show of in Profession; but if any of the Saints of God do witness these
things, and shall testify in the Power of the Lord the enjoyment of these
things, and that they are at present in this Life possessed (to wit) Christ now
lives in us, and is come, and his Blood has cleansed from sin, and he has
forgiven it, and he has justified, redeemed and saved: I say, if any do
witness these things in present enjoyment, and that they are now in this
present time witnessed in the Spirit of Christ, and not only professed from
the Letter without, but experienced by the Work of God within; Antichrist
opposes this, and gainsayes present enjoyment: And such indeed are Subjects of
Antichrist's kingdom, who have the profession of Christ in words, but no
present enjoyment of him, but want his Nature, and are in the Nature contrary
to him, and feed upon Reports of things done by him without, and upon the
expectations of what he shall do hereafter, and in this present state are
without Christ, and are Sinners and Transgressors against the Life of
Righteousness, unconverted and unregenerated by Christ; all such as these are
the Subjects of Antichrist's kingdom.

And as concerning the Rise and Fall of Antichrist, the Beginning and Ending of
his Kingdom; these things in season may be declared, if God permit.

E. B.

A Hue-and-Cry AFTER THE FALSE PROPHETS AND DECEIVERS Of Our AGE: And a
DISCOVERY of them by their WORKS and FRUITS; And who they are in this Age that
follow the same spirit, and act the same things, as did the false Prophet in
former Generations.
FOrasmuch as in the World at this day, and through all Christian Nations,
there is a great Cry concerning False Prophets and Deceivers, each one Sort and
Sect of People accusing and charging the Teachers and Ministers that are of
others, and not of their Way, to be Deceivers and false Prophets: Thus the
Papists cry against the Protestant Ministers, and the Protestant Ministers do
the like by the Papists, each one sort of people cries the like against the
Ministers of the others.

And without all controversy, there are in the Christian-World (so called) and
in these Kingdoms, many false Prophets and Deceivers even at this day, and has
been for many Ages since the days of the Apostles: And the World, and Nations
and Multitudes have been deceived into the way of Error through the means of
the Deceivers, who have done much Hurt in the World by their Divinations and
Antichristian-wayes that they have walked in: But though it is acknowledged by
all sorts of Christians, That there are and have been many Deceivers and false
Prophets; yet the great Controversy is at this day, Who are the Deceivers and
false Prophets? seeing (as I have said) that every sort of Men are accusing
others to be such: But now it remains to be sought out [and that carefully by
all] who are the Deceivers and false Prophets? whether Papists Ministers, or
Protestant Ministers, or whether any others? and who such are in this day?

Now therefore for this very End, that it may be made manifest unto all, who
the Deceivers are, and that they may be turned from, and their Ways eschewed
by all People; thus I try them, and bring them to right and true Judgment, and
shall not charge the Papists, the Protestants, or any others, by their Name, or
because of their Name, that therefore they are Deceivers: But seeing that all
sorts of Christians do profess the Scriptures, and that they own them;
Therefore according to the Scriptures, and by the Spirit of God, I shall lay
both Papists, and Protestants, and all others to the Line of Judgment by the
Rule of Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them; and if Papists, Protestants,
or whose Ministers soever come under the Judgment of that Rule, they shall be
concluded by the Rule of the Spirit of God and the Scriptures, to be false
Prophets and Deceivers. Therefore come out Papists, Protestants, Anabaptists,
Quakers, and all others; come forth and hear your Trial, and receive your
Judgment.

First of all, It is concluded (and that I hope by all reasonable men) That
whosoever they are at this day through the World, whether Papists or
Protestants (so called) or whoever, that shall be found walking by the same
spirit, and in the same Ways, and doing the same things that the false
Prophets of Israel did in the days of old, and that the false Brethren and
false Teachers among the Churches of the Christians in the Apostles days
walked in and followed, such may at this day be adjudged, deemed and taken to
be false Prophets and false Teachers; Deceivers and Seducers, and this without
respect to any Name or Title whatsoever that they bear in their Religion. And
this is the Rule of Trial and Judgment, in which I may Justly and Righteously
proceed.

1. They were false Prophets and Deceivers in the days of the true Prophets,
Isa. 56. 11. That were Greedy Dumb Dogs; which could never have enough; and
that sought every one of them for their Gain from their Quarter; and that
Preached for Hire, and Divined for Money, Mic. 3. 11. The Priests that Taught
for Hire, and the Prophets that Divined for Money; against such as these Isaiah
and Micah cried, and that by the Spirit of the Lord, being commanded of him so
to do.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants of any sort, Independents,
Presbyterians, Quakers, or any other, that have a Quarter, from whence they
seek their Gain for Preaching, and Teach for Hire, and have Hire for Teaching,
(viz.) Tithes, or Sums of Money, and Divine for Money; such, whatsoever they
be, without respect of their Names or Professions, walk by the same spirit, and
in the same way, and do the same things as the false Prophets did, and are
false Prophets and Deceivers.

And therefore all People, it is left to the Witness of God in your
Consciences, and that you may give Witness in this Case, who are they now, and
where they are that can never have enough, but are greedy after Gain, and
Covetous, and that seek for Gain from their Quarters, or Portions of a Country
or City? and where are they now, and who is it that Preach for Hire, and Divine
for Money, that take so much Money or Gifts by the Year or Month for
Preaching? who is it, or who are they now that walk in these Ways? such,
whoever they be, whether Papists, Protestants, Sectaries (so called) are false
Prophets and Deceivers.

2. They were false Prophets and Deceivers, That stood not in the Counsel of
the Lord, and that did not turn People from their Iniquities and Evil Ways;
but spoke a Vision of their own Hearts, and not from the Mouth of the Lord: And
that cried Peace to them that walked Wickedly, and Prophesied Lies, and used
their Tongues, and said, The Lord says it, whenas the Lord had not spoken to
them; and that seduced the People by crying Peace, when there was no Peace; and
saw Vanity, and spok^ Vanity and Lies in the days of the true Prophets: I say,
such were false Prophets and Deceivers.

Now whosoever, whether Papists, or Protestants, or any others, that do not
stand in the Counsel of God, and that do not turn People from their Iniquities,
and their Evil Ways; but speak a Vision of their own Hearts, and not from the
Mouth of the Lord; and that cry Peace to them that walk wickedly, that prophecy
Lies, and use their Tongues, when the Lord has not spoken to them; and that
seduce People by crying Peace, when there is no Peace; and that builds the
Wall, and daubs it with untempered Mortar, and that do not Profit the People at
all, but cause them to err; Such are false Prophets and Deceivers at this day,
wheresoever and whosoever (without respect of Name or Title in their
Profession) Such now walk by the spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the
way of the Deceivers, which the Lord sent true Prophets to cry against.

And now to all People of what Name soever, it is left to the Witness of God in
you all to give witness, who they are now, and where they are that are guilty
hereof. Who is it now that stand not in the Counsel of God, and that do not
turn People from their Iniquities, that do not convert them to God by their
preaching, But speak what they have studied for, even a Divination of their own
Brain, and not what they have received from God; and that use their tongues,
and take other men's words, the Words of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles; when
as they have not the same Spirit of Christ and his Apostles; Nor have they
heard the Voice of God speaking to them, But take Chapter and Verse, and say,
Hear the Word of the Lord, when the Lord never spoke to them, nor sent them.
Who is it now, and where are they that are guilty hereof? and that cry Peace to
the Wicked, when the Lord speaks no Peace to them; and that are light vain
persons, and covetous and greedy persons, and that see Vanity, and daub with
untempered Mortar; that cry Peace unto People, and say they shall have Peace by
Christ, while yet they kill Christ, and are not Changed by Him. Where are there
such now, by whom People are not converted to God, although they preach time
after time? Let all People bring in their Witness: For whosoever are such at
this day, whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers (so
called) or whosoever, Such* (I say) are led by the spirit of the false
Prophets, and are in their way and practices, and all such are to be judged,
deemed and taken for Antichrists Ministers, false Prophets and Deceivers,
without respect of Persons or Titles of Religion.

3. They were false Brethren, and false Teachers, that taught for filthy lucre;
that professed they knew God in words, and in works denied him; being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; who had a Form of
Godliness, but denied the Power; and were heady and high-minded men, and lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God; that were ever teaching, and never able
to bring people to the knowledge of the Truth. And such were false Prophets,
and false Teachers, that through covetousness and feigned words did make
Merchandise of People; that beguiled unstable Souls, and that had hearts
exercised with covetous practices; being out of the right way, and following
the way of Balaam, who loved the Wages of unrighteousness: These, and such as
these, were Deceivers and false Teachers in the Apostles days, Tit. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 5, 7. 2 Pet. chap. 2.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or of what Sect soever they be
that do these things, that teach for filthy lucre; that profess God in words,
but in works deny him; and that live wickedly, and are disobedient to God; and
have the Form of Godliness, but want the Power; and are heady and highminded
men, and love pleasures; under whom people are ever learning, but not able to
come to the knowledge of the Truth; and that through Covetousness and feigned
words make Merchandise of people; that are unstable men, and do exercise
themselves in covetous practices; and are not in the right way, but do follow
the way of Balaam, who loved unrighteous Wages: Whosoever are such, whether
they be Papists or Protestants, or Quakers, or whomsoever they be, they follow
the Spirit of the false Prophets, and are in the way of the false Teachers, and
are Ministers of Antichrist, even false Prophets and Deceivers.

And now to all people whatsoever I appeal for Evidence to the Witness of God
in your Consciences, that you may judge in this case: Where are they now, and
who is it? are there not some such present amongst you this day in your Cities
and Towns and Countries, even such as teach for filthy lucre; that will preach
where they can get gain for preaching, but not otherwise; and that Profess God
and Christ with their lips, and show much love, but deny God in works; who live
unholy lives, and in evil ways, and give bad Examples to People, and that are
reprobate to good works; and that have the Form of Godliness, but not the
Power; and that are heady and high-minded, and ambitious persons; and that are
teaching many years together, and People cannot come to the knowledge of the
Truth by them, but are always ignorant and wicked. And do not your Teachers
exercise covetous practices among you, and go in the way of Balaam for Gifts
and Rewards (viz) so much for a Sermon, and for a years Preaching: Such who are
made Ministers by man, and not by the Lord, and who do not profit the People at
all: Whosoever they are, that are such [now in this Age] are False Prophets and
Deceivers, and follow the spirit and walk in the steps of the Deceivers of old;
and whosoever they are, whether Papists, Protestants, or any others, they may
lawfully be taken, judged and deemed to be false Prophets, Ministers of
Antichrist, and Deceivers.

4. The false Prophets and Deceivers in the days of old, were feigning and
flattering men, and cried peace to the wicked; and cried Peace, peace, to every
one that put into their mouths; but Prepared War against every one that did
not, Micah 3. 5. And they respected men's persons, and held men's persons in
Admiration because of Advantage, Jude 16.

Now whosoever, whether Papists or Protestants, or any else, that are Feigners
and Flatterers, and that cry Peace to the Wicked, and cry Peace to them that
put into their Mouths; but are Bitter, and Angry and Perverse against such as
will not, or cannot give them Hire and Money for Preaching; and that respect
men's Persons, and turn every way, from one kind of Worship to another; and have
men's Persons in Admiration for their own Gain and Advantage: whoever are such
now in this Age, are false Prophets and Deceivers.

And therefore all People, bring in your Evidence; Who are such now? and where
are they that are flattering men, that cry Peace to all that will give them
Means, and put into their Mouths, and that Admire the Persons of Great Men,
and that respect the Persons of Great Men for Advantage? If there be any such
now amongst you, whether they be Papists or Protestants, Anabaptists or Quakers
(so called) you may justly take such, and let such be deemed, judged and
reputed false Prophets, Seducers, and Ministers of Antichrist.

And now all People upon Earth, try, learn and examine your Teachers and
Ministers, lay them to the Line of Judgment; For if they are such as are here
described, if they bear these Marks and Fruits declared, and if they follow the
same spirit, and do as the false Prophets of old did, according as it is
declared in the Scriptures; then may you justly judge them to be Deceivers, and
false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist: For whosoever they be that are
amongst you, as Preach for Hire, and that have a Quarter from whence they seek
their Gain, and Divine for Money, and go a Preaching for Gifts and Rewards, and
that teach for filthy Lucre, and that are Covetous Persons, Heady and
Highminded Persons, and Ambitious Men, that do not profit the People at all,
nor turn them from sin by their Preaching; and that Prophecy Lies, and that
are Flatterers and Changeable Persons, and will turn from one Way to another,
and have men's Persons in Admiration because of Advantage: Whosoever he be that
is one of these above described, who has these Marks and Signs upon him, of
this Physiognomy, of this Nature and Feature, as before described; wheresoever
such a one shall be found, or whenever you see him, or meet with him, or if
such a one be amongst you, or pass by you, let him be suspected, taken, deemed
and judged for a false Prophet and Deceiver, without respect of his Name and
Title in his Profession of Religion.

Again, Christ Jesus prophesied and said, That Deceivers and false Prophets
should come, who should have the Sheep's-Clothing, but inwardly Ravening
Wolves. And John said, The false Prophets were already come into the World [in
his dayes] even the false Prophets and Antichrist, whom Christ said should
come; and the False Prophets and Deceivers that Christ said should come, John
saw were come into the World in his days.

Now, who is it, and where are they that are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, that
are those Antichrists that Christ said should come; and John said were come?
Even such are they that have the Outside (viz.) Christ's words, and the
Apostles words, and the Saints practices; they have the Sheep's clothing, but
inwardly are the Wolves in the evil nature; and their evil nature is covered
with the Saints words and practices; and such are the Wolves in Sheep's
clothing, that have the outside of the Sheep, but want the Nature of Christ,
and are in the contrary nature.

And to all people that are upon the Earth I do appeal, and ask, where are they
that are such now? and who are they? whether they be Papists or Protestants, or
whomsoever else that are such, that have the outside, the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are wolves of a devouring nature; such are they that Christ said
should come, and John saw was come; And such are Ministers of Antichrist,
whosoever they are, and such are in the World, and have overspread it since
the Apostles days; and whole Christendom has been deceived by such Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, even by such as have got the Outside, the Saints words and
Practices, but wanted the Life, and have been in the Evil Nature, and not in
the Nature of CHRIST JESUS: And such now in this Age, are to be taken, judged
and deemed false Prophets and Deceivers, Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and
Ministers of Antichrist.

E. B.

TO THE Friends of Truth In and about LONDON.
DEarly and well-beloved in Christ our Life and Glory, The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, and at this time quickens my heart into the lively remembrance of
you all, herewith sending the hearty and fervent Salutation of my dear and
perfect Love, unto all the Faithful amongst you; for the Fathers Love fills
my heart, and has raised up my spirit into an holy frame and temper of
gladness and rejoicing, of great joy and comfort in the remembrance and feeling
sense of what the Lord has wrought and made manifest among his People, and the
fullness of his Love and rejoicing flows out in praising and magnifying the
Lord our God for evermore.

Oh what has the Lord wrought for us in our day! How has his outstretched Arm
been made bare again and again for our Salvation and Deliverance? How many have
his Mercies been, and how numberless have his Lovingkindnesses been showed to
us? How has his power and wisdom been discovered amongst his People, by which
we are quickened and revived into the Life of Righteousness and Peace, to be
Servants and Heirs of the Everlasting Father, the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
being called by him out of Darkness into his mavelous Light? And how glorious
is the Light that has appeared upon our Tabernacle, and shined in our hearts,
and that has led us in the Way of Peace, and taught us in the Path of
Righteousness: Thus, and much more has the hand of the Lord wrought for us,
having raised us up to be a Poeple, that in times past were not a people; but
now he has formed us for himself, and created us for his praise, having
gathered us as a Shepherd does his Flock from our strayed estate, in which we
were strangers and afar off, inhabiting in death and darkness, but now raised
up to sit together in heavenly places, and to feed in the fat pastures of his
fullness that fills all in all.

This has been effected by the Hand and Power of the most High, who has also
preserved us unto this day through many trials and tribulations; and again and
again, when our enemies have risen up against us to destroy us, even then has
the Lord been our defense, and confounded our Persecutors, so that we yet live,
blessed be the Name of the Lord, the remembrance of which infinite tender
Mercies from the Father, that we have received, have a Heavenly influence upon
my heart at this time, which causes me to say, What manner of Love is this! Oh
the hight, and depth, and infiniteness of the same! the Beauty thereof has
ravished my heart, the Strength thereof has overcome me, and the Virtue
thereof has overcome me, and the Virtue thereof has filled my Soul: And this
is the present frame of my spirit; full of Love and Good Will to the Lord God,
and to all his Saints, and particularly unto you, unto whom my spirit desires
in the Lord the increase of Peace, and Mercies, and Blessings, and all Heavenly
Virtue unto you all, for I am under particular Engagements unto you more then
unto many.

1. Because my labor and service in the work of the Gospel has been more
amongst you then amongst others; even for diverse years have I been conversant
among you, in the administration of the gift of the Gospel, by dispensing the
Word of Life, to the Converting of some, and to the Strengthening and Confirming
of others in the way of the Lord. And let the Just God bear witness of that
faithfulness, and integrity and sincerity of heart, in which he has carried me
amongst you, while many precious days I have passed away with you, and have
not sought yours but you; nor do I desire ought concerning you, but your
Faithfulness to the Lord, and your growth and establishment in the Wisdom of
Christ Jesus, and that blessings and Peace may ever rest with you. And seeing
it is thus, that some of my precious years in the service of God have been
spent amongst you; therefore is my heart and spirit engaged to you-wards, even
while I live, to advise you, and exhort you, and to pray for you, that you may
be sound in the Faith, and established in the Truth, and Confirmed in the
Possession that never fades away.

2. In respect of that place of your outward Residence, (that great City I
mean) where Satan's Seat is, and where wickedness abounds, and many temptations
and provocations which may attempt to draw you from the Lord; I do know the
dangers are many which may easily be met withal in that place; There is both
the love, glory and excellency of this World near unto you; and also the
terrors, threats, losses and persecutions of this evil World even dwelling
with you, all which may work upon some many fears and doubts, and begat
temptations to the denying of the Lord; and seeing the danger is such to
you-wards in that place, even more then to some others, therefore is my soul
engaged to admonish, and instruct, and Pray for your preservation unto the end,
that ye may walk as the Lords, and to his glory.

3. And also my desires are for you, that blessings and Peace may be multiplied
unto you, and that you may walk in the Wisdom and Power of the Lord in this
respect, that Truth may be honored, and crowned with dominion and Authority,
and good report in that great City, by your faithfulness, and patience, and
diligence, and all the fruits of righteousness; for as many temptations do
attend you (as I have said before) so also many eyes are upon you, beholding
what you are, and what you do, and what will become of you; and if you Walk in
Faithfulness and Righteousness, and be preserved unto the Lord in boldness and
valor for his Names sake, this will magnify the Truth, and crown it with
honor, and strengthen and comfort many that are weak, and be a joy to all the
upright; and it will confound your Enemies, and put them to shame, and limit
the unreasonable spirit of the power of darkness, when our enemies see your
just, faithful, righteous and inoffensive manner of walking in all things. And
therefore for this cause, my heart is engaged to pray for you, seeing the eyes
of many are upon you to mark your ways and doings, and what will be the end.

And now, dearly beloved, as by the free grace and kindness of God ye are
called unto this Calling, and are renewed and changed into the Life of
Righteousness; so it is by the same Grace and Power of the Father, that ye must
stand and be preserved unto the end; for by Grace and Faith we all stand, even
through Diligence, Faithfulness, and Watchfulness in the same Grace, being
obedient unto its teachings, and fruitful in its motions, and walking by its
Rule, in meekness and lowliness of heart, in sincerity and godly Fear, not
being or doing any thing of our selves, distinct or divided from this Grace;
but being and doing all things, through the Grace of God dwelling in us; and
this is the highest Perfection of Saints. Every ones highest state admits of
Watchfulness, and Faithfulness, and Obedience, and to Hearken to the Lord, and
do his Will in all things; and whatsoever is of our selves, and related to the
outward World, may be kept in Subjection by his Power, that he alone may Rule,
and be exalted in Heaven and Earth, and in all things, what we are, and what we
do.

And wait upon the Lord, that ye may be established and settled in the Truth,
and that ye may be confirmed therein forever, as being natural Heirs of the
possession of Grace and Truth, to do, and walk, and live according to his will,
being so inherited never to go forth any more; and able to say, Nothing can
separate us from the Love of God, not Death, nor Life, nor any other thing.

For I would put you in mind, and ye also know it, How that many have been
touched in their Heart with the sense of the Lord, and his Love, yea, and many
have enjoyed of the good Gift of God, and walked with us for a time, that have
not remained unto the End; but have started aside from the Lord, and been
overcome with the Temptations of this World, even to the forsaking of the Way
of Truth and Righteousness; and such have dishonored the Lord, and forfeited
their Peace and Inheritance in God, and become hardened in their Hearts, and
dead to God, and the Latter-end of such has been worse then their Beginning;
though yet for a time such walked with us, and tasted of the good Gifts of God,
yet are become Reprobate, because their Hearts have not been firm, and
constant, and sound, and approved to God; but of an Evil Frame and Temper of
Spirit, Ambitious, Vainglorious, Self-seeking, and such like, which spirit
could not retain the Gift of God, but abused it, and perverted it from it
proper End.

And therefore, dearly beloved, it is exceeding precious to have a Heart and
Spirit tried and approved of the Lord; a good and honest Heart, an upright and
contrite Spirit; for that will abide in Faithfulness unto God through all
Tribulations and Trials; if the Heart be right in the sight of God, whatsoever
the Knowledge be, or whether the Gifts be little or great, yet the Lord's
Presence is there, and such are blessed: so that its not enough only to have a
touch and taste of the Loving kindness of God; but every one must be
established therein, in an approved Heart and tried Spirit, which can endure
all things, and not be shaken nor moved; and its only that kind of Spirit,
which is Meek and Lowly, Sincere and Upright, which is established in the
Truth, and which only can remain unmovable.

And according to the ancient Doctrine of Christ, which ye have believed, every
one must look to your own particular standing, and must feel your own
particular Joy, Peace and Comfort, and must receive the assurance of Life in
your own Souls; for it is an Everlasting Word: Every one must stand by their
own, by what they feel and enjoy of Eternal Life in their own Hearts, that only
is every ones Security and Assurance in the Kingdom of Peace and Glory: And it
is the height of Perfection, To have the Seal of the Spirit of God in our
Consciences, witnessing to us, That we are the Lord's; and Blessed are they
that have this Testimony, even that of the Spirit of the Father, which is the
Everlasting Comforter against all Sorrow; and the Perfect Seal against all
Doubts, and the sure Guide against all Opposition: This is the Office of the
Spirit of the Lord, and its Work in the Hearts of his Children.

Therefore my Advice is to you, as from the beginning, Look to your own, to
your own Measure of the Gift of Grace and Truth; that only stands, when all
Wanderings after men and things fall; and in that is your security, as I have
said.

And let your Conversations and Walkings be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, in all Faithfulness and Righteousness, that you may be an Honor to the
Lord in your Generation; for this only have we to do in this World, even to
show forth his Praise and Glory, who has created us in Christ Jesus.

All things in relation to Truth are well in these Cou^ies; the Dominion of
Truth is set up over the Heads of the Wicked, and it is a Terror to its
Enemies, and the Joy of all Good men; and Friends are Faithful in the Power of
the Lord, and look over this World, to the World that has no End, and their
Hope and Confidence is in that; and Meetings are generally quiet, and the
Presence of the Lord is amongst his People. And thus to the Grace, Power and
Wisdom of the Lord God are ye committed, who is the only Preserver of his
Children. Grace and Peace be with you all.

Edw. Buroughs.
Underbarrow, the 18th day of the 8th Month, 1661.
THE CASE Of the People called QUAKERS (ONCE MORE) Stated and Published TO THE
WORLD: With the ACCUSATIONS charged upon them, and their ANSWERS.
WE are an afflicted and Suffering People in these Kingdoms at this day;
Mocked, Reproached, Haled before Magistrates, Violently abused, and Imprisoned,
and much Hard-dealing exercised upon us: This is apparently visible to all
people, and needs no further Proof.

But whether these Afflictions and Sufferings, Imprisonments and Hard-dealing,
be Just, or Unjust, according to our Deserts, or out of the Malice and Enmity
of our Adversaries; this is the Question to be enquired into: Unjust, and
Unrighteous, and out of Malice and Enmity; and not of true Desert (say we) are
these Sufferings imposed on us. But, Justly, and according to Desert, and the
Laws of the Land (say our Adversaries) Who shall be judge in the Case between
us? Even the Law of God, the Gospel of Christ, the Scriptures of Truth, the
Example of Primitive Christians, our Neighbors, and the Witness in every Man's
Conscience; and to the Judgment of all these we appeal, and shall abide their
Sentence.

First, We are Accused of an Heinous Crime, and as if we deserved the greatest
Punishments, Because we are Dissenting and Differing from the Church of
England, and cannot Conform to all Her Worships and Ceremonies; therefore are
we said to be Heretics: Because holding and practizing Different Things from
Her, etc.

Plea. First, The Scriptures of Truth (which are according to both Law and
Gospel) do say and Judge, That they who sometimes did Dissent, and Differ from
some of the Church of Christ, in some Principles and Practices and could not
practice in all things, what some others did, as Romans 14. where it is
signified, That some of the Church of Christ believed they might eat All
Things; some others of the Church did eat Herbs, some esteemed One day above
Another, others esteemed Every day Alike; this kind of dissenting, and
difference, about Meats, and Days, and Ceremonies, were amongst the Members of
the True Church; but What is the Judgment of Scripture in this case of
Difference amongst them? Not that the Dissenters one from another should be
Punished, and Imprisoned, and Banished, but ver. 5. Let every man be persuaded
in his own mind. And One was not so much as to Judge Another in this case of
Difference, and Dissenting; much less to Imprison one another for that Cause.
And in Phil. 3. 15. it is there signified, That if any persons were dissenting,
and different in Judgment, or in the growth in Grace, from the rest of the
Church, every one was to walk in that measure of Truth, as he had attained to;
And if any were otherwise-minded, (viz. Different in the Growth in the Grace of
God) then God should reveal the same unto them; And notwithstanding their
difference in Judgment, whether in cases Substantial, or Ceremonial, yet, they
were still to be in Love and Unity, and walk in their measures, to which they
had atained, and they were not to be Imprisoned and persecuted, as we are at
this day: Hence observe, That the Judgment of Scriptures, which the Law of God,
and Gospel of Christ are according to, is clear for us, and against them that
hate us, that imprison us, and afflict us, for dissenting and differing in some
Doctrines, and Practices, from the Church of England. But

Secondly, If we were indeed Heretics, and Erroneous People; suppose so, which
never yet was truly proved of us, nor can be; What Judgment do the Scriptures
(which are according to the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ) give in that
case? Not that we should be thus imprisoned, and Afflicted, with corporal
punishments; but according to Titus, Tit. 3 10, 11. we should first be
Admonished in Love, and Exhorted once and again; and then, if we gainsay, and
will not hear Reproof, to be Rejected, cast Out, and Denied of the Assembly of
Saints; but not imprisoned, and banished: and according to 1 Cor. 5. where it
is signified, That some, in the denomination of the Church, did Offend against
Christ and the Church, and were Heretics, and Dissenters, because of their
Evil deeds, from the True Church; yet, these were not to be imprisoned, and
persecuted in their persons, but delivered unto Satan for the destruction of
the Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord; they were to
be Spiritually dealt withal; and they were to be cast out into the Wicked
World, anong the Ungodly, to have their portion from God, with the Wicked, to
be delivered to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that it might be
destroyed, and the Spirit saved in the Day of the Lord. So, if we were indeed
such as these were, Dissenters, and in Difference from the true Church, because
of some Wickedness, yet the Judgment of Scriptures are against our Enemies in
this Case, who persecute and imprison us; for thus it ought not to be done unto
us, if the Church of England were the true Church of Christ, and we in
difference from her, by False Principles, or Evil Conversation, or any thing
else. Thus you see the Judgment of the Scriptures, and of the Law of God, and
Gospel of Christ, is against our Persecutors.

Thirdly, But suppose we doubt, That the Church of England, and its Ordinances,
Discipline, its Worship and Ceremonies, be not according to the Scriptures of
Truth, but are in the Form of Godliness, without the Power; suppose we in
Conscience believe this, and think we can prove it, which is the very truth of
the Case, and therefore do deny Conformity to her, lest we should sin against
God, and wrong our own Consciences, at least, as we believe. What Judgment does
the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, give in this Case? We are Exhorted and
Commanded in Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. From Covetous Men, and Proud Men, Lovers of
themselves, false Accusers, Despisers of them that are Good, High-minded Men,
and Lovers of Pleasures, they that have the Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power, from all such we are to turn away. And therefore we believe we are
Justified by the Scriptures in turning away for these diverse years past (and
till we be otherwise persuaded by sound Doctrine) from the Ministry and
Churches that are in England, or lately have been (and sound Reason has not
been yet showed us to the contrary by you) because they are such as the
Scriptures exhort us to turn away from; and because we have judged, that they
have had the Form of Godliness, but not the Power; so we are not to be
imprisoned and persecuted though we differ, and dissent, and turn away from all
them that are Covetous, Proud, Boasters, Lovers of themselves Despisers of them
that are Good, High minded Men, and such as have a form of godliness, but not
the Power. But we are Judged Just, and our Case not condemned by the Law of
God, and Gospel of Christ, and by the holy Scriptures, but rather such as
inflict Sufferings upon us: And for any of our Principles and Doctrines that we
hold, we deserve no punishment nor persecution, because hereof; for we testify
before God, Angels and Men, That we hold and maintain, no principles of
Religion, nor practice of Worship, nor Doctrines of Gospel, but what are
according to Scriptures of Truth. And we are ready to be tried, and proved in
that case, and to bring the matter to Issue, in fair proceedings with any man,
that shall object the contrary; And thus the Judgment of Scriptures are for us,
as we suppose (at least) and if we are in Error, either by denying any thing
on the one hand, or affirming any thing on the other, we have not been
hitherto, well Proceeded against, in order to our Conviction.

Secondly, We are accused as for a great Crime, and Imprisoned, because we meet
together, in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, to wait upon him, and to
Worship him in Spirit and Truth; in Prayer to God, and Exhortations one to
another, to Righteousness and Holiness: But, what Judgment does the Law and
Gospel, and holy Scriptures give, and our Neighbors also, between us in this
Case? Lets come all to their Bar and receive Just Sentence.

Plea. First, The Judgment of God's Law, Christ's Gospel and holy Scriptures,
are not against our meeting together, but on the contrary, do command us, and
Exhort us, with promises of blessings, to meet together in the Worship of God,
and to wait upon him; And it was the practice of the primitive Christians, to
assemble themselves together, in that form and manner as we do at this day, (to
wit) in a private manner, and separate from the multitude, and all the Jews
Synagogues, as in Acts 1. 17. The Saints and Disciples, both Men and Women, to
the number of one hundred and twenty, (which were far more then five) went into
an upper Chamber, being a private place, and no public Synagogue, and their
waited upon the Lord in Prayer and Supplication, according as we do at this
day: Thus the Scriptures justify the way and manner of our Meetings, and
condemns them not. Again, in Acts 20. 8. the Saints and Disciples were gathered
together in an upper Chamber, and Paul Preached unto them until midnight. Here
was a private Meeting, far above the number of five and out of any Public
Synagogues; and Christ Jesus said, Where two or three are met together in my
Name, there I am in the midct of them.

And He and his Disciples, often met together in private places, apart from the
Jews public Worships, sometimes in a Ship, and sometimes in Deserts, and on
the Mountains, and in particular Houses, and Preached, and Prayed; this the
Scriptures Prove. And also; in Heb. 10. 25. we are expressly commanded, not to
neglect the Assembling of our selves together, but to exhort one another and so
much the more as the day approached. By all which Scriptures, with many more
that might be quoted, it is Evident to all the World, That our meeting together
for the Worship of God, in that form and manner as Practiced by us, is
according to the Law of God, the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the holy
Scriptures: And all these give Just Judgment for us, and Justify us, and
therefore consequently condemn such as do violence to us, for this practice of
Meeting together, for the Worship of God.

And thus, though we are Accused and Imprisoned as Evil doers, yet, such our
practice of meeting is manifestly according to the Law of God, Gospel of
Christ, Scriptures, Example of Saints, and President of primitive Christians;
all which give Judgment for us.

Secondly, What Judgment do our Neighbors give in this Case? they say,
concerning our Meetings, That they have known us to meet together in such
manner, for diverse years, in their Towns and Villages, and never knew, nor
understood of any harm or danger herein, nor ever were any way prejudiced,
either in their Persons or Estates, by our meetings. The very witness of God in
all our Neighbors do Testify, and give Judgment, that our Meetings have
always been peaceable and quiet, and that we come together in peace and good
order, and parted in the same, and no person has been harmed by such our
Meetings; enquire of the Neighborhood, and they will tell you, they believe in
their Consciences, our Meetings are for good, and have good effects, and are
not evil, nor brings forth any evil to any.

And as for the manner of our Meeting and and sitting together, it is orderly
and decently, and of good report among men; and for any Doctrine that ever was
there held, or heard by any, none can truly accuse it to be either Error, or
Heresy, or Sedition; but on the contrary, they know it witnesses against all
Sin and Iniquity, and tends to the turning of people from Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness, to Truth and Holiness: And many can tell, this is effected, by
our Doctrine Preached in our Meetings; and our Neighbors can witness, that we
part again in Peace and Good order, and in convenient time; and they can show
you, they are not terrified, nor the peace of the Land disturbed (on our part)
by our Meetings, which are in God's fear, and to the Glory of his Name, which
all sober men know, are according to the Law of God, and Gospel, and primitive
Christians Example. And thus our Neighbors give Judgment for us, and in their
Consciences do not Justify them that Imprison us, for this matter of meeting
together, which Gods Law, Gospel, Scriptures, and our Neighbors, do thus
clearly justify.

Thirdly. We are Accused, as guilty of a heinous Crime, and Imprisoned, Because
we refuse to Swear at all, or take any Oath in any Case.

Plea. First, The Judgment of the Law of the New. Testament of God, and Gospel
of Christ, and Scriptures in this case, is clear on our behalf. As in the
express Command of Christ, in his Law and Scriptures Recorded, Mat. 5. where he
says, Swear not at all, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by the
Head; but, let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is more
comes of Evil. And again, Iam. 5. the Apostle commands the Saints in these
words, Above all things my Brethren, Swear not, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor any
other Oath. And many holy Martyrs since the Apostles days did deny all
Swearing. Thus you see, the Judgment of Christ Jesus, and of the Gospel, and of
the Apostle, and of Scriptures, are so far from Condemning of us to
Imprisonment and Banishment, for our refusing to Swear, that we are Commanded
and Exhorted by them, not to Swear at all; and therefore consequently, justify
us in our refusing to Swear; and thus, give not Judgment for such as do
Imprison and Persecute us for not Swearing. Come to the Judgment of Christ, his
Gospel, and holy Scriptures; Let you and us appear together be fore their
Judgment Seat, whether they give judgment against us, that deny all Swearing,
or against you, that Imprison us for that Cause: And let the Lord God, Angels
and just Men, give their Judgment in this Case; we a poor Afflicted people, do
appeal to you, for just Sentence of Judgment, between us and our Opponents.

Secondly, Let our Neighbors, give their Judgment, though we do refuse to take
any Oath, because of the Commands of Christ and his Gospel, as aforesaid; yet,
what harm has this ever yet been to any of our Neighbors, let them speak; or
what detriment ought this to be to any of them, they will tell you: Though we
cannot formally take an Oath, yet we are ready at all times to do the Truth,
and to speak it on all good occasions, as much as if we did Swear upon a Book;
and they can trust us upon our words, as much, if not more, then they can do
any that Swear upon their Oaths; and therefore they shall give judgment, that
according to their best knowledge, we ought not to be Imprisoned and Banished;
though we cannot Swear formally upon a Book, being the Truth is not suppressed,
nor yet the administration of justice ought to be obstructed for our refusing
to Swear. Thus the Neighborhood bears witness for us, and against such as deal
hardly by us, and Persecute us because hereof.

Fourthly, We are accused as Heinous Offenders, and imprisoned, because it is
supposed, We do not submit to obey the known Laws of the Land, but break them,
and will not conform to the Church, pay Tithes, take Oaths, leave meeting
together, etc. though we know the Laws of the Land command these things.

Plea, First, As to submitting to all known Laws of the Land; this is known to
God and our Neighbors, that our Principle and Practice is, and ever has been,
to submit to every Government, and to submit to all Laws of men, either by
doing or by suffering, as at this day, we resist not the greatest of
Afflictions and Tribulations that can be imposed on us; and this is well known
to our Neighbous and all People, that we are submissive to all Laws of Men, by
patient Suffering without Resistance, even when any Law requires any thing of
us which we cannot perform for Conscience sake, that Law we fulfill by patient
suffering, resisting no man, no^ rendering Evil for Evil to any. And the
Judgment of the Scriptures, which are according to both Law and Gospel, and the
Presidents of Saints justify us in this Case, in choosing patiently to suffer
the greatest Penalties of the Law, rather than to obey by doing any such Law,
as requires things contrary to our pure Consciences; as in the Example of the
Three Children, Dan. 3. who were commanded, To fall down and worship the Golden
Image, at what time soever they heard the sound of the Music, upon the Penalty
of being cast into the midst of the burning Fiery Furnace: which Commandment
they could not obey, nor could Truth fall down to worship the Image; but rather
chused to suffer the Penalty of being cast into the midst of the burning Fiery
Furnace, which accordingly was done unto them. Again, in the Case of Daniel,
chap. 6. who was commanded, To make no Petition to any God or man for Thirty
Days, save to King Darius, upon the Penalty and Affliction of being cast into
the Lions Den: But Daniel did rather choose to suffer the Penalty, to be cast
into the Den of Lions, than to obey the Commandment; and was cast into the
Lions Den. By these Examples of holy Men, with many more that might be given
out of the Scriptures, it is evident, That Righteous Men will rather choose to
suffer, than to obey any Law of Men contrary to their Consciences. So the Law
of God, and Example of Saints, and holy Scriptures give Judgment for us in this
Case, of rather choosing to suffer, than to obey Laws contrary to our
Consciences; and consequently must needs condemn such that Persecute and
Imprison us, because they require Obedience of us in Things against our
Consciences.

Secondly, Though we do disobey Laws, and cannot actively obey every Law of
man, when it requires and commands things contrary to a good Conscience; yet
herein also are we justified, by the Law of God, Example of Saints, and holy
Scriptures, and they give Judgment for us, and consequently against our
Enemies in this Case; and in particular in the two Examples before mentioned in
Daniel, the Three Children were expressly commanded, To fall down and worship
the Golden Image; and Daniel was also required by the King's Decree, Not to
pray to any God or Man, save to King Darius; yet all these Holy Men of God did
absolutely disobey the Law and Decree so requiring of them, and did contrary to
the Commandment; for the three Children did not how, nor Daniel cease to pray
to his God, but prayed as at other times, and yet were justified of God in so
doing. Also, the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ (Acts 4. 18.) were
commanded, To Preach no more in the Name of Jesus; but the Apostles did disobey
their Commandment, and went on and preached in the Spirit and Power of Christ,
contrary to the Commandment of the Rulers, and appealed to them. Whether it
were not better to obey God than man? Many Examples we might collect out of the
Scriptures, that the Servants of God did disobey the Commands of Kings and
Rulers, and could not obey (by doing) any Command contrary to God; but rather
choosed to suffer Afflictions, and Death it self, than to obey such Laws and
Decrees, as required any thing contrary to a pure Conscience; and this is our
case at this day, we cannot obey (by doing) any thing against our Consciences,
but must break the Laws of men, and disobey their Commandments, rather than
break the Law of God, and sin against their own Consciences, whatsoever we
suffer because hereof; and yet the Examples of Saints and Scriptures justify
us in this behalf.

And let all our Enemies cease to cry out, Rebellious and Disobedient to Laws
and Government* for we are not such as do wilfully and obstinately disobey any
Laws of Men, but for Conscience sake, and that we may not sin against God, nor
offend his Witness in us; therefore we cannot obey Laws contrary to our
Consciences, whatsoeve^ we suffer, which we resist not, nor rebel against any
in this Case: So that our Principles and Practices are to obey every Law and
Government, either by Doing, or Suffering. And though we disobey such Laws as
are not according to the Law of God, and rather do chose to suffer; yet herein
we are justified by the Law of God, and the holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, And as for our Conversations among men, in respect of our daily
walking and converse with them in our dealing, in respect of Honesty and
Faithfulness, and Truth, and Justness in Works and Words; our Neighbors shall
give Witness for us: We will not justify our selves, it is God that justifies
us, and the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Scriptures, Examples of Holy Men, our
Neighbors, and the Witness of God in all men's Consciences, shall bear witness
to us; And all these do give Judgment for us in these Cases, to whom we do
appeal for Judgment. And, O Lord God Everlasting, do thou judge our Cause; do
thou make it manifest in thy due Season to all the World, that we are thy
People, that we Love thee above all, that we fear thy Name more than all, that
we love Righteousness and hate Iniquity; and that we now suffer for thy holy
Name and Truth, and for thy Honor and Justice, and for thy Truth and Holiness:
O Lord, thou know we are resolved to Perish, rather than to lose one Grain
hereof. Amen, Amen.

Our Accusations and Answers truly compared, and weighed in the Balance of
Justice and Truth in every man's Conscience, let all the World judge of the
Case* Do we deserve to be Ruined, Destroyed, Imprisoned and Banished, and that
to be devoured of Wild Beasts, as our Enemy threatens us he will do? Is it so?
Are we Heretics? Are we Seditious? Are we Drunkards? Are we Doubledealers? are
we such as the Law of God condemns? what Evil have we done in the Land? do we
hurt any Body? are we not Innocent before the Lord and men? we appeal to the
just Witness of God and Men, let it be answered; and though no man will hear
and consider our Cause this Day, yet the Lord will plead our Cause in his Time
and Season, and make the World to know, We are his People; in the mean time we
are willing to suffer the Reproaches of Ungodly Men, till the Lord works
Deliverance in the Earth.

But now it may be objected by the Magistrates and Rulers, That we have now a
Law against you, and you must suffer; for we cannot but put the Law in
Execution, according to our Oaths and Offices; and it is not we that persecute
you, but it is the Law of the Land by which you now suffer; and we cannot be
blamed for your suffering, we only Execute the Law. And after this manner is
the Reasoning of some at this day, etc.

Answ. To all which I do Answer; It is true, there is a Law now Enacted against
us, which is pretendedly made the ground of our Suffering; but whether that Law
be in it self Just, or Unjust, I shall not now demonstrate, but shall leave it
to the Judgment of all Christian Men, that know us, our Principles, Doctrines,
Ways and Conversations, and let them judge whether we deserve the Penalties
and Punishments therein described, for any Principle or Practice held and
maintained by us. And though there be a Law against us, yet the Magistrates
that are Executors thereof, may execute the same with Moderation or with
Violence, with Discretion, or too much Rigor; and it will be well for them to
use Moderation and Discretion in this Case: Hereby may they save themselves
from that weight of Anger and Indignation of the Lord God, that will come upon
all Violent Doers, who seek to destroy the Innocent, and Rejoice in the
Occasion administered.

And though this Law be Enacted against our Meetings; not ours, I may say, but
such Meetings as are Dangerous to the public Peace, and to the Terror of the
People: But our Meetings are not such, and therefore this Law may not justly
extend in its Execution to the breaking of our Meetings, nor to Banish us
because of our Meeting together, which is for the Worship of God, and are
Peaceable and of good Report among all good Men; and are not for Disturbance of
the Peace, nor Terror of the People, and therefore justly free from this Law,
as aforesaid.

And though this Law is pretended against us, for to Banish us, and to rid the
Land of us, as some vainly suppose; Yet, must it needs be executed to the
height of it, without Limitation or Restriction? Must this Law be Executed to
its height more than some other Laws, that are as truly Enacted, and as fully
in Force as this Act can be: Yet some such Laws there are, which better deserve
Execution than this, yet they lie dormant, as is visibly apparent at this day,
as in 4 Iac. cap. 5. in these words, Be it Enacted, etc. That all, and every
Person or Persons, which after Forty Days next following the end of this
present Session of Parliament, shall be Drunk, and of the same Offense of
Drunkenness shall be lawfully convicted, shall for every such Offense forfeit
and lose Five Shillings, etc. to be paid to the hands of the Church Wardens of
that Parish where the Offense shall be committed, who shall be accountable
therefore to the use of the Poor of the same Parish. And if the said Person or
Persons so convicted, shall refuse or neglect to pay the said Forfeiture, then
the same shall be levied of the Goods of every such Person or Persons, by
Warrant of Precept from the Court, Judge, or Justices, before whom the same
conviction shall be: And if the Offender be not able to pay the sum of five
shillings, then he shall be committed to the Stocks for the space of Six Hours.
I pray you read the Statute at large, it is worth a sober man's pains to read
over, and then judge whether that Law be duly execued at this day; and also,
whether it deserves not more strict Execution than the present Act against us.
Also the 1 Iac. cap. 7. in these words, That all Persons calling themselves
Scholars, going about Begging; all idle Persons going about in any Country,
either Begging, or using any subtle Craft, or unlawful Games or Plays, or
faigning themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, or pretending that they
can tell Fortunes, or such other like fantastical Imaginations; all Fencers,
Bearwards, Common-Players of Interludes and Minstrels, wandering abroad, shall
be taken, adjudged and deemed as Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars; and
shall suffer such Pains and Punishments as is expressed, 39 Eliz. cap. 4.
(viz.) That every such Person shall be stripped Naked from the Middle upwards,
and shall be openly Whipped until His or Her Body be Bloody, etc. and shall be
forthwith sent from Parish to Parish, etc.And read the Statute at large, and
then consider how duly it is Executed now, and whether it deserves not the
Execution as much as the late Act against us, though in some places the one is
more executed than the other; where many of our Friends, being honest sober
Persons, and of good Conversation, and yet are haled out of their Meetings,
where they are met only to Worship God, and for no other End, and ^sent to
Prison; and persecuted to the very height of the said Act; whenas idle Persons,
following unlawful Games, and Plays and Bearward, Common-Players of Interludes
and Minstrels of diverse kinds, do wander up and down City and Country, and
having their Play Houses public, where their Wickedness is acted; such
Persons, and such things, though appearing publicly, yet are permitted, and
little or no notice taken of them by some of the Magistrates, so as to punish
them for Breach of the Laws, for the preventing of these Evils: But such
Wickedness is too much suffered, though there be diverse Acts of Parliaments
against such Persons and such Actions, as well as there is one against our
Meetings, yet the Act against us is more put in Execution some Places for the
breaking of out Meetings, which are for the Worship of God, than the good Laws
for suppressing Wickedness, though there is better Law for the one than for the
other. Diverse other Laws and Statutes made for good Ends, for the suppressing
of Wickedness in the Land, there are, which are but easily Executed at this
day; but here is one Act against Peaceable meeting together for the Worship of
God, which is violently prosecuted and executed upon Innocent Men; and let all
just Men judge of these things: Though there be a Law Enacted against our
Meetings, so there is against Drunkards and Drunkenness, and Unreasonable
Tippling in Taverns and Alehouses, and against Minstrels, Fiddlers, Pipers and
Players, Common-Players and Stage Players, that go up and down the Countries,
and have their Play Houses in public Cities, which Statutes ought rather to be
Executed, though they are not: But these things we shall leave to all sober
People to judge of.

And seeing that the Law against us is more put in Execution, than these other
Laws, it does appear, That there is more Envy against us, and our Peaceable
Religious Meetings, than there is against Profaneness and Wickedness,
Drunkenness and Stage-Playing, and such like; and such Magistrates, wheresoever
they are, are not excusable in the Sight of God, though there is a Law against
us, while they prosecute it against us, and not these other good Laws against
Profane and Ungodly Persons and Practices; And therefore seeing we do suffer,
we must say, It is not only because there is a Law against us; but it is also,
or rather, Because there is Enmity, and Wrath and Wickedness in the Hearts of
Men against us, which is the main Cause of our Sufferings at this day. And let
the Magistrates compare this Law, made against us, with that Saying in Doctor
and Student, Chap. 2. speaking concerning the Law written in the Heart,
teaching every man what is to be done, and what is to be fled; And (says he)
Because it is written in the heart, therefore it may not be put away, nor is it
ever changable by any diversity of place, or time; And therefore against this
Law, Prescription, Statute nor Custom may not prevail; and if any be brought in
against it, they be not Prescriptions, Statutes, nor Customs, but things void,
and against justice, and all other Laws; as well the Law of God, as the Acts
of Men, ought to be grounded upon the Law written in the Heart. And in cap 4.
of the same its said; Every man's Law must be consonant with the Law of God, and
therefore the Laws of Princes, the Commandments of Prelates, the Statutes of
Commonalties, nor yet the Ordinances of the Church are not Righteous, nor
Obligatory, but as it is consonant to the Law of God. And we are sure the Law
of God and holy Scriptures do justify our Meeting together, as before is
expressed. Also in the Statute 28. Hen. 8. chap 7. it is said in these words,
That no man, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition soever he be, has Power to
dispense with Gods Laws, as all the Clergy of this Realm, and the most part of
all the Universities of Christendom. And we also Affirm, and think these things
truly compared one with another, We leave them to the Judgment of the Law of
God, Gospel of Christ, holy Scriptures, and our Neighbors; and let Truth
determine: So be it.

Edward Buroughs.

A TABLE OF THE Several Books Contained in this VOLUMN, And of the Principal
HEADS and Matters contained in the said Books.
A Warning from the Lord to the Inhabitants of Underbarrow, and to all the
Inhabitants in England: Which contains, 1. A Warning to all who hold up the
false Teachers and false Worship, page 1. to 11. 2. A true Declaration to all
the World of his manner of Life, what he had been, and what he was at that
present, p. 15. 16.
The Walls of Ierico razed down to the Ground: Which contains an Answer to a
Book called, The Quarkers Principles dashed in pieces, put forth by Enoch
Howet, called an Anabaptist, p. 18, etc. An Answer to several Queries: Put
forth to the People called Quakers, by Phillip Bennit, a pretended Minister of
Christ; and John Reeve, one who called himself, The Last Messenger and Witness,
p. 29, etc. An Answer to a Book called, Choice Experiences, put forth by J.
Turner, p. 45. The Copy of a Letter sent to the Assembly of them called
Anabaptists in Newcastle, p. 51. An Answer to a Book called, A Voice from the
Word of the Lord, put forth by one John Griffith against the People called
Quakers, p. 54. A Visitation of the Rebellious Nation of Ireland, and a Warning
from the Lord Proclaimed to all the Inhabitants thereof; with a Lamentation
over its Unfruitfulness and Rebellion, after so many Visitations, p. 77.
Containing several particular Papers, written in that Nation to several sorts
of People, (viz.) 1. An Information to the Heads, and the Ground of the Law
laid down to the Judges and Justices, etc. p. 83. 2. An Exhortation sent to the
chief Commander and his Council, and the Just Cause of the Innocent laid before
them, p. 85. 3. The Unjust Sufferings of the Just declared, and their Appeal to
the Just Witness of God in all their Consciences, p. 88. 4. A Challenge to the
Priests of Dublin to try their Godd, and their Ministry, and their Worships, p.
90. 5. A Discovery of the Idol Dumb Shepherds in that Nation, and a Lamentation
ever their starved and strayed Flocks, p. 91. 6. An Invitation to all the poor
desolate Soldiers, to Repent, and make their Peace with the Lord, and their
Duty showed them what the Lord requires of them, p. 93. 7. A Warning from the
Lord to the Natives of that Nation of Ireland, p. 94.
A Trumpet of the Lord sounded forth of Zion: Which contains a Testimony from
the Word of the Lord 1. To Oliver Cromwell, and his Counsel, p. 97. 2. To all
the Judges and Lawyers, p. 98. 3. To all Astrologers, Magitians, South-sayers
and Wisemen, p. 99. 4. To all the Generals, Colonels, Commanders, Officers
and Soldiers, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, p. 99. 5. To all the Priests,
and Prophets, and Teachers of the People, p. 100. 6. To all them called
Papists, and to their whole Body, and Head at Rome, p. 102. 7. To all them
called Protestants of the eldest sort, p. 103. 8. To all them called
Presbyterians and Independants, p. 103. 9. To all them called Anabaptists, p.
105. 10. To all them called Free-willers, who say, Christ dyed for all, p. 107.
11. To all them that say, They wait and believe for the coming of Christ to
Reign in Person upon Earth, p. 107. 12. To all them called Ranters, p. 108. 13.
To all them called Seekers and Waiters, p. 109. 14. The Beast which all the
World Wonders after (but they whose Names are written in the Lamb's Book of
Life) has many Heads and many Horns, p. 109.
A Description of the State and Condition of all Mankind upon the Face of the
whole Earth: Shows, from p. 115. to 123. 1. What man was in his Creation,
before Transgression. 2. What he is in Transgression, and how he became a
degenerate Plant. 3. The Way of Restoration, Salvation, and of Life Eternal,
declared to the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the whole World.
Truth Defended; or, Certain Accusations answered, cast upon the People called
Quakers, by the Teachers of the World: In which is discovered, 1. Who are the
false Prophets. 2. When they came in. 3. How they may be known. 4. Who they are
that deny Christ, and preach another Gospel. 5. Who they are that deny the
Scriptures, Churches, Ministers and Magistrates, etc. p. 124. to 135. The true
Faith of the Gospel of Peace Contended for in the Spirit of Meekness: Being an
Answer to John Bunnian, a professed Minister in Bedfordshire, p. 136. An Answer
to a Book called, Stablishing against Quaking; put forth by Giles Firmin, a
professed Minister in Essex, p. 153. The Crying Sins Reproved, whereof the
Rulers and People of England are highly guilty: Being Additions to their own
Confessions held forth by them in their Declaration, wherein these Three
Nations were invited to a solemn Day of Fasting, etc. p. 168. A Measure of the
Times: Wherein is showed, 1. What the state of things have been in Ages past.
2. What the state of things are at this present day. 3. What shall be the state
of things hereafter, from p. 183. to 203.
The Testimony of the Lord concerning London: Being a Warning to all sorts of
People in it, what the Lord requires of them, p. 214. to 222. A Just and Lawful
Trial of the Teachers and Professed Ministers of this Age: Wherein is showed,
That they are judged, and by the Scriptures proved to be contrary to all the
Ministers of Christ in former Ages. 2. And are proved to agree with all the
false Prophets and Deceivers in their Call, Maintenance, Doctrine and Practice.
In which Book is also a Description of the true Ministry of Christ, from p.
223. to 239. A Standard lifted up, and an Ensign held forth to all Nations:
Being a Testimony Concerning The True God, p. 241. The Son of God, p. 242. The
Spirit of God, p. 242. Man, and all Mankind, p. 243. The World in general, p.
243. Man's Restoration, Redemption and Salvation, what they are, and by whom
they are wrought, p. 245. True Religion, and the true Worship of the true God,
p. 245. Justification and Sanctification, p. 246. The Kingdom of Christ, and
how it is to be set up, p. 246. Governors and Government, and Subjection to
them, p. 247. The true Ministry of Christ, and the false Ministry, and the
Difference betwixt them, p. 248. The Gospel of Christ, p. 249. The Word of God,
and the Scriptures, p. 249. The Devil and Damnation, p. 250. All Creatures that
God made, p. 251. The New Covenant, p. 252. Faith, p. 253. What Works are
accepted of God, and what Works are not accepted, p. 253. Man's State in the
first Adam, before Conversion, and his State after Conversion, and what
Conversion is, p. 254.

The Woeful Cry of Unjust Persecutions and grievous Oppressions of the People of
God in England: Showing the Ground of Persecution in its first Cause, and the
Enmity which is betwixt the two Seeds, p. 256. Truth the Strongest of all,
witnessed forth in the Spitit of Truth against all Deceit: In a Reply to John
Bunnian' s second Book, p. 275. Many Strong Reasons Confounded: Being an Answer
to Richard Baxter' s Twenty four Arguments, which he said, Would hinder any
reasonable man from being a Quaker, p. 310. The true Christian Religion again
Discovered, after a long and dark Night of Apostasy: Showing who it is of the
Sects and Forms of Religion in the Nations, that are agreeable to the
Scriptures, p. 325. A Message for Instruction to all the Rulers, Judges and
Magistrates to whom the Law is committed: Showing, 1. What Just Government is.
2. How far the Magistrates Power reaches; and what the Sword of Justice is to
cut down, and what it is to defend. 3. An Exposition of some parts of the Law
for the Edification of such as desire to judge Righteously between man and man,
p. 343.
The State of the Controversy between Richard Mayo Priest of Kingstone, and
Edw. Buroughs, p. 375. Truth made Manifest: Being an Answer to a Book called,
The Quakers Rounds, put forth by one Philip Taverner, p. 399. A Testimony
concerning the Estate of the True Church: Showing, 1. What she has been. 2.
What she is, page 413. The True State of Christianity truly described: Showing,
1. What it was in its Beginning and Purity. 2. What it now is in its Apostasy
and Degeneration. And also, shows the Woeful State wherein them called
Christians now stand, being departed and revolted from the Spirit of Christ,
and from his Teachings, page 418. A Declaration to all the World of our Faith,
and what we believe who are called Quakers, page 439. Some of the Principles of
the Quakers (scornfully so called by men) Vindicated: In Answer to two Printed
Books put forth by Philip Taverner, a supposed Minister of the Gospel in
Middlesex, p. 444. A Testimony against a Great Idolatry committed: Being a true
Mourning of the Lord's Servant, upon the many Considerations of his Heart, upon
that Occasion of the great stir about an Image of O. Cromwell, carried about
the 23th of the 9th Month, 1658. p. 457. A Message proclaimed by Divine
Authority; From the Chosen Assembly of the Redeemed People in England, to the
Pope (chief Bishop in Rome) and to his Cardinals, Jesuits and Priests, etc.
being an Invitation and Challenge to them, to come forth to Trial, and show if
they have the same Faith, Power, Spirit, Authority and Government as had the
Apostles and true Churches before the Apostasy, p. 462. A Faithful Testimony
concerning the true Worship of God: Showing, 1. What it is in it self. 2. And
who are the true Worshippers, p. 474. Some false Principles and Errors
Discovered: In Answer to a Book supposed to be put forth by Samuel Eaton, a
professed Minister of the Gospel amongst the Sect of Independents in Cheshire,
p. 483. A Message to all Kings and Rulers in Christendom: Being a Warning from
the Lord to them, to take heed of Oppression, and to cease to grind the Face of
the Poor, and from drinking the Whore's Cup, and from carrying of her, and from
all Oppressions whatsoever, lest the Lord God Almighty execute his fierce
Indignation upon them, p. 492. An Account of some Grounds and Reasons of the
Innocent Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers: And why they testify
against the Vain Customs and Practices of the World; presented to the
Parliament Anno 1659. p. 499. An Answer (to a Great Cry up and down the Nation)
That the Quakers Meetings must be broken and suppressed, and that this present
Parliament intended to do it, p. 502. A Cry of great Judgment and Vengeance
upon the Wicked, near to be Executed, as it was received from the Lord into his
Servant E. B. p. 504. To the Rulers, and to such as are in Authority: Being a
true and faithful Testimony concerning Religion, and the Establishment thereof;
and shows, How it may be established in Persons, and Nations, page 508.
Satan's Design Defeated: Being an Answer to a Manuscript, sent by Priest
Jackson of Sussex, to a Member of Parliament, p. 514. A Visitation and Warning
proclaimed, and an Alarm sounded in the Pope's Borders: Being, 1. The Account
of a Journey to Dunkirk, p. 525. 2. A Letter to the Deputy Governor, p. 527.
3. Queries to the Friars, p. 529. 4. Propositions, as a Charge against the
Romish Church, with a Letter to the chief Jesuit Rector in Dunkirk, p. 534. 5.
A Warning to the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army, p. 537. 6. Some
Propositions to the English Priests, p. 541.
Good Counsel and Advice rejected by Dissobedient Men; and the days of O.
Cromwell passed over, and of Richard Cromwell his Son, late Protectors of these
Nations: Showing the many precious Warnings neglected by them, which from time
to time were given to them, p. 551. To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, sitting in the year, 1659. a Warnining to them, to take off
Oppression, that Truth and Righteousness might be established in the Earth, p.
592. A Message to the present Rulers of England; Delivered to them in the year,
1659. p. 588. To the present Distracted and Broken Nation of England: Being a
Mourning and Lamentation for the Confusions and Distractions that were then
over the Land; giving good Counsel and Advice how Peace might be restored, p.
598. A Presentation to London: Being an Answer to the Young Men and
Apprenteces, returned to some part of their Petition, directed by them to the
^^yor and Aldermen of the City. p. 607. To the present Assembly Members of
Parliament at Westminster; presented to them in the 11th Month, 1659. p. 612.
An Answer to a Declaration of the People called Anabaptists, in and about the
City of London, p. 615. An Answer to a great Cry, The Quakers will soon fall,
etc. p. 623. A Discovery of some part of the War between the Kingdom of the
Lamb, and the Kingdom of Antichrist: Being an Account of several Disputes
between E. B. and one Christopher Fowler, a professed Minister in London, p.
625. A Return to the Ministers of London; By way of Answer to their Seasonable
Exhortation (so called) directed to their Congregations, p. 642. A Visitation
and Presentation of Love unto the King, and those called Royalists: Consisting
of, 1. An Answer to several Queries proposed to the People (called Quakers)
from a s^^sed Royalist, p. 667. 2. An Objection answered concerning the King's
Supremacy, p. 678. 3. An Epistle directed to the King, and those called
Royalists, p. 679. 4. Certain Queries returned to them (called Royalists) to
answer, p. 684.
A Testimony concerning the Book of Common Prayer (so called) Being an Answer
to an Objection, Whether it be not in it self, and as practiced in this Nation
heretofore, and at this present, the true Worship of the true and living God,
p. 693. A Presentation of wholesome Informations unto the King of England: Being
an Answer to certain Accusations, charged before him in a Printed Book called,
The Thrice Happy Welcome of King Charles the Second, by one Geo. Wellington of
Bristol City, against them whom in Derision the Accuser calls Quakers, p. 702.
The Everlasting Gospel of Repentance and Remission of Sins, held forth and
declared to the Inhabitants of the Earth: Being a Message of Reconciliation to
all People every where in General; with certain Propositions of Faith laid
down, which every one must believe, or else they cannot be saved, p 724. and
732. A Vindication of the People of God called Quakers: Being an Answer to a
Book put forth by one Geo. Pressick of Dublin in Ireland; in which many Lies
and Calu^nies were written against the People of God, p. 743. Some
Considerations presented to the King of England: Being an Answer to a Petition
and Address of the General Court of Boston in New England, subscribed by John
Indicot, delivered to the King in the 11th Month, 1660. thinking thereby to
cover themselves from the Blood of the Innocent, p 756. A Just and Righteous
Plea presentented unto the King of England, and his Counsel: Being the true
State of the present Case of the People called Quakers: 1. Concerning Swearing
at all, and particularly of the Oath of Allegiance, p. 773. 2. Concerning
Meeting together to Worship God, p. 776. 3. Concerning Tithes among the Jews,
and among the Christians; and why we refuse to pay them at this day, p. 779. 4.
Concerning giving Security by Bond to live Peaceably, or to answer Accusations
then, and there, etc. p. 782. 5. Concerning G^^ernment it self, and
particularly of this present Government, p. 784. 6. Concerning Persecution,
what it is in it self, and how great an Enemy it is to the King and his
Government, laid down in ten Particulars p. 787.
Persecution Impeached as a Traitor against God, his Laws, and Government:
Being a Vindication of the Cause of the Ancient Martyrs against the Cruelty
inflicted on them by the Papists in former days; containing an Answer to a
Book called, Semper Iidem, or A Parallel of Phanaticks; wherein several of the
Martyrs are vilified and and reproached by the Name and Term of Ancient
Phanaticks, p. 793. The Case of Free Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of
Faith and Religion; Presented unto the King and both Houses of Parliament:
Declaring it absolutely needful for them to grant it; and showing the woeful
Effects and ill Consequence which will infallibly follow upon the contrary, to
the Misery and Destruction of these Nations, p. 813. A Discovery of Divine
Mysteries; Wherein is unfolded the secret things of the Kingdom of God: Being a
Testimony, 1. Concerning Life and Death, with their several Fruits and Effects
distinguished, p. 823. 2. Concerning the Mystery of God and Godliness, and
concerning the Mystery the Devil and Iniquity, p. 827. 3. Concerning true
Liberty of Conscience, what it is in it self, and how it is obtained; and what
the true Guide and Rule is of the Exercise of Conscience, p. 830. 4. Concerning
the Diversity of Judgments in Religion, p. 834.
Antichrist's Government Justly Detected of Unrighteousness, Injustice, etc.
Showed and declared, 1. In the Case of Imposing upon Conscience in Matters
Religious by Force of outward Violence or Pains and Penalties on the Persons
and Estates of Men, p. 850. 2. In the Case of Heresy; showing what it is in it
self, who is a Heretic, who are the true Judges of it, and what Punishment
pertains to such as are truly convicted thereof; and that to kill, burn,
banish, or to punish Heretics (as such) Corporally, is of Antichrist, etc. p.
859. 3. Concerning Antichrist, and his Mystery of Deceivabless, what he is in
himself, and how he appears in the World, what his Works are, and what his
Government is, and where it is, and who are the Subjects of his Kingdom, p. 868.
A Hue-and-Cry after the false Prophets and Deceivers of our Age: Being a short
and full Discovery of them by their Works and Fruits, p. 879. The Case of the
People called Quakers once more stated and published; with Answers to the
Accusations charged upon them, p. 888.
Several Epistles written to Friends in Truth.
A Word to the Brethren and Companions in Tribulation, by the World scornfully
called Quakers, page 12, 13. To the Camp of the Lord in England: Showing, 1.
The Work of God, which has broke forth in this Nation, p. 64. 2. And where it
first arose, p 66. 3. And i^ exhorts to put on the Armor of Truth, and to keep
the Watchtower, p. 66, 67
Several Epistles to Friends in Truth in London, at their first Convincement
from p. 64. to 76. Containing these Exhortations following, viz. 1. To dwell in
the Judgments of the Lord, and to abide in the Counsel of God, p. 68. 2. To
mind the Light which keeps out of all perishing things, and discovers a^
Deceivers, and to keep to the Cross of Christ, and to do nothing Rashly, p. 69,
70, 71. 3. To keep in Lowliness, p. 73. 4. Shows what the Living Hope is, p.
75.
The First General Epistle and Greeting of the Fathers's Love to all the
Saints: Being (to all such as are found worthy to suffer for the Truth's sake)
an Exhortation to the strengthening of their Faith, whereby they may continue
boldly witnessing to the End. Also, an Exhortation to try the Spirits; and the
Marks of the wrong spirits made known, p. 204. to 213. An Epistle to Friends in
Westmoreland and Cumberland: Exhorting all to know a Hiding Place in God, and
to put on the Armor of Light, etc. p. 364. The Second General Epistle to all
the Saints: Being an Exhortation, 1. to the Brethren who are called into the
Work and Ministry of the Gospel. 2. To all the Babes and Children in Christ, to
live in Unity and to bear their Afflictions and Sufferings with Patience, p.
368, 369. To the Elect and C^^^sen ^ed of God i^ London: C^aining Ex^tations to
be watchful, and to keep (...) (...) dis^erly spirits, p. 373, 374. To all
Friends that are moved of the Lord to go into other Nations, p. 386. The Third
General Epistle to all the Saints: Being an Exhortation to seek the Glory of
God above all. p. 387. Two Epistles to Friends in London: Being a Testimony
against deceitful spirits, and such as professed the Truth and turned from it,
and were unfaithful to the Lord, p. 392. An Epistle to Friends in London,
concerning how to proceed against disorderly spirits, 543. To the Churches in
New England, Barbados, and other Islands: Exhortations to be obedient to the
Light, and to dwell in the d^ily Cross, etc. p. 546. An Epistle to Friends in
London: Exhorting to dwell in Love and Unity one with another, and to be
Examples of Righteousness, etc. p. 547. An Epistle to Friends in Barbados,
Virginia and New England, etc. p. 548. The Fourth General Epistle to all the
Saints: Exhorting, To feel the Immortal Life begotten of the Father in them,
and to dwell in it always, that they might not be overcome by Trials and
Temptations, p. 662. To the Friends of Christ in London: Exhorting, to live in
Patience in all Tribulations, and to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, p.
690. To the Beloved and Chosen of God in the Seed Elected, particularly in
London, and elsewhere: Exhortations to mind the Word which first begat them,
and none to be troubled at the Days and Seasons, p. 700. An Epistle to all his
dear Companions in the Travel and Labor of the Gospel of Christ, and in the
Faith and Patience, (...) the Sufferings for his Name's sake, p. 764. The Fifth
General Epistle: Being a tender Salutaion of perfect Love unto the Elect of
God, the Royal Seed, the Saints of the Most high; containing Exhortations to
Friends, 1. To consider their former Estate, p. 839. 2. The tender Dealing of
God toward them since, p. 840. 3. To consider what their then present State
and Standing was, p. 841. With several other weighty Things very necessary to
be often read and kept in mind by Friends.
To the Friends of Truth in and about London: Which Epistle shows, wherein
every oxes Preservation stands, and that in the highest Estate there is need
of Watchful^^ss, etc. p. 884.
THE END.

