THE PRINCIPLES OF TRUTH: Being A DECLARATION OF OUR FAITH Who are called
QUAKERS:

Whereby all that want PEACE with GOD, may Return into their First Estate,
through the Operation of the LIGHT and Power of God in the great Work of
REGENERATION.

Written by E.B. J.C. W.D. H.S. I.P. and A.P.

Truth's Principles: OR, Those things about Doctrine and Worship, which are
most Surely Believed and Received among the People of God called QUAKERS.
MAny are the Reports that are abroad concerning this People, not only as to
their Practices and Deportments; but also as to other Doctrines and Beliefs.

The former, time having in a great measure resolved and worn out, as being the
Refuge of Lies for the Ignorant and Unrighteous to flee unto; but that stormy
and wintry Appearance is well nigh over and gone, because the Sun is so far
risen, and the true Light so shines, that most begin to see that those Reports
were but Lies and Scandals, raised as Fig leaves to cover the Nakedness of
other Professions, that begun so manifestly to appear, through the Light that
shined in these Peoples Lives and Conversations. But though the first be gone,
yet the later sticks with many, as not knowing what they hold as to Doctrine;
some saying, They deny the Scripture, and the Resurrection of the Body, and all
Ordinances, with the Man Christ, and his Death and Sufferings, and Imputation
of his Righteousness, and Faith in his Blood, etc. Wherefore for the
Satisfaction of all that would willingly be resolved, and know the Truth, as it
is in Jesus, I have written this short Account of their Faith and Belief; and,
if it were possible, to stop the Mouths of the clamorous Tongues, before the
Sentence be given against them by some signal Stroke of the Lord from Heaven,
which he will undoubtedly in his appointed Time reveal and make manifest, to
the trembling of all hearts concerned therein, and tinglong of all Ears that
shall hear thereof, when it shall be said to them, The holy shall be holy
still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 22. 11.

We believe, That the God of all Grace has given a measure of Grace, or some
Manifestation of his Spirit and Light thereof unto all men, according unto
these Scriptures, Jo. 1. 9. Tit. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Neh. 9. 20. and
Experiences of all men, who at some time or other) do feel something in their
Hearts and Consciences, that does lust against the Flesh, and the Flesh against
it, and that these two are contrary the one to the other; one lasting after
Evil, which is Evil; and the other after Good, which is Good; the one Carnal,
the other Spiritual; the one from Earth, the other from Heaven, Gal. 5. 16, 17.

We believe, By this Gift, Grace and Inspiration of the Almighty, man only can
come to know the true God truly, what he is, and how he works in the Hearts and
Consciences of People, to regnerate them, and make them bear his Image,
according to 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20. 21. Luke 10. 21. and Experiences of all that
ever were regenerated and born again.

We believe, That all the Errors and Mistakes about God, and the things
relating to his Kingdom, sprang and arose from men's wandering from this gift of
God, into their own Imaginations; whereby, though they thought themselves wise,
yet they became Fools, and erred, their foolish hearts being darkened, according
to Romans 1. 21. not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, as it is
written Mat. 22. 29.

We believe and know, That this Gift and Grace of God appears in and unto all
men that all may be without Excuse, accusing for the Evil, and excusing for the
Good, according to Romans 2. 15, 16. showing unto man what is good, and reproving
of him in his own Conscience for the evil, whether Thoughts, Words or Deeds;
and that this Reproof of Instruction is the Way of Life, Prove. 6. 23.

We believe, That as the true God and eternal Life is known only by the Light
of this Gift and Grace, according unto the Scriptures, from which Light and
Spirit of God came the Scriptures, both from the old and new Testament, as it
is written, 2 Pet. 1. 21. so can they only be read as truly to be believed,
fulfilled and practiced in the Light and Power of the same; and all that are
out of this Spirit must needs be ignorant and unlearned in the Apostle's Sense,
who wrest the Scriptures to their own Destruction, as it is written: for Peter
and John were unlearned men outwardly, not knowing Letters; but inwardly read
in the knowledge of this Light and Spirit of God, and wrest^d not the
Scriptures, Acts 4. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 16.

We believe, according to the Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. 3. That wheresoever the
Power of God is not known within, there the Gospel is hid, and unknown, unto
them that are lost, in whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of
them that believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, should shine unto them, and God should heal them; because it
is only by the Light of Christ, the Power of God, that the Creature comes truly
to see himself in his lost and undone Estate; from which Sight arises the true
Sense in the Heart of the Creature, that makes him cry out of his Wretchedness,
by reason of the Body of Sin and Death, which necessitates him to look out for
a Savior, whom God manifests in and by the same Light, that shines in the
heart, on purpose, to give the sight of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in
the Face of Jesus Christ, God's Image, whereby God heals the Soul; and
therefore does the Devil, the God of the World, strive so much by the Gift of
the Pleasures, Profits, Vanities and Lusts that are in the World, which he
presents to men and women now, as he did to Christ in the days of his Flesh,
when he showed to him all the World, with its Glory; which Glory is, the Lust
of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye and the Pride of the Life; whatever may make
this Life happy (as it were) in the things that may pride it, or lift it up to
sit as a Queen. And as Man and Woman take and receive the Gifts from the God of
this World, their Minds are blinded, because they believe not in the Light,
which shows thee the Vanities of all the Gifts of the God of this World; which
Gifts, the Devil knows (if they be received) will so blind the Minds of them
that receive them, that they will not come to be sensible, in the true Light,
of their lost conditions, so as to cry unto God from the deep and true Sence^
for then, God, out of the Depths of his Love and Mercy, could not but Heal
them: And therefore, lest the true Light should shine into them, to give them
the sensible Knowledge of themselves, and God should Heal them, the Devil (as
God of the World, by the things of the World) endeavors to blind the mind (not
the Brain-Knowledge, but the Heart F^eling Sense within, in the mind) lest the
Light within should so shine as God should heal them; and all the Buslings of
Satan with his Gifts, are but to blind the Mind within, lest God should heal
the Soul, that complains to him from the true Sight and Sense of his Misery, as
in himself.

By this Grace and Gift within, we believe, That to Us (though in the World
there be Lords many and Gods many) there is but ONE GOD, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, witnessed within man, only by the Spirit of Truth, that manifests
both the Father and the Son; and yet these Three are One, and agree in One; and
he that honors the Father, honors the Son, that proceeds from him; and he
that denies the Spirit, denies both the Father and the Son, and is Antichrist;
but he that believes in the Spirit, and is led by it, is the Son of God, Romans
8. 14. As many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God.

We believe, The Scriptures bear witness unto, and testify of Christ; but they
say, The Witness of God is greater then them; The Spirit it self bearing
witness with our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God: For it is not the
Scriptures without the Spirit, nor the Spirit contrary to the Scriptures, but
the Spirit's discovering the Will of God in the Heart o^ opening of the
Scrlp^ures in its own Time and Way, and not in or by the Will of Man, but as it
self pleases, who searches all, even the deep things of God, and manifests
them unto the Soul, which gives the Perfect Sound and Saving Knowledge; for,
said Christ, The Spirit shall take of mine, and show them unto you. And as Holy
Men gave forth the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 21. so Holy Men, and they only, come
truly to understand them; and not proud and ungodly men, because their Hearts
and Lives do not answer the Hearts and Lives of those that gave them forth, as
Face answers Face in a Glass: And this we believe to be the Reason, why so long
Preaching (by men of corrupt Minds, who have and do handle the Word deceitfully
for Selfish Ends, and filthy Lucre sake) has brought forth so little Fruit,
and been to so little Purpose, except to their Purses and Bellies; for, had
they believed, and therefore spoaken, and stood in God's Counsel, they should
have profited their Hearers, Jer. 23. 21, 22, 23, to the end.

Through this Gift we believe, That Christ Jesus (the Son of God) was manifest
in the Flesh in the Fullness of time: And this we know, by the same Spirit by
which our Fathers believed he should come, and Abraham saw his Day, by the same
we do believe he is come, and do see his Day; as also by the Prophet and
Apostles Writing, which twofold Cord is not easily broken.

We believe also according to the Scriptures of Truth, That this same Jesus
has God highly exalted, and given him a Name above every Name, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life; and that there is
not another Name, whereby any can be saved, than this Name of Jesus Christ: nor
is Remission of Sins to be preached by any other Name: But as we do not
believe, that the outward Letters and Syllables are that Name that is to be
bowed to by the outward Knee, no more then the Letters or Syllables in the
words God or Spirit, seeing the Scripture faith, Unto God, who is a Spirit,
every Knee shall bow, Isa. 45. 93. But the Name which saves, is the Power and
Arm of God, that brings Salvation from Sin, and makes every Soul that names it,
to depart from Iniquity: This is that Name which was preached, and which is
preached through Faith, in which Name Remission of Sin is obtained: Therefore
was the outward word Jesus given him, as his outward Name; Thou shall call his
Name JESUS; for he shall save his People from their Sins [mark] for he shall
save, etc. So that which saves, is the Name, which is to be believed in, which
is that Arm of God that brings Salvation, when no Eye pities, neither is there
any Help: the Power of God that then saves, is that Grace that comes from the
Fullness of Christ, the Savior: And without this Virtue, Christ and Jesus are
but empty Names, 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say, that Jesus is the LORD, but by
the Holy Ghost.

We believe also, That this Jesus dyed for or because of Sin, and rose again
for the Justification of those that believe in him, as well as to manifest to
all the World, that he was the Son of God, and that he thereby spoiled
Principalities and Power, and triumphed over them openly, and led Captivity
captive in his own Person; yet we believe and know, by his Grace in our Hearts,
that as his Name Jesus, without Virtue and Power, is but an empty Word; so his
Dying, without man's Conformity to his Death, or being planted into the
Likeness thereof, or being crucified with Christ (as says the Scripture, Romans
6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Gal. 2. 20.) will not profit man as to the Salvation of his
Soul, no more then the naming of his outward Name [Jesus] does at this day make
People to depart from Iniquity: For we believe, and are ^ure, that man must dye
inwardly, as well as Christ died outwardly, and must be put to Death in his
Flesh, as Christ was in his; for he that is in the Flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8. 8. Neither ceaese from Sin; but he that is dead, is freed from Sin,
Romans 6. 7. And yet man's dying unto Sin, and the Root and Principle of it in
himself, is so far from making void Christ's Death in his own Person, that it
establishes it to all those Ends and Purposes for which it was intended of the
Father. As the Cures which the Physician does, manifest and establish his Skill
and Ability, so does man's dying unto Sin, and Self, and living unto God,
manifest and establish the Virtue and Power of Christ's Death: for as man
manifests his being risen with Christ, by his seeking the things that are
above, Col. 3. 1, 2. so does he manifest his Knowledge of the Death of Christ,
by his being crucified with Christ, and bearing about in his Body the Dying of
the Lord Jesus: For, as it is not an outward Belief, gathered from the Letter,
that will change the Heart and Life (though the Judgment and Opinion it may) so
it is not a Belief from the History, or Letter only, that can give man a saving
Knowledge of the Death of Christ; but he must have the same Glory and Power of
the Father in measure, working in him there, to beget Faith in his Heart, tha^
he may believe unto Salvation from his own Filthiness and Righteous^ess, as
well as confess with his Mouth, Romans 10. and must have that Spirit in him,
quickening his mortal Body, as well as to believe, that it was in Christ, and
raised up him from the Dead, Romans 8. 11. And this man, whoever he be, Bound or
F^ee, that thus believes the Death of Christ, and it^ Satisfaction to God, as
well as its Usefulness to man, cannot make it void, nor divide it and its
Virtue upon the Soul that thus knows it; but will say, Here is a dying man,
witnessing the Death of Christ, and nevertheless the same man living with
Christ; and concluding, if Christ had not dyed, man must have perished in his
Sin: This being the Way found out by God to recover him, whereby he knows
Christ, and him crucified, and what the preaching of the Cross of Christ is,
which is Foolishness to them that perish, but to them that are saved, the
Wisdom of God and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 81.

By this Gift of God in our Hearts, we further believe, That Christ Jesus rose
again from the Dead, according to the Scriptures, and sits at God's Right Hand
in a Glorious Body. And we believe, that our low Estates and humble Bodies
shall be made like unto his glorious Body, through the Working of his Mighty
Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, and that this
Mortality shall put on Immortality. For though we believe that Christ Jesus
has lighted every man with his Light, whereby man may come to know himself
lost and undone, as before is said; yet therefore is not every man saved,
though the Grace that appears to all men is sufficient in it self; but some
have the Grace of God bestowed upon them in vain, not likeing to retain God in
their Knowledge, though something within them shows them what is good: But they
reject the Counsel of God within, or against themselves to their own
Destruction, Luke. 7. 30. (see the Mergant) and yet it does not follow, that
the Grace is insufficient of it self, no more then it follows, that Christ's
Death is insufficient, because he tasted Death for every man, and yet every man
is not saved. Neither does Regeneration, or the believing in the Light of
Christ within, make void the Death and Sufferings of Christ without at
Jerusalem, no more then believing the Scripture testimony without, concerning
Christ's Death, makes void the Work of Regenertaion and Mortification within;
but as the Apostle says in another Case, so I say in this, For as the Man is
not without the Woman, neither is the Woman without the Man in the Lord; even
so is not the Death and Sufferings of Christ without at Jerusalem, to be made
void and of none effect by any thing within, neither does the Light within make
that of none effect without, but both in the Lord answers his Will: For, though
there is and may be a Knowledge and Belief of what Christ did and Suffered
without the Gates, in his own Body, upon the Tree, and yet Sin alive in the
Heart, and the Work of Regeneration not known; yet it cannot be so where the
Light within is believed on and obeyed, so as to have its perfect Work in the
Heart, to regenerate and make all things new, and to be of God, this man can
never make void what Christ has done and suffered without: And yet this New
Birth, or Christ formed within, and dwelling in the Heart by Faith, does not
limit or confine Christ to be only within, and not without also; but both
within and without, according to the Good Pleasure of the Father to reveal and
make him known; for, he fills all things, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain him; and yet is he at God's Right Hand, far above all Heavens, in a
glorious Body.

And we also believe the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust; the One to
Salvation, and the Other to Condemnation, according unto the Judgment of the
great Day, and then shall every Seed have its own Body, according to 1 Cor. 15.
36, 37. which we verily believe; For if the Dead rise not, we are of all men
most miserable: But because we dare not be so foolishly inquisitive as to say,
With what Bodies shall they arise? therefore do some say, We deny both the
Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of all that are or shall be dead: But
this also is false; for every man shall be raised in his own Order; but Christ
the First Fruits, 1 Cor. 15. 23. And we believe they shall be raised with the
same Bodies, so far as a Natural and Spiritual, Corruptible and Incorruptible,
Terrestrial and Celestial can be the same.

We further believe (according unto the S^riptures) concerning Faith, That this
Faith is only true which is God's Gift, and has Christ Jesus (the Power of God)
for its Author and Object; and is distinguished from the Dead Faith by its
Fruits: For though in Description and Definition they may carry a Resemblance,
yet in Nature are as different as a Living Man is from a Dead, which wants not
Form or Shape, but Life and Power: So says the Apostle James, As the Body
without a Spirit is dead, so is Faith without Works; even so is that Faith
which stands in the Wisdom of Words, and not in the Power of God; by the one,
man is kept in Captivity to the World, and the things of it; but by the other,
he has Victory over the World, 1 John 5 4. and the Seal and Witness thereof in
his own Heart, whereby it is purified, and God is seen; for the Pure in Heart
see God, Mat. 5. 8. This Faith differs men now, and their Worships, as it did
Cain and Abel; For, By Faith Abel offered up a more excellent Sacrifice then
Cain, Hebr. 11. By this Living Faith Abel saw beyond the Sacrifice, unto Christ
(the First Born of God) beyond the Firstling of the Flock, which he offered,
and therefore God had Respect unto Ab^l and his Offering, but God rejected Cain
and his Offering; though he had Faith to believe it to be his Duty; yet
sticking in the Form, and not flying on the Wing of Faith unto Christ (the One
Offering) he missed the Mark, as all have done ever since, that have gone in
Cain's Way of Worshipping, as well as Killing men about Worship. But we
believe, that Faith to be only true and saving, that flies over Self
Righteousness, as well as Filthiness, unto the Fountain of Life in Christ;
which Faith has nothing of man in it, but is as the Breath of Life, by which
the Soul lives; nor a bare Assent of the Truth of a Proposition in ^he natural
Understanding; but the Soul's cleaving unto God out of a Naturalness between
Christ and the Soul, and so live rather by Relation, then bare Cerdit, or
desperate Adventure and Hazard; not looking at its doing to commend it, but
God's Love and Bounty in Christ, the Light, to receive it; and yet Holiness is
its Delight, and he can no more live out of it, then the Fish upon the dry Land.

We believe, That this Faith keeps the ^ind pure and the Heart clean, through
the sprinkling of the Heart from an Evil Conscience by the Blood of Jesus,
which remits the Sin, and justisies the Soul, through the Virtue of this Blood,
received into the Heart by this living Faith, which receives all its Power and
Virtue from Christ, in whom it abides, as its Root and Object, whereby
Justification is witnessed from Sin, not in Sin, Romans 6. 22. But now being made
free from Sin, and become Servants unto God, you have your Fruit unto Holiness,
and the End Everlasting Life.

We believe, That Justification and Sanctification are distinguished, but not
divided; for as he that sanctifies and justifies is one, so do these go
together; and when the Son has the grea^t Sense of Justification upon it,
through the Virtue of the Blood of Jesus by the Living Faith, then is it most
in Love with Holiness, and at the gratest Distance from Sin and Evil: and
whenever there is a Failing in Sanctification, there is also some ^elipse of
Justification in the Eye of the Soul, until Faith has received its Strength
again, which it lost by Sin's prevailing: For, as the farthest and clear'st
Sight is in the brightest Day; so is it with the Soul, when it is most in the
Brightness and Beauty of Holiness, its Justification appears most Glorious, and
its Union and Communion most sweet and lasting; and so like two Twins, as they
are much of an Age, so they are like one to the other: And what God has joined
together, let no man put asunder.

We also by this Light believe, That Acceptance with the Father is only in
Christ, and by his Righteousness made ours, or imputed unto us; not by the
Creaturely Skill, but by the Applicatory Act of God's Gift of Grace, whereby
the Soul feels the Difference between Self-applying by its own Faith, and God
appling by his Spirit, and so making Christ unto the Soul Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: So that we b^lieve, and are sure,
that there is a great Difference between Imputa^on, as it is the Act of man's
Spirit, and as it is the Act of Free Grace, without man's forcing. And so we
distinguish between Imagination and Imputation, between Reckoning or Imputing
that is Real, and Reckoning or Imputation that is not Real, but a Fiction and
Imagination in the Creaturely Will and Power: And because we are against the
latter, we are clamoured upon, as if we denied the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, when it is only unto those who are not made Righteous by it, to
walk as he also walked: For, as the Scripture says it is not he that says he
is Righteous by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; but he that does
Right^ousness, is Righteous, even as Christ is Righteous, 1 John 3. 7. he that
believes otherwise, is deceived. And yet it is not Acts of Righteousness, as
done by us, nor as inherent in us, as Acts by which we are accepted of God, and
justified before him, but by Christ, the Author and Worker of those Acts in us
and for us; whereby we know that we are in him, and he in us, and we hold him
as our Head, unto whom all things are gathered together in one, even in him.

We further believe, That God is only to be Worshipped, and not any Likeness
that man makes unto himself of God, from any View, Sight and Knowledge that he
has had of him; but in every Act and Service man is to know what
substantially, as well as whom speculatively or notionally he wopships; as it
is written; John 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not what; we know what we worship;
for Salvation is of the Jews. And he that thus worships the Father, honors the
Son by the same Spirit, which is one with the Father and the Son; in which
Spirit only God is worshipped, according to the Form of its own chufing and
manifesting of himself in and by, according unto the Good Pleasure of the
Father, who is a Spirit, and limits man unto the Spirit's Form, but allows not
man to limit the Spirit unto his Form, though it be not of his inventing
originally, but of the Father: Yet Man must no more limit God unto it, then he
could command God to appear in it at first: For as he chose it himself, so he
has reserved Liberty to leave it at his Pleasure; who works all things after
the Counsel of his own Will, which be has purposed in himself, that the Gift
of the Knowledge of the Mystery of his Will might forever be acknowledged to be
of his Grace, and for the Riches of the Glory thereof, according to Ephesians. 1.
and man be bound, but God free: Man bound to wait in the Light for God's
Movings; but God free to move in whom, to what, and when he pleases: Then man
is to go, when he says, Go; and come, when he says, Come; and such Servants
do serve him: And then there is no more Curse, as in the days of Will Worship,
and Voluntary Humility, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Col. 2. 18, 23.
Rev. 22. 3, 4. And they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be on their
Foreheads.

We believe also, That this Worship is spiritual (and not carnal) in all its
Parts and Ordinances, and not to be imposed by any outward Force, but performed
by the inward Leading of God's Holy Spirit, according as the Holy Men of God
were led and guided in the days past, who gave forth the Scriptures; all
Impsitions of Worship outward being only enjoined under the first, Covenant,
that made nothing perfect, until the Time of Reformation, spoken of, Hebr 9 10.
But Christ being come, there is an End as well of such Imp^sitions, as of the
Meats and Drinks, and diverse Baptisms, and carnal Ordinances, they being all
but Temporary, and in Order unto an End; but all to vail to Christ, the sum and
substance of all, [the first] pointed at by all, and [the last] ending of all,
the Amen. And he that thus worships God in Christ, his Ordinances are spiritual
and not carnal; and his Faith carries him beyond his Works, with righteous
Abel, and preserves him, that he is not drowned in the Form, like Cain; neither
falls he short of the glory of God, nor of his assurance of Acceptance with him.

We believe, There is one Baptism necessary to Salvation, Ephs. 4. 5. One Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism. And this Baptism is Spiritual, of which John's Water
was but a figure, John 1. 31. That he should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come, baptizing with Water, says John: and 1 Pet. 3. 21. The
like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us: not the pu^ting away
the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
R^surrection of Jesus Christ. This one Spiritual Baptism into the Name of Jesus
Christ is that which saves, the Water being but a figure, that Christ might be
manifest to Israel, who had diverse Baptisms imposed on them until the time of
Reformation; but Christ the Substance being come, the Shadows flee away. And
yet wherever any are commanded now by the same Spirit, that commanded the
Believers to be Baptized in the days past, either for the furtherance of the
Gospel, or trial of their Faith, we judge them not. But this obedience is very
rare to be found; and we could heartily desire, that all would consider
seriously, whether literal sayings, observed only by outward reading, hearing
by the ^ar, or inward impluses upon the heart by the Divine Power, are the
motives unto Obedience in this kind. And if honesty and uprightness of heart
may be heard, we believe and know the many dead souls every where,
notwithstanding their Baptisms, will be as so many witnesses against them, by
their grovelling upon the Earth, as so many slain and killed men by the Letter,
while the Spirit's quicknings, have not been known in the true Baptism into
death. For we find by daily experiences, that most men and women live like
Pharaoh's lean Kine, only to eat up the fat, and to envy those that are not so
lean-soul'd as themselves.

We believe also, That as there is one true saving Baptism, so there is one
Bread, or Body of Christ, which all the Saints do feed upon; and though they be
many, as to persons, yet their Bread is but one and they all in it but one
Bread: And this we believe is the flesh that came down from Heaven, John 6. 33.
Though the outward Jews now as then, murmur at him, because he said, I am the
Bread which came down from Heaven, ver. 41, 42. But Christ, (ver. 45.) to stop
their murmuring tells them, that the knowledge of this Mystery was only
revealed unto them whom God (and not man) teaches, and no more then are taught
of God, can set seal and subscribe unto this Truth in Jesus; though we believe
also, that Jesus took outward bread, and break it, and gave it to the
D^sciples, as the Scripture says; and this was a figure of his Body (that was
to be pierced and broken upon the Tree) and a show, to show forth his Death
until he came.

And we believe, he did arise again and appear unto his Disciples; and all that
believed were together, and had [All things Common] etc. And they continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, breaking bread from house to house, did
eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having
favor with all the People, Acts 2. 44, 45, 46, 47. And we believe that the
Apostle, in 1 Cor. 11. 20. said true, where he said, When ye come together
therefore in one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. And all that he
speaks in that chap^er is not to perpetuate that outward breaking of Bread,
otherwise then as the Belivers did, that were filled with the holy Ghost in
singleness of heart, as before is said: and yet we judge not those who break
outward Bread and drink outward Wine, being commanded so to do, and put in
remembrance thereby of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, by the Remember
ancer, the Spirit of Truth, which is appointed by the Father to lead into all
Truth. But to do it by imitation, or tradition only (as most do it, if not all
at this day) we know it is not an Offering unto God in Righteousness, neither
do we believe this to be the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; and yet
the eating of the Flesh, and drinking of the Blood of Christ, we believe man
must know and witness, or he has no life in him, Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55. And we
believe, that many are striving now in their Spirits, as the Jews did, verse
52. saying, How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? And not only the Jews,
but many of his Disciples said, This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Verse.
60. And in verse. 63. he tells them, It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life. And he that hears and understands these words that are Spirit and
Life, will not be offended at what I have spoken of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ.

By the same Spirit and Grace we believe, That Prayer is an Ordinance of God,
when performed by his Spirit, in its words (and not those which man's wisdom
teaches) or without words, by sighs and groans which cannot b^ uttered, and
these so often as the Spirit it self pleases: But the Form without the Spirit,
whether it be by words of other men's framing, or words of man's own Spirit,
according to his will, time and manner; this is not the Prayer that prevails
with God. And we believe that there is none so weak and infirm, but this spirit
proffers his help at some time or other, though man regards it not. And the
more man's mind is gathered within from all visibles, the more he comes to be
sensible of the Movings and Stirring, of this Spirit, in its secret cries unto
God, answerable to the wants of that man or woman, in whom it moves and cries.
And by the due watching thereunto, we believe and know the Spirit of Prayer and
of Adoption, that cries unto God, comes to be discerned and distinguished from
a man's own spirit and will.

We believe by the same gift of Grace, that there are several Minstrations, and
several Operations, according to 1 C^r. 12. and all by the same Spirit, as
before and after the Law by Moses, and after by John the Baptist, and Christ
and his Apostles, and in all these the ministration had acceptance with God
through the mannagment of the Spirit, and its rejection and dislike of God for
the want thereof. And by this Spirit were the Scriptures given forth, and the
Holy men of God did speak, prophecy, preach and pray as they were moved; and
for want of it the letter did and does kill. And for the further appearance and
pouring out of this Spirit, answerable unto the work and service that God had
for them to do, they we^e to wait, as Christ commanded his (...) to do at
Jerusalem, to receive the Promise of the Father: For by this spirit he that
speaks, speaks as the Oracle of God. And therefore, as it was the practice of
the People of God in old time, to wait for the moving and stirring of this
Spirit, that they might speak (...) it gave them utterance* in the evidence and
demonstration thereof; so do this People (called Quakers) now; and according to
its moving in their hearts they minister, according to the signification of the
Spirit, whereby they understand both what, and when to speak, and when to be
silent; as also, who are they that minister and speak in their own wills above
the Cross of Christ, which the Apostle was careful always to be in subjection
to, lest he should make it void, by speaking the words which man's wisdom
teaches; and therefore as the Saints did, so we do believe, and therefore we
speak: And such Preaching and Speaking in Faith, as well as Praying in Faith,
is acceptable unto God, as his worship, and not otherwise.

And we further believe by the same Spirit, that the sum of all Religion,
according to the Truth and signification of the word [Religion] is, Man not at
liberty in his will, but bound again unto God, by his having given to him, by
the Light of Christ within, the true sight and knowledge of himself, as in
himself, as lost and undone forever, and from this Sight a true sense to arise
upon and remain with him; from whence spring unutterable groans and cries unto
God, under the weight of the burden and wretchedness, by reason of the body of
Sin and Death, and then when there was none to help or pity in this state,
then is Mercy showed in Christ the Arm of God, which is revealed as an help,
neither seen nor known, where, how, or when to come at it, or meet with it; And
this begets in the heart of that man or woman, in and unto whom it is thus
revealed, thanks and praises unto God, for this Gift and Revelation of his Son,
in this needful time, whom the Soul sees to be the Gist of Eternal Love.

And we believe and know, upon this Love and Faithfulness of God, is founded,
built and established the Everlasting Covenant, (whereby not only all men may
be saved for its ability, but some shall be saved because for its Prevalency)
which is not like to the Covenant h^ made with our Fathers. And although all
mankind is not saved, yet it is not because either of in sufficiency in this
Covenant, or because of the weakness of the Grace that appears in, and unto all
men; but because of man's will loving death, and choosing his own delusions,
whereby his destruction is of himself, and God clear of his Blood in the free
tender of his Grace, Gift and striving of the Spirit within him. For we know
assuredly, according to the Scriptures of Truth, and experience of all souls
that ever were truly converted to God, that though by Grace man is saved, not
of himself, but by the free Gift, yet as the old world did, and those
rebellious Jews, spoken of, Acts 7. who as did their Fathers, so did they,
always resist the Holy Ghost; so do men now. And yet in the tender of this
Grace, and striving of his spirit, the Lord is a God so hiding himself in the
mannagement of this striving and Ministration of his Spirit, as if it wholly
depended upon man's choice and consenting, that man's will, as to him is (as it
were) free in rejecting or accepting, Life and Death being set before him;
whereby in the wisdom of God, the propensity of his Name, as it came out of the
hands of his Maker, has an advantage by this dealing of God, to put forth it
self; so that man is as free in the choice, as he is in the refusal of the
tender of Mercy and Help, and that with an equal indifferency, as it appears to
him in this state; notwithstanding afterward, in the further growth in this
Grace and knowledge of Christ, he sees clearly and convincingly, that the Grace
(that wrought hiddenly from his sight and knowledge, in the first working,
tender and ministration of God toward him) gained his consent through its own
prevalency in the Love of God, by which sight and sense self comes to be
abhorred, and the free Love so admired, that he knows from first to last, all
was of Grace, and that free; that self is not able to challenge any thing as
due from what it had done, but all of gift: and yet as before, with such an
equal indifferency on man's account: so that God may and will appear to be just,
both in condemning and saving; and the Justifier freely of all that believe in
Jesus, the Light of the world.

Therefore, let all take heed how they dislike this Ministration of God, and
striving of his Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences, under color and
pretense of its in sufficiency; and therefore they will not come to him,
because his drivings and strivings are not so strong as they would have them to
be, looking for such an overpowering and irresistibleness, as they are not able
to withstand and gainsay; left such perish through a willful neglect; and for
want of stretching out their hand when the Lord holds out his, and so they
perish in the ditch, with a vain expectation of further Power; or cry in their
mouths, Lord have mercy upon us! and so with the Sluggard, while they cry, Yet
a little more slumber and folding of the hands to sleep, their Garden is
overgrown with weeds, and their backs clothed with rags, and they beg in
harvest; whilst others that have sown in tears, not fainting, do in due time
reap in joy; and not despising the crumbs that fell from the table, nor the day
of small things, Witness the presence of their Beloved, come down into his
Garden, and walking among the Li^ies.

Let these thing be truly considered, pondered and weighed in the true Balance
of Light and Righteousness, lest any Soul perish through the false weight and
measure; so shall my soul rejoice that any have escaped the Net of the Fowler,
through the discovery of the true Light; and God have all the Glory, unto whom
alone it belongs, and man ashamed, confounded, his ^th stopped, and he laid in
the dust forever; and then shall my end be answered in writting these things.

John Crook.

Concerning Persuasions in Matters of Religion.
THere is the Natural man, and the Spiritual man, and there are the Persuasions
of each in and about matter of Religion. There is the persuasion of Reason and
the persuasion of Faith.

The persuasion of Reason is that Belief which man receives into his mind or
heart from the exercise of the Reasoning Faculty: and this persuasion in matters
of Religion is but man's Opinion or Judgment, which how certain or infallible
soever it appears to him, yet may be shaken by a demonstration or evidence of a
higher kind of nature

The persuasion of Faith, is that Belief which the new Creature receives into
the renewing Mind, from the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, which
opens and manifests the things of the Spirit, unto that mind which is
begotten and renewed by it. And this persuasion is certain and infallible,
however it may be struck at, and battered by the reasonings of the wise Earthly
part, even in that very man, whose heart is thus persuaded, by the Light of the
Spirit of God, concerning the things of Gods Kingdom.

Now the lowest persuasion of Faith is higher and of a more noble nature then
the highest persuasion of Reason, because Faith is of an higher Principle, and
of a deeper nature and ground, then man's Reason is: But this (because it
appears not in man's sphere, but rather out of it, and is contrary to the line
and reach of his wisdom) is accounted by him foolishness and madness. This is
the Wi^dom of God (and the children thereof) judged and condemned by man in his
day.

And how can it be otherwise? How can the wisdom of men but judge that as
foolishness, whose beauty and excellency is hid from its eye? But this is,
because the wisdom of man is out of its place, not subjected to the Wisdom of
God, but exalted above it: therefore (as a Curse unto it) is it suffered to
lift up it self in its conceitfulness against, and so to persecute the pure
Wisdom of God and the birth thereof, that it might fall, and be broken, and
snared, and taken, and its day deservedly come to an end, and be shut up in the
shadows and chambers of eternal darkness.

But what Ear of Man can hear this? Surely none that is whole in the line of
Man's wisdom, reason and understanding, but that alone which is bruised,
broken, and in some measure dashed to pieces, by the inroads of a divine Life
and Nature. This, i^ the leading of that Life which has broken it, and in the
shinings of the Light eternal upon it and into it may be enabled to take up the
Cross to the natural part, and to die that Death with Christ, which preserves
from the second Death, with the misery thereof.

Happy is he who knows and hearkens to the Persuasions of God's Spirit, who is
born of God, and taught to wait upon him and worship him in Spirit, who
receives his Religion from the Lig^ of Faith, into the renewed Nature and Mind,
and not from the Reason of Man into the natural understanding, which is easily
corrupted and cannot be kept pure, but alone by the indwelling of the Principle
of Eternal Life in it.

For though such may suffer very deeply in this World, from the men of this
world, (as the Subjects and Servants to the Principle of Life have done in all
Ages and Generations) yet their Principle will bear them out, in which God will
appear to strengthen and refresh their spirits, and carry them up above all
their Sufferings in the Patience, Meekness, and Faith of the Lamb; And keeping
to their Principle, they cannot be overcome, but must either live or die
Conquerors, according to the will and good pleasure of Him who orders and
disposes of all things well, and brings good out of every evil, in despite
of all the Powers of Darkness. And he that overcomes (whether by life or
death) in the Lamb's Spirit, shall wear the Lambs Crown, and sit down in that
perfect Rest in the Kingdom of the Father, which will give the hearts of all
his Children full Satisfaction. In which assured hope (Life stirring in our
bosoms, and quickening our hearts with Love unto our God, and Zeal for his
Truth) we can freely give up all that is near and dear unto us in this World,
and lay down our heads in inward Peace ^n the midst of the greatest outward
Persecution and Trouble. Even so, O Lord, thy Will be done concerning this
Generation of thy People, whom thou have begotten to thy Self, and brought
forth by thy mighty Power, to testify to thy Truth in this present day:
Dispose of them as it pleases Thee, and let not their Faith in thee, nor thy
Faithfulness to them fail, but let them be a Praise to thy Name throughout all
Generations, and tendered by Thee as the First fruits of thine Appearance, in
the Glorious Light of the Everlasting Day, after this great, long, thick and
dark Night of Apostasy from the Life and Spirit of the Apostles, has so long
ecclipsed and covered the brightness of thy Beauty from the fight of the Earth.

Isaac Pennington.

A Declaration to all the World of our Faith, and what we Believe, who are
called QUAKERS. Also, what Ministers and Magistrates we own, and what, and whom
we deny.
Concerning God, Christ. and the Spirit.
FIrst, That there is only one true God, who is a Spirit, and his Presence
fills Heaven and Earth; he is Eternal and Everlasting, the Creator and
Preserver of all things; that Heaven and Earth, and all things therein by him
were framed and brought forth, and all things remain unto this day by his
Power, and whatsoeve^ he wills in Heaven and Earth, he brings to pass by his
Word and Power.

And we believe, That this God only is, and ought to be feared, loved, obeyed
and worshipped by all Creatures, and no other thing besides him in Heaven and
Earth: and we believe, that his Worship, and Obedience, and Care, and Love is
to be given in Spirit, even i^ what his own Spirit moves and leads his
people unto.

And we believe, his True Worship required and accepted of him, is not by the
tradition of men in outward observances, or set days, or places, but he is
worshipped only in Spirit and Truth, without respect of times, places or
things: and that none can worship him in righteousness but his Children, who
are born of his Spirit, and are led and guided thereby.

And we believe, that this God has given his Son Christ Jesus, into the World,
a free Gift unto the whole World, and that every man that comes into the World
is lighted by him, that every man may believe and be saved.

And we believe, That he is given into the World, and no Nation, Country or
People excepted, but to all mankind he is given of God, and has enlightened
them; And every man through the world that believes in, and receives Christ,
who is the Wisdom and Power of the Father, shall be saved with eternal
Salvation; And every one that believes not in him shall be damned, and shall
possess everlasting misery.

And we believe. That Salvation, Justification, and Sanctification is only in
Him, wrought by him, and no other; for there is no other Name given under
Heaven, but him alone, by which Salvation is: and we believe, all that receive
him, and believe in him are reconciled to God, and are made alive to God, to
live to him in all things, and do receive the forgiveness of Sins, and are set
free from all unrighteousness, and from the body of Sin and Death, and have the
witness of the Spirit in them, and the Spirit of the Father they have received,
and it witnesses in them of the Father and of the Son, and of the things that
belong to their peace; and it is the Earnest of the Inheritance, and the Seal
of the Promise of Eternal Life; and by it are the deep things of God revealed
to mankind; and by it the Father and the Son dwell in the Saints; and by it
they have fellowship one with another, and the Father, Son and Spirit are one:
And this we faithfully believe.

Again, concerning Christ, we believe, Tha^ he is one with the Father, and was
with the Father before the World was; and what the Father works, is by the
Son, for he is the Arm of Gods Salvation, and the very Power and Wisdom of the
Creator; and was, is, and, is to come; without beginning or end.

And we believe, That all the Prophets gave Testimony of him, and that he was
made manifest in Judea and Jerusalem, and did the Work of the Father, and was
persecuted of the Jews, and was crucified by his Enemies, and that he was
buried, and rose again according to the Scriptures.

And we believe, He is now ascended on high and exalted at the right hand of
the Father for ev^; and that he is glo^ified with the same glory that he had
before the world was, and that even the same that came down from Heaven, is
ascended up to Heaven; and the same that descended, is he that ascended.

And we believe, Even he that was dead, is alive, and lives for evermore; and
that he comes, and shall come again to judge the whole world with
righteousness, and all people with equity, and shall give to every man
according to his deeds at the day of Judgment, when all shall arise to
condemnation or justification; he that has done good shall receive Life, and
he that has done evil, everlasting Condemnation.

And we believe, He is to be waited for in Spirit, to be known after the
Spirit, as he was before the World was, and that is the knowledge unto Eternal
Life, which all that believe in him do receive; and he subdues death and
destroys him that has the power of it, and restores from Death to Life, and
quickens by his Spirit all that the Father has given him; and we believe
such he justifies and sanctifi^th, and such are taught of him; but he condemns
all that believe not and continue in unbelief, and are not taught of him: And
this we faithfully believe.

And we believe, That unto all People upon the face of the whole Earth, is a
time and day of Visitation given, that they may return and be saved by Jesus
Christ, who is given of the Father to call the worst of men to repentance; and
the most ungodly of sinners are convinced by him of their ungodly deeds, that
they may believe, and be converted and saved.

And we believe, Herein is the love of God manifested to all mankind; and that
none were shut out by him before they were born into the world; but unto all
men is a visitation given and they that perish, it is because they do not
believe in Christ; and Destruction is of a man's self, but Salvation is of God,
through believing in his Son, who takes away sin and renews into his
ownImage, that they may become Heirs with him.

And we believe, That there is a Crown of eternal Glory, and an Inheritance of
eternal Life to be enjoyed for evermore, by all that believe and are chosen of
God; and that there is an everlasting Misery and Destruction to be possessed by
all that believe not, but continue in the state of Reprobation, and are not
changed from the ways of sin and death, but walk after the ways of their own
hearts lusts, fulfilling the will of the flesh, in the evil of this world, and
follow not Christ the Light of the world, that they may be saved; and we
believe, upon all such the Wrath of God abides, and that they have no part in
the Inheritance of God.

And we believe, That it is only he that is born again of the Spirit, and that
walks after the Spirit, who is changed from Death unto Life, and who is
redeemed out of the world and all its ways; such only must inherit the Kingdom
of God, and they only have right thereunto, and none besides; even they that
are washed and cleans'd from all unrighteousness by the Blood of Jesus, by
which their sins are remitted; for his Blood cleanses them from all
Unrighteousness and Sin; yea, all such that walk and abide in the Light, which
Jesus Christ has enlightened the World withal.

And we believe, That the Saints upon Earth may receive forgiveness of Sins,
and may be perfectly freed from the body of sin and death, and in Christ may be
perfect and without Sin and may have Victory over all Temptations by Faith in
Jesus Christ.

And we believe, Every Saint that is called of God ought to press after
Perfection, and to overcome the Devil and all his Temptations upon Earth; and
we believe, they that faithfully wait for it, shall obtain it, and shall be
presented without sin in the Image of the Father; and such walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, and are in Covenant with God, and their Sins are
blotted out, and remembered no more; for they cease to commit sin, being born of
the Seed of God.

And we believe the Go^pel of Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation, and
that it ought to be preached freely unto all People, and Christ to be held
forth to all Mankind by the Ministry sent of him.

And we believe, this Ministry is received by the gift of the holy Ghost, and
all they that receive it, are lawfully called to the Ministry, and they may
preach the Gospel of Christ freely, as they have received it freely; and this
Ministry is not of man, but of God, and is made powerful, to the converting of
sinners, and to the bringing of People to God, and to the knowledge of his
ways. And we do not believe, that any man is a Minister of Christ without the
gift of the holy Ghost, or that the Gospel can be received by natural Larning
or Education.

And we believe, such as preach for hire, and have hire for preaching, are not
the lawfully called Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; such as are proud, and
high-minded, and covetous men, who do not profit the people at all, such as
have run, and never were sent of Christ, who calls by his Spirit into the Work
of the Ministry; and as every one has received the Gift of that Spirit, so he
may administer to others.

Concerning Rulers and Governors, we believe, That there ought to be Rulers and
Governors in every Nation, City, Country or Town, and they ought to be such men
as fear God, and hate every evil way, who will judge for God, and not for man,
and will judge Righteously, Equally and Justly, and will give true and sound
Judgment unto all men, without bribery or respect of Persons, not regarding the
Rich above the Poor, but being a Praise unto all that do well, and a terror to
all evil doers, having knowledge in the pure Law of God, and themselves
continually exercised therein.

And we believe, That every Law of man ought to be grounded upon the Law of
God, pure Reason and Equity being the Foundation thereof, that Gods witness in
every man may answer to it; and the Law ought to be known unto all People
before Transgression be charged or punished in any man.

And we believe, That every Transgression ought to be punished according to its
nature, and that the punishment exceed not the greatness of the Transgression;
neither ought Transgressors to escape unpunished; neither ought any, upon false
suspicion or jealousies, be caused to suffer, without the Testi^ony of true
men, or the Confession of the Party.

And we believe, That the Executors of the Law ought to be just men, and not
given to Pride, Drunkenness, or any other Evil. And thus true Judgment and
Justice will be brought forth in the Earth, and all that do well will have
Praise, and live in Rest and Peace, that all Evildoers may stand in a we, and
be afraid of God and Just men, and the Execution of good Laws.

Concerning Religion, we believe, That it is the Spirit the of Lord, that makes
men truly Religious, and no man ought to be compelled to or from any exercise
or practice in Religion by any outward Law or Power, but every man ought to be
left free, as the Lord shall persuade his own mind, in doing or leaving undone
this or the other practice in Religion; and every man, of what Profession in
Religion soever, ought to be protected in Peace, provided himself be a man of
Peace, not seeking the wrong of any man's Person or Estate.

And we believe, That to reprove false Opinions and unsound Doctrines and
Principles, seeking to convince them that oppose themselves by Ex^rtation or
sharp Reproof, by word or writing, ought not to be counted a breach of the
Peace, or to strive about the things of the Kingdom of God, by men of contrary
Minds or Judgments, this ought not to be punished by the Magistrates and their
Laws; for we believe that the outward Laws and Powers of the Earth are only to
preserve men's Persons and Estates, and not to preserve men in Opinions; neither
ought the Laws of the Nation to be laid upon men's Consciences to bind them to
or from such a Judgment or Practice in Religion.

And we believe, That Christ is and ought only to be Lord and Exerciser of men's
Consciences, and his Spirit must only lead into all Truth.

And we believe, That Obedience and Subjection in the Lord belongs to
Superiors, and that Subjects ought to obey them [in the Lord] that have rule
over them; and that Children ought to obey their Parents, and Wives their
Husbands, and Servants their Masters in all things, which is according to God,
which stands in the exercise of a pure Conscience toward God: But where
Rulers, Parents or Masters, or any other, command or require Subjection in any
thing which is contrary to God, or not according to him, in such cases all
People are free, and ought to obey God rather than man: And we believe, that
herein God will justify them, being guided and led by his Spirit in all that
which is good, and out of all that which is evil.

Again, We believe concerning Election and Reprobation, That there is a State
of Election, and a State of Reprobation, a state chosen of God, and a state
rejected of God; and that all Mankind are in one of these states: All that are
elected are elected in Christ, and all that are out of him, are in the state
Reprobate, bringing forth fruits of death and darkness, being Children of Wrath
and Disoebdience, in the Alienation and Separation from God, in the
Transgression unreconciled to God, the Enmity ruling in the heart, being in the
fall, and not restored to God again, but ignorant of his Power and Wisdom,
having the Understanding darkened, that they cannot see nor perceive the things
that are Eternal: And in this condition his best Works are Sin, and whatsoever
he does, he cannot be accepted of God; for he is dead to God, and alive to all
Evil, bringing forth all his Works out of that ground which is cursed. This is
the condition of all Mankind upon the face of the Earth in the first Adam; and
this is the state of Reprobation; and all that abide herein are rejected of
God, and shall never enherit eternal Life, but go into Perdition; yet have all
such a day of Visitation, that they may return out of the state of Reprobation,
but hating Knowledge, and desp^fing the Love of God. they continue in the state
Reprobate, and the Wrath of God abides upon them; but they that are chosen of
God, are delivered from W^ for they believe in the Light, and become Children
of the Light, and are renewed in mind and heart, and receive the love of the
Father, and become planted into Christ, the second Adam, and are chosen in him
to bring forth fruit unto the Father, and all their fru^t ^pringeth from that
ground which is blessed; for they are led by the Spirit of the Father, and such
are in the state of Election, who are made Heirs with Christ of the Everlasting
Inheritance that never fades away. And this we faithfully believe, that Mercy
is not showed to the Reprobate, nor Judgment to them that are chosen of God.

And this is to go abroad into the World, that all People may understand what
we believe, and what we have received of God: And they that believe this, and
walk therein by the Spirit of the Father, shall be saved; but they that believe
not, but are disobedient to the Truth, shall be condemned because they do not
believe. Much more might be written, but in short, this is given forth by one
that has believed and received the knowledge of these things from God: A
Friend unto all People,

Edward Buroughs.

To all that say, we (whom the World do in scorn call Quakers) do deny
Ministers and Magistrates; These things I write unto you, to give you in short
an understanding what Ministers and Magistrates we own, and what, and whom we
deny.

1. SUch Ministers as are made by God, who are sanctified by his Word and
Power, who have freely received perfect Gifts from God, and so by the Spirit
and Power of God are sent forth into the World, to turn the People from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God; who freely
Minister unto others, without coveting any man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel;
not seeking theirs, but them: Warning every man and teaching every man in all
Wisdom, that they might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: Such as
minister from the Spirit, and have the Word of God abiding in them, who are
never unprovided, but at all times and seasons, and in all places, do speak and
declare the Truth, as they are moved and instructed, and as the Spirit of Truth
does give them utterance; such Ministers we own, and have in great esteem for
their works sake, Gal. 1. 1, 12. Joh. 15. 3. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 11, 12, 13. Acts
26. 15, 16, 17, 18. Mat. 10 8. Acts 20. 33. 2 Cor. 12. 14. Col. 1. 27, 28, 29.
2 Corinthians. 3. 6. John 15. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. John 4. 10, 14. and 7. 38, 39. 2 Timothy
4. 2, 3. Acts 2. 4.

But such as are brought up at Schools and Colleges, and so made Ministers by
the will of man, who have not freely received perfect gifts from God for
perfecting of the Saints, but deny Perfection, and so deny the Ministers work
neither do ministr freely, but seek for gain from their Quarters, and will not
preach without a price, who are not sanctified by the Word of God, but plead
for a continuance in sin while people walk upon the Earth: Such as Minister
from the Letter and not from the Spirit, who cannot Preach except they have
time to study, and so by their industry povide themselves, and are not provided
of the Lord (such a Mninistry is of works and not the Free Gift from God) such
cannot profit people, but lead them captive in an empty and dead Form, always
hearing, but never able to come to the true knowledge of God: such, called
Ministers, we do deny, and turn from them, and testify against them, as the
holy men of God fromerly did, read Isa. 56. 10, 11. Jer. 5. 31. Mic. 3. 11. 1
Cor. 1. 19, 20, 26, 27, 28, 29. and chap. 21. 11. Jer. 23. 15, 61, 17, 22, 30,
31, 32. Isa. 50. 10, 11. Phil. 3. 18, 19. Jude 11. John 8. 24. 1 John 3. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezekiel. 34 Hos. 6. 9. Mat. 23. 1 Timothy 5. 6, 10,
11. 2 Timothy 3. 2 P^t. 2.

2. Such Magistrates who rule for God, who be men of Truth, fearing God and
bating coveto^sness, who execute true Justice and Judgment in the Earth without
partiality, not respecting the persons of the Rich, nor despising the persons
of the poor, but in Tuth and Equity giving to every one his due and portion
according to the Law of Equity, who neither seek nor receive honor from men,
but seek the honor that comes from God only; who are a terror to evil d^ers,
but a praise to them that do well; such Magistrates we own, and in the Lord
honor, Exodus 18. 21. De^t. 16. 18, 19, 20. Joh 5. 41, 44. Romans 13. 3, 4.

But such Magistrates who be proud and lofty who rule not for God, but for
themselves, who love the praise of men, and judge for Gifts and rewards, and
love money which is the root of all evil; who respect the rich in their gay
clothing, above the poor in vile raiment; who seek and receive honor of men
(and if they be not honored with that which they seek for, turn judgment
backwards, that Equity cannot enter) such as be wrathful and malicious cannot
rule for God, such are encouragers of vice and wickedness, and turn their sword
backward against the Upright and Innocent, who reprove sin in the gate, such
magistrates we do deny and testify against; for when the wicked bear rule, the
Righteous mourn, and the Evildoers rejoice over them, and mock and reproach
them, Isa. 1. 21, 23. chap. 2. 11, 12. John 6. 43. Mic. 3. 11. Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3,
4, 9. John 5. 44. Isa. 59. 13, 14, 15. Isa. 29. 21. Prove. 29. 2.

Such as live in pride and pleasures, and follow ungodly Lust and wicked
practices, deny God, though in words they may profess him; even so, all such as
do evil, who follow Drunkenness, Oaths, Games, vain Sports and Pleasures, and
such like ungodly actions, do deny, disgrace and greatly dishonor both
Ministers and Magistrates, though in words they may own them, and bow the Hat
and Knee, and give flattering Titles unto them, Tit. 1. 16. Psalm 15. Hosea 4.
James 1. 25. Job 32. 21, 22.

To walk Soberly, Righteously, and doing Justly according as the Grace of God
which brings Salvation, does teach and direct, is a sweet savor to the Lord,
and a true owning, and in the Lord honoring true Ministers and Magistates,
Micha 6. 8. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Psalm. 15. 17. Isa. (...). 15. Romans 13. 3.

But to walk loosly and profanely, doing wieked and unjust actions, turning
the Grace of God into Wantonness; such are an ill savor to God, and deny and
dishonor true Ministers and Magistrates, James 3. 14, 15, 16. Jude 4. Isa. 59.
2, 3, etc.

True Honor does not consist in bowing the Hat and Knee, and such like things
(for that is the honor below, which men seek and receive one of another, which
is in the unbelief) but in the obedience of the Magistrates just Commands, who
are a Terror to wickedness, but a praise to them that do well: For the Law was
not made for the Righteous, who fear God, and live uprightly, but for the
Lawless, who are out of Gods Fear, who live wickedly, casting the Law of God
behind their backs, John 5. 44. Romans 13. 3, 4. 1 Ti^ 1. 8, 9, 10. Psalm 50.
16, 17.

So this may certify all whom this may come unto, that we do not deny
Ministers nor Magistrates, who are made and ordained by God, but honor them in
the Lord; let our Lives and Coversations, and that of God in all your
Consciences judge; for if all were brought into our life, the Magistrate should
live at peace: and so as the eyes of your understandings come to be opned with
true Light, you will see that those who live soberly and righteously do own and
honor Ministers and Magistrates, though they cannot for Conscince sake respect
their persons, nor give them flattering Titles as your Highness, your Lordship,
your Worship and such like, for such belong to God: For Christ Jesus said, I
receive not honor from man: and says he, How can you believe, that receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only^ Gal.
1. 11, 12. Romans 13. 1. Dut. 16. 18, 19. John 1. 9. Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9. John
5. 44.

Read with understanding, prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1
These. 5. 21. A. Parker.

To all that want Peace with God; To the Sheep every where not brought home; To
the thirsty breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Ca^tivity among, and in
the midst of all Professors^ Greetings of Love, Mercy and Peace from God the
Father of the Living.

WHere the Bowels are not shut up, nor the Heart darkened; and where that does
not bear rule which stops the ear, end closes the eye; and where Prejudice
and Rebellion against the Light, with the wisdom of the flesh, through that
knowledge which pusseth up, has not wholly caten up, devoured, got over, and
wholly overcome that tender Principle, which once moved in the heart, toward
that Being of the living Substance, there may my words take entrance; and unto
such who feel that which breathes to God, and who are willing to be satisfied
concerning the Living Truth of his Son, and who would receive the Truth if they
knew it, and do yet more desire after the Power of God, then all the temporal
things that are seen; and who are yet come no further than the reading of the
Law, the Priests, Tythe's, and that Religion that makes nothing perfect: and
who are come no further then the outward Baptis^, or Shadow, or Figure, or such
things, which are to be left behind, He^. 6. or who are come no further then
the Supper, or the Death, and so not yet saved by his Life, nor drunk of that
which saves, and is to cleanse from all that which separateth from God; after
whom, and the incomes of his Love immortal, whosoever truly desires, and is
willing to receive the Power of his Life, and come into Covenant with the Lord,

Such may lend me an ear a little, and you are them who may receive some
benefit hereby; for behold I write in plainness of the things of God, my heart
being enlarged with abundance of his Peace, in which there is good will toward
men, that you might come to draw near to the Witness, the Testimony whereof is
within the Vail, which Vail is over the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15. and is not done
away, but as you come to be in him, who is given for a Witness, Isaiah 55. 4.
by believing in the Light, John 12. 36. and so to have the Witness in you, 1
John 5. 10 and you to be in it; and that you may come to participate of God's
indwellings, and feel the Oil which will last forever; threrefore I proceed
thus:

How can I but look back a little, with an eye of pity over those, who yet are
where once I was, when the Darkness was over the Earth, and the cloud of
Errorscompassed me as well as others; surely, I cannot now be unmindful of them
that are yet lost, as not to have compassion upon the Outcasts of Israel, or
to conceal from them these things of so great concernment; but rather, as the
Lord of my Life has opened to me, I will reach forth my hand toward the weak,
and utter my voice to the Prisoner of hope, and show unto the Meek in the
Earth, how the invisible God has led his Seed, and is leading his Remnant
through, and out of the variety of things, unto the One thing it self, from
whence the various Things, Gifts and Ministrations do come.

Now, that which is chiefly in my heart to writ for the Seeds sake, is;

First, Something Concerning the Ministration of Moses (when he was upon the
Earth.)

Secondly, Concerning the Ministration of Christ (whilst he was upon Earth.)

Thirdly, and chiefly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit.

First, Concerning Moses's Ministration (when he was upon Earth) which was to
last till Shilo same, or until the time of Reformation.
As concerning Moses's Ministration, to wit, the Law, Condemnation, or Death,
with the Priests Offering, and worldly Sanctuary, and an outward Tabernacle,
and daily Offerings for Sin, and Storehouses for the Levites, Strangers,
Fatherless and Widows, having the Ark of the Testimony within the Vail, and
the Mercy. Seat covered, and the Golden Pot, and the People to seek the Law at
the Priests mouth, whereby their knowledge is preserved, and many profit much
thereby, and come day by day, and year by year unto that which they esteem a
place of Holy Worship, and Ordinances of God. And notwithstanding the Priests
of Moses'^ Law were made by the Law of God, yet that P^iesthood changes, and
the Law changes, and the very glory of all this passes away; for this did
once seem glorious unto me, and many more, which only discovered sin, though it
made nothing perfect, and with much delight was the reading of the Law and the
Prophets hearkened unto, and the daily Confession of Sin (but the Vail is over
the heart whilst Moses is Preached) and Sacrifices Morning and Evening, with
the long Prayers, which the Comers thereunto were not at all thereby made
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; though it had a Shadow of good things
to come, yet the glory thereof comes to be done away; Then how much more will
the very glory of the most glorious appearance of that Ministry perish, and be
done away, which comes short of this, and has not so much as the image of
this, which was a Shadow? O weak and beggarly things, that are found among
those Priest now, and their Followers, who come short of Moses's Ministry! for
he directed them to Christ, the Substance and so his Ministration come to be
done away, as Christ comes to be received; for Moses did not seek to uphold his
Priests, or Law, or Tithes, or any thing else when Christ should come, who is
the end of the Law, but did write of him; and notwithstanding his Ministry and
Priests, he said He that would not hearken unto him, should be cut off; and
said, The Lord will raise up [mark the Words, raise up] The Lord shall raise up
a Prophet; and when the Prophet was come, he said, I am the Light, and I am
meek and low in heart; and this is to be raised up which is meek; for to them
that sat in Darkness, Light has sprung up: And the Soul that hearkneth not to
the Prophet which springs up shall be cut off; for Truth springs up out of
the Earth, and Christ is the Truth, and he said, I am the Light, which is the
Horn of Salvation, that God raised up to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and is the Salvation of Israel; and so the soul is to hearken to that which God
raised up, and that it is which condemns Sin (under it) who is like unto Moses,
whose Ministry discovers Sin, and so Moses directed unto Christ (who puts away
the Sin) and Paul said of the glory of Moses's Ministration, that it was no
glory, in respect of the glory of the Ministration of the Spirit; and the
gloriou^ Ministry of the Spirit was received, after he who had a body prepared
had suffered the crucifying of his body, and the Prophets searched diligently
to see the glory that was to be after the Sufferings of Christ. 1 P^t. 1. 10,
11.

But the thing intended, that Moses when he was upon the Earth, directed unto
Christ, and gave commandment that they should hearken unto him (who said) I am
the Light (and this is one Tittle of the Law, that the Light be hearkened unto)
who is the end of the Law, and the Substance; and he that offends herein, is
guilty of all? and this is that in which all the large Ministrations of Moses
are included, that Christ the Light, the true Prophet be hearkened unto and
obeyed, that by hearing and obeying his voice (or the word in the heart) they
might come from under the Law, and the Priests, and that which waxes old, unto
the Life and Obedience of him who abides a Priest forever, even the Lord of
that glory which lasts for evermore.

Secondly, Concerning CHRIST, and his Ministration, (when he was upon Earth)
and his Work which he finished.
And when he comes, which Moses commands to hearken unto, even Christ the
true Prophet, the Light of the World, the Living Minister, the end of the Law,
who had a body prepared to do the Will of the Father, which was in him, the Man
CHRIST JESUS, he says, Follow me; and he took up his Cross and passed through
the Death and the Vail, and so being made perfect through Sufferings, attained
that glory which he had with the Father before he had a body, which body was
prepared to do the Father's Will; whose Will was, that all men should be saved;
therefore Christ tasted death for every man, and rose again for the
Justification of those that believe in him, who said, I am the Light, and is
sat down at the right hand of God, who is a Spirit eternally in the Heavens,
ascended up out of the sight of them which gazed after that Body which i^ gone
out of their sight, even he, Christ, the Mystery, hid from Ages and Generations
now made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil; being meek and low in
heart, he says, Learn of me: Then not of the Priests, nor any longer of Moses;
for the Law is the Schoolmaster to Christ; who being come, calls one from
the Custom, another from going to bury the dead, another from questioning and
reasoning what this man or another man should do, that he might not stand
looking out at others, but himself to follow the Light, saying, Follow thou me.

And those that followed him when he was upon Earth, saw his miracles, and
heard his Parables, and eat of the outward Bread, and were filled (though many
now eat and are not filled) and they had his Body among them, and they came to
the Baptism, and the Supper, but Christ himself baptized not: and when he was
upon the Earth, he said, I go to the Father, and I go to prepare a place for
you; And he said, Whither I go, ye know; and he said before, Follow me; and
except a man deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me, he cannot be
my Disciple: and he said, My sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me: and he
entered within the Vail (and the Vail is over the heart) and was made perfect
through sufferings, and is sat down in the Majesty on high, glorified with God
the Father; and the Father was in him, even the fullness of God; and that which
may be known of God is manifest in thee; and he said, he had finished the work
the Father gave him to do, and so the Father's will was accomplished and done,
for which the body was prepared: he said, Now glorify (...), Father, with the
same glory which I had with thee from the beginning; and he that spoke in the
body abides forever, who said, A body have thou prepared me, which Body being
crucified, he took up his Life again, and then those that did know him, three
days before, knew him not: and he ascended, and a cloud received him out of
the sight of certain men, who never found him unto this day for he remains
out of the sight of most that prosess him, and as Lightning in the Clouds of
Heaven does he come again, and every eye shall see him that condemns Sin: and
the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, and yet the blind cannot see, nor the deaf
hear.

And this was he that Moses commanded to hear, who said, he that is with you
shall be in you, and he that was with or without, was to go away; and that
which was to be received within, he said should abide with them forever, and
the spirit of Truth was to lead into all Truth: for, though the body was
prepared to do God's Will, yet they by it were not lead into all Truth, but
sometimes understood it not, though he spoke Spirit and Life; and moreover,
they went away, and some fled from the Truth, and Peter denied him that was the
Truth: and so such as have got a profession of the Truth without them, and not
the Spirit within to lead into all Truth, such fly in the day of Trial from
that they profess; and some deny it rather then suffer with, or for it; and
herein them called Baptists also have not come short, and some of them have
bowed to the Beast, and so it is with many who profess Christ and Truth without
them, even as with those who understood not the Parables, neither could cast
out the unclean Spirits: so that Christ was and is grieved, when he has been
so long with, and professed and followed without, and yet not come to that
Faith which purifies the heart, whereby to cast out the unclean within, as thou
may read in thy self.

And therefore Christ, when he was upon Earth, did often speak unto them, of
what was yet to come; and I do seldom read, to take notice, that he did so
often Preach and repeat any one thing unto them, as that of the Spirit to come,
saying that it (mark, the Spirit) would lead into all Truth; and seeing their
weakness and unbelief, Mark 16. 14. he by the often repetition thereof, did (as
it were) the more chiefly to engage their hearts to wait for, and seek after
the Incomes of that which should comfort them, and abide with them, when his
body was gone from them, whither they could not come; and to this one thing
does he direct them in various expressions, as of his going to the Father, and
coming again, and says he, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive,
John 14. 16. And many things Jesus did which if they should be all wirtten, the
World might not contain the Books, John 21. 25. And many things he spoke unto
them, Acts 2. 40. And yet there was something to come to be waited for, and
after to be received, which was more then all this; for, says he, These things
have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you; [but] the Comforter, etc.
Mark, the word [but] intimates someth^ng greater, or more than what was spoken
to them, whilst he was with them; for, says he, He that is with you, shall be
in you, John 14. 17. And said, but the Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit,
whom the Father will send in my Name, he will teach you all things (mark what
that is that teaches all things) and bring all things to your Remembrance
whatsoever I have said, (and so, that is within which brings the words of
Spirit and Life to remembrance,) John 14. 25, 26. And having spoken of other
things he says again, But when the Comforter comes, even the Spirit of Truth,
John 15. 26. And if I go not away, the Comforter will not come, but if I depart
I will send him unto you, John 16. 7. And I have many things to say unto you,
but you cannot bear them now; howbeit, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he
will guide you into all Truth, John 16. 12, 13. Here it may be seen that they
who followed Christ without and not received the Spirit within, could not bear
what he had to speak unto them; and also, it may be seen that when the Spirit
was come, it would be better with them.

And much more might be mentioned, how Christ foretold what was to come and be
received, and revealed in that day, John 16. 23. When the Spirit should be
poured forth according to the Prophets; all which plainly declares, and most
evidently sets forth, how Christ in his Ministry, when he was upon Earth, did
most chiefly direct unto the Ministration of the Spirit of Truth, which was
then yet to come; and that they might not run to teach others (as many do now)
before they had received the Spirit of Truth in themselves, by, and with that
to be led into all Truth, but might receive the Power of truth in themselves,
from the Life thereof, to convert others unto the same: therefore said he
further, after he was risen again; But tarry ye in the City of Jerusa em until
you be endued with power from on high, Mark 24. 4. so that though they had seen
his body before, and had now seen him after his Resurrection, yet that and all
the rest was not enough without the Power and the Spirit which was to come,
which they were to wait for. And so now men should tarry, wait and stand still,
to see the Salvation of God, and until they receive the Spirit; for it is the
Spirit (not the body) which searches all things, and shows plainly of the
Father.

And by this before written in short, I have a little endeavored, to show,
unto the ^cek and single-hearted, that Moses when he was upon Earth, directed
unto Christ; as in these words:

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midest of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Dc^t. 18. 15.

And Christ when he was upon Earth, directed unto the Spirit which was to come,
in like words, saying:

These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the
comforter, which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, John 14. 25, 26.

And then, what if I did write after the manner of men, and fay If Moses were
now upon the Earth, and Christ in his own body upon the Earth, and Moses with
all his P^iests, Tithes, Offerings, and Religion, which discovers Sin, but
makes nothing perfect, which Paul profited much in; If he, I say, should
command and exhort all People under his Ministry, to go to Christ and hear him?

And if Christ were now upon Earth, and notwithstanding his outward Miracles,
Circumcision, Baptism, Supper, and Death, yet he should command and exhort all
(that ^ome through the Law or Ministration of Moses unto him.) to look, and
tarry, and wait for another Comforter, that they might receive the Spirit in
them, and say unto them, that that should teach them all things, and lead them
into all Truth?

Then whether or no people were to continue following Moses's Priests, with
their Tithes and long Prayers, and still be seeking the Law at their mouths,
or to come to Christ, to seek the Gospel? for Moses himself did not fay, that
they should seek the Gospel at the Priests mouth: And then when did the Priests
ever preach the Gospel?

And then, whether those obey not Moses, who leave the Priests and come to
Christ, the Light? and whether such, when they are come to Christ, should
always be looking and following after his Body, Miracles, Baptism, or Supper
without them, or tarry and wait to receive the Spirit within them?

And then, which of these now should all people that profess Christ, be led by
in these days, either Moses, or the Person of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth?
And whether such as have received, and are truly indeed led by this Spirit of
Truth, and know that to be their Teacher, and follow it, and are ruled,
governed and guided by it, according to the Command of Moses and Christ, do not
hereby obey the command of Moses and Christ, and fulfill their Doctrine? And
whether any other People or Professors whatever do obey the Command of Moses
and Christ, but only such? And whether this be not a thing of great concernment
to be known and learned by all who Profess Christianity?

But why then do People follow these Priests of England any longer, which are
contrary to Moses, and also to Christ, who have no Storehouses, but suffer the
poor to want within and without, and the Widow and the Stranger ready to
perish, and moreover devour, and can never have enough of the Spoil of other
men's goods?

And why do others dispute about, and talk of the Body so much, which they
never saw nor knew? And is it not better to be silent, and know God who dwells
in his People, and the Spirit of Truth, which he requires in the inward parts,
and to feel after God, even the Life in themselves, because the Apostle said,
they were saved by his Life being before reconcited by his Death, Romans 5. 10?
And until the Life came, there were many things which they were not saved from
by the Body, for the Body was before the Death, and the Death which reconciles
was passed through, before the Life was received again to save and Justify.

And why then are people so much busied about that which was before the
Reconciliation (and so therein much short of the Life) and for outward Bread,
Wine, and Water; Are not these things which are seen? And are not the things
that are seen Temporal?

But Christ the true Prophet, being come, of whom Moses did write, who is the
end of the Law, and so the end of that Ministry, whereby that is done away for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof; and Christ coming after John, of
whom John bore witness, that he was before, and greater, and came after him;
and Christ also having finished that which he himself came to do: and likewise
so largely and often Exhorted to wait for another Comforter, even the Spirit of
Truth.

Then what Ministration is it that now stands and remains, which is
according both to Moses, Christ and the holy Scriptures? and what Ministration
is to be expected or waited for, but the Ministration of the Spirit? And
whether all they be not compassed about with a cloud of error, who are
upholding that Ministry of the Law (or a worse) which Christ is the end of, and
the Apostles said was done away; and likewise such as are upholding and keeping
up that which Christ said, he had finished? And whether the upholding of such
things now, be not quite opposite, both to Moses, Christ and Scriptures?

And being that Moses, nor indeed his true Ministers of the Law, are not upon
Earth, neither that Body of Christ (which by the Professors was murdered at
Jerusalem) visibly to be seen upon Earth; then what is it those have to follow,
who have not received the Spirit to be led by? and if they will say, they have
the Writings of Moses and the Words of Christ; I say, if that be all, then they
that forsook and denied Christ had more then them; for they had the words from
his own mouth, which were Spirit and Life, and yet they understood not; (and
then what do those understand who have not so much as they had?) therefore
after he had suffered, and rose again, he opened their understandings.

And so, what is all their Religion worth, who are not come to the Spirit? And
whether Moses's Ministration being ended by Christ, and Christ also having
finished his work, are not all People in the first place, now to wait for the
Spirit, and to receive the Spirit by it, then to be led into all Truth; and so
being first led into the Truth, then in the same Truth to worship God in
Spirit, who is a Spirit? And whether there be now any true Worship standing,
which God accepts, but only this? And whether this alone be not agreeable to
Moses, Christ and Scriptures? And whether all other Worships now upheld, be not
contrary to this true Worship of God, and contrary to Moses, Christ and
Scriptures, and indeed chiesly opposite to the Spirit of God, whereby he is
grieved? And if so, whether all such Worship, Way. Practice, Performances,
Duties, and Ordinances (so called) be not better left undone then Performed,
until Gods Spirit be received to guide therein?

Thirdly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, which abides for ever.
Moses and his Ministry were visible, and Christ in the form of a Servant (and
so like unto Moses) was visible, and so were his Miracles; and that which is
visible to the natural eye, the carnal mind can come to profess and contend
about; but the blessed eye, which God opens with the Light, comes to see the
one done away, and the other finished by Christ, the Light and Life.

And the Spirit is that which first moved, and yet moves, and moved unto, and
led through the visible Ministration; and this Spirit is invisible, as it is
wirtten, the invisible only wise God, whom no eye of flesh has seen, or can
see; and this moving invisible Spirit of God which is without limit or end, is
that which all people should be led unto, by all its outward visible
appearances, ministration and dispensations; and this Spirit was that which
gave forth and ordained the Ministration of the Law, which was glorious in its
time, though to be done away: but how much more glorious is the Ministration of
that Spirit of Life it self, from which the Ministration of the Law came, which
Spirit abides for ever. And the second Adam is made a quickening Spirit; and
the Spirit which is the Word, was with God, and was God, before the body of
flesh was made; and that Spirit abides forever, as i^ heard out of the Law. He
shall abide forever. And this is that which ever lives to interceed.

And this forever blessed invisible Spirit was before time, and is to be when
time shall be no more; and is without limit, an eternal lively Substance,
giving Life from it self, and secretly covering it self from the carnal part of
man, not seen nor understood, but by such as by its secret motions come to be
led to see through that which shadows it forth, and by the Image, form, shadow
or figure, to discern the Substance, which is the Life, where Immortality
dwells: for in the most innermost and secret of all is the Life of all, being
covered over with that in which it lies; through which it breaking forth in any
discovery of it self, is that whereby the beholders might be drawn through the
discovry unto it self, which in the discovery broke forth; for the discovery
was still too short of that from whence it came, and that which was discovered
forth in any Shadow, Form or Image, was not to be idolized nor set up, for the
very things or Substance of Life, from whence it proceeded; and herein has
been much mistaken, by such who came not by that, which opened in the Visibles,
to that from whence it came, in that to have their understandings opened, and
thereby to be made sensible of that which is Eternal by it to be brought in,
where its Indwellings abide forever, whose breaking forth in the Visible (which
was to draw to that invisible) refreshed the Soul invisibly, in an unexpected
manner and time; but being (after) sought for in the visibles (and not in the
Eternal) withdraws it self out of the visibles, and out of the sight and reach
of that which seeks it there, that thereby that which is to live forever with
it, may come through all that which it appeared in unto the very thing and
invisible Substance it self, which is the Life of all, and the true Center of
the living motion which moves of itself, and gave forth all things good, as
they proceed from it, by virtue of its gradual, and various motions; and this
being come opens it self, in them that find it, and live therein; and this
makes Darkness Light before the People whose dwellings is with God, and the
crooked comes to be made straight by the things it self, and dark sayings of
old come to be opened, and secret things revealed.

But to write more plain for the sake of the weak, of this glorious indwelling
Spirit, which in the fullness of time comes forth in flefh, laying hold of the
Seed of Abraham, the most glorious Appearance that ever was; being thus
appeared, was the express Image of God, who dwells in his People, whose
bodies are flesh and earthly Tabernacles; but by the operations of the
Sanctifying, cleansing Siprit, which the Father sends, are made fit
habitations of God, and Coheirs with Christ, and Members of his Body, Flesh
and Bones; which Spirit quickneth to God, and being thus received and obeyed,
is felt to live forever, though the shadowings forth of it be done away, and
this is Eternal, and never ends, but a bideth with such forever; and the
Ministration of it i^ Life it self to the Soul and more to be valued and
desired, then all that ever was seen before it.

And as the Lord took of that Spirit which was upon Moses, and put it upon his
Brethren the Elders of Israel, whereby they might rule and judge with him; so
says Christ, The Father shall take of mine, and give it unto you, even of that
Spirit of Love, Life, Power, Valor and Virtue, which was upon and in him,
(that was like unto Moses) is ministered into, and put upon such as are truly
his Brethren and Friends, whereby, with him, they (thus gifted, sanctified and
qualified) judge the World: for all Judgment is committed to the Son, and of
that which the Son has (and is committed to him) does the Father give unto his
Members, and so from Christ the Head they come to receive Power over the World,
and its Way, Worship, and Fashions, and over unclean spirits. And that is an
unclean spirit which will lead into any sin, and it is an unclean spirit in
which sin stands, and which pleads for the continuance, and upholding of
that which is unclean; and that is of the World, which the Saints Judge.

And as those Elders of Israel (who were of the Church in the Wilderness) were
not made fit to Judge or Rule in outward matters by all the writings and words
of the Law (though received by disposition of Angels) until the Lord himself
took of that Spirit which was upon Moses and put upon them.

So those that profess to be Elders in the Church now, or any other person
whatsoever, are much less made fit to Rule or Judge in Spiritual matters, by
all the reading and professing Moses Writings, and Christ's Words, and the rest
of the Holy Scriptures (though they were given by the Inspiration of God) until
the Lord take of that Spirit which was upon, and in Christ (who is like unto
Moses) and give unto, and pour it upon, and minister it in un^o them. And this
is done in Gods way (which is secret) and time (which is in his own hand) to
those whom he accounts wrothy thus to honor, and who truly wait for it as a
wayfering man for a resting place, and as a Captive for deliverance.

And though Christ (after his Resurrection) said, All Power in Heaven and in
Earth is given unto me, Go ye therefore and teach; yet they were to tarry until
they had the power in themselves; and when that was come, which they were to
tarry and wait for, then with that they went, and so taught the Nations, from
the sensible feeling of that which taught them how to teach, and all things
else, when the same Spirit and Power was upon them, which was before committed
unto him; and so the coming forth of it from him into them and filling them
therewith, was to them in that work of the Ministry most effectual: like as the
Virtue going forth of Christ healed the Woman; so the Power and Virtue of the
Holy Spirit, coming forth from Christ, being sent of the Father, and received
by the Disciples (who with much desire waited for that) empowered them to do
that which before they were commanded to do, after they were endued with Power
(or had the Power in them) and so what they were commanded to do, they were to
wait to receive Power in themselves from God to perform; and Christ did intend
to give them Power to do that which he commanded: And as he commanded them to
go and teach, he also required them to tarry (and so not to go) until they had
received so to do; and so it was the Power of the holy Ghost in them, which
made them Ministers, and these were, and such are, truly Ordained Ministers:
And after they had received Power from on High, even the Spirit (or Life) of
Truth, and were filled therewith, and so had it in them, then they went to do
that which was commanded them; then they went to teach Nations, and converted
thousands, and turned sinners, and brought Souls to God, and then they were
called Christians, and then were People brought to be of the True Church which
Christ builds upon that which Flesh and Blood reveals not.

And this is the Entrance into the Church in God, 2 These. 1. 1. The receiving
of the Spirit, and in this God is Worshipped, and not else, for this has
excluded all other Worship; and these only are the true Worshippers, who come
in thus by the door, which is Christ, the Light and Spirit of Truth, sent into
the heart from God.

And if all the prudent learned Divines (so called) in Europe, or all, or any
of the wisest Orthodox men (so called) in any other quarter of the whole World,
can prove by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament any other true Worship
of God (who is a Spirit) now extant among men, and to be performed (especially
among them called Christians) with acceptance to God, but only that which the
Spirit of Truth leads such unto as receive it; then let them bring it forth
that we may see it, and prove it by plain undeniable truth of Scripture; or
otherwise I shall look upon their proofs, words, ways, actions, practices,
performances, duties, and several Worships, as things of no value.

Or if there be any other entrance into the true Worship of God, then this
Spirit that God sends for the Light, which leads to it, or if there be any
other Worship which God does, or will accept to be after this, spoken or
prophesied of in the Scriptures of Truth, whereby this shall ever be done away,
or ended, from being the true, only, and alone Worship of God, whilst men have
a being upon Earth, then let the wisest of the sons of men bring it forth, and
produce their strong Reasons therein, that we may plead together, and that the
entrance into, and the true Worship it self of the only true invisible God,
may be declared all over the World, for the satisfaction of every tender heart
concerning this.

For this I am satisfied in, that Christ Jesus (who is the End of the Law, and
who finished his work, when he was upon the Earth) is made a Quickening Spirit,
and is the Way and Truth of life, which brings into the Worship of God, and
he is the Beginning and the End, and he leads to the beginning of Gods
Worship, and he is the end and the Rest of all the Faithful, in whom all the
promises are Yea and Amen; and without him all is as nothing, and all that
comes before him are Theives and Robbers: and he it is that abides a Priest
forever, and his Spirit of Truth is it, which all ^cople and Professors
whatsoever should first wait to receive, thereby to be led into the true
spiritual Worship, which alone God accepts; ll^st they have their worship and
building fall together, in a day when there is none to deliver.

And then thus I query; If Christ's own dear Disciples, who had forsook all and
followed him (not Priests or Papists) did not come to receive this Spirit, by
hearing all the words which he spoke unto them, but by waiting after the words
were ended; Then, whether those that have not forsaken all (nor so much as the
Worlds fashions) do now come to receive the Spirit by reading, hearing or
professing the same words of Christ, now written, or any other part of the
Scriptures?

Or, whether a Proud man has received this Spirit, or a Liar or Profane
Person, or any Wise or Prudent Man whatsoever, by any means or way of his? And
whether any such ever did, have or can or may by any industry, or other way or
means attain to this Spirit which leads in the true Worship of God, but as it
is freely given forth from God? and then whether all people are not to be led
by that Spirit (which God freely gives) into the Worship of God; because
Christ said, the Spirit shall lead, which indeed does lead into all Truth, and
nothing else does so? And they that have not received this from God to lead
them, are not yet come to be led by that which the Sons and Children of God
were, and are led by.

And the Ministration of the Spirit, which all are now to be taught by, is
inwardly to be known, in the nearest, secret invisible manner, and is more out
of the sight, comprehension, and reach of man's Wisdom then any other
Ministration; and it is given forth from the clear Foundation it self, unto the
soul satisfaction of man, when he is come to the end of words; or having heard
much, or all the words that can he spoken of it, remains unsatisfied, in a
restless longing desire, to find, receive, feel and enjoy the thing it self,
which the words declare of; and that which sat^fieth the true thirsting Soul,
comes clearly from God, to the refreshing of the inward parts of man, and
filling of the empty, barren, hungrv Spirit, which cannot be satisfied without
God's indwellings; and thus the Disciples were led along, and at last, in a
foolish way to the great Professors, they waited among them in Jerusalem, and
the Lord had regard unto them and sent his own Spirit unto them, and then they
were filled with the Holy Ghost.

And the secret invisible Hand of God whose Power was and is felt in my heart,
having out of the sight of Flesh and Blood, in the hidden counsel of his secret
Will, led me by the virtue of the opreations and drawings thereof, through
those things, which thereby I come to leave behind, and to receive and feel
that which now goes before, and is my Leader, in whose Covenant of Life
Eternal, my Soul is now satisfied; and so by good experience of the Lords
Leadings, and from an experimental knowledge, sensible Feeling, and present
enjoyment of the incomes of the Spirit of Truth and Life, which fills the
inward parts with the Holiness of it self, and gives Power to do the things
required before of God, even from the right and good understanding thereof, is
this written; That where it meets with the like condition in a weary Travailer,
it may answer its own, and be helpful to the weak and feeble; that such may not
give over pressing forwards, nor faint in their long travel, though many
Mountains, on which they did nourish themselves at formerly will not yield them
Bread now; yet that they may with me, and the rest of the Followers and Friends
of C^ist (past and present) always continue following the Spirit as it leads,
until the inward man be filled therewith, and so Power and Strength from God
comes to be known and received in every particular.

For thus it is with Chirsts Followers now; they are not satisfied, until they
are filled with that which they have heard of, and their Souls thirsted after;
and so it was with them then, and they were filled with what they wanted
before; and then, from that, which they were filled with, they spoak forth, and
so they did teach the Nations, and brought People under the Power of God, and
baptized them into that, and dipped them into the Name of the Father, and brought
them under that which saves from Sin, and plunged them into the holy Spirit;
and as they teach'd, they did this, baptizing as they did teach, and plunging
them (as their doctrine went forth) into that which washes and purifieth the
Conscience from the filth and guilt of Sin, of which the outward Baptism was a
figure of this which saves: And so their Doctrine was from an inward Life, and
proceeded from that which was invisible; and so reached to that which wanted
life in the Hearers, and so brought up the Power of God over them, and them
under it, and into it; for the Word is [^nto] and they were to bring people
into the Name (not Water) and they were to bring or Baptize them into the Name,
as they did Teach, Go ye and teach, Baptizing into; Baptizing is in the Present
Tense, when they did Teach: and here, the spiritual and Inward Baptism goes
along with the Preaching of the Word of Life, which is inward, and brings Man
into an inward enjoyment of God, being baptized into his Name, which is a
Strong Tower, which preserves from the power of the Devil: and we all who are
brought into this, and are come in here, (...) all by one Spirit baptized into
one Body, and so worship God in the Spirit, having the heart sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, by the washing of Regeneration in the Ministration of the
Gospel of Peace, whereby there is a Drawing nigh to God (being brought into his
Name) and a free access to the Throne of that Grace, which saves from and out
of all filthiness of flesh and spirit.

Humphrey Smith.

The Discovery of man's Return to his first Estate, by the Operation of the
Power of God in the great work of Regeneration.

ALL Men and Women, behold, and see (...) what estate you were created.

And God said, Let us make Man in our Image; God created Man in his own Image,
and in the Image of God created he him, male and female created he them.

And the Lord took Man, and put him in the Garden of Eden, to dress, and to
keep it. And the Lord God commanded the Man, saying, Of every Tree in the
Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat of it: for in the day thou (...) thereof, thou shall surely
dye the death.

The Serpen^ was more subtle then any Best^ of the Field which the Lord God had
made; he said unto the Woman, Ye shall not surely dye: for God does know that
in the day you eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God,
knowing good and evil.

And when the Woman saw the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant
unto the eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise, she took the fruit
thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.

And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and
they sewed Fig Leaves together, and made them Aprons.

And they heard the Voice of the Lord God, walking in the Garden in the cool of
the day, and Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord
among the Trees of the Garden: and the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto
him Where art thou?

And he said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and was afraid; and because I
was naked I hid my self; and he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? have
thou eaten of the Tree whereof that I commanded thee that thou should not
eat? And the Man said, The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of
the Tree, and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the Woman, What is this that thou have done? The
Woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art
cursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field, and upon thy belly
shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

And I will put enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, and betwixt thy seed and her
Seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

And the Lord God said, Behold, this Man is become as one of us, to know good
and evil: and now left he put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of
Life, and eat, and live forever. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the
Garden of Eden, to till the Ground from whence he was taken, and he drove out
the man, and placed at the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming
Sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life.

Every Man and Woman, behold and see how you are fallen from the estate and
condition you are created in; you were created in the Image of God, to delight
alone in him, but you are fallen in obeying the Counsel of the Serpent, and are
driven out from the Presence of God into the Earth, and there your Minds are
feeding upon the dust of the Earth, created objects which will perish: some
delight in Father and Mother, some in Wife and Children, some in House and
Lands, some in Money and Gold, some in Meats and Drinks, some in Raiment, what
they shall put on, some in Lusts and Pleasures; in Wantonness, in vain idle
Communication, foolish Jesting and Laughter, which is madness and folly, and
some in Honor and Preferment in this world, wherein their hearts are lifted up
in Pride and Exaltation above others whom they have Power over, not considering
how you are driven out from the Presence of the Lord, wherein you were placed
in the beginning; and some there are that feed upon the letter of the
Scripture, which is death, comprehending God and Christ in their wisdom from
what the Saints of the most high God have spoaken forth from the Life they have
enjoyed in Christ Jesus, which was in them the Hope of their glory; and man in
his serpentine wisdom steals the Saints words into his understanding, and never
knew the Life and Power thereof in himself, and so speaks a divination of his
own brain, a ridle to his own heart; and while he speaks to others, himself is
cast away.

Every man and Woman in particular, deal justly with your own hearts, and see
where your hearts are, and what they delight in; For, in some of these created
objects you delight in and feed upon, if you cannot witness your change by the
Eternal and Powerful Word of Truth; for into the Earth you are driven from the
Presence of God, and these are the fruits which spring out of the Earth, which
are in your hearts, Self-love, Pride, Covetousness, Anger, Revenge, Hastiness,
Frowardness, Backbiting, Hard heartedness Cruelty and Oppression, Lust,
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Impatiency, and Unbelief, and you are fenced out,
from coming to the Tree of Life, with Cherubims and the flaming Sword, which
turns every way to keep the Tree of Life. So every one see what you can witness
of your return again unto God; from whence you are separated by the
disobedience and evil of your hearts, and see what is the ground of the hope of
your calling, and by what Power you are acted in your obedience unto God,
whether by the power of the first Adam, or by the power of the second? for if
thou, upon the convincement of the evil of thy ways, do not wait in the Light
which is in thy conscience, that convinces thee of the evil of thy doings, for
power from the Lord to guide thee forth of the evil, which the Light discovers,
which would guide thee into the kingdom of God, but thou runest out into the
wisdom of the first Adam, to seek the Kingdom of God in outwrad froms and
observations, according as thou comprehendest of the Saints practices, and thou
imitatest their practices in thy wisdom, and though thou walk never so
strictly in these outward Forms, thou art alive in the first Adam, sewing
fig leaves together to cover thy nakedness, a piece of new cloth in an old
garment, thou art putting new wine into old Bottles, and art building up a
Tower to get up to God in thy Heathonish and Babylonish Wisdom, and confusion
will come upon thee: In the day when the Lord comes to look for fruit, thou will be found a fruitless Tree that cumbers the Ground; Cain, with his offering
up Sacrifice unto God in thy first Nature; Esau, seeking the Birt-righ with
tears, who shall never find it; and all the fruit that is raised in thee, is
from Hagar the Bondwoman, and thou have thy end for thy self in all that thou
do, which is thy hire, which thou expectest in the end, life, for thy labor
and obedience, and regardest not the Glory of the Lord, and his Fear is not
before thine eyes: Therefore every man and woman, deal justly with your own
hearts, under what name or title soever thou art, whether thou be a Teacher of
others, or a Professor of what thou comprehendest to be Truth from the
Testimony the Saints gave forth, from the Life and Power of Christ that was in
them, and thou expectest Life in thy outward Forms and observations, and
mindest not to be guided by that Light, which is of Christ, in thine own
Conscience; which Light guided the Saints that gave forth the Scriptures: and
while thou disobeyest that Light, profess what thou will, thou art in the fall,
first Adam is yet alive in thee, Cain is not yet banished, nor Esan reprobated,
nor the bond woman and her Son cast out; which are all figures and types of the
first Nature, which is yet alive in thee, and thy will is thy guide, and thy
heart is in the Earth, notwithstanding all thy profession, and thou art a
painted beast, made drunk with the wine of the wrath of the Whore, which is thy
Wisdom, which comprehends that which thou never did know manifest in it
self, and sits decked a well-favouored Horlot, above the Cross of Christ; thou will be found a Thief and a Robber, who come not in by the Door, Jesus
Christ, but climbest up some other way: and thus far went the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the young man, who had kept the Commandments from his youth, but
when he should have sold all for Christ, he went away sorrowful: And thus far
went Paul when he persecuted Jesus Christ, according to the Law he walked
blameless; and all thy strict walking to get life in observations according to
the Letter is striving again to get to the Tree of Life by thy own Power, who
are fenced out with Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, which turns every way to
keep the Tree of Life; And if thou never saw thy self fenced out from the
presence of God, notwithstanding all thy righteousness in observations, thou
art not come so near God as to see the flaming Sword which is placed to meet
thee in every way thou turnest to get life in thy own Power, and to cut thee
down and kill thee, that Christ may be thy life, thou art alive in the first
Adam, and art in the death, for Death reigns over all from Adam to Moses, and
Moses is until the Prophets, and the Prophets till John, and John until Christ;
and if thou can not witness that thou art come to Moses, profess what thou will, thou have not set thy face toward God, nor one step in the strait and
narrow way to Eternal Li^e, but art going the broad way to destruction,
whatever thou be, whether a Teacher of others, or a Professor of what thou
comprehendest to be Truth from the Letter of the Scripture, under what Form,
Name, or Title soever thou be, thou art a dead Man, and a dead Woman, and the
wrath of God abides on thee, though thou see it not; Romans 7. 9. there Paul
witnesses, I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came,
Sin revived and I dyed.

Friends, every one in particular, deal justly with your hearts, see what you
can witness of your death with Christ by the powerful Word of Truth, which
enlightens the Conscience, and condemns Sin in the flesh: for every one would
ascend with Christ to be partakers of the Life and Glory with him, but he
becomes a stumbling stone, to be Baptized with him unto his Sufferings and
Death, to descend with him into Hell; and this thou must witness before ever
thou come to sit with him in heavenly places: for it is they, and they alone
that shall reign with him, who suffer with him; and they that are dead shall
live with him: It is the dead that hear the voice of the Son of God, and they
that hear shall live. Arise thou that sleep in the dust of the Earth
securely in thy serpentine wisdom, thy Mind feeding upon the dust of the
Earth, created objects, which will perish; Arise, stand up to Judgment, that
Christ may give thee Life. This is required of thee, O man, To do Justly, love
Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God. Examine thy heart, and deal justly with
thy own Soul: There is a Light in thy Conscience, which Light is of Christ;
minding it, it will let thee see the Mystery of Iniquity, that lodges in thy
heart, which is deceitful and desperately wicked; and this Light in thy
Conscience, which discovers unto thee the evil of thine heart, is of the
Eternal Word of God, and was from the beginning, according as it is written in
the outward Testimony of the Truth.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word is God,
and the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; in him was Life, and the Lifo
was the Light of men. And the Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehends it not. Every one arise out of your earthly wisdom, and mind the
Light in thy Conscience, and wait on the Power of the Lord in it, and it will
bring thee to Judgment before the Throne of the Lamb, where the righ^teous Law
will be opened in thy heart, that will cry through thy earthly heart for
Righteousness and Judgment, and the Book will be opened in thee, where thou
shall see all written that thou have done in the body, and shall give an
account for every idle word, and receive thy reward for what thou have done,
and thy reward is wrath and Condemnation, which will pass upon thee from the
presence of the Lamb, for thy disob dience and breaking of the righteous Law,
that goes out of the mouth of the Lamb, 'twill turn every way, and meet thee,
and cut thee down, and cast thee into Hell, where there is weeping and wailing
for want of the presence of God, and thou can do nothing to pacific the Wrath
of God which is gone out against thee. Now would^t thou hide thy self, as Adam
did, when he appears in thy heart, thy fig-leav'd garment of prayers, tears,
form., outward observations according to thy comprehension of the Letter, will
not cover thy nakedness, it served to cover thy nakedness from the sight of
men, but now when the Lord appears in thy heart, thou can not stand before
him: Now comes Cain in thee to be driven from the Face of God, to be a fugitive
and a Vagabond in the Earth, not withstanding all his Sacrifices; and Esau in
thee reprobated, never to have the blessing, though he seek it with tears; and
the Bond woman and her^son cast out, and the first Adam now slain with the
sharp Sword that goes out of the mouth of the Lamb, and art made to give up
thy soul to God, whose it is, to do with thee what he will; if he destroy thee
forever, he may; and if he save thee from Eternal Death, it is his free Love.
Now art thou Baptized with Christ into his Sufferings and Death, where thou
lie sealed down under the Eternal Judgment of God, and there perishest
forever, for any Power or help thou have in thy self; and this is the
Administration of Moses, where thou lie condemned forever under the righteous
Law without any help or hope, until the Administration of the Prophets, that
prophecy of a Christ that has satisfied the righteous Law of God for thee,
who art lost and condemned under the Power of the Law of Moses: And now there
is a secret hope raised up in thy Soul, and thou look up from under the
condemning Power of Moses for a Savior: And the prophets are until John, and
of all that were horn of Women there was not one greater then John, for he is a
burning and shining Light, that lets thee fee the filthiness of thy heart; and
the Law shines in its purity to condemn the Earthly man in thee, bu the
strengthens the hope in thee that was raised up by the Prophets, to see the
beauty and excellency of Jesus Christ, which ravished thy lost condemned Soul,
that thou art willing to sell all for him, the Scripture now being fulfilled in
thee who witnesses this from the days of John even until now; The Kingdom of
God suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: now is every Mountain
and Hill laid low in thee, and crooked ways made straight, and the rough way
in thee made smooth, and thou waitest in the Wilderness and lost condition of
thy self for the Salvation of God, to be manifest to thee in Jesus Christ; and
in the appointed time of the Father, the Son of Man comes to thy soul as a
thief in the night, as the lightening from the East to the West, so is his
appearance in thee, and causes thy ^ead soul to hear his voice, which
witnesses to it eternal life freely through his own Blood; and thy soul hears
his voice, and by the Word of his Power is made to live, and is sealed up by
the Holy Spirit of promise, the Spirit of God bearing witness with thy spirit
that thou art his child: Now come thou to witness the second Adam to be a
quickening Spirit, and Isaac the promised Seed to be Heir forever; And that the
wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life: And that by Grace
thou are saved, through Faith in the Lord Jesus; not of works, left any should
boast: and he that has Hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure, and the
Love of Christ constrains thee now, who can^t witness this work of Regeneration
manifest in thee, to follow him whither soever he goes; no more to obey him for
life, as thou did, when thou wast without, seeking him in Forms and
Observations, but now the love and life thou enjoyst in Christ Jesus constrains
thee to deny thy self, and take up the Corss daily and follow him.

Now art thou come into the beginning to live in the Lord, guided by the
powerful word of Faith, the Light that shines in thy heart, which is the Light
of the City, New Jerusalem, to whom thou art come to worship the Father in
Spirit and Truth; and all that are come to walk in the Light of the City New
Jerusalem, are the true Israel of God, that are taught of God, to whom the New
and Everlasting Covenant is made, according to the Promise of the Lord; This is
the Covenant I will make with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah;
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and
write it in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me
a People. And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, nor every man
his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least
of them to the greatest of them; I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness,
and their Sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more. And in this City
there is no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, which are
borrowed lights, outward dispensations, and teachings of men; for the glory of
the Lord God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. And the
Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Light of it; and the Kings of
the Earth bring their glory and honor unto it; and there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, neither what soever works abomination
or makes a lie; but they ever which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life:
And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no
night there, for the Lord God gives them Light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever.

Hallelujah to the Highest.
To all revolted Souls, who have departed from the Counsel of the Lord, and are
made drunk with the Wine of the wrath of the Fornication of the Whore,
bewitched with the Mother of Witchcraft, to return unto spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, where our Lord is Crucified.

Whoever thou art, in whom the righteous Law of God, Jesus Christ, the Light,
in thee has cried through thy Earthly heart for Righteousness and Judgment,
and there thou did stand arraigned before the Throne of the Lamb, where the
Book was opened in thee, and written therein all the deeds thou have done in
the body, and the Sentence of Wrath and Judgment passed out of the mouth of the
Lamb on thee for every idle word, and all that thou have done; and in this thy
condemned estate, thou rannest to and fro to hide thee from the Wrath of the
Lamb, in reforming thy ways, and strictly observin^ that thou wast convinced
of to be the will of God; but what way soever thou turnedst in thine obedience
toward God, to get Life, thither the flaming Sword turned that proceeded out
of the mouth of the Lamb, and cut thee down, and cast thee into Hell, where
thou layst weeping and wailing under the Wrath of God, sealed down under his
eternal Judgment for evermore, for any help or power thou had in thy self,
until Jesus Christ manifested eternal Love and Mercy freely to thy poor lost
condemned Soul, and raised thee up to a lively hope, and sealed thee up in the
Covenant of Life with his own blood. Now after the Witnesses have sealed up
their Testimony, the Beast, which is thy will, that ascends out of the
bottomless pit of thy deceived heart, which is deceitful and desperately
wicked, has made war against the Witnesses, Christ in thee, and ^ain them, and
they lie dead in the spiritual City of Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is
crucified; and thou art made drunk with the wine of the wrath of the
Fornication of the Whore, and bewitched with her witchcrafts, who now tells
thee, whom he loves he loves to the end, and to the pure all things are pure;
thou art no more under the Law but under Grace, and all things are alike; that
when thou disobeyest the pure Law, which once had power over thee, and yet
witnesses against thee secretly, crying in thy heart, Use thy Liberty, but not
as an occasion to the Flesh, that regardest not the Counsel of the Lord, but
hearkenest to the Mother of Harlots in thee, and causes thee to wrest the
Scriptures to thy own Destruction, and tells thee, the Law has no power over
thee, that thou art under Grace, it is but the Law in thy Members that wars
against the Law in thy mind, the acting of the Humanity, which acts in its
place, that the Grace of God may appear more gloriously; God sees no sin in
thee, for it is no more thou, but Sin that dwells in thee, and the former
misery thou wast in under the Wrath of God, for the disobeying of the Righteous
Law thou now treadst under thy feet, and lies slain in spiritual Sodom and
Egypt in thy heart, yet not put in the grave, but lies in thy sight, and lets
thee see the evil of thy doings, and vexes and torments thy earthly and carnal
heart in the midst of all thy joy: but the Whore in thee, tells thee, that the
former trouble thou wast in, was through the ignorance of God, but now thou are
grown up to a higher stature in Christ, to see nothing but Love in whatsoever
thou do, and now thou know nothing but to eat, and to drink, and to be
merry, for the Children of the Bride-chamber cannot mourn while the Bridgroom
is with them; time was thou did mourn, but it was when the Bridegroom was not
with thee; but now the Winner is past, and Summer come, and singing of Birds is
heard in thy Land; and now wash thy face, and anoint thy head with Oil, that
thou appear no more before men, as thou (...) when thou wast a Pharisee: Now to
be a Friend to Publicans and Sinners, and become all to all, that thou may
win some, and whatever thou do, it is God that acts thee, for thou art not
stronger then he to resist him; and if he would have it otherways, how could^
thou hinder it? so it is as it must be, and it cannot be other ways. Thus the
subtle Serpent wind^ into the mind of man, and causes him to wrest the
Scriptures to his own destruction, to draw back into Perdition.

Woe, woe unto thee, thou backslider in heart who chargest God, who i^ Purity it
self, to be the Author of Sin, and the Actor of thee in all thy silthy and
unrighteous walking, and have turned the Grace of God into Wantonness, and
take liberty to sin, because Grace abounds, and make the coming of Christ
(who came to fulfill the Law) to destroy it, through the evil of thy heart,
that when the righteous Law cries in thee for Purity, and condemns thee for thy
unrighteous walking, then thou fleest to the free Grace in Christ to save thee
from the power of the Law, but thou shall find the Law has Power over the
fleshly man as long as he lives, and the fleshly man that now guides thee, is
under the Law, until it be destroyed through Faith in Jesu Christ; For he came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and the Saints witness it, though
thou wrest the words of Paul (when he declared his condition before he came to
the fullness of stature in Christ) to thy own destruction: I see a Law in my
members warring against the Law of my mind, bringing me into captivity to the
Law of Sin, which is in my members; but he gave not up himself to be a Servant
of ^in, as thou do, it was his Burden that made him to cry, O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? And he waited in the
Faith until he was freed, Romans 8. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. He witnessed Christ come in him to fulfill the
Law, and so do all the Saints now, according to their growth; Some witness the
Law fulfilled in them, and others are waiting in the Faith patiently, following
the Lord daily through the Cross, until the Law be fulfilled. But thou art
departed from the Counsel of the Lord thy God, and causest his Name to be evil
spoken of, and have made the Hearts of his people sad, as they did that the
Apostle speaks of; For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ; whose End is
Destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their Shame, who mind
Earthly things. These Scriptures are fulfilled in thee, which the Apostle
mentions, And while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants
of Corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into
Bondage: For if after they have escaped the Polution of the World, through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the later End of them is worse with them than the
Beginning: For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment
delivered unto them: But it happened unto them according to the true Proverb,
the Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the Mire. And thou may read what will be manifest to thee from
the Lord.

For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment,
and f^erce Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.

He that despised Moses Law dyed without Mercy, how much sorer Punishment
supposest thou, shall thou be thought worthy of? who have trodden under foot the
Son of God, and have counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith thou wast
Sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done despite to the Spirit of Grace, and
we know him that has said, vengeance belonget^ unto me, I will recompense,
says the Lord: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, Repent, and do thy first work, in
minding that Light of Jesus Christ in thee, before whom thou once stoodst
condemned, for that thou now live in: Prize the time, and give up to be
guided by the Counsel of the Lord in thee, the Light of thy Conscience, that
discovers every vain thought; wait on the Power that is present with the Light,
and it will dash Babylons childern against the Stones, which is Sin in its
conception, so will thy carnal mind be brought to the Cross daily, and thy
heart will be purged with the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of Burning:
Kiss the Son in obeying his Counsel, the Light in thee, lest thou perish in the
way; for if his Anger be kindled a little, blessed are they that trust in him.

The Discovery of Mystery Babylon,
To all enslaved Captives in Babylons's Kingdom, who are made drunk with the
Wine of ^he W^ath of her Fornications, and bewitched through the multitude of
her Enchantments.

FRiends, Babylon is within you, the Mother of Harlots is within you, and she
bewitcheth you through the abundance of her Sorceries: and the Beast is within
you, that arises out of the bottomless Pit of the deceived heart, which is
deceitful and desperately wicked; and the Beast which all the World wonders
after, is your wills that make war against the Lamb of God in you, which is the
Light that makes manifest the evil of your hearts, and your wisdom is the great
Whore that sits upon the Beast, that arises out of the bottomless Pit of the
deceitful heart, and she finds out many deceitful inventions to preserve the
beastly will alive, having a golden Cup in her hand, full of the abominations
of the Earth, and this Golden Cup is your outward professions, glorious
comprehensions and conceivements of God and Christ, imitating what the Saints
did in power, according as they were moved by the operation of the Spirit of
the Most High God, and you imitate the Saints practice by your wisdom.

There is nothing but confusion in the Kingdom of Babylon; So come you to be
divided into so many particular Forms, as Presbyterians, Imdependants,
Anabaptists, and diverse others, that are in outward worships, painted over with
glorious words; and yet you whose wills guide you, are painted Beasts,
bewitched with the Mother of Harlots, notwithstanding all your outward
professions and glorious observations, they are but the golden Cup, and within
you are full of the Abominations of the Earth, as Self-Love, Covetousness,
^usts, Uncleanness, Frowardness, Backbiting, Slandering, Hard-heartedness,
Cruelty and Oppression, Grinding the Faces of the Poor, Impatiency and
Unbelief, and the fear of the Lord is not before your eyes; and thus you lie
enslaved Captives in the Kingdom of Babylon, refreshing your hearts in the
Creature enjoyments, which will perish; some in Father and Mother, some in Wife
and Children, some in House and Land, some in Gold and Silver; some in the Self
Wisdom, delighting in themselves; some in Honor and Preferment in this World:
and when there is enjoyment of these visible creatures, then there is content;
and when they are taken away there is trouble, the mind always Plotting,
Contriving, and Acting every way to get of the creatures what the heart lusts
after, and he that gets the most is highest exalted; so every one is exalted
above another, and there is nothing but Tyranny, Cruelty and Oppression among
you, you sous and daughters of Babylon; and in her was found the Blood of the
Prophets, and of the Saiuts, and all that were slain upon the Earth.

The Merchants of Babylon are your Teachers, who draw you from your Guide,
which is the pure Light of Christ in you, to seek the Kingdom of God in
observations without you, contrary to the mind of Christ: The Kingdom of God
comes not with Observations, neither shall they say Lo here, or Lo there; for
behold, the Kingdom of God is within you.

But these your Merchants have no Scripture for their Merchandise which they
sell to you enslaved Captives for so many hundreds in the year, and is paid in
the Nation, or elsewhere; for these observations, they tell you, you must
observe, or else you cannot come to the Kingdom of Heaven, though they are
contrary to the Scriptures, as are practiced by them, there is no Scripture
that witnesses their call to the Ministry by humane wisdom; Not many great,
not many noble, not many wise after the flesh.

There is no Scripture which testifies of any that Jesus Christ sent forth that
made a bargain with the people for so much a year, as th^se do, that profess
themselves to be sent of Christ.

This is the call of the Ministers of Christ, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
neither of man, nor by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. I send you
forth (says Jesus Christ) as Lambs among Wolves: Into what Town or City ye
enter, enquire who is worthy; and if they receive you, there abide eating such
things as are set before you; the Labourer is worthy of his meat: freely ye
have received, freely minister.

Those whom Jesus Christ commits the Word of Eternal Life unto, and calls them
forth to declare it unto others, the Love of Jesus Christ, which is sealed up
to their Souls through his own Blood, constrains them to give up themselves to
death, in witnessing forth the eternal Life they enjoy in Christ; as it was, it
is, The Love of Christ constrainet^ (...) t^ preach the Gospel, says Paul: But
these your Merchants are they which have forsaken the right way, and are gone
astray following the way of Balaa^ the Son of B^sor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness.

And as there is no Scripture for their Call to the Ministry by their human
learning, nor making bargains with the people for so much in the year; So there
is no Scripture for these observations they call Ordinances of God, as they are
Practiced by them

There is no Scripture, that Christ, or any that he sent forth, did take a
Child and sprinkle water on its Face, and said in so doing, They Baptized it
into the Church of Christ.

Suffer little Children to come unto me, says Christ, and forbid them not, for
such is the Kingdom of God; whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a
little Child, shall not enter therein; He sets the Child as a Type and a Figure
to show forth to every one, that they must become as a little Child depending
upon the will of God, before they enter into the Kingdom of God: He took them
up into his Arms and put his Hands on them, and blessed them, but that he
sprinkled water on their Faces, and said, He Baptized them into his Church,
there is no such Scripture.

Another observation your Teachers tell you, you must observe, is, hearing
these studied Sermons, in taking a part of Scripture, and adding to it their
wisdom, call it The Word of God, which is contrary to the Scriptures; but they
say, They have Christ for an Example.

There was delivered to him the Book of the Prophet I saiah, and when he had
opened the Book, ^oe found where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to Preach the Gosp^l unto the Poor, he has
sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to Preach Deliverance to the Captives: And
recovering of the Sight of the blind, and to set at liberty them that are
bruised, to Preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he closed the Book, and
sat down; And he began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled
in your ears: And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth; He was the substance of the prophecy, which was
then fulfilled in him.

This is no ground for any to take the Saints words, and to add to them their
wisdom, and call that the Word of God.

The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream: he that has my Word, let
him speak my Word faithfully. What is the Chaff to the Wheat says, the Lord?
is not my Word like a fire, and like a hammer, says the Lord, that breaks the
Rocks in pieces? all to whom the Word of the Lord is committed, can witness it
to be as a fire within them, and as an hammer that breaks the Rocks in pieces,
subjecting all in the heart under the Power of it self, so it alone rules and
guides him; that he is what he speaks; that if he had never seen any thing that
the Saints have declared without him, he had known what is manifest in him; and
he to whom the Word is thus made manifest, is a true Minister of Christ, who is
called to speak the Word faithfully.

But these, that call themselves, your Teachers and make bargains with you, for
so much by the year, they never witnessed the word of the Lord, in them, as a
fire, and like a hammer that breaks the Rocks in pieces; so they never had
any thing to have spoken of the Lord; but as they have stolen it from the
Testimony of the Saints, so they speak a divination of their own Brain a Riddle
to their own Hearts, and whilst they speak to others, themselves are Cast-aways.

And the Lord testifies against them, Behold, I am against the Prophets, says
the Lord, that steal my Word every one from his Neighbor.

Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their tongue, and
say, He says.

Behold, I am against them that Prophecy false Droams, says the Lord, and do
tell them, and cause my People to err by their Lies, and by their Lightness,
yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit the
People as all, says the Lord: And this fruit is made manifest of the Ministry
that has been in England.

Another Observation your Teachers bid you observe which is contrary to
Scripture, as it is practiced by them in singing of David's Psalms in meeter,
taking David's words, who was a man after God's own heart, and putting words
into the mouths of poor ignorant People to sing that which they never knew,
and so cause them to blaspheme the name of God, saying; Let us sing to the
Praise and Glory of God, as,

O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye,
I do not exercise my self in things that are too high:
When they never knew any change wrought in their minds, and so causes the
People to lie. And causing them to sing David's Prayers, as O Lord rebuke me
not in thy Wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure, for thine Arrows
stick fast in me, and thine hand presses me sore: for mine Iniquities are gone
over mine head, as an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me to bear; my
wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness; I am troubled, I am
bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long: And may be none of you in
all that place can witness the condition, and so blaspheme the Name of God, who
will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: and this is the Rule given out from
him, if any be afflicted, let him Pray, if any be merry, let him sing Psalms:
And there is none merry but the Ransomed of the Lord, who return to Sion with
joy and singing, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and Sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

All People may search the Scriptures, and see how you have been deceived by
your Teachers, who have caused you to seek your lost God in carnal and dead
observations which they have not any Scripture for; all cease from them; for
the Lord complains of them, The Loaders of my People causo them to err, says
the Lord of Hosts; and now are these Scriptures fulfilled in these men, which
the Apostle prophesied of.

This know also, that in the last days perilous ti^es shall come; for men shall
be lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy. All People see, are not your
Teachers so, Selflovers? before they come at you, they must know what they must
have, covetous, griping for much; and if you will not give them so much as they
can have in another Place, they will not come at you: here is Self-love and
Covetousness manifested; -- without natural affection, Truce Breakers, false
accusers, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a Form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such the
Apostle exhorts to turn away. All People, behold and see, all these Scriptures
are fulfilled in your Teachers: they spoke against Pride, and live in it;
against Covetousness, and live in it: They teach by words to be naturally
affectionate one toward another, and they walk contrary, causing poor People
to pay to maintain them in Pride and high ranks in the Earth, who can scarce
get Bread for their bellies, and clothes for their backs; yet they force them
to pay them, being void of all natural affections: and they are Truce Breakers,
breaking all Bonds and Covenants, if they can get more money in another place.
Thus, they show forth to all the world, that they are lovers of Pleasures more
then lovers of God, and have a form of Godliness in words, but deny the Power
thereof; from such turn away: for of this sort are they which creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with Sin and diverse lusts. These
Scriptures are fulfilled in your Teachers, every one has his particular house
to creep into, where none must come but themselves, or whom they please, which
is contrary to the practice of Christ, or any that he sent forth^they went
through the countries, Towns, Cities and Villages, according as they were
guided by the Spirit of God, to declare what he gave them to spoke; and your
Teachers lead silly woman captive, laden with Sin, and led away with diverse
Lusts, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Do
not they tell you to look for Christ's coming in such observations as they set
up? which are nothing but the inventions of their brains; for Christ tells you,
The Kingdom of God comes not with observations, But is within you. But many of
them deny, that the Light in your Consciences, which makes manifest the evil of
your hearts, to be the Kingdom of God, calling it the Light of a corrupt
conscience, so shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and will neither enter
in themselves to be guided by the pure Light of the Kingdom of Christ within
them, nor suffer them that are entering in, to enter, as the Scribes and
Pharisees did: Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these men
resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds, Reprobates concerning the Faith: but
they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all
men, as theirs also was: and no man shall buy their Merchandise any more. All
you enslaved captives in the Kingdom of Babylon, why will you lay out your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not? hearken diligently unto Jesus Christ, the Light, that lets you see the
evil of your hearts, to be guided by it, and you shall eat that which is good.
Incline your ears, says Christ, and come unto me; hear and your souls shall
live, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies
of David: Mind the Call of a powerful and tender Father in the Lord Jesus, who
calls, Come forth of Babylon my People, and touch no unclean Thing, and I will
rceieve you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Friends, prize your time, slight not
the Day of the Lord's Mercy, for he waits to be gracious, and says, I stretch
forth my Arm all the Day long to a backsliding and gainsaying People. Every
one mind your Conditions, deal justly with your own Hearts, fee what your
Hearts have Fellowship with, and guide your Minds; for the Kingdom of Christ is
within you, it is not in Observations, as your Teachers tell you, for they
deceive you; therefore Christ forewarned us for looking forth at those which
would come in the latter days, that would say, Lo here is Christ, lo there is
Christ, as it is in these our days, some say, Lo here is Christ, in the
Presbyterian practice; the Independants say, He is there, and the Anabaptists
say, Lo he is here. But Friends, mind what Christ says unto you, Believe them
not, look not forth, the Kingdom of Christ is not in any of those, nor in any
other outward observations, but (be warned) the Kingdom of Christ is in you,
and that is the Light that lets you see the evil of your hearts: and Christ
compares it to a grain of Mustard Seed, the least of all Seeds, and it grows up
above all other Herbs, and becomes a Tree that the Fowls of the Air lodge
therein; and he compares it to a little Leaven, that a Woman took and hid in
three measures of Meal, and it leavened the whole lump. These are Earthly
parables and figures, which Christ lays down, speaking to the earthly and
carnal heart of man, that he might read his condition within. Therefore despise
not the day of small things, but mind the Counsel of the Lord Jesus, the little
Light, that shines in thy dark heart; look upon the figures, the parables. The
little Leaven which is hid in three measures of meal, it changes the whele
lump into the nature of it self: So the little Light that shines in thy dark
Heart, is the powerful Word of Faith, which was in the Beginning, by which all
Things were created, and without him was nothing made; this Word is Life, and
the Life is the Light of Men, and Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehends it not; This Light is the Word of Faith the Apostle exhorted to
take heed unto; Say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend up to Heaven to fetch
Christ down? or down into the Deep to fetch him up? the Word is nigh thee in
thy Heart and in thy Mouth, and this is the word of Faith which we preach, the
unctio^ of the Holy One, given of the Father, whereby we need not teach one
another, but as the Anointing teaches us, which is Truth, and no Lie, which is
the sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a Light
shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your
Hearts.

All People return within, give up your selves freely to be guided by that
Light, that discovers to you the Evil of your Hearts; and none be discour^ged,
because you see an evil Heart, but prize the Love of God that discovers it to
you; and whatever the Light makes manifest to you to be Evil, Wait on the Lord
for Power, and he will give thee Power to obey, and in being faithful in a
little, more will be communicated from the Lord; so will the Righteous Law be
set up in your Hearts, that will cry through your Earthly and Carnal Hearts for
Righteousness and Judgment, and so will bring y^u to an Account for every idle
Word, and all Deeds done in the Body: Look up unto the Lord, against whom you
have sinned, and he will arm you with Power, to what he lays upon you, with
Patience to undergo his Will, until all the Powers of the Earth in you be
fa^ished and slain under his Righteous Judgments; then will Judgment be brought
forth into Victory, that you can no longer live without the Loving Kindness of
your Father in Christ Jesus.

Now is the Parable fulfilled, the little Grain of Mustard Seed grown up above
all Herbs; and the little Leaven has leavened the whole Lump; and the Prodigal
starved forever, if his Father receive him not freely into his House.

Thou that can witness this Condition stand still in the Will of God, he will
raise up his Seed in thee to trust in his Name, and to delight in the Eternal
Covenant of Love and Life, he has made with thy Soul in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and will guide thee by the Word of his power, in a Way thou know not, forth
of Babylon (where thou wast an enslaved Captive, under the Power of the filthy
Beast, which is thy Will, and the Whore, the Mother of Witchcrafts, which is
thy Wisdom, which enthralled thee under the Powers of Darkness, to satisfy the
Lust of thy own Heart, which led thee to Destruction) up to Sion, to live by
Faith in the Lord Jesus, which will purify thy Heart, and set thy Soul free
from under the Powers of Darkness, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God, where thou shall sing the Songs of Sion, Hallelujahs and Praises for
evermore, unto the Lord God that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb forever
and ever.

W. D.

To all enslaved, hard-hearted, and unbelieving Jews in this Nation and
elsewhere, who are made drunk with the Wisdom of the Whore, and bewitched
through the Abundance of her Sorceries, to put the Day of the Lord afar off,
looking for Christ's coming in the Spirit, as the hard-hearted, unbelieving
Jews in the letter, did for his coming in the Flesh, according to the Promise,
but they limited the Holy One, according to their carnal Wisdom, expected his
coming in great Pomp and Glory; and when he came in that poor despised Way,
contrary to their Expectations, they stumbled at him, and would not own him to
be their Savior, but rose up against him, and put him to Death, Mat. 27. I: to
Verse. 50.

BEhold you hard hearted and unbelieving Jews, do you not look for Christ
coming in the Spirit, according to his Promise, as they did for his coming in
the Flesh? but you limit the Holy One, as they did, expecting Christ to come in
Power and Glory, according to your own Fancies; and so put the Day of the Lord
afar off you, in rejecting and despi^ng the counsel of Jesus Chirst, the pure
Light in your Conscienees, which lets you see every evil Thought, Word and
Action, and cries behind you, This is the Way, walk in it; but you disobey the
Light, and hearken to the Counsel of your Hearts, as the Jews in the Letter
did, who put Christ to Death; and so you slay the witnesses in Spiritual Sodom
and Egypt in your Hearts, where our Lord is crucified, in not regarding the
Counsel of Christ, which is that Light that shines in your dark Hearts, which
knocks at the Door, according to his Word, I stand at the Door and knock, if
any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me.

Oh! thou enslaved Soul under the Power of Babylon in thee, come forth, mind
the Light in thee, which is the sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well to
take heed, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your Hearts; stand not out against this secret Counsel of
Christ in you, le^ you perish in your Gain sayings; for if his Anger be kindled
a little, blessed are all they that trust in him: All give up, give up freely
to be guided by the Counsel of the Lord, the Light in you, believing in his
Power that is present with the light; he will lead you daily through the Cross,
in the st^aight Way of his Sufferings and Death, where the Old Man will be put
off with hi^ Deeds, and so you shall have right to the Tree of Life, and shall
enter with him through the Gates into the City, New Jer^salem, where you shall
have Communion with the Father and the Son, and an Inheritance with those that
are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and shall reign as Kings upon the Earth, to the
Praise and Glory of the Riches of the Grace of our Heavenly Father, to whom
alone be all Power, Dominion, Honor and Glory, forever and ever.

W. D.

A Word from the Lord to all that are waiting on the Lord in Sion, and to those
that are weeping, and are seeking the Lord their God, asking the Way to Sion,
with their Faces thitherwards.

FEar not ye Mourners in Sion, the Lord waits on you to be gracious unto you;
and though he give you the Bread of Adversity now, and the Water of Affliction,
yet shall not your Teachers be removed into Corners any more, but your Eyes
shall see your Teachers, and your Ears shall hear a Voice behind you, saying,
This is the way, walk in it, when you turn to the right Hand, or the left;
therefore every one of you, mind the Light, which is of Jesus Christ, in you,
that judges the Unrighteousness of your Hearts; give up to be guided by the
pure Light in you, which is your Teacher, the Counsel of Jesus Christ, and it
will bring Judgment forth unto Victory; and whatever he makes manifest to you
to be his Will. Wait on the Lord in his Counsel, and he will give you Power to
obey, and when you have obeyed his Will, take heed of departing from the
Counsel of the Lord, which is, the Light within you, to hearken to the Counsel
of your own Hearts, which will draw your Minds to look back at your Obedience,
and the Experiences you have passed through; so will the Beast which received a
deadly Wound with the Sword, the Righteous Law, that goes out of the Mouth of
the Lamb in you, his deadly Wound will be healed (and sits a painted Beast
above the Cross of Christ, working lying Wonders in your Hearts, and imitating
the Operation of the Power of God, who is purifying his Sons and Daughters with
the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of Burning) and the Beast in you, that
tasted of the Power of God, when he received his deadly Wound under the Justice
of God, now can imitate the same in Deceit, and cause Fire to come down from
He^en in the Sight of Men, intimating the Operation of the Spirit of Burning,
and so deceives himself and all that dwell upon the Earth, he is made manifest
to all that dwell in the Heavenly Light in their Hearts: All Friends, mind you^
Watch; for the Adversary, the Devil, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour; abide in the Counsel of the Lord, which is the Light in
you, and you will discern between the Beast, which is Antichrist in his lying
Wonders, and the Lamb Jesus Christ, in the Operation of his Power; so you will
come to try the Spirits, whether they be of God, yea or nay; all that are
guided by the Beast have their Life in speaking and acting in outward
Operations what they once experienced, and what they comprehended to be Truth,
speaking that they enjoy not, and are exalted in Pride, the Heart returned into
the Earth: But thou that art guided by the Lamb, the Light in thy Conscience,
the righteous Law cries through thy earthly Heart, and bring^ it to Judgment,
and thou can find no Life in the Operation of the Power of God, nor in thy
Obedience, but whilst the Presence of the Lord is with thee in it; and when
thou ha^ done the Will of God, in obeying what he has made known unto thee,
thou see^t thy self to be an Unprofitable Servant, and have need of Patience,
that thou may est receive the Promise, where thy Life is hid with Christ in
God, to save thee freely for his Names sake, or else thou perishest, and to
carry thee on by his Mighty Power, or else thou fallest; so thou haft nothing
to glory in, but in the Lord.

And as they that are guided by the Beast (which is Antichrist) spoke, of the
Truth, a riddle to their own hearts, not knowing the Power and Life of what
they speak, adding to the Word of the Lord, and the Plagues and Curse of God
will be added unto them: But thou art guided by the Lamb Jesus Christ; thou
know when the Word of the Lord is committed to thee; If any have my Word,
says the Lord, let him speak my Word faithfully: Is not my Word like a Fire,
says the Lord, and like an Hammer, that breaks the Rocks in Pieces? Thou
can witness the Word of the Lord, to be as a Fire, and as a Hammer, to break
the Rocks in Pieces in thee, and bring down all in thee in Subjection to
itself, and it alone rules in thee: And thou that can witness the Word of the
Lord thus manifested in thee, thou art a true Messenger of the Lord, let not
the Deceit stop thy Mouth; for the Word of the Lord that calls thee to speak,
shall perfect his Work for which he is sent.

All Friends, stand fast in the Counsel and Will of God, be faithful in
following the Lamb daily through the Cross, and none be discouraged: In
Temptations be content; look up to the Lord to keep you in the Hour of
Temptations; for it is no Sin to be tempted, but to yield to the Tempter: and
when the Lord delivers you from the Power of the Tempter, watch that your Will
get not from under the Cross, but sink down into the Love of God: And every one
be content in what the Lord has made manifest to you, and be faithful
according to your Talents, and more will be communicated to you: And none look
forth at others Conditions; for if you do, the Enemy will cause you to stumble,
and you will come to a Loss in your own Condition: Wait patiently in the
Counsel of the Lord, the Light in you; for he is making a short Work in the
Earth, that you that come into the Vineyard at the eleaventh Hour, shall
receive as much as they that came in at the third Hour, and have labored in
the Heat of the Day.

All ye Children of the Lord, lift up your Heads, behold your King riding in
Majesty and Power, upon the wild Ass Colt, which is your wild Nature,
subjecting it to himself, that you may enter with him through the Gates of the
city into the New Jerusalem, where there enters nothing that works
Abomination, and makes a Lie, but what is written in the Lamb's Book of Life;
and there you shall dwell in the Banqueting House of the Lord forever, feeding
upon the Feast of fat Things, rejoicing in the Eternal Love and Mercy of your
Souls, in the free Covenant of Life, in the Blood of Christ, who is the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, God blessed forever; who is riding on in Majesty and
in Power, conquering and to conquer all the Powers of Darkness in the Hearts of
his Saints, that they may reign as Kings upon the Earth, to the Praise and
Glory of our God, who is taking unto him his Great Power, to reign in his
Saints for evermore; to whom alor^ be all Honor, Glory, Power, and Eternal
Praises forever.

W. D.

A Word of Consolation unto the Child of Light, that yet sits in Darkness,
being deeply afflicted and wounded in Spirit, through Ignorance of Salvation in
the New Covenant, in Christ Jesus, the Light.

DEar Child, of the Birth of the Immortal Seed, which cries over all the
World, and beyond all the Pleasure, Pomp and Vanity therein, for the Enjoyment
of the light Countenance of God; fear thou not, neither be thou discouraged
because of the violent Assaults of the Enemy, who seeks to draw thee into the
carnal Reasonings of thy Spirit, and in it to kindle a Fire to thy self, and
cause thee to walk in the Light of the Sparks that thou have kindled; and this
have thou at the Hand of the Lord, in thy going from his Counsel, lie down in
Sorrow; few know thy great Distress, but to the Lord it is known, and to them
that had, and walked in the same Paths.

O thou beloved Babe, who lie in the deep Sense of the working of the Evil
One in thy Mind, and many times art ready to say, Never was any like unto me,
neither any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow! and in this languishing despairing
Mournings of thy soul, all things made bitter unto thee as the Waters of Marah;
thus art thou driven from all Comfort, as a Child without a Father, and a
desolate Widow without a Husband, and as a Stranger that no Eye pitieth, in
thy Apprehension; sometimes saying in thy Heart, in the Heat of the Temptation,
and the Fire that thou have kindled; Oh that I had been any Creature but what I
am, or if it were the Will of the Lord, that he would shorten my days, that I
might not be any longer on Earth to sin against him! For in thy own Sense and
Feeling thou walking in the Sparks thou have kindled in carnal Reasonings thou
deservest not any Thing but Wrath, Horror, Misery and Distress on every side,
and great Languishings that thy days were shortened, secretly crying out in
thine Heart, O'that I were alone in the Wilderness, or in any Cave or Den in
the Earth, that I might never ses nor hear any of the Sons of men any more; but
in the secret Retiredness even roar and mourn out my days until (...) dye.

O thou Royal Child of the Birth of the Morning of the pure eternal Day of the
God of Israel, hearken no longer to the Enemy, who says, There has none
traveled where thou art, nor none drunk of the Cup that thou art drinking; he
is a Liar, who goes about to destroy thy precious Soul: In the Word of the Lord
God I declare unto thee, I drank the same Cup with my faithful Friends, who are
born of the Royal Seed; every one in their Measures traveled in the same Path,
and have endured the same Temptations, and walked in the Light of the same
Sparks, and laid down in Sorrow, in the Sense of the same Misery, as thou
mournest under this Day; no longer lend an Ear to the Enemy and the Thoughts of
thy Heart: Arise, arise, in the Light of the Covenant, stay thy Heart, and the
Lord will throw down the enemy of thy Peace, destroy the carnal Reasonings of
thy Mind, put out the Fire that thou have kindled, and he will deliver thee out
of the horrible Pit, and set thy Feet upon the Rock of Ages; and thou shall
tread down the Enemies of thy Soul, in the sensible Feeling of the Love of the
Father, who will manifest himself to be a Father to the Fatherless in thee, and
an Husband to the Mournful Widow, and a Comforter to the Immortal Babe that
mourns in thee, in the Uprightness of thy Heart to do the Will of the Living
God: So, in the Power of his Might stay thine Heart, and tread upon all Doubts,
Fears, dispairing Thoughts, Questionings, Reasonings, Musings, Imaginations and
Consultings; arise over them all in the Light of Christ, he will lead thee into
the Banqueting house of the Pleasure of our God, where thou shall sit down with
me, and all the redeemed of my Father, who are born of the Immortal Seed, and
have passed through great Tribulations, and have washed our Garments and made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb; Therefore do we now stand before the
Throne of God, praising him Day and Night in his Holy Temple. And this shall be
the Portion of thy Cup, if thou diligently hearken to the Counsel of the Lord,
which calls thee to trust in him, he will embrace thee in the Arms of his
Love, and thou shall praise his Name forever.

God Almighty in his Light and Life, raise up thy Soul, and establish thy Heart
in his Counsel, steadfastly to wait in his Power, to lead thee in the Cross, out
of all Unbelief, and cause thee to lie down at rest in Obedience to his Will,
where thou shall drink the Cup of Salvation forever. Farewell.

William Dewsbury.


