THE TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION AGAIN DISCOVERED After the long and dark Night of
Apostasy, which has overshadowed the whole World for many ages; and the
profession and practice thereof witnessed unto by the Scriptures. And here all
may see who it is of all these Sects and diverse forms of Religion in these
Nations, that are agreeable to the Scriptures in what they profess and
practice, and who it is that are not according thereunto; for the line of true
judgment is stretched upon all profession, and a true search into, and trial
thereof is made, and hereby it is manifest who it is, and what sort of people,
that may justly claim the benefit of the Protectors Oath, to be protected
thereby in their practices of Religion, who has bound himself to maintain and
uphold that Christian Religion which is according to the Scriptures, etc.

This is written for the good of this Commonwealth, and the information of all
people in it. By a friend to all people, especially them that fears God, and
loves righteousness.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

THE TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION Again discovered, etc.
FOrasmuch as Oliver Cromwell, called Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, (chief Ruler according to man) has bound himself by an oath, and
sworn that he will uphold and maintain the true reformed Protestan^ Christian
Religion in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Old and new Testament
of the Scriptures; which oath he is bound to perform before the Lord and unto
all men.

Now it remains to be tried and proved what the Christian Religion is, and who
it is in these Nations that are of the true reformed Protestant Christian
Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Scriptures, seeing
there are abundance of Sects and diversities of judgments, and many Assemblies
and gatherings of people who are diverse in their ways, in their practices, and
in their form of Religion in these Nations, which does all profess the
Scriptures, and that their form of Religion is accorco the Scriptures; but this
cannot be, but it will be manifest otherwise; for the Scriptures which were
given forth by the one spirit of God, bears not witness of many true Ways, or
unto many true Religions, but unto one truth, and unto one true Religion, and
is the Declaration of one way of life, and salvation by one Jesus Christ, and
there is no other Name under heaven given for salvation; and they that believe
in him, and receive him, they it is only that are of the true Religion, who
are guided by his spirit, and changed thereby from death to life, and such has
unity with the Father, and with the Son, and one with another, and are not of
this world, but heirs of the Kindom of God, and these may own and claim a title
to be defended and preserved in their exercise and practice of Religion.

Therefore come all sorts of people, and let us try and prove who it is that is
of the true Religion, and who it is that he is bound to maintain and uphold by
his oath: Come I say, all Sects and sorts of people, and appear to trial; Dare
you join issue with me in this matter, to try your profession and practice of
Religion, whether it be according to the Scriptures in the purity thereof yea
or nay; for the Lord has put it into my heart to lay you all to the line of
true judgment, and to prove you whether you must be upholden and maintained in
your Religion, yea or nay: Come claim your privilege; if your profession and
practice in Religion be according to the Scriptures, then you may own your
right, and the benefit of the Protectors oath; but if your profession and
practice in Religion be otherwise, and not according to the Scriptures, then
you must stand back, and defend your selves if you can, for the Protector is
not bound to maintain and uphold you in your practice of Religion: And with
this argument I shall try you all, whatsoever is professed and practiced for
Religion, for which there is neither command nor president in Scripture, is not
according to the Scripture; let this fall where it may, this is truth; and
therefore all people come to trial, and receive your judgment by this rule^

And first, the true Religion is a walking with God in purity and holiness, a
performing of good to him, and not doing any evil; a belief in Christ, and
receiving of him, and a living in him, and through the operation of his spirit,
to be changed into his image, and the body of sin and death put off, and a
living to God in all things, and not a living to this vain World in any thing,
but in all things to be guided by the spirit of Christ: This in short is a
description of the true Religion, and they that are of this Religion shall be
saved in the day of the Lord, and in equity and righteousness should be
protected according to the Oath beforementioned, or else the oath is not
performed in justice, but rather broken through transgression; And first of
all, as concerning that profession and practice in Religion, which is most
general in these Nations I mean such as sprinkle Infants, and are sprinkled
being Infants, professing it to be the Baptism into the faith of Christ, and
that it is a seal of the new Covenant, and of remission of sins, and that
thereby people are made capable of union with Christ, and that (...) (...)sign
of regeneration, etc. This is practiced and professed by many for Religion, but
this practice and doctrine is not according to the Scripture, being it was
never commanded, nor any example for it in Scripture; therefore all ye through
all these Nations that are made Christians, and ownes your title in
Christianity, and a right to fellowship with Christ, and that ye are joined to
the Church, and become members of Christ, because you were sprinkled when you
were Infants, (and all ye that teach this for doctrine, and practice it for
Religion) you are not of the true Christian Religion in the purity thereof, as
it is contained in the Scriptures. This I do affirm; therefore stand you by,
for what you practice and profess, there is neither command nor president in
Scripture; if you could show any, you are now called, and a necessity is put
upon you to make use of your knowledge, if you would be protected in this
Commonwealth in your practice of RELIGION; likewise you sing, and give to sing
David's Psalms in rhyme and meeter, professing it is to the glory and honor of
God; ye practice this as an Ordinance of God, as a part of his Worship, and as
a part of your Religion; but this practice and profession also is manifest not
to be according to Scriptures, because it was never commanded, neither is there
any president for this practice in the Scriptures, in Gospel Times: Therefore
in this part of your Religion you cannot justly own to be protected and
maintained, because the Protectors oath reaches not to uphold and maintain any
such practices in Religion, which is not according to the Scriptures, likewise
all ye that meets together to exercise your Religion, and to worship God in
Temples made with hands, set apart by you for that practice, professing them to
be Churches of Christ, this is not according, but contrary to the Scriptures,
which says, God dwells not in Temples made with hands; neither did the Saints
of old constantly practice any such thing, but it was the persecutors that met
in Temples made with hands, who cast out, and hailed the Apostles out of such
Temples, so that in this practice you cannot justly own to be protected, as not
being a practice in Religion according to Scriptures. Likewise all ye whose
Ministers preaches for hire, and have hire for preaching, so much a year, and
so much a Sermon at a Town, or a Parish in a settled place, and who takes
Tithes, and compells people to pay tithes by a Law; such are not the Ministers
of Christ; and ye that uphold such for Ministers of Christ, are false in
judgment, and blind in understanding, and are not of that Christian Religion
which is according to Scriptures in the purity thereof, neither Ministers nor
people, for the Ministers of Christ never acted any such thing; it was the
false Prophets, and false Apostles that preached for hire, and for gifts and
rewards; neither did the Saints and Churches of Christ look upon them that
acted those things, to be Ministers of Christ, but on the contrary, declared
against them to be deceivers; so that all you people, and you professed
Ministers that acts those things that the false Prophets acted, and all you
people that loves to have it so, and gives hire to your Ministers for
preaching, and consents unto it, none of you are of the christian Religion,
as it is held forth in the Scriptures, because this part of your practice in
Religion is not according, but contrary to Scriptures: Now substracting all
these in these Nations from the whole which practices and professes these
things mentioned for Ordinances of God, and for his Worship, none of you are of
the true christian religion as it is held forth in the Scriptures, because
these things which you practice for Religion, is not held forth in all the
Scriptures by any example or command; likewise you are of the greatest number
of people in all these Nations* and that practice and profession in Religion
which the greatest number follow and exercise themselves in, cannot be the true
christian Religion, because the Scripture says, Few are in the straight way
that leads to life, to wit, in the pure and true Religion; but many are in the
broad way that leads to destruction; and such that are the greatest number who
are in the broad way, are not in the Religion in the purity thereof, as it is
held forth in the Scriptures; likewise many of ye who practice those things
mentioned for Religion, are yet unconverted to God, but lives in wickedness, in
the pride and vanities, and in all the evil of this World, in double-dealing,
in drunkenness, in Whoredom, and in the Works of darkness; therefore you are
not of the true christian Religion, neither do you walk with God in purity and
holiness, neither are you changed by Christ into his Image, nor are guided by
his spirit, neither do you live to God in any thing, but to this world in all
things; and your Religion is manifest not to be according to the Scriptures,
but contrary; and so let all people consider whether or no you must be
maintained in your Religion. Come forth and plead your cause all ye that are
called Presbyterians, and Independents, and all others, stand up, and prove if
you can, your practice in religion to be according to Scriptures; but seeing no
man is able to prove these things mentioned, which is practiced by you for
Religion, to wit, Sprinkling of Infants, and singing David's experiences in rhyme
and meeter, and worshipping God in set-places, as Idol-Temples, and preaching
for, and giving great s^ms of money for preaching, with other things practiced
by you for Religion; neither were these things ever commanded in Scriptures;
neither is there any example for the practice of these things in Scripture by
any of the Lords people, and therefore you cannot justly own a title in the
Protectors oath, to be maintained and upheld by virtue thereof in these your
practices of Religion; for it appears he is but bound only to uphold and
maintain that Religion which is according to Scriptures, and not them who
practices those things for Religion which are not according, but contrary to
the Scriptures; Likewise all ye that are called gathered churches, who holds
forth for Doctrine that the Scriptures are the word, (by which the world was
made) and that the Scriptures are the foundation; and that the Scriptures are
the way to salvation; and that the Letter and the Spirit are unseparable; and
that the Scriptures are both the writings and the thing signified; and that
except a man be baptized with water, he cannot be saved; with such like
Doctrines which have been held forth by some professing themselves to be of the
church of Christ; all you are manifest not to be of the christian religion,
because those doctrines are not according, but rather contrary to the
Scriptures: Likewise all ye whose practice in the exercise of Religion is but
by imitation from the Scriptures, and you are not led by the spirit of the
Father in what you speak, and practice, you are not of the true christian
religion which the Scripture speaks of; for the sons of God, and who are of the
true Religion, are led by the spirit of God, and not by their own thoughts and
imaginations, and the traditions of men; and all that are not led by the spirit
of the Father, are not of the true christian Religion as it is held forth in
the Scriptures, and not any that are such can justly own to be protected in
their Religion, because it is not according to the Scriptures; likewise all ye
that does profess the things of God and Christ, and that you are members of the
church of Christ, and professes righteousness and truth in words, and yet lives
in pride and the vanities of this world, and in unrighteousness, and the
customs of the heathen, which are vain; and are not cleansed from
unrighteousnes, nor freed from the body of sin and death; neither does answer
your profession with a conversation, showing that you are not guided with that
spirit whose words you do profess, all you are hypocrites, and lives in
hypocrisy, none of you are of the true Christian Religion as it is held forth
in the Scriptures; for the exercise in true Religion shows forth in life what
is professed in words; come try your selves, and prove your selves all sorts of
people, for now your Religion is to be tried, what Name soever you go under;
and all you that practice and profess those things for Religion for which there
is neither command nor president in Scripture, your Religion is concluded not
to be according to Scriptures, and so no title or privilege can any of you
justly own of being upheld or maintained by the Protectors oath; but as I have
said, for sprinkling of Infants, and singing David's experiences in rhyme and
meeter, etc there is neither command nor president in Scriptures, and therefore
you that practice those things which I have mentioned for Religion, are not of
the true christian Religion which is according to the Scriptures, which is to
be protected. Likewise all ye that persecutes by reproaches or revilings, and
cruelty, or that causes the people of God to be persecuted; many of you there
are in these Nations which professes Religion, yet are envious persons, and
persecutors of the innocent, hereby it is manifest that you are not of that
Religion which is according to Scriptures; for the Saints never persecuted any,
but were themselves persecuted for righteousness sake; so you are not to be
protected in such exercise, because it is not according, but contrary to the
Scriptures; for you have no example from the Saints for professing and
practicing Religion, and yet persecuting such as are of the true Religion,
whose consciences are truly exercised toward God, and toward all men.

Now seeing that it is discovered in part, who it is that are not of the true
christian Religion according to the Scriptures; it remains to be proved (if
there be any) who it is that is of the true christian Religion as it is held
forth in the Scriptures, and who it is that is to be protected in their
practice and exercise of Religion: And as concerning the despised and rejected
people called Quakers, herein I shall speak for them as a Friend to them, and a
lover of their ways, who is not ashamed of their practices in Religion, and
shall measure and try their practices in Religion whether it be according to
Scripture, and if it prove so to be, that what they practice for Religion, and
holds forth for Doctrine, is according to the Scriptures, then why should not
they own their right and privilege to be upholden and maintained by the
Protectors oath, who has sworn to uphold and maintain them and their Religion,
whose exercise in Religion is according to Scriptures, being that same people
is, and has been faithful subjects of this Commonwealth.

And first of all, they dare not own themselves to be Christians, nor to be
members of Christ, nor to have any right or title to the Kingdom of God, but as
they witness converting by the spirit of the Lord, and are changed from death
to life, and from darkness to light, and from Satan's power to the power of
God, through the operation of the same spirit, and as in all their works and
ways, and exercises in Religion, they are guided by the same spirit who leads
them out of the World, and out of all the vanities and evil works thereof; and
this is according to the Scriptures, and their Religion herein is justified by
the Scriptures, who witnesses That Christ is in them, and that they have
received him through faith, and thereby are cleansed from all unrighteousness,
and have put off, and are putting off the body of sin and death, and walks with
God in purity and holiness, being led by the spirit of God therein, and with
God they have peace, being reconciled by Jesus Christ, who is their salvation,
and they have no other; and this is according to the Scriptures.

And again as concerning their meetings, and the manner thereof, it is not
contrary, but according to the Scriptures; for though they meet in many parts
of these Nations by great numbers, some in the open fields, and some on the
Mountains in some places, and sometime without doors, and sometime in houses;
all this practice is according to the Scriptures; for we read Mat. 5.1. in the
days of Christ, That there were great multitudes of people that followed him,
and he went up into a Mountain, and preached, and taught them upon the
Mountain; and in Matt. 14. and 14. we read that there was great multitudes that
came out of the Cities unto Jesus into the Deserts, and he had compassion
toward them, and did good unto them, and at that time there was many thousands
met together, as you may read, and it seems stayed whole days together, for
they sat down on the grass, and eat together, and then Jesus sent the
multitudes away; and in Mark 6. you may read how that multitudes came to Jesus
out of the Cities into a desert place, and Jesus began to teach them many
things in that desert place, for he had compassion on the multitude; and in
Luke 9. how the people again followed Jesus into a desert place, and he
preached un^o them the King^om of God: Such meetings then was counted strange,
as such meetings are now when the people of God meets together by great
numbers, to preach, and to hear the Kingdom of God preached; but their meetings
are according to the Scriptures, for the people of God in generations past, met
in the same manner as the people of God called Quakers, meets now; for sometime
Christ preached out of a Mark 4.1, 2. Luke 5 3.
ship unto the people that stood on the sea shore; and Act: 20
Paul kneeled down and prayed among the Saints near the sea shore, at his
passing into the ship; and we read Acts 2: that there was three thousand
converted at one Sermon, then there must needs be a great meeting, and a great
deal of people met together, such meetings now are wondered at, but such
meetings are but according to Scripture; so that this part of their practice in
religion is agreeable to the Scriptures, and the same as the saints practice
was in ages past: And as for the people of God meeting together sometime in the
night-season to wait upon the Lord, and sometimes sitting in silence, and
waiting upon the Lord and no words uttered amongst them, but every one sitting
silent before the Lord having received nothing from the Lord to speak one to
another, at which the people of the world do wonder, and falsely judge it not to
be a christian exercise; but we read in the Scripture, Job 2: that Job (who was
a christian, for he was a just and perfect man) he and his friends sat upon
the ground seven days, and seven nights, and spoke not a word one to another;
this would be a strange thing at this day to see practiced: And in Jer. 8.14.
you may read, where the Prophet Jeremiah exhorted the people to assemble
themselves, and said, Let us enter into the defenced Cities, and let us be
silent there, for the Lord our God has put us to silence; but such a practice
now is thought strange by the people of the world, who are not acquainted with
the ways of God; who are wise in their own eyes, and knows not what it is to
wait upon the Lord in silence, who never yet was put to silence in themselves
by the Lord; and you may read Ezekiel. 3: where the Prophet sat down among the
people of the Captivity, and they were astonished seven days; and at the end of
seven days, (and not before) the word of the Lord came to the Prophet; so that
you see it was the practice of the servants of the Lord oftentimes to sit and
wait upon the Lord in silence, though people wonder at such meetings now; and
we do not read that there was always speaking among the Saints in the churches
when they were met together; but Acts 2. we read that the church was met
together in a place, and the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and then they began to
speak as the Spirit gave them utterance; then it seems they had not spoken
before, though they had met together in a house, and then they spoke the
wonderful things of God, and some that heard, mocked; and others said they were
full of new Wine; even as the people of the World do at this day when any of
the people of the Lord are moved to speak as the spirit gives utterance; so
that sometime to sit in silence being met together to wait upon the Lord, as
many of the servants of the Lord do in this Nation, is a practice of Religion,
and not contrary, but according to the Scriptures, for many of the servants and
assemblies of the Lords people practiced the same thing in ages past, as the
servants of the Lord do at this day; and so this practice is to be upholden and
maintained, because it is proved to be according to the Scriptures, for the
same thing was practiced heretofore; and we read Acts 20.7. that the church met
in the night, for Paul continued his sermon till midnight: And as for their
practice in speaking, either man or woman as the spirit gives utterance, this
is according to the Scriptures, though it be much wondered at, and cried against
by the wise men and people of this age, for we read Act. 2. that they spoke in
their meeting as the spirit gave them utterance, without studying beforehand
what to say; and the Lord promised that sons and daughters should prophecy;
and in Act. 21.9. we read of one that had four daughters that did prophecy;
and diverse other places in Scripture does show that women Phil. 4.3
labored in the Gospel, which does prove that a woman speaking and declaring
the things of God, is not contrary, but according to the Scriptures, and that
any who are moved of the Lord, may declare the things of God, man or woman; and
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.10. As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another; so that this practice in Religion is proved
to be according to the Scriptures.

And as concerning their call to the Ministry, some are called from their
ordinary callings, as from the Plough, or from handicraft work or tradings, or
such like: this is according to the Scriptures also, for we read Matt. 4.18,
19. where the disciples were called from their Nets, and some were called from
the receipt of custom* and we read Amos 7. that he was a Herdsman, and a
gatherer of Sycamore fruit, and 1 Kings 19.19.
Elisha was called from the Plough; and some others were called from keeping of
sheep: So that their call to the Ministry, and practice in the Ministry, is
according to the Scriptures; for the servants of the Lord in former ages were
called to the Ministry after the same manner; so in that they do agree to the
Scripture both in Ministry and ministering, and so may own protection herein by
the Protectors oath.

And as concerning their going up and down through the Countries, and from City
to City, and from one Town to another, and from one Nation to another, this is
according to the Scriptures, though some seek occasion thereby against them,
and unjustly takes them as for Vagabonds, and executes their envy upon them,
yet it was the Apostles practice, as you may read in the Book of Acts, where
the Apostles traveled from Country to Country, and from one City to another;
and though some of the servants of the Lord are moved now to speak and dispute
in the Markets, and reprove sin in the gates, and in the streets, and in the
highways, and threatening Gods judgments against the wicked, all these things
are according to the Scripture, and their practice herein is justified by the
Scriptures; for we read Acts 17.17. that Paul disputed in the Synagogues with
the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the Market daily with them that
met with him; and we read Jer. 7. that he was commanded to stand in the Gate of
the Lords House, and to speak to all that passed into it. And Jer. 26. we read
that he was commanded to stand in the Court of the Lords House, without doors,
and to speak to all the Cities of Judah. And we read in the Book of Jonah, how
he was commanded to go through the streets, and to reprove sin, and to threaten
Gods judgments against the wicked; and these practices were strange in that
generation, as they are at this day unto the World, who are not acquainted with
the ways of God; but all people may see, though the servants of the Lord do
practice these things now as they are moved, their practice herein is according
to the Scriptures, for the servants of the Lord in former ages acted the same
things; so that in this practice the servants of the Lord ought not to be
persecuted, but protected and maintained in it, and that by the Protectors
oath, because it is proved to be according to the Scriptures, which he is sworn
to maintain.

And as concerning their crying against such, and declaring against them by
word and writing, that preach for hire, and divines for money, and seeks for
their gain from their quarter, and such who goes for gifts and rewards, and
has sums of money by the year for preaching, and though they deny such that
acts those things, to be Ministers of Christ; this practice also is according
to the Scriptures, for we read Mich. 3. that he declared against such as
preached for hire, and divined for money, and such were no Ministers of Christ.
And we read Isa. 56. that he declared against them that sought for their gain
from their quarter, which were greedy covetous men, such as is many of the
Teachers of England. Again, we read Matt. 23. where Christ declared against
such, and did not own such to be any of his Ministers, who were called of men
Master, who stood praying in the Synagogue, and had the chief places in the
Assemblies. And we read in 2 Pet. 2. and in many other places, where the
Apostles declared against such, and denied such to be Ministers of Christ, that
preached for filthy lucre, and took gifts and rewards for preaching, and by
feigned words made merchandise of souls, who were heady and high minded men, as
you may read 2 Timothy 3. chap. and such men were denied to be Ministers of
Christ, by the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles. So that all people may see
this practice of the servants of the Lord at this day, who are moved to declare
against such men that acts these things mentioned, is perfectly according to
the Scriptures; for the servants of the Lord spoken of in Scripture, did the
very same things in this particular, as is done at this day; therefore for this
practice they ought not to be persecuted as they have been, but ought to be
protected and maintained in it, and that by the Protectors Oath, who has sworn
to maintain that practice which is according to the Scripture; and to declare
against them that preach for hire, and have great sums of money for preaching,
and that are called of men Master, and that takes gifts and rewards of people
for preaching; I say, to do thus is a practice which the Scripture gives a
large example for; and so it must needs be according to the Scriptures, and
ought to be protected in this Government.

Again, as concerning their denying to respect persons, or to bow with hat or
knee, in respect of worshipping any creature, this also is according to the
Scriptures, though the people of the world, who live in pride and vain customs,
are offended with them in this practice; for we read that God commanded not to
bow to any likeness, Exodus 20. And we read James 2. the Apostle exhorts not to
have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, but condemns
that practice of respecting such as are in goodly apparel, and gay clothing,
and have gold Rings, above a poor man in vile raiment; and he says plainly,
They that have respect to persons, commits sin; and we read that the Pharisees
said of Christ, he respected no man's person; and he is our example. And we read
that the three children was cast into the fiery Furnace with indignation before
the King, being bound before him, and cast into the Furnace, Dan. 3. And we
read that Paul and all the servants of God, did thou Kings, and Princes, and
Rulers, and they spoke plainly to all men, and durst not give flattering titles
to any, as you may read in Job 32. so that all people may see the practice in
denying to respect persons, and in speaking plainly, without flattering Titles
to any man, denying to put off the Hat, or bowing to men in gay clothing, or
giving place to such that wear Gold Rings, and have goodly apparel, before such
as have vile raiment, is justly according to the Scriptures, though people
stumble at such practices; and the people of God may claim to be maintained in
this practice of their Religion, seeing it is proved to be commanded in
Scriptures, not to respect the person of any man; and also it was the Saints
practice, and therefore herein they ought not to be condemned, but ^ustified,
as being a practice in Religion agreeing with the Scriptures.

And as concerning their denying obedience to Magistrates in some causes, this
is according to the Scripture also; for we read that the Rulers commanded the
Apostles, and straightly charged them to speak no more in the Name of Jesus; yet
the Apostles did not obey Magistrates herein, neither did they cease to preach
in the Name of Jesus; and though Christ was commanded, or besought to depart
out of their coasts, yet he did not obey their request; and we read that the
three children were commanded to worship the great Image, yet they did not obey
this command of the King. So that all people may see it is lawful for the
Saints to disobey commands of Kings and Rulers, where they command that to be
done or spoken which God does not, but the contrary: And I say again, Where
Kings or Rulers, Parents or Masters does command or require any thing of them
that are under them which is not according to God, in such causes subjects, or
people, and children and servants, are free, and not required of the Lord to
subject to any thing which is not justly according to him; but yet we say, That
subjects, and people, and children, and servants* ought to be subject to them
that have rule over them, in all things which is according to God in truth and
righteousness; and by the Law of God all people are bound to obey those that
have rule over them, and not to disobey them in any thing which may stand with
the exercise of a good conscience to God; so that though the people of the Lord
now do deny to depart out of a Town or place, and though they will not cease to
declare against sin and wickedness in Teachers and people, though a Magistrate
command it, this is but according to the Scriptures, for the Apostles went on
boldly, declaring the Name of the Lord after they were forbidden; and thus the
servants of the Lord does now, they freely declare the way of salvation, and
calls people to repent, and reproves iniquity in ^ll sorts of people, though
wicked men command them to the contrary, and falsely charges them that they are
disobedient to Government and Authority, though they are not, no more then the
servants of God, and Apostles of Christ, who in the same causes, did the same
things; and the Lord has commanded to cry aloud, and not to spare, but to tell
people of their transgressions; and therefore many of the Lords servants does
deny to be silent, or to cease from declaring against sin, though a Magistrate
command it: And Christ has commanded not to swear at all; and therefore many
does deny to swear upon any account, in any place, though the Magistrates do
command it. And the servants of the Lord does deny to put off a Hat, or to bow
in respect of any man's person, though a Magistrate command it; for the
Scripture does say, He that respects persons, commits sin; so that all people
may see that what the servant of the Lord does in these things, are not
contrary, but according to the Scriptures; for all these things were commanded
and practiced by the Saints in former ages, and they said it was better to obey
God then man, and we ought to do it in all things, and that according to the
Scriptures too. So that in all these practices in religion the Scriptures
justifies them, and be^rs witness to them, and they might claim protection in
the exercise of them by the Protectors oath; but if they be not maintained, but
persecuted for the practice of these things, then will the light in every man's
conscience witness the oath is broken, and not kept; for it extends to uphold
and maintain the practice of Religion which is according to the Scriptures, as
these is proved to be.

And as concerning their doctrines which the world stumbles at, yet their
doctrines are according to the Scripture; though they say, Chr. is the light of
the world, and lights every man, or has given light to every man that comes
into the world, this is according the Scripture, as you may read, Joh. 8.12.
and Ioh. 1.9. and though they turn people from darkness to the light of Christ
within them, and exhorts people to hearken to that within them, and not to seek
a Christ without them, to ascend or descend to fetch him, these Doctrines are
perfectly according to the Scripture; for you may read Acts 26.18. Paul says
he was sent to turn people from darkness to the light, and from the power of
Satan to the power of God; and Romans 10 you may read the Apostle says, What
says it, The Word is nigh thee in thy heart, that is, The Word of Faith which
we preach; and they were not to say, Who shall ascend, or descend to fetch
Christ. And though they tell people they must witness Christ in them, or else
they cannot be saved; this also is according to the Scriptures, as you may read
2 Cor. 13. chap. the Apostle says, Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates. And though they say, Christ is the Word of God, and does deny the
Scriptures to be the Word by which the World was made; this Doctrine also is
according to the Scriptures; for we read Rev. 19.13. that the Name of Jesus is
called the Word of God. And Luke 1. of the Scriptures it is said, they are a
Declaration by those which were eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word. And
though they press people to perfection, and does say, Men may be perfect upon
Earth, and complete in Christ Jesus, this Doctrine also is according to the
Scriptures; for you may read 1 Cor. 2. chap: and 6: of some that were perfect,
who were men upon earth; and the Ministers of Christ spoke Wisdom among them
that were already perfect; and Col. 2^10. the Apostle says unto the Church who
were men in this life upon Earth, he says to them, Ye are complete in him. And
though they press the people to live without sin, and does say, They that are
born of God does not commit sin; this also is according to the Scripture; for
it is Christ's command, Mat: 5: Be perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect:
and 1 John 3. there it is spoken of some that were the sons of God already, and
he says, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for he cannot sin
because he is born of God; and says he, A^ he is, [Christ] so are we in this
present world. And now all people may understand that in all these Doctrines
which they do hold forth, they do fully agree with the Scriptures; and they
bear witness to the truth of their Doctrines, that the servants of God, and the
Apostles of Christ, did preach the very same things for Doctrine as is done at
this day; and so these Doctrines are not to be wondered at, not so much as they
are by the wicked to be cried against for heresy and error; and these few
particulars only I have mentioned, at which the people of this age the most
stumble at; and all other things whatsoever which is held forth for Doctrines
unto people, I am able to prove them by the Scriptures, that in all things they
are according to the Scripture, and not different or contrary to the
Scriptures; so that all people may take notice and see that whatsoever they do
practice for Religion, and holds forth for Doctrine, they do herein justly
according to the Scriptures, and they justify their practices and doctrines in
these things mentioned, and in whatsoever else can be objected by any man. And
this I shall take in hand to prove before all the World, That the people of God
called Quakers, does practice nothing for Religion, or preach for Doctrine, but
what is perfectly according to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and
in the fulfilling of them; and so they are proved to be of that true christian
Religion which is according to the Scriptures, and so may fully claim
protection and preservation in their practice of Religion: And this is to be
considered by the Protector and all Magistrates and people in these Nations,
that they may know what the true Christian Religion is, and who is in it, and
who is not in it; and for this purpose is this written, for the satisfaction of
all people, that they may see who it is that has a right and privilege to be
protected and upholden by virtue of the Oath.

Likewise all may understand, That what such practice and profes for Religion,
is not without good ground, but that the very same things were practiced by
them that were of the true Christian Religion, and preached for Doctrine by
them that were Saints, which is now practiced and held forth by the people of
God; and the Scriptures does fully bear witness in all things, showing that
such are guided by the same spirit which the Saints were guided by in ages
past; and as they had, so have these the testimony that they are of God, and
that the whole world lies in wickedness.

And as concerning their being persecuted by many of the Rulers, Priests and
People, though they be sent to prison, and banished out of Towns, and whipped
and beaten, and scorned, and reviled, this is also according to the Scriptures,
and the Scriptures is fulfilled upon them; for the same things were done to the
Apostles, and to the servants of the Lord, as you may read through the Acts,
the people mocked the Apostles, and slandered them, and said they were full of
new Wine, and the chief Priests conspired against Christ and the Apostles, and
incensed the Magistrates against them, and the Magistrates put Christ and many
of the Apostles in prison, and caused them to be whipped and beaten, and to be
banished, and many other cruelties done unto them; the Scripture is full to
prove this, from the beginning, to the end of it; and Christ said, They shall
persecute you, and speak all manner of evil of you for my Names sake, and as
they have done unto me, so shall they do unto you; ye shall be hated of
Nations: And the Apostle said, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution. So that all people may see, though the people of the Lord
be persecuted, and reviled, and imprisoned, and cruelty done unto them; and
though it be done by the chief Magistrates, and chief Rulers, and the wise men
of this age, all this is according to the Scriptures, and that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled; and the same things which are now done unto the people of
God, were done unto the people of God in ages past by the same instruments, to
wit, the Rulers and Magistrates; and by the same means, to wit, by the
information, and false accusations of the chief Priests and Teachers; in
Jeremiah you may read how the Priests sought to take away his life; and you may
read how the chief Priests consulted against Christ, and how they complained to
the Magistrates against him and the Apostles; and the same things are now come
to pass, and we do not strange at it, for it is the chief Priests of England
that does most seek the persecution, and causes the people of God to be
persecuted by their complaining and petitioning to the Magistrates; so that in
all these things, not only what is practiced and preached for Doctrine, but
also in what is suffered, is perfectly according to the Scriptures, and all
people that are not blind, may see that this Religion is in all things
agreeable with the Scriptures, both in what they do and in what they suffer, so
that this is given forth for the good information of the Protector, and all
Magistrates, that they may hear the trial of all things, and may not falsely
conjecture or suppose, and thereupon give judgment without any true knowledge,
let them search the Scripture, and try; I hope the worst of men has so much
conscience, that they will stand in awe of the breach of their own oaths, and
that they will perform unto the Lord and unto all men, what they have firmly
(and not compelled) sworn to do; and thus it may be hoped the woeful persecution
will cease, which is lamentable to be declared, how the people of the Lord have
sufferd in many things, even them whose Religion is proved to be according to
the Scriptures, who practice nothing for Religion, neither holds forth any
thing for Doctrine but that which is perfectly agreeable to the Scriptures, as
all people hereby may understand; which Religion the Protector has sworn to
maintain and uphold; then who shall presume to persecute the people whose
practice in Religion is proved to be the very same which his oath extends to
maintain? Surely no men will be so impudent, or show such rebellion to
Government, as to endeavor to break down and destroy that people whose
Religion is proved to be justly that which he is by oath bound to maintain;
some heretofore before this Oath was taken, might plead ignorance, and say they
knew not the mind of the Protector; but now his mind is fully discovered, and
he does not only allow, but also has solemnly sworn to maintain and uphold
that Christian Religion which is according to Scriptures; and it is proved what
people it is whose Religion is so; and I say again, That same people mentioned
does practice nothing, neither holds forth any thing for Doctrine, but it is
either commanded, or there is president for it in Scripture, or agreeable
thereto; and therefore that same people is of the true Christian Religion which
the Lord Protector has bound himself to maintain, by oath in the face of the
whole Nations, so that none of the Magistrates now can plead ignorance* for as
he is sworn to uphold the people of God in their Religion, so are they bound to
be true to him and the Government, and to fulfill the good Laws, and his oaths
and enterprises; so that I say again, it may be hoped for the time to come, for
protection, and to be maintained, and no longer persecuted and destroyed in
their persons and estates, as formerly they have been, if men regard their own
oaths, or there be any truth or sincerity in the heart of man; and I say, By
this very oath mentioned might the people of God own and claim protection and
defense in their way and practice of Religion, which is so plainly proved to be
according to the Scriptures, though none of them desired such an oath for their
protection, or sought after it; yet being voluntarily instituted and taken, why
may not they own the extent of it, which reaches to them more then to any
besides, as is clearly described; and not for their own sakes altogether, do
they own the benefit of it, but that he which has taken it, may be clear in
the sight of the Lord in performing of his oath, for his felicity, and the
increase and continuance of good Government, they desire as much as their own
protection; and they would not have any man so wicked, or the cause of
perpetual infamy to be given to this Nation so much, as that any thing should
be destroyed or broken down, which is sworn to be upheld and maintained in the
Nation, lest the Heathen Rulers rise in condemnation against the doers thereof:
These, with many other arguments which might be produced, presses many to
endeavor the fulfilling of the said oath, for his own sake who has taken it.

And that first of all, by that oath the people of God may own protection in
this Commonwealth, because their Religion is according to the Scriptures, etc.

Secondly, That some people might also own protection in this Commonwealth, in
that the most of them, if not all, have been true and faithful subjects of this
Commonwealth, and hazarded lives and estates for the establishing of such a
Government wherein the people of God might have full liberty for the exercise
of their pure conscience.

Again, they may own protection in this Commonwealth as being at this day a
harmless and innocent people, not being offensive to any man's person or estate,
or in any other thing, (except to sin and wickedness, and the workers thereof)
and I say again, That they do not desire any thing but the welfare, and the
increase, and the establishment of this present Government, wherein it is
according to God: And this is written for the information of all sorts of
people, that they may know unto what sort of people the Protectors oath extends
to uphold and maintain; and as concerning all those whose practice in Religion
and Doctrines are not according to Scripture, but contrary to it, as is
manifest, and so not to be maintained and uphold^n in their profession and
practice of Religion by the Protectors oath; yet it is not desired that such
should be destroyed, or overthrown, or bound, or imprisoned, or any cruelty
done to them, though their practice be not according to Scriptures; but its
desired that such may live in peace in the Commonwealth, enjoying their
Religion to themselves without any molestation from any ou^ward Law, or outward
power, for many would not that any should be compelled to, or from any
exercises in Religion by an outward Law, but let them defend themselves in
their Religion, from those who may be moved of the Lord to reprove them, or
declare against them, or covince them; so that many would have Religion to
defend it self, and that the Magistrates with their Laws may preserve the peace
in the Commonwealth, and men's persons and Estates, and not their opinions and
judgments; and we would they may not limit or stint tender consciences, for
many may be of a tender conscience in those things wherein their consciences
are not truly informed, and such should not be condemned to death, but to b^
won by sound doctrine, and instructed by those who are called of God, and so
this is written that the whole Nation may understand the mind of the Lords
servants in all these things. And let no man blame me, for I have but with an
equal hand brought all sorts of people to the line of true judgment, that they
may know who is to be maintained (and who is not) in their Religion, and
practices thereof.

But and if that after all this, the people of God be persecuted, and violence
be done to them, and injustice and unrighteousness acted upon them in this
Commonwealth, as of late years has been, and yet it be suffered to be, and
none taken any notice to preserve and defend them whose Religion is according
to Scripture, which he is sworn to maintain, then I leave it to the light in
all men's consciences to judge* what a condition such are in whose oath is not
kept, but broken; for these things are of no less value then either breaking or
keeping a man's own oath, which solemnly has been taken; and this is not a
light thing, but to be seriously considered of both by Magistrates, Teachers
and people in this Commonwealth, yet notwithstanding all this, the people of
God does not boast in, or trust unto the arm of flesh, neither are any whit the
more confident in their way, though it be proved that they ought in justice to
be upholden and maintained in what they profess and practice, as aforesaid; for
their hope and confidence is only in God, who only is sufficient to protect
and uphold his people in all their ways and exercises; and though all men do
forget their own promises and oaths, yet will not the Lord forget his chosen
people, to defend them from all their Enemies, who has again appeared to
gather his people, after the long and dark night of apostasy, and his House and
Tabernacle shall be exalted over all the Earth.

An Objection.
Now many may say, seeing I challenge, claim, and affirm that this Religion is
the true Religion which is according to Scripture, then they ask and say, Has
there been no true Religion before this? or has all these Religions been false
before? and seeing this has but newly appeared in the world, was there no true
Religion before? and if there were any, where was it? and what was that
Religion, seeing there has not been for many ages such a Religion as this is:
And after this manner does many reason and object to themselves, and raises to
themselves stumblings, and conceits themselves that our forefathers were of a
good way, and many of them sure were saved which was not of this Religion,
which did not profess and practice these things which is professed and
practiced by this people.

Answer*
Now unto all these I do answer and say, That this Religion is the true
Religion which is according to Scriptures, as is proved already, seeing they
profess and practice nothing for Religion but what the Scriptures does
justify, and shows the very examples of the same things; but that God had a
people in all ages, and a feed that never bowed to Baal its believed, and such
as did sincerely seek after God according to what they knew, and they were
accepted of God according to what was made manifest in that age and generation;
yet the testimony of truth it self, and the way of the Lord it self, for many
generations has not so clearly and purely been held forth, as it is now in
this age and generation; for now the true light has shined, and the way of
salvation is evidently made manifest, as by many witnesses and evident tokens
which may be given, and was not so clearly for many ages past, held forth and
known: And such who have been sincerely seeking after God, though they knew not
perfectly the way unto him, neither had they such a pure testimony revealed to
guide them, as now is manifest, yet such do now rejoice, and owns the way of
the Lord, and the seed of God is refreshed in them, and all causes of stumbling
removed, and the pure light of the Gospel is sprung forth more clear in this
age, then in any age for many generations; for the Scripture shows that a
dark night of Apostasy has been over the whole world, and the beast has
reigned, and the false Prophet has deceived many Nations; and the whole World
has wondered after the beast for many ages, and the beast has made war with
the Saints, and has had power to kill them, and has put a stop many times to
the appearances of God, till now at length he does appear, and the power of
hell and death shall not stop it, and they do say that they are come out of the
Apostasy, to the dawning of the day again, and the same power of God, and the
same truth as was in the Apostles days, and the same Ministry by the gift of
the same Holy Ghost as was in the Apostles days, is now witnessed, and at the
time of ignorance God winked, but now the eye is opened, and all is called to
repentance; so it will not excuse any man to plead how it was with our
forefathers, or to say, Where was this Religion before these few years, and
such like, for now the power of God it self is made manifest, which brings into
the true Religion, and all that are of God hears it, and shall own it, and
shall receive the Testimony which is given: It Is known that there are many
thousands which has not yet owned it, in which there is true thirstings after
God, and a zeal for him, and such are not condemned to be altogether out of
Religion, for such seeks his face, and the day is neither clear nor dark to
them, in which they are; and such shall own and submit to the Government of
Christ; and they that are not under the Government, are not of the true
Religion* as I said; This is the time of restoration, and the Lord is bringing
back again, and a through reformation will the Lord work in the Earth, such as
has not been known in ages past. There has been a Seed sown which the Devil
has catched away; but now the Seed shall grow* and become the greatest of all
herbs, and the fowls of Heaven shall lodge in the Branches.

And this is a plain answer to all sober people, for according to the
Scriptures in the times of the Apostles, the day of glorious light sprung
forth, and mighty was the power of God at that day, but since has darkness
overshadowed all, and Antichrist has reigned, and the whole world has been
made drunk with the wine of forn^cation, which has been in the hand of the
whore, who has set upon the Beast, and upon Nations and Peoples, and the
Gentiles has trodden under foot the holy City of God for forty and two months;
but now is the time of restoration as has been promised, that the Lord is
bringing back his people again, and the Tabernacle of God shall be with men,
and Christ alone must reign and rule, and his Kingdom set up over the whole
world.

And let no man be offended at what I have done; for I have not reflected upon
any man's person, but on what he practices for Religion.

London, the tenth Month, 1657.
The End:

