GOSPEL-RECONCILIATION: OR, CHRIST'S TRVMPET OF Peace to the World.

Wherein is showed (besides many other Gospel Truth.) 1. That there was a
Breach made between God and Man. 2. That there is away to make up this Breach.
3 Reconciliation, opened in eight Particulars. Twelve blessed Consequences
thereof. How to know whether a Man's peace be made with God. Five Helps to make
our peace with God. 4. God begins the Work of Reconciliation with man. 5 Our
Reconciliation with God, is by Christ. How Christ is a fit Reconciler. Christ
has undertaken, 1. To satisfy Gods Justice. 2. To bring our hearts, and
subdue them to God. 6 Gods reconciling the [World] to himself. 7 Why God will
not himself immediately dispense this Gospel Reconciliation. 8 The Ministers of
the Gospel are Ambassadors of Christ. What kind of Ministry God speaks most in.
How we ought to hear the Word. The horrible wickedness of those that are idle
in the Ministry 9 The exceeding willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled
to sinners. Sixteen Arguments manifesting Gods exceeding willingness to be
reconciled to sinners. 10 Christ's willingness to be reconciled to sinners,
further opened. 11 Objections Answered, concerning the exceeding willingness of
God and Christ to be reconciled to sinners.


To which is added two Sermons

By JEREMIAH BUROUGHS.

Published (with a Testimony) By Thomas Goodwin, William Bridge, William
Greenhil, Sydrach Sympson, Philip Nigh, John Yates, William Adderley.


London: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Printing-press
in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1657.

A Testimony to the World concerning several Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs,
that are Printing, and will shortly be Published.
WHat we have by way of Preface set before the several Books already published
of this Reverend Author, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, may sufficiently serve for all
that are come forth: So that we only need now, to give Letters Testimonial to
the World, that these ( viz. The Sermons on the 2 Corinthians, the 5. chapter,
the 18. 19. and 20. verses. Hos. 2.14. Prove. 16.31. Math. 11.28.29.30. Which
are, or will shortly be Printed) We avouch likewise to be the painful and
profitable Labors of the same Author, and published by the best and most
Authentic Copies.

Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, William Bridge, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh,
John Yates, William Adderly.
The Names of Books printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of London:
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the Seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there is also showed. 1
That the end why the Saints receive al glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire, and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union, and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven. The first
eight Books: of the Application of Redemption, By the effectual Work of the
Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God. In
which (besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths) there is also
largely showed. 1 Christ has purchased al spiritual good for HIS. 2 Christ
puts al HIS into possession of all that good that he has purchased. 3 The Soul
must be fitted for Christ before it can receive him: And a powerful Ministry is
the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ. 4 The work of God is free:
And the day of Salvation, is while this Life last, and the Gospel continue. 5
God calls his Elect at any Age, but the most before old Age. 6 The Soul is
naturally settled in a sinful security. 7 The heart of a Natural man is wholly
unwilling to submit to the Word that would sever him from his sins. 8 God the
Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their corruptions, and
draws them to believe in Christ. The Ninth and Tenth Books of the Application
of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word, and spirit of Christ, for the
bringing home of lost sinners to God. Besides many other seasonable, and
Soul-searching Truths, there is also largely showed. 1 The heart must be humble
and contrite before the Lord will dwell in it. 2 Stubborn, and bloody sinners may
be made brokenhearted. 3 There must be true sight of sin, before the heart can
be broken for it. 4 Application of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to
bring men to sight of, and sorrow for them. 5 Meditation of sin, a special
means to break the heart. 6 The same word is profitable to some, not to
another. 7 The Lord sometimes makes the word prevail most, when its most
opposed. 8 Sins unrepented of, makes way for piercing Terrors. 9 The Truth
terible to a guilty conscience. 10 Gross and scandalous sinners, God usually
exercises with heavy breakings of heart, before they be brought to Christ. 11
Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces the heart of the sinner thoroughly. 12
They whose hearts are pierced by the Word, are carried with love and respect to
the Ministers of it: And are busy to enquire, and ready to submit to the mind
of God. 13 Sinners in distress of conscience, are ignorant what they should do.
14 A contrite sinner sees a necessity of coming out of his sinful condition. 15
There is a secret hope wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite
sinners. 16 They who are truly pierced for their sins, do prise and covet
deliverance from their sins. 17 True contrition is accompanied with confession
of sin, when God calls thereunto. 18 The Soul that is pierced for sin, is
carried with a restless dislike against it Six Books more of Mr. Hookers in two
Volums in Quarto, are printing.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions 2. Natural and Supernatual Dreams. 3 Impressions with, and without Word
4 Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7.
Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1.19. 2
Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1. The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after
effects of his Death, 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And his satisfaction
therein. Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa. 53 11. 3 A Lifting up for
the Cast-down, in case of, 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage
of Duties. 4. Want of Assurance, 5. Affliction. 6 Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8.
Unserviceableness. 9, Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in
thirteen Sermons, on Psalm, 42.11. His Four Sermons concerning, 4 Sin against
the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered
7 The good and means of Establishment 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The
great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints
Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 11
Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptaton 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14
The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical
Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints
Hiding place, etc. 19 Christ's Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances
21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts
Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending his
Ambassadors to that End From. 2 Cor. 5 19, 20, 21. 2 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1 What Contentment is.
2 It is an Holy art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it. 4 The Evil of the
contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 3 Gospel Worship, on
Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the Worship of God in
General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords supper, and
prayer. 4 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1 17 Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature.
2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14. 5 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness:
Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The great Evil thereof, on
Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of
Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5.24. and on Phil. 3.20. 6
An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 9 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, on Job 16.21. 10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.3.
12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7. Mr. Buroughs his fifty nine Sermons on
Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Are Printing A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the
first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at
Dedham in Essex. Mr Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Cure:
Discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Self-denial
and Faith. Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The Wonders of the Loadstone.
By Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St.
Matthew. By Mr. Ward. The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the
Churches and Synod there.
Eleven Books by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1. The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of al Diseases in the Body of Man. Being a Translation
of the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, now living;
Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above fifteen thousand
of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few Years, having been
eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature,
Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for
the cure for them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2. A Sure Guide
to Physic and Chyrurgery: That is to say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and
Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical Description of the whole body of Man, and
its parts, with their Respective diseases, demonstrated from the Fabric and
use of the said Parts. In Six Books of Riolanus, translated, and adorned with a
hundred eighty four Figures cut in Brass. 3 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of
Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several Parts of the Body of Man,
illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever was in English before.
4 A Translation of the New dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added The Key to Galens Method of Physic, 5 The English
Physician enlarged. being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs
of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most Diseases
incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for three pence
charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering al Herbs, both
Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping them and their
Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping al manner of useful Compounds, made of
those Herbs. The way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and
Mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted. 6 A Directory for
Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every sheet,
and illustrated with diverse new Plates. 7 Galens Art of Physic, with a large
Comment. 8 A New Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 9 A Treatise
of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children^ wherein is showed, 1 The
Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of the Disease: Published in
Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates and Dr. Regemorter, translated into English,
And corrected by N. Culpeper. 10 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the
Common People. 11 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic. The
Idea of Practical Physic, in twelve Books, are Printing. The London
Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin. The London Dispensatory
in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin. The Royal and Delightful Game of
Picquet, written in French, and now rendered into English. Octavo. The Golden
Rule of Justice Advanced.
Six Sermons preached by Dr. Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods Eternal preparation for his Dying Saints. A Commemoration
of King Charles his Inauguration. In a Sermon, By William Land, then Bishop of
Canterbury. Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before
the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows. Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance.
Englands Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery, compared with its
Deliverance from the Roman Papicy. In a Sermon on the 5 of Nov. 1651. before
the Parliament. By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with his People in these
Nations. Opened in a Thanksgiving Sermon, preached on the 5 of November. 1656
before the Right Honorable, the High Court of Parliament. By Peter Sterry. Mr.
Sympsons Sermon at Westminster Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. The Best
and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon. A Sacred Panegyric. By
Stephen Martial. A Sermon. The Cras^ and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries.
By Matthew Newcomin. A Sermon. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. A
Sermon. A Vindication of Free Grace: Endeavoring to prove, 1. That we are not
elected as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds,
but persons. 2. that Christ did not by his death intend to save all men, and
touching those whom he intended to save, that he did not die for them only, if
they would believe, but that they might believe. 3. that we are not justified
properly by our believing in Christ, but by our Christ, believing in him. 4.
that which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of a
common ability restored through Christ to al men in general, but a principle.
of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson. A Sermon.
The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel. A Sermon. Eaton on the
Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblige not. A Relation of
the Barbados. A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in
New England: by Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew. The Institutes of the Laws of
England, by John Cowel. Octavo. A Description of the Grand Signiors Scraglio;
or the Turkish Emperors Court. By John Greaves. Octavo. The reigning Error
arraigned at the Bar of Scripture, and Reason. By Francis Fulwood. Octavo. The
state of future Life. By Thomas White. twelves. Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell.
-- of Christ's Genealogy. The Cause of our Divisions discovered, and the Cure
propounded. Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of
Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church
Ordinance of Baptism Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and
Speech. A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone
in New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are
answered, 1 Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and
Governors have an Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whther Kings and Governors
be subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the
People are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the People have, be their
Governors. 6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor. 7 What Confidence
is to be given to Princes. The Compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the
Philippians. Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints
submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time.
Barriff's Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's Soul The Anatomist
Anatomized The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech
on the Scaffold. A Looking-Glass for the Anabaptists. Woodwards Sacred
Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to al
Rational men concerning his trial. De Corpore Politico: Or the Elements of Law,
Moral and Politic. By Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. The Copyholders Plea,
against the excess of Fines uncertain exacted of them by their Lords upon their
Admittance. A Trumpeter sent by God to all Europe. Woodwards Antidote against
the Plague-sores, in Mr. Edwards his Gangraena. Baptism; Breaking Bread, or the
Lords Supper briefly discussed. The Army Vindicated
The Contents.
CHAP. 1. Page 1 Chap. 2. That there was a breach made between God and man
after a blessed Union. Page 5 Chap. 3. That there is away to make up a Peace
between God and Sinful Man. Page 11 Chap. 4. Reconciliation Opened, 1. By it
Gods enmity is taken away. 2. The enmity on the souls part is taken away. 3.
God takes into entire Love. 4. By it thou come to be in League and Covenant
with God. 5. The soul is perfectly Reconciled. 6. This Reconciliation its
everlasting. 7. It continues notwithstanding al thy sins. 8. The Devils
accusations shall never make God thy Enemy again. Page 17 Chap. 5. Twelve
Blessed Consequences of our Reconciliation. Page 25 Chap. 6. Use, 1. Page 34
Chap. 7. Use, 2. Page 38 Chap. 8. How to know whether a man's Peace be made with
God, opened in in seven Particulars. 1. Every weapon of war against God is laid
down 2. There has been treaties of Peace between God and that soul. 3. Peace
with God will make thee abhor thy self for thy former cursed ways. 4. It will
make thee on Gods side. 5. It will preserve from evil. 6. It will enable thee to
suffer much. 7. It will make thee highly prise it. Page 41 Chap. 9. Use, 3. To
seek to make our Peace with God: five helps thereunto. 1. Keep from the outward
Acts of sin. 2. Labor to set God continually before you. 3. Resolve not to be
at Peace with your selves til you be at Peace with God. 4. Seek Peace with God
on his own Conditions, 5. Prize Peace with God now, as you will value it at the
day of judgment. Page 50 Chap. 10. God begins the work of Reconciliation with
man. Page 59 Chap. 11. Uses of Gods beginning with man to be Reconciled. Use,
1. Admire his goodness in beginning, seeing he had no need of us; and had so
great advantage against us. Use, 2. Begin to seek peace even with our
inferiors. Use, 3. The certainty of our salvation being reconciled. Use, 4. Not
to be backward and hang off when God calls to duty. Page 61 Chap. 12. Doct. Our
Reconciliation with God is made in Christ. Seven things propounded for opening
the Doctrine. Page 67 Chap. 13. The necessity of Christ's coming in, for our
Reconciliation. Page 73 Chap. 14. How Christ comes to be a sit Reconciler.
Opened in seven Particularrs; 1. Because he is the second person in the
Trinity. 2. He has taken our Nature on him. 3. He knows fully the mind of the
Father. 4. He knows what will satisfy the Father. 5. God the Father does
infinitely Love him. 6. He never offended the Father. 7. What he does has
infinite efficacy and worth. Page 76 Chap. 15. What Christ has undertaken and
performed in our Reconciliation, 1. To satisfy Gods Justice, 2. To bring our
hearts and subdue them to God. Page 82 Chap. 16. How what Christ has done for
Our Reconciliation, come to be made Ours, 1. Christ the head of the second
Covenant. Page 87 Chap. 17, How we come to have intrest in what Christ has
done is further opened. Page 89 Chap. 18. Eight Consequences of Our
Recenciliation being made in Christ. 1. It is a deep Mystery 2. It is very
free. 3. It is sure and certain. 4. It is full. 5. It is an honorable way. 6.
Yet in such a way as does debase man. 7. It is firm and everlasting. 8. This
Reconciliation was a very difficult work. Page 91 Chap. 19. Three Reasons why
God would be Reconciled to the world in Christ and no other way. 1. Because God
the Son is most glorified this way. 2. Because God the Father is most glorified
this way. 3. Because there was no such way as this to melt the hearts of
sinners. Or to encourage them to come to God. Page 100 Chap. 20. Application.
Use, 1. See the woeful misery sin has brought us unto; humiliation for sin
useful. Page 106 Chap. 21. Use, 2, Discovering of Mistakes about
Reconciliation. Page 111 Chap. 22. Use, 3. To encourage sinners to come to God
for Reconciliation: And discouragements removed. Page 113 Chap. 23. Use, 4.
Despair not of Gods making peace in this Nation. Page 118 Chap. 24. Use, 5.
Those that have assurance of their peace with God; highly to prise it. Page 121
Chap. 25. Christians may loose the assurance of their Peace with God through
the weakness of their Faith. 1. Weakness, When they think the sin they fall
into, does presently cause an enmity between God and them. Object. What need
Believers then be careful to avoid sin? Answered. 2 Weakness, Judging Gods
works as enmity against them Page 123 Chap. 26. We may loose the assurance of
our Peace with God by our sinful walking. Page 133 Chap. 27. Use, 6. Give God
the glory of our Reconciliation. Page 135 Chap. 28. Use, 7. To love Christ, And
do or suffer for him. Page 137 Chap. 29. Use, 8. In Seeking Reconciliation by
Christ. Page 140 Chap. 30. God [was] reconciling the world to himself from all
eternity, opened. Page 141 Chap. 31. The of work our Reconciliation with God in
Christ has been a doing from all eternity. Page 146 Chap. 32. Five Uses of the
former Doctrine. Page 153 Chap. 33. Of Gods Reconciling the world to himself.
Page 158 Chap. 34. Gods reconciling [the World] to himself, cannot be meant of
every individual man; proved by scripture: And Three Reasons. Page 160 Chap.
35, Why Gods Reconciling to himself is expressed in so large a term as the
[World.] Six Reasons thereof. Page 163 Chap. 36. Use. 1, Seeing God has
excepted none from Mercy, let none except themselves. Page 168 Chap, 37, Use,
2. Page 170 Chap, 38, Not imputing their trespasses; Opened And 3. Notes on the
text. Page 172 Chap, 39, The Ministers Commission to Preach Reconciliation to
the World. Page 251 Chap. 40. Why God chose Men rather than Angels to dispense
the Mystery of Reconciliation. The Reasons thereof, Page 259 Chap, 41, Why God
will not himself immediately dispute this Gospel Reconciliation. Page 264 Chap,
42, Use, 1; The sending of the Ministers of the Gospel is to be accounted a
glorious blessing, Page 267 Chap, 43, Use, 2. The Great honor of Ministers that
are Faithful. Page 268 Chap, 44, Page 272 Chap, 45, Verse, 20. Opened, and Five
Doctrines propounded. Page 278 Chap, 46. The Ministers of the Gospel Are
Ambassadors of Christ, Opened in six particulars. Page 280 Chap. 47, Use, 1.
Page 283 Chap, 48, The second Doctrine, (Propounded in the 45, Chapter)
prosecuted. Page 284 Chap, 49, The Second Doctrine (propounded in the 45,
Chapter) further prosecuted. Page 288 Chap. 59, Use 1. Answering the Objections
of the Arminians. And the Wantons of our Age, Page 291 Chap 51, Use, 2,
Ministers ought to speak as the Oracles of God. The manner of their preaching
Opened. Page 293 Chap, 52, How to know what kind of Ministry God speaks most
in. Page 299 Chap, 53. Use, 3, We should delight in the Word. Page 301 Chap,
54, Use, 4. If God and Christ speak in the word, how dreadful ought it to be to
the Neglectors, Disobayers, and Contemners of the word? Page 303 Chap, 55, How
we ought to have the word. Page 307 Chap, 56, The third Doctrine (propounded in
the 45. Chapter) prosecuted, Viz, The excellency of the Gospel make the
Ministers earnest in their Ministration. Page 309 Chap, 57, Reasons of Faithful
Ministers earnestness, 1, their love to God, 2, their love to Jesus Christ, 3,
their love to their souls to whom they Preach, 4, a kind of love to themselves,
Page 311 Chap, 58, Use, 1, The horrible wickedness of those that are idle in
the Ministry. Page 315 Chap, 59, Use, 2, Page 316 Chap, 60, The fourth
Doctrine (propounded in the 45, Chapter) viz, That God and Christ are exceeding
willing and desirous to be reconciled to sinners. Page 317 Chap. 61, The First
Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to be reconciled to
sinners. Page 318 Chap, 62 The Second Argument: Manifesting the exceeding
willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled to sinners. Page 319 Chap, 63,
The third Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and Christ to
be Reconciled to sinners. Page 320 Chap, 64, The fourth Argument: Manifesting
the exceeding willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled to sinners. Page
321 Chap 65, The Fifth Argument, Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
and Christ to be reciled to sinners. Page 322 Chap, 66, The Sixth Argument:
Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled to
sinners. Page 323 Chap, 67, The Seventh Argument: Manifesting the exceeding
willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled to sinners, Page 325 Chap, 68,
The Eight Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to be
reconciled to sinners, Page 326 Chap, 69 The Ninth Argument: Manifesting the
exceeding willingness of God to be reconciled to sinners, Page 327 Chap. 70,
The tenth argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and Christ to
be reconciled to sinners. Page 329 Chap, 71, The eleventh argument: Manifesting
the exceeding willingness of God and Christ to be reconciled to sinners. Page
333 Chap, 72, The twelfth argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of
God and Christ to be reconciled to Sinners. Page 335 Chap. 73, The thirtenth
argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to be reconciled to
Sinners, Page 340 Chap, 74, The Fourteenth argument: Manifesting the exceeding
willingness of God to be reconciled to sinners Page 341 Chap. 75, The fifteenth
argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to be reconciled to
sinners Page 344 Chap. 76. The sixteenth argument: Manifesting the exceeding
willingness of God to be reconciled to sinners. Page 346 Chap. 77, Christ's
willingness to be reconciled to Sinners, further opened Page 350 Chap. 78
Objections answered concerning the willingness of God and Christ to be
reconciled t^ ^^^ners. Page ^^^ Chap. 79. Use, 1, Admire Gods infinite Grace in
entreatng to be reconciled to Sinners, Considering. 1. What it is God intreates
for. 2. Who are entreated. 3. By whom you are entreated. 4, What need has God
of you? Page 364 Chap. 80, Use, 2, and 3. Page 366 Chap. 81, Use, 4, To
strengthen our Faith; if God were reconciled when we were enemies, he will not
cast us off for every infirmity. Objections Answered. Page 368
GOSPEL-RECONCILIATION, OR Christ's Trumpet of Peace TO THE WORLD.
2 Cor. 5.19, 20. To-witt; that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto Us the
word of Reconciliation. Now then we as Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled unto
God.
CHAP. 1.
THIS Apostle Paul who was the Penman of this, and the former Epistle, was a
chosen vessel to bear the name of Christ in the World; a glorius instrument to
publish the grace of God in Jesus Christ: One of the most famous Ambassadors
that ever was upon the earth; One that honored Jesus Christ as much as ever
man did that we either ever read of, or ever heard of; all his care was to
Magnify, yea indeed to Omnifie Jesus Christ; the very name of Christ was as
sugar in his mouth, and rolled up and down under his tongue; He himself had
tasted upon his spirit much of the sweetness of the grace of God in Christ;
and he labors much to make this known unto others, that they might likewise
experience the sweetness thereof. And in these two verses there is as much set
forth of the grace of God in the Gospel as I know in any two verses together in
all the Book of God.

We have here set out unto us.

1. The Doctrine of Reconciliation between God, and man.

2. The Apostles Commission for to declare this Doctrine of Reconciliation.

3. The Faithful discharge of this his Commission. The first two are in the 19.
verse. And the third is in the 20. verse.

As for this 19. verse we heave here. First the Doctrine of Reconciliation: to
wit; That God was in Christ Reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing
their trespasses to them. And in that you have these Two things.

First, the Doctrine of Reconciliation set down more generally; Namely; that
God was in Christ Reconciling the world to himself.

Secondly, An instance in one special great work of God, in Reconciling the
world unto himself.

We shall make an entrance into the first of these and so proceed; namely, The
Doctrine of Reconciliation set down more generally. That God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself.

This word (...), Reconciliation, Notes and implies; that there was a formal
breach between God, and us: we cannot understand what it is to be Reconciled,
except we do beforehand know somewhat about the Breach which this Reconciliation
must make up. It does implie an enmity that there was between man and God; for
if two be reconciled, then certainly, it implys, that once there was an enmity
between them. Conciliari is to bring into favor, but Reconciliari, is to bring
into favor again those that have bin in favor before, and between whom there
has been a Breach; therefore to bring into feavor again; is in plain terms,
Reconciliation. And in the opening of this doctrine therefore, there are these
particulars that plainly lie before us in the Text; for I will go no further in
the opening of the Doctrine of Reconciliation but merely to that which you have
lying obviously, and plainly before you in the words. In which you have these
Particulars.

First, That which is implied; namely, That there was a blessed Union at the
first between God and Man, but this was broken, and there was an enmity after
that union between God and Man. I put these Two ^^ether; namely that after the
first union that was between God and Man, there was an enmity between God and
Man.

Secondly, There is yet a way to have this Breach made up; there is a
possibillity for man that is at enmity with God, to be Reconciled.

Thirdly, We shall open to you, wherein this Reconciliation does consist; what
that Reconciliation is which the text speaks of, and which the Gospel does
tender unto us.

Fourthly, We shall show the principal cause of this, how this Reconciliation
did begin. It was God himself that did begin with us, we did not begin with him
to make peace, God did first begin with us, or there would never have peace
been made between him and Man.

Fifthly, We shall show in whom this Reconciliation is made; it is in Jesus
Christ; which indeed is the principal thing of al; and that wherein the mystery
of the Gospel lies: and when we come to that, we shall open the Mystery of this
Reconciliation. And then,

Sixthly, Further from what time this Reconciliation has been. It [was] says
the Te^^ God [was] in Christ; it was not onl^ made at the present; but there
was a work between God and Christ concerning the Reconciliation of man from all
eternity.

Seventhly, Who they are here that are said to be reconciled; that is; the
[World] to wit, that God was in Christ Reconciling the world to himself.

CHAP. 2. That there was a breach made between God and man after a blessed Union
IN the first Chapter we have much work cut out. Some of the particulars I will
pass over very briefly, for my scope and drift is to open to you the
Evangelical part of this Text, and to insist specially upon what is plainly
expressed, rather than to insist on what is employed. But because we cannot
treat of what is expressed without treating a little of what is employed:
Therefore in a few lines of that, and so pass on.

1 That which is employed, is, That there is a Breach made between God and us
after Union (I put these two together) There was at first a blessed union
between God and mankind; God did make man in a happy estate according to his
own Image, that is, in perfect holiness, and righteousness. When he had made
al other Creatures, he makes man as his chosen Creature, stamps upon him his
own image, to the end that he might by man have his glory from all the other
Creatures that were made, that he might in this world have a creature which
might be able to know him, and to worship him, and to serve him, and to take
notice of the luster of his glory that arose from al his other works, and to
reflect this glory upon his face: and he made man a Creture fit to do this
work. Man was very hapy in his first creation in this thing, that God made him
of al his creaturs fit for such a business to reflect his own glory upon his
own face, and so to enjoy communion with himself, which no creature in the
world, except the Angels which were in Heaven, were capable of. And the Lord
loved this creature, and took delight in him, therefore it is observable in
that 1. Gen the last, that though when he beheld all his other works, he only
said that they were good; yet when the sixth day came wherein man was made, the
text says, that he saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very
good: Every particular Creature was good taken by it self, good as from God,
good in their qualities and effects, wthout any, either guilt or hurt. But now
taken altogether are very good, especially seeing man was made who is the most
excellent of all Gods visible works in the morning of his creation.
observe it, it is never said very good, till the last day, till man is made;
there is not this Commendation of the works of God mentioned till he had made
man; and the reason is indeed, because the Lord did not take so much delight in
all the works he had made in this world, until he had made man, man was the
very complement of all the excellencies of Gods works; for indeed he was the
End of all his works, he made all the other for man, and man for himself. God
has not his glory, I mean not immediately from al his other works in the
world, but only through man, and had it not been for man, he had lost the
greatest part of his glory in the rest of his works; his glory passes from all
the works that he made, unto him through man. Now therefore though the works
that God made, the Heaven, the Earth, and the Seas, and the like, were good in
themselves; yet, what glory could God have had in all these? he could have no
Communion with these Creatures after they were made, and these Creatures could
have no communion with him; none of them could know God, or take any notice of
God, or praise God actively. God is a pure act, and he is not content with
having his glory passively, but he must have his glory actively: It is true, al
his Creatures were made as an instrument in tune; but there was none to play
upon it; and though there be never so much of the glory of God in all the
Creatures in the world, yet if man had not been made, none could have sounded
forth this glory of God; those Creatures had been Dumb in that respect, like an
instrument that cannot of it self sound forth any music unless there were
some to play upon it: and so it is here, God had made all other Creatures very
good, and there was in them matter of Gods praise; but now, to the end that
this praise and glory of God may be sounded forth, he brings in man, and he
gives him skill to praise the name of God in all these Creatures; and in this
God delighted very much.

Thus there was a most blessed union, and a wonderful delight between God and
Man at first; but the truth is, this union was soon broken, and man in a small
time, did come to be (next to the Devils) the most deadly enemy that God had,
though there was a most blessed union between God and man at first; so that
Adam could walk, and Converse with God, as he did for a while; yet Adam sins
against God and turns a most disperate enemy against God; even he himself, and
all his posterity; therefore you shall observe in the story where the fall of
man is set forth; that as soon as Adam had sinned, the voice of God which he
did but hear in the Garden, became terrible to him, and he presently seeks to
hide himself; he was Conscious to himself that h^ had made God his enemy and he
looks upon God as his enemy, and so flies from him, as from his enemy; O what
a change was here of man's condition! what a sad thing was this; that God who
had no Creature in all the world to know him, and fear him, and serve him, and
love him, and in whom he could delight, and have Communion, but only man, and
that that man should presently turn rebel, and enemy unto God; such an enemy as
God looks upon him, as one having a most opposite nature unto him; and man
looks upon God as an enemy to him, and flies from him as from an enemy; so that
God was sain as it were to call after him; Adam where art thou? This is the
woeful fruit of sin, even of the first sin, of the fall of our first Parents;
and since the world began, since that very time, this man, this Adam has
begotten none but enemies unto God; and if there be any truth in the word of
God, this is certain, That there was never any Child of Adam but was born an
enemy unto God; the Scripture is as Clear in this, as in any thing; I might
name abundance of texts for it, which for brevity sake I shall omit. Romans 5.10.
When we were enemies, we were Reconciled unto God: Certainly if any men in the
world were not enemies unto God, they are those that are Reconciled afterward;
but the Apostle speaks of himself and of all other Christians that are
Reconciled unto God; he says, that they were enemies unto him: this may be
said of every man child in the world; that he is an enemy unto God; and such
enemies are every one of us unto God naturally, as that there is an antipathy
between our hearts and him; and the enmity of antipathy is the greatest; it is
not an enmity occasioned by some il carriage in one act: as for example: Two
men, though they were great friends before, yet there may be some miscarriage
between them, that they may be as enemies for a while; but that is not al: the
enmity that is on man's part against God, is in his very nature. It is true,
there was a sinful act brought it in first, and made a breach between God and
man; but that is not al, it went further, there was by this sin begoten in the
heart of man an antipathy, a natural antipathy between him, and God; so that
the poison of a Toad in the Body of a man is not more opposite, and there is
not a greater enmity to the nature of man, than the nature of man is opposite,
and an enemy unto God himself. Two sheep may fight one against another by
occasion and be as enemies one with another; but two sheep can never be at
enmity one with another, as the Wolf and the Lamb are, for their enmity is
natural; their natures are opposite one to another: So the heart of man is
opposite unto God even naturally. And know this: that there is in man's nature
not only a hatred of God, but a deadly hatred. Perhaps you may think you are
free from this; but Certainly, this is in every one of your hearts naturally,
even in those that have the best natures in the world, as you call them: there
is in their hearts a hatred; nay, a deadly hatred against God. But you will say,
God forbid: what, hate God? Se that Scripture in Romans 1. Where when the Apostle
reckons up the evil of those that were in their natural Condition, verse 13. he
says, that they were haters of God: and what the Apostle there speaks of them,
he intends of all, for that is his scope in that place to show our natural
condition, and that therefore we cannot be justified by any works of our own,
but it must be by faith in Christ, because we are by nature haters of of God.
And in the second Commandment ye have that expressed, even of those that seem
to be the greatest lovers of God, that would be thought to love God more than
any people, that will devise pictures to worship God by; and bestow much cost
upon them, and they say, it is for the honor of God, and who would not think
but that these men loved God exceedingly; yet though these men may be thought
to be Lovers of God; there is no Commandment in which the breakers of it are
said to be haters of God, but in that Commandment; he will vissit the inniquity
of the Fathers upon the Children unto third, and fourth, genneration of them
that hate him; that is, upon those that howsoever they; pretend love unto him
in their false worship, yet they hate him. So that certainly there is a
hatred, yea, deadly hatered in the heart of man by nature against God. But you
will say: how does that appear: or wherein does the deadly hatred of God
consist? In this. When one man hates another so as he would wish him dead, he
would wish him out of the way: he would wish him that he were not: such a kind
of hatred is therein every man's heart naturally: which I make plain, thus. The
very nature of God is holiness it self: and if God should be less holy than he
is, he should loose his very Being: or if God should be less just than he is,
he would loose his life, and cease to be. Now I put this question to you, to
you that are wicked men, that are unconverted, have you not sometimes a secret
wish in your hearts, that God were not so holy as he is; could you not wish in
your hearts that God were not so just as he is; that he did not hate Sin as he
does; and why would you not have God so holy, and so just as he is? even
because you might have the more liberty in your way of sin; that you might have
more freedom in fulfilling the lust of the flesh; is not this in your hearts
oftentimes; see then what it comes to, it is as much as if he should say? my
heart is so set upon such, and such a last, that I had rather God should cease
to be God, than I should not have liberty to enjoy that lust; this is the very
plain english of it; though you do not come to that height to say so, in so
many words, for I suppose none of you to be so abominably wicked, or that ever
came to that height of impiety, as to say plainly with your mouths, I love such
a lust so dearly, that I would rather God should not be God, than I loose my
lust. But you are to know that there is a language in your actions, as well as
in your words; and God can understand the language of your actions, as well as
the expressions of your mouths. Now, it is apparent that when a man loves his
lust so well, as that to the end he may have the more liberty for the enjoyment
of it, he could secretly wish that God were not so infinitely holy, and just as
he is; certainly there is this in it; that he does in effect desire, and wish
that God might rather cease to be, then that he might not have his lust; and
is not this a deadly hatred? thou do so far love thy lust, as that thou have
a deadly hatred against God, whose holiness, and justice thou know to be so
infinite, as that they are both set against it; and therefore for the better
enjoyment of thy lust, thou could wish, that God were neither so holy, nor
so just as he is; which is in effect to wish that he were not God. For if he
should cease to be holy or less holy, and less just than he is, he should cease
to be God. And truly if we rightly understood our own natures in this
particular; there is nothing will break the heart of a man more than it: what
can break the heart of a man more, than to sit down and consider; I am an enemy
unto God; and I have been in enmity against God al my days, and therefore what
can I expect, but that God should be an enemy unto me everlastingly. This is
that which will strike down the proudest heart in the world. And let me tell you;
till you come to see sin thus, you do not see it to any purpose. But though
this argument may take up my treatise, yet because I mention it to make way to
that which remains, and which I principally aim at in the doctrine of
Reconciliation: I shall therefore pass it over.

CHAP. 3. That there is a way to make up a Peace between God and Sinful Man.
II. Would it not now be joyful news to you to hear of a possibility for God to
be Reconciled to you? You see there is an enmity in your hearts to God; and not
only an enmity; but a most deadly, and desperate one. I could show you
abundance of particulars of this enmity, but the maine thing that I aim at,
is, only to open the Doctrine of Reconciliation: therefore if thou apprehendest
this truth of God; and if God has darted it into thy Conscience: will not the
Doctrine of Reconciliation be acceptable to thee? O! it would; and it is unto
those that fear God, and rightly apprehend themselves as enemies unto him. But
I fear, least while I am treating of the Doctrine of Reconciliation between God
you, you should not apprehend the excellency of it, and not relish it in the
sweetness of it. And therefore if I have said any thing that seems to be
terrible to you in my other treatises. If I have showed to you what an evil,
and dangerous Condition you are in naturally, and how liable to the wrath of
God, and to the torments of Hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire goes
not out; it is al to this end; that you might the better relish the blessed,
and sweet doctrine of Reconciliation between God, and your Souls. This is that
then which we shall begin withal, as the first sound of the blessed Silver
Trumpet of the Gospel; namely;

Doct. That there is a way to make up a peace between God and sinful man. God
has not left mankind, who has Sunk himself into such a depth of misery, I
say, God has not left them irrecoverable irreconcilable: the Lord does here
profess unto you, that he is willing to be reconciled unto you; yea, we shall
see afterward, that he does entreat you to be reconciled. But here is the first
sound of the Trumpet of the Gospel, and blessed are they that hear this joyful
sound: namly, that there is a possiblity of being reconciled; that the Lord is
content to enter into parley with his enemies, for God might have cast them off
forever, and never so much as parley with them, as he has done the Angels that
sinned, against whom he was so provoked, that he resolved within himself, and
he has kept his resolution since the beginning of the world, and he will keep
it unto all eternity, that he will not so much as enter into parley with those
Creatures, or be reconciled with them upon any terms. As when a man is so
fallen out with an another, as that if one should come to speak about terms of
peace, he cannot endure to hear of them; no, says he, I will never enter into
treaty with him so long as I live, about it. So God will never enter into treaty
with the Angels, he will not hear of any terms of Reconciliation, but is
resolved to revenge himself upon them to al eternity: therefore the Apostle
says, they are reserved in chains to the judgmtnt of the great day. But now,
Lord what shall become of man? poor man might well fear, when he hears what God
has resolved upon against the Angels, he has cause enough to shake at that,
for indeed man is a far more poor, and mean, and wretched Creature than those
Angels are. If it be so between man, and man, that when a great Prince is
offended with some Noble man in his Court, and so offended with him, yea, for
his first offense, as that all the men in the world cannot persuade that Prince
so much as to vouchsafe to hearken to any terms of reconciliation, and if some
meaner officer, some poor Groom shall have offended the King, and provoked his
wrath, and hears of this, that his Chief favorite, one that was near unto him;
that was always in his presence did but offend him once, and yet the King
should never hearken to any means of pacification: surely this man would soon
think with himself, Lord what will become of me,? Is there any hope that there
shall be a parley between the King and me? Certainly this poor man will even be
ready to have his heart sink within him, and sit down altogether overwhelmed
with fear, and despair. And so indeed should we all have done upon our
reasoning within our selves concerning Gods dealing with the fallen Angels, had
we not had this glorious, and blessed sound of the Gospel, and hopes of
Reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ, we would all have sunk down into
the battomlesse Gulf of despair, and concluded certainly against our selves,
that there can be no peace between God and us, we being such enemies unto him
as we are by nature. But though this be beyond our thoughts as far as the
Heaven is above the Earth; and though this could never enter into the heart of
man, that ever God would parley with poor falen man after so great an emnity
begot by sin; yet know, this is the message that is come from Heaven, even from
God himself, that he is contented to parley with you; yea, so Contented, as that
he himself has sent ambassadors to us to entreat us be reconciled. But of that
hereafter. God I say is Content to enter into treaty with man concerning a
Reconciliation and the making up of a peace between him, and their souls; for
that indeed is the very scope of the Gospel. If I should a little dwell here to
inquire the Reason of this, why the Lord should be willing to enter into this
treaty with mankind: the truth is, it is an unsearchable depth, we cannot
imagine any Reason why the Lord should rather choose to parley with us, and to
treat concerning terms of peace with us than with the Angels. There is
something indeed which we may have in our thoughts; As thus. If God did not
Reconcile himself to man, and save him, he should loose his whole Creature; he
did not loose all the Angels when they fell, but if God should not provide a
way to be Reconciled to man, the whole kind of that Creature would be utterly
lost: now the Lord will not cast away the whole kind of such an excellent
Creature as man is. But the truth is, these are but guesses at this Reason in
choosing to treat with us about salvation, and not with the Angels. But the main
thing is: God has ways to glorify himself that we know not of in reconciling
himself to mankind. We know this, that there are glorious intentions that God
has in this work, but what these are, we shall never know througbly til we come
to Heaven; and that indeed will be the very work of Heaven it self to be
praising of God to all eternity for that great act of his, namely his
willingness to be reconciled to lost man, rather than to the fallen Angels. We
shall know some Reasons of that afterward, for God does things according to the
Counsel of his will; and there is nothing he does, but he has a great deal of
Reason for which we must adore though we cannot now fully understand. Only for
the present let me hint this unto you; let the Consideration of but thus much
affect your hearts. O should we be sent to preach to the Devils such a point as
this is, or to the Angels in Hell; and say, the Lord has kept this Council
from you almost this six thousand years, and his ways toward you have been ^o
as if he would never enter parley with you, but now God has revealed his will
toward you, that he is content to enter into a Treaty with you about the
things that concern your peace, and the reconciling of you unto himself, what a
message would this be to them think you? but this never was, nor never shall be
preached unto them. If God should send this message to the damned in Hell, and
say to them, the Lord is content to enter into a parley with you about the
reconciling of himself unto you, what a message would this be to them? but this
cannot be; this is only a message to those that are alive here in this world,
to that part of the children of men that are living upon the earth, unto them
only can this be preached, that there is a possibility of Reconciliation
between God and them. Truly the consideration of a possibility is that which
may satisfy the heart of man, let the terms be what they will. O! is it
possible that God may be reconciled, I will never inquire about the terms out of
fear that the hardness of them should discourage me; O! let the terms be what
they will, this is the most acceptable news, this is the best tidings to my
soul, more acceptable than it I were told, that I had a thousand worlds given
unto me, even this that I hear, that there is a possiblity of reconciliation
betwixt God and my self. This may serve to be some prop to support, and keep up
any troubled Conscience from despair, even the very reading of this, though
still they are afraid of Gods willingness to make up the peace, but it is
possible thou may have it. No Angel in Heaven, Nor man in the world, do, or
can know to the contrary, but that it is possible for thee, and thee, for such
a sinner as thou art, or such as thou art to come to be reconciled.

And does this begin a little to stir thy heart, but to read that the Condition
of man is not desperate, but there is a possibility of his being Reconciled:
do thou believe because of this? then (as Christ said unto Nathaniel) thou
shall see greater things than these. So, if thy heart begin to be affected by
this: thou shall before we have done with this subject, read greater things of
the council of God about his willingness to be reconciled unto the Children of
men.

Only before I pass let me speak this one Word about this point. Let us take
heed that we do not turn this grace of God that we hear of this day, to the
increase of our more fearful condemnation, or make our condemnation far more
dreadful then the condemnation of the Devils is, because we have more means
afforded us for our delivery than ever they had, for if we look not to it, it
may prove so, that our condemnation may be more dreadful then the condemnation
of the Devils; and therefore you had need, when you hear anything of this
Decoctine of Reconciliation, or of a possibillity of being reconciled unto God,
to lift up your hearts unto God, and desire that the reading of this blessed
Doctrine may not prove to the increase of your condemnation. There is not such
a thing preached to the Devils; therefore if I come not in, and accept of the
terms, of Reconciliation, I shall be in worse case than the Devils. It can never
be charged upon them, that God was willing to be reconciled, and they would
not; but it may be thus said of al wicked and ungodly men, that live under the
sound of the Gospel, and so Continue in their wickedness, and die in it: this
will be the charge that will lie upon them another day; and God will say unto
them; you did indeed hear that you were naturally enemies to me; yet I
manifestd in my Gospel, that I would enter into terms of peace with you, but
you refused it, and slighted it, and scorned it. What can possibly provoke the
heart of a man so much as this, that when he has his enemy who has deeply
offended him, at an advantage, should yet offer terms of peace to him; and yet
his enemy goes away scorning, slighting and contemning him. Truly, thus do
wicked men that live under the light of the Gospel; when the Ministers of the
Gospel come, and preach peace and Reconciliation to them; tell them, that God is
willing to be at peace with them; that he is willing to treat, and to parley
with them about the business of salvation; they go away, and the language of
their actions is this; well, we will shift as well as we can for our selves, we
are resolved to have our ways of sin, and to have our Satisfaction in this,
and the other lust. Now God forbid that this should be in the heart of any one
that casts his eyes on this book.

CHAP. 4. Reconciliation Opened, 1 By it Gods enmity is taken away. 2 The
enmity on the souls part is taken away. 3 God takes into entire Love. 4 By it
thou come to be in League and Covenant with God. 5. The soul is perfectly
Reconciled. 6. This Reconciliation its everlasting. 7 It continues
notwithstanding all thy sins. 8. The Devils Accusations shall never make God
thy Enemy again.
III. Therefore I am in the third place to open a little further this grace of
God, the doctrine of Reconciliation, and it is a most blessed, and sweet
doctrine, especially in these times wherein there are so many Cumbustions
abroad in the world, wherein we hear of Wars and rumors of Wars, yea, of Wars
near to us, even in our own land, our bowels, what can be more acceptable in
such times as these, than to hearof Reconciliation; Now when things are grown
to such a height, when there is such a deadly hatred (for let me tell you, there
was never such a deadly hatred in a Nation between one party, and another, as
there is now) it is boiled up to the highest; as poison, may be boiled up to
such a height, as that it may be death to touch it: so the poison, and rage of
our adversaries is boiled up to the greatest height. But though we are not able
to Conceive that there can be a Reconciliation between them and us, yet there
may be a possibility of a Reconciliation between God and us, and the hearing of
the Doctrine of Reconciliation, may quiet, and support our hearts against the
fear, and truoble that we have in these times, wherein we have nothing but
rumors of wars round about us yea in the midest of al these miseries which we
hear of, as the effect of these unnatural broils that are amongst us.

Now the Doctrine, it may be opened in these several particulars.

The first is this. That enmity which we have heard of before, when once God
comes to be Reconciled to a soul, is al done away; all that enmity, is then so
removed, as that the ways of the Lord to a man are turned quite contrary to
that they have formerly been; which I shall afterward discover in the effect of
this Reconciliation more fully. But this is the first thing; the doing away of
all that wrath, and displeasure that was in the heart of God against the
sinner; so that if it were possible that you could but look into the heart of
God, you should not see any remainder of that wrath, and displeasure that was
in him, because of sin. It is true, if we do consider of God in all his workings
together, from Election to glorification; it will be hard to affirm, that ever
God should be in a way of enmity against his Elect ones, because he did always
love them; for the truth is; though we conceive Gods works by pieces, yet they
are al one in him; but if we would understand God aright, we must understand
him in releation to his Creature, and in releation unto himself; for as God is
in himself, it is impossible for us to understand him: but, we must understand
him in reference to his Creatures; there we find, that one excellency of God is
cut into several pieces, and parts; and that one act of God, which is his own
being is discovered in several ways of acting.

There are a great many mistakes about God when as men do draw Consequences
from what God is in himself, to bring them to what God is in relation to his
Creature; and because they cannot reconcile these two; namely, what God is
infinitely in himself, (which is above our apprehension) and what God is in his
manifestation to the Creature, not being able to r^^ncile those Two, they draw
most absurd, and vile Consequences from God. Sometimes they look upon God in
himself, and sometimes upon God as he is to the Creature, and not being able to
distinguish, they mistake the ways of God exceedingly. As thus: If you would
look upon God as he is in himself; there are not two Attributes in his Essence:
that which we call Mercy, and that which we call Justice, is one and the same in
God. That which we call Love, and that which we call Hatred, in God is al one,
but in us they are two things: In man, Justice is one thing, and power, is
another thing, and patience is another thing, and love is another thing; but in
God, al these are but one infinite Essence. And so for actions, sometimes we
conceive of God acting one way, and then another way. First, acting in the way
of his wrath, and then in the way of his love; but God himself is one pure act,
and when we look upon God in himself, we can see him but absolutely one in his
own nature, there is no such Attributes as we speak of, it is but only
according to man's Capacity, and according to the several ways of the
manifestation of Gods own infinite Essence, and of the several actions of God.
But when we look upon God in reference to the Creature, we see God as it were
divided. As for example: when the Sun shines, and the Beams thereof appear, if
you put a green, or a blew, or a red glass between your eye and it, then the
reflection will be blew, or green, or red, according to the coler of the glass;
yet in the mean time, the Beams of the Sun are al one: then take the same
glass that is blew, if you can but make it green, the shining of the Sun will
be green to, all the variety is in the glass, not in the Sun. So God is the
same forever; but according to the several Conditions men are in, so are the
workings of God toward that Creature. As now; man in the state of innocence,
he was as it were a white clear glass, and God shined there in a way of
goodness, and love to man: the same man falls, and is dyed red by his sin; let
him be now presented unto God, then the ways of God are bloody, and show full
of wrath. Let this man again be converted unto God and now the glass is changed
and God represents himself another way, but still the same God; only
according to the several ways of the Creature, so are his several actings.
Therefore those that will go to speak of God as he is in himself, who is but one
act, they are apt to lead you into abundance of errors, because they are not
able to manage their apprehensions of him as he is in himself; therefore they
draw such ill Consequences from God. They will tell you that God is unchangable,
how then can you be under the wrath of God, when he loves you from all
eternity? Yes; The same God that can look upon the Creature in one
Consideration with love; he may look upon the same Creature in another
Consideration with hatred. We Converts, (says the Apostle) were the Children
of wrath as well as others by nature; in that respect there was no difference
between us, and others. I will but put this to these men: Was not there a time
when Jesus Christ was under Gods wrath? yet God loved his Son from al eternity,
he always loved him; yet, there was a time when he was under the wrath of God;
that is, Christ being presented unto God with our nature, with our sins, Gods
ways toward him was (as we may say) in a red way: so we may understand, that
even those that are elect, God loving of them from all eternity, they may yet
be in a state of enmity unto God, he working upon the Creature according to the
several Considerations of it; so that while he is walking contrary unto God,
God is also walking contrary unto him. So that thus you see what this
Reconciliation is. This enmity is taken away; that is, whereas before God did
shine upon them through a red reflection; now that is gone, and he shines upon
them through a white glass; this dreadful wrath of his that is out against
them, and that Contrariety of God in his ways against them is quite taken
away. This is the first.

Secondly, The Second thing in reconciliation is this: not only the enmity that
is in God is done away; but the Lord also does take away the enmity on the
souls part; that is, Thou come by virtue of this Reconciliation to be so
overpowred by the spirit of God, as that thou have a heart in amity with God;
at least that natural crosness and perverseness of thy heart against God whereby
thou do hate God and that which is holy and spiritual, is taken away, and
thou have a frameable spirit, framed by God, and made willing to come in and
submit, and yield thy self unto God: God puts a Reconcilable spirit into thee,
as he himself has a Reconcilable spirit toward thee.

Thirdly, Further, in the third place: There is a receiving into entire love:
not only a ceasing of the wrath, and of the enmity that is in God against thee,
and a taking away of the enmity that is in thee against God: but there is a
receiving into entire love, and that mutually, God receives thee into the love
of a friend, and thou receivest God into the love of a friend too, so that
there was never such an entire friendship between one friend and another after
peace has been made between them, as there is now between God and thy soul.
And this is more than barely to be pacified, for men who were at enmity one
with another may possibly come to have the fierceness of their enmity taken
away, yea they may come to be so far Reconciled, as that they will never do one
another hurt, they will never fight the one against the other as formerly they
did: But yet perhaps for all this, they will never come to be: entirely loving
one to another: it may be they will live as strangers one toward another. But
when ever the soul comes to be Reconciled to God, there is a through
Reconciliation, the enmity is not only taken away, but there is an entire love
between God and the soul, thou art made a friend unto God, and God is become a
friend unto thee Yea.

Fourthly, In the fourth place, there is this in Reconciliation likewise. Thou
come now to be in league with God, God and thee come to shake hands one with
another, yea, more than shake hands; thou come to be one of his own people,
God takes thee into an everlasting Covenant with himself, and thou take him
to be thy God in an everlasting Covenant likewise. As when Princes have War one
against another, there may be a peace made, and they may lay down reasons on
both sides, but all this while they may not come in to a league of friendship,
and amity one with another. But God is so Reconciled to a soul, as that he
enters into a League with the soul, enters into Covenant.

Fifthly, The Lord when he is Reconciled to a soul, he is perfectly Reconciled,
we may give it that word, for the truth is, it is such a Reconciliation, so
perfect, as that there shall not remain the least grudg in the heart of God
toward a man Reconciled. It is true, on our side it is not so perfect, but on
Gods side it is so perfect a Reconciliation as that there shall not remain the
least grudg in the heart of God against the Creature for any hurt to the
Creature.

Sixthly, Yea, such is the Reconciliation, as that it is everlasting, such a
Reconciliation, as there shall never be breach made more, such a Reconciliation,
as there shall never be a falling out more. And where was there ever such a
peace made between one man and another? when was ever one man so Reconciled
unto another, as that a man may say, well, these two are thus, and thus
Reconciled who were at deadly enmity before? yea, they are so Reconciled, as
that there will never more be any breach between them: so Reconciled, as that
all that ever can be done in the world shall never break the bond of friendship
that is between them. Here is a Reconcilement to purpose, and this
Reconcilement there is between God, and every Believing Soul at the first
moment; when thou first come to Jesus Christ, God shakes hands with thee,
enters into League with thee, become a friend to thee, is so Reconciled unto
thee, as that there shall be nothing in the world shall ever break the Atonement
that is made between God thy Soul. You shall see how God himself expresses it;
in that 54. Isa. 10. speaking to his Church about this very word of
Rec^nciliation, he says: The mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed,
but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my
Peace be removed says the Lord that has mercy on thee. This Scripture, though
spoken to the Church, is true of every believing soul. Do you think that
Mountains are firm? many storms, and tempests may be abroad; but all the
storms in the world cannot remove the mountains. Look, says God how firm,
and steady the mountains are, So firm shall my mercy be to thee, and the
Covenant of my peace. Has God had mercy upon thy soul, and has he been
reconciled unto thee? know then, it is such a Reconciliation as is more stable,
and firm than the very mountains themselves. O! this is the Complement, the top
of Reconciliation, that it is a perpetual Reconciliation; So that
notwithstanding, though some of Gods ways may perhaps be toward you as if you
were an enemy, God may so appear to you sometimes, yet peace is to thee; God
intends no hurt at all, howsoever he may look sometimes as an enemy, yet at that
time he means thee not the least hurt. All the afflictions that befall thee,
they do not come from God as from an enemy, though perhaps through thy
weakness thou ma^'st think so; for though God be Reconciled to thee in so
gracious a way, yet if he correct thee, thou art apt to look upon him as an
enemy; No, it is thy mistake, Gods Reconciliation is a through Reconciliation,
and may stand with all those Corrections that he uses toward thee.

7 Yea, this Reconciliation will continue constant, notwithstanding all those
sins of thine, which indeed of their own nature make breaches between God, and
man. Take heed of abusing such a doctrine as this is. Thy sins cannot overcome
Gods goodness; O! let Gods goodness overcome thy wickedness: for that is
certain; the Lord when he was first reconciled to thee, he did know that there
would be many failings, and fallings out, as it were, but yet he was resolved
to be reconciled; and that that receconciliation should continue
notwithstanding all those failings: and thy sins, though they may change some
administrations of God toward thee, so that he may severely Correct thee, yet
they shall not take away this Reconcilation, but the Lord will continue thy
friend still. But yet if indeed thou be Reconciled; God will put this into thy
heart, that when there is any failing in thee, thou will never be at quiet till
thou come to renew thy peace again. Thou may lose the sense of thy peace,
but thou shall never lose thy peace indeed. And though we cannot speak such a
truth as this is without fear, and trembling; because it may cost the hardening
of many a soul, yet so willing is God that his people shall be Comforted, as
that he will have this doctrine of Reconciliation published, though it cost the
damnation of many sinners.

8 Yea, the Accusations of the Devil against thee shall never provoke God, so as
to turn enemy to thee again. There may be peace made between friend, and
friend, but it may be there may be some whisperers some tale-bearers, and
make-bates, by a spirit of Jealousy that may go between them, and do
abundance of mischief by their suggestions; but this cannot be between God and
us. It is true, the Devil would be continually a makebate between God, and thy
soul, and does continually go before God to accuse the soul, and therefore he
is called the Accuser of the Brethren. But the peace that is made up between
God, and a soul, through his Son, is so firm, and the friendship is so stable,
as that the Lord shuts his Ears aganist all the accusations that can be made
against his friends. One entire friend cannot endure to hear ill of another. It
is a sign that freindship begins to grow cold when they are willing to hear of
any evil against their friend. The Lord will not listen to the least
accusation that is made by Satan against his friend, he will not so much as be
willing to hear of any thing spoken against his people; such a perfect, and
through, and firm peace is there made between the soul, and God.

CHAP. 5. Twelve Blessed Consequencs of our Reconciliation.
But now that which I specially intended, should have been to have showed you
some Consequences of this peace. And therein I should have showed you, the
excellency of the Reconciliation. I will give you the particulars thereof very
briefly.

The first Consequence.
First, hence follows peace with all the Creatures in the world; whereas
before, not only God was an enemy, but all the Creatures were enemies: the good
Creatures, the ill Creatures, thy Companions whom thou thoughtest to be thy
friends; the Heavens, the earth, the Beasts in the field, the Stones in thy
House, they were all thy enemies, not the least Creature in the world but was
one of the Host of God ready pressed to avenge the quarrel of God upon thee.
You are afraid of soldiers, why have you not all this while been afraid of the
Host of the Almighty God? God has Soldiers enough, even in your own house
which he can raise up against you; he can raise the very dog that is in your
family to tear out your throat if he once give him a Commission; for there is
an enmity between every Creature, and a sinful soul, and it must be so. If
there be an enmity against the General, and Commander in chief of the Army,
there must needs be then the like enmity against the soldiers. Thou that art a
sinful soul, thou walk up and down in the midst of Gods Host that are ready
every moment to destroy thee, and that stands waiting for a Commission from
God, the Lord of Host to revenge his quarrel upon thee. But now being once
reconciled unto God, all this Host, all the whole Creation is reconciled unto
thee. All the good Creatures, the Angels they are now for thy good, whereas
before they stood ready waiting for a Commission from God to strike thee to the
heart, for the Angels do wait when God will give them a command to execute upon
those that offend him, and they are gone pesently to put the same in execution;
and so it is with every other Creature. But now being reconciled, these Angels
are become ministering spirits unto thee. It is a great matter to have the
Angels reconciled: by being at peace with God they come to be Reconciled also
unto thee, and instead of being thy enemies, they are as so many fair chariots
to guard thee from whatsoever may hurt thee. The same I may say of all evil
Creatures too, they are al so far reconciled to thee, as that they shall do thee
no hurt or prejudice. But

The Second Consequence
Secondly: A Second fruit that follows, is, Peace of Conscience, whereas before
thy Conscience terrified thee, struck fear, and dread in thy heart, and
continually accused thee before God, and was as Gods Officer to fill thy Soul
with poisoned Arrows, and to rend and tear thee. But now thou being at peace
with God, thy Conscience is at peace too, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we
have peace with God through Jesus Christ; then follows those most sweet, and
com^ortable effects which we are afterward to treat of: But this is the fruit
of Reconciliation, Peace of Conscience, which is worth ten thousand worlds. For
one to have his Conscience his enemy, to have his Conscience continually to
terrify him, it is a greater judgment, than to have all the wild Beasts in the
world, to come and tear and rent his flesh.

Third Consequence.
Thirdly, there is in the soul a Peace in all other faculties. As thus: Before
the work of Reconciliation between God and man was done, the Scripture says,
there is no Peace to the wicked in regard of tumultuous workings of the many
lusts that are in their hearts, the one continally fighting against the other:
the Conscience telling one thing, and the will of a man that opposes
Conscience; and the affections they are all in a tumult one against another;
one lust opposes another, fights against another; there is a disorder, and a
confusion, and a tumult in the heart of a wicked man, he goes against the
light, and the light against him, and there is nothing but warring, and
combustion in his heart: Your lusts (says the Apostle) war one against another
within you; and you may easily find it to be so if you observe your selves,
that when your lusts are once up, they breed such a woeful disturbance in your
heart, that you are like the Sea that casts up nothing but mire and dirt. Take
a wicked man that has but some darting in of any light, telling him what the
mind of God is, his heart fights against this light, and the light fights
against his heart; so that there are nothing but woeful disturbances in his
Soul, and he is never at Peace; No, not when he seems to be most serene and
quiet. But now when we come to be at Peace wih God there is a blessed calm
comes into the Spirit of a man, the Conscience, the will, and the affections are
brought into a sweet, and Comely order, and things are in a great measure more
quiet than ever they were.

The fourth Consequence.
4. The fourth fruit is, Joy in the Holy Ghost: for God being at Peace with a
soul, the Holy Spirit comes, and sheddeth abroad the love of God. It is true,
sometimes we are not sensible of this joy, but when once we come to know that we
are Reconciled unto God, then we come to feel the joy of the Holy Spirit shed
abroad in our hearts. This you have in Romans 5. Having Peace with God, we
rejoice in tribulation. And more especially in Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God
is nor meat, and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the Holy
Spirit: Joy in the Holy Spirit follows our Peace, or our Reconciliation with
God. That is a fourth particular.

The fifth Consequence.
5. There is likewise this fruit of it. Hence the soul comes to have free
access into Gods presence with boldness. Indeed when I look upon God as an
enemy unto me, and upon my self as an enemy unto God, how can I come into Gods
presence with boldness. But being Reconciled, I come to have access to God.
Adam could not stand in Gods presence when once he had broken his Peace with
God, but our Peace being made through Jesus Christ, we may come into the
presence of God, and comfortably look upon his face, and see no hatred, no
revenging wrath in it.

The sixth Consequence.
6. Hence there may be a sweet, and blessed trade between Heaven and Earth,
between God, and the soul Reconciled. As in Countries that are at War one with
another, there cannot be any traffic, or trading between those Countries. But
if once there come to be a League and a Peace made up between the one and the
other, then trade is open. So it is between God, and the soul. And the truth
is, there is no free trade made between Heaven and us, till Peace be made, we
cannot trade to Heaven, and fetch Commodities from thence, we may speak to
Heaven, and Cry, and say our Prayers (as the phrase is) but to fetch from
thence the rich Commodities that are in that Country, we cannot til there be a
Peace Concluded. Indeed a gracious heart that is Reconciled to God, never sends
up a prayer unto God, but he does as a rich man that sends a Ship to the
Indies, nay, it is far more and better, for you may loose your Ship, and your
adventure that you send may miscarry: But when a gracious soul trades with God,
and sends his Ship of prayer to Heaven, he never fails of having a sweet and
rich return.

The seventh Consequence.
7. Now we come to enjoy all the good we have in this world as upon a new
right, it is settled upon us, and comes to us upon a new account, through a new
right, and so it is far more Comfortable than before; for before we had
forseited all that we had, because we had taken up Arms against God: and you
know, when there is once a taking up of Arms, that very act occasions presently
a forfeiting of an estate. So, we having taken up Arms against the God of
Heaven, we have forfeited al our Comforts, and enjoyments, and we have cause to
wonder that God does not send some arrest upon our estates, and seize upon all
that we have. But now peace being made between God, and us, all is restored
again. And so those who are reconciled unto God, they may enjoy Comfort in
what they do possess, they may look upon their Houses, upon their Trade, upon
their meat, and upon their drink, as all fruits of their Peace with God.

The eight Consequence.
8. Hence follows likewise the protection of God over us, and over all we have,
so that we may enjoy al securely. I do not affirm but God may send the
Adversary, and he may take away our goods when he sees it may make for our
good: But certainly we are under Gods protection, and there shall not one hair
fall from our heads without leave and Commission from God, the enemy cannot take
away one hair, or one farthing token without Commission from God, under whose
protection we are, you shall not lose so much as one farthing, but so, as if you
knew all, you would be willing to lose it. You will say, Would any one be
willing to be plundered? Truly, if you knew that there were the work of Gods
wisdom in it to you, and how it does accomplish his end, and work his glory, if
you loved God, you would willingly give up your selves, and your estates unto
him, and say, it is better for me to give up all that I have when it may be for
the glory of God, though I cannot tell the particular way, yet I know God will
have his glory by it, than it is for me still to retain the possession thereof.
Therefore the Saints of God have nothing taken away from them, but what is by
warrant from God; and from God that is my friend, and remains my friend. We do
not understand the vastness of Gods love, if we do not think that Gods entire
love can stand with such a work, as taking away some of our estate: Gods love
is so vast, as it can stand with a thousand such things as that is. Al these
troubles, and afflictions falling into the infinite Sea of Gods love, makes no
alteration therein.

The ninth Consequence.
9. Upon this Reconciliation with God, God, and you come to have Common friends
and Common enemies. Does God come into a league with you, and are you
Reconciled unto God? hence forward says God, all your enemies shall be my
enemies, and all your friends shall be my friends, and so it shall be with you,
you shall look upon al my enemies, as your enemies, and upon al my friends, as
your friends.

The tenth Consequence.
10. Now you come to be in as good a Condition as ever you were before there
was any sin committed in the world: we were at Peace with God in Adam, and it
is broken. I do not say this which we have now is Peace so properly, as it is
Reconciliation, it is a recovering of Peace, and thou being received into this
Peace, thou art in as good a condition, in as happy an estate as Adam was in
Innocence, yea, and happyer too; for though there was a Peace between God and
him then, yet there was a possibility for Adam to turn an enemy to God. But it
is not so with thee, now thou art therefore safer. Gods heart is as much
toward thee, as ever it was toward Adam, yea more, for thou art in a better
Covenant now, in regard thou art in a Covenant of grace, though no thank to
sin, but God has so ordered it, and turned it, that as they say of a bone that
is broken, if it be well set, it is stronger than it was before: So when the
heart is true, and well set in this Reconciliation with God, it is more firm
with God, it is in a better Condition than it was before the Breach was made.
This is that which may be abundance of joy to the heart of a man. When a man
has been at a difference with a great man, at whose disposed lies his life,
and all that he has, what a joyful thing is it to that man when there comes in
one to Reconcile them both, and so to R^concile them, that he shall be in a
better Condition than ever he was, that he shall have the great man to be a
surer friend to him than ever he was. Well, Christians, go together and rejoice
in this blessed goodness of God, in this happy Reconciliation which Christ is
come to make between God and man.

The eleventh Consequence.
11. That by our Peace, and with our Peace, whatsoever wrath of God, whatsoever
Judgments of God comes abroad, or are executed in the world, we come to be
freed from the evil of them, so that none of that wrath shall befall us, not in
any revenging way, as it does befall wicked and ungodly men, but we shall
Certainly be delivered from all the evil of it. When judgments are sent from
heaven abroad into the world, there is a protection unto al those that are
Reconciled unto God, though there be darkness every where else, yet there is
light in their hearts, they are always in Goshan, though God be never so
terrible in his judgments unto others, yet this terror of God is taken from
them. If you should hear the noise of Trumpets, and Drums, the neighing of
Horses, the roaring of Cannons, and shooting of Muskets, and all the dreadful
sound of warlike instruments: peradventure at the first it may strike some
fear and terror into you, but when you come to hear, that al comes from your
friend, it takes away the terror of al these things. If a man comes to a house
where there are a Company of fierce mastive Dogs that are barking as if they
would come presenly and tear out his throat, he may happily be in some fear;
but if the master of the house be his friend, and if he stand by, he need not
then fear that any hurt shall come to him by them. It is true indeed, if he be
an enemy, or if he be a Thief, that comes to steal, and destroy he may fear
these mastives. So, the Troubles of the world, may come with open mouth, as if
they would devour us, but if we be Gods friends, if he stand by, we need not
fear what they can do to us, for we have a quietus est, we have a protection
from God from all the evils that are in the world. Though the devouring Angel
shall come to destroy, yet (if the blood of Christ who is our Peace be sprinkled
upon the posts of the doors of our hearts) this Angel shall pass away from us.
This is another fruit of our Peace with God; namely, protection from the wrath
of God when it spreads abroad as Lightning in the world.

The twelfth Consequence.
12. Again: Hence all that is in Gods word speaks Peace to us, both the Law,
and the Gospel; the very Law it self comes to speak Peace to us because it is
now fully satisfied; there is nothing in the word of God, but is at Peace with
those that are at Peace with him. The threats that are in the word of God bring
no evil at all to him that is reconciled to God, every part of Gods word does
do good to them that walk uprightly, according to that in Mic. 2.7. Do not my
words do good to him that walks uprightly? When thou read any part of the
word of God though never so terrible, if thou art Reconciled to God, thou
may read it with comfort. Many people dare not read somewhat of Gods word;
they scarce dare come to hear somewhat of Gods word, but if thou be at peace
with God, thou need not fear the reading, or the hearing of any part of Gods
word. What is the Reason that many people when there is an argument preached
that has any terror in it, they will come no more to hear it? It is,
whatsoevever their pretenses be, a sign that there is some guilt in their
hearts, they look upon the word of God as if it were their enemy; and it is a
sad thing for a man to look upon any part of Gods word as his enemy; Certainly
if any part of Gods word be thy enemy, God is thy enemy, for there is no part
of the word of God, but there is Gods mind, and Gods heart in it, and therefore
if thou be at peace with God, there is nothing in that word of God which is
thine enemy. Indeed, a man that is on the Sea, if storms, and Tempests arise:
he may peradventure be afraid to look out, he may not dare to stir out of his
Cabin: But if he be on shore, he can stand, and look upon all the waves of the
Sea, and upon all the boysterousnesse of it without any trouble to him. So,
when men are in their natural Condition, when they are not converted unto God;
then when they come to hear of the terrors of the Law, alas they cannot enter
into Consideration of that wrath of God which the Law threatens, and which
they apprehend is due unto them because of sin, but their very hearts shake,
and they do even shut their eyes against those truths. But when they are once
got upon the shore, when there is a Peace made between God and them, then they
may look upon all the terrors of the Law, and upon all that wrath that is
threatened therein, with joy and Comfort, and bless the name of God for ever
that they are freed and delivered from them. These are the blessed, and happy
fruits of our Peace, and Reconciliation with God. And now before we go any
further, we must abide a while in the Application of what has been thus far
opened unto you concerning the excellencies, and glorious fruits of this Peace
and Reconciliation.

CAHP. 6.
USE 1.
Wherefore in the first Place: From hence it must needs follow, that if there
be such a blessed peace between God, and a true Christian as has been opened:
Then he must needs be very peaceable in the world, he must needs be of a very
peaceable disposition before men. You will say, How does this follow? Thus.
There is so much sweeteness in this Peace with God that it must needs so quiet
the spirit of that man in whom it is, that whatsoever is without shall never be
able to make any great disturbance in his Spirit, so great, and so excellent is
the sweetness of this Peace. A Merchant that has al his estate in one Bottom,
he is upon every stirring of the winds, or upon the hearing of any storm,
afraid that all is cast away. But if he hear news, that the Ship is safe, and
that al is come securely into the Haven, his Spirit that was afraid before, will
be now so quieted, and sattisfied with this news, that it will not be a very
easy matter at such a time to anger such a man. There is nothing that is more
able to keep the heart of a man from passion, and frowardness, and disturbance,
than a full sattisfaction within ones own spirit. Now, if there be any thing in
the world that is able to sattisfy the spirit of a man; surely it is the Peace
with God, it is Reconciliation which is made between a man, and God. The
Scripture says, that a good man shall be satisfied from himself. Prove. 14.14.
Ex sese, at Mercerus, expresses it, i. e. from himself.
Although he meets with those without that are troublesome, and will not
sattisfy him, that he has so much within, that he sattisfies, and quieteth his
own spirit: Therefore a Christian needs not be beholding to the world for
Peace, for he has Peace enough within his own bosom. That which is the
greatest Jewel in the world, a Christian has the full pofession of within his
own heart. All the Storms, and tempests that are abroad in the world can never
make an Earthquake if there be not some vapors within to do it. So, that which
does shake the hearts of men, and make a Combustion in their Spirits, it is
more the inward disturbances that are there, than any thing from without. We
may Complain of outward things, and of this matter, and of this occasion, and
the like; But the truth is, if al be examined, and the true ground of our
disquietness searched into, we shall find, that the Cause of al our disturbance
is rather from within, than from without; and if al were well within, we should
never be troubled with any thing which does befall us from without. Now then if
any thing in the world will make al quiet within, if any thing in the world will
beget a serenity, and Calmness in the spirits of men, it is this Reconciliation
with God. No marvel then that the Gospel speaks so much of the peaceable
disposition of those that entertain it, that it tells us of the Wolses
dwelling with the Lamb, of the Lions eating straw with the Ox, that is, though
men were formerly of such Wolfish, and Lyon-like natures, yet having received
the Gospel, and accepted of the terms of Reconciliation with God, they shall
be as Lambs, they shall agree one with another. And the reason is because there
is so much in the Peace of the Gospel as will quiet the heart, so that a man may
wonder when he Considers of the excellency of the Peace that is between God and
man, how it is possible for a Christian to be put into a passion? You Complain
of the troubles you meet withal in your world, that your Husband is froward, or
that the Wife is froward, that you have perverse Neighbors; but, is God at
Peace with thee? is not he froward toward thee? and shall your spirits be
disturbed with those things when you are at Peace with God? is there not enough
in this peace to swallow up all those disturbances? I have observed, that it is
a frequent complaint of those that are taken to be godly men, they will say,
such a one is a very good man, but he is very passionate, and froward: truly it
is a an extreme blot to professors: and the truth is, if we duly consider all
things, a man would think there should be nothing more opposite to the spirit
of a Christian, than frowardness, and passion is, nothing more opposite to true
grace; for when grace comes, when Faith in Christ comes, it breeds such
abundance of peace in our hearts, that one would think that frowardness, and
passion with any in the world should be inconsistent with the Reconciliation
here spoken of, with true grace, and with Faith in Christ. When men are of such
spirits that they are soon put into a passion, and being in a passion cannot be
Reconciled, it is a dangerous sign that there is not that peace made between
God and your souls that you speak of. And Certainly this is the reason why
many Christians are so passionate as they are, because they do not maintain
their peace with God: there is usually some breach in their peace with God
which makes them so froward, and so passionate as they are with men. And to
show, that the more our peace with God is broken, the more froward will our
spirits be. You have a notable example for that in Saul; Saul when he came
first to the Crown, he seemed to be of a very low, and meek spirit, he counts
his family to be the least of the Tribes, and himself to be of the least of
that family. And when there were some Children of Belial that spaek against
him, and said, Shall this man be King over us? The scripture tells us that he
held his peace: and when some would have had those that spoke against him
before to be put to death, no, says Saul, there shall not any man be put to
death this day. At first you see Saul was of a quiet spirit, of a very meek
disposition, but after Saul had departed from God, and God was departed from
him, he was then of a very froward, and surly, and rugged and harsh
disposition, and he that was before of a peaceable, and quiet disposition to
his enemies, yet afterward he was of a froward, and cross disposition, even to
his own Son, to Jonathan who was a good Son, a gracious, and godly Son, a Son
of a sweet nature, and yet even to him, how harsh was he, O thou child of a
perverse woman says he, and he would have slain him in that passion, if the
people had not prevented him. And how froward was he likewise when he was but
crossed of his will, when he heard that the Priests had but let David pass away
with some small supplies, they must be al put to death, man, woman, and Child,
and fourscore and five of the Priests of the Lord that wore a sinnen Ephod must
al be presently murdered, such a froward, cross, rugged, and harsh nature was
Saul of, and what was the reason of this? Because he had departed from God, and
God was departed from him. You therefore that are of froward, and passionate
Spirits, have cause to look into your own hearts, and examine your selves well
whether this be not the ground of it, even that you have broke your peace with
God, and now you are at peace with no body, not with Husband, nor with Wife,
nor with Neighbors, whereas if you did keep close with God, and maintained but
the sweetness of your hearts in the enjoyment of peace with him, it would not
be easy for you to be disturbed with any thing that befalls you from without.
This is the first thing that follows from the sweetness of our Reconciliation
with God, that a gracious heart who knows what that means, must needs be of a
sweet, and lovely, and meek disposition toward others.

CHAP. 7.
USE. 2.
Secondly, O! the blessed estate of a Believer, of one that has embraced the
Gospel, he is Reconciled to God, he is at peace with God, and that has a great
deal in it as you have have heard. The Jews were wont to express all kind of
prosperity, and happpinesse by this word [Peace] Peace be to you; and in saying
so, they did wish all manner of good; for indeed the word is a comprehensive
word; and therefore God accounts it his glory, to be called the God of Peace;
and the very God of Peace, etc. And the Son of God, it is his glory to be the
Prince of Peace. And the spirit of God, it is his glory to have the fruits of
the spirit to be Joy, and Peace. And it is the honor of the Gospel, to be the
Gospel of Peace. And it is the glory of the Kingdom of God to consist in
righteousness, and Peace. And it is the Evangelical benediction; Grace, and
peace, It is the glory of the Covenant of Life, to be a Covenant of Peace.
Peace, it is a most amiable thing; But Peace with God, how lovely, and amiable,
and glorious is it? Ask a wounded Conscience that apprehends, and is sensible
of that enmity that sin has put between God, and it, what it would give for
peace with God? Ask, Ask a dying man that apprehends what God is, one who has
no peace with God, what he would give for Peace with God? If you could possibly
ask those damned spirits that are now in Hell, what they think of peace with
God? O! what a Commendation would they set on this peace! Well may we be
willing to endure some trouble in seeking after this peace with God: well may
we be contented to lie under the stroke of the Law as long as God pleases, for
this peace will at last make up all. Those that have endured the greatest
terrors of the Law, when the Lord has come in with manifestations of this
peace, and Reconciliation to them in Jesus Christ, they have thought all well
recompensed; and if it had been to endure a thousand times more than they have
done, they would have thought all to have been made up in this blessed peace.
This is a blessing indeed in these troublesome times wherein we hear of nothing
but of wars and of rumors of wars, and we are taught by what we now hear, and
feel, and know, to prize outward peace. But if we think outward peace be so
great a mercy, what is this Reconciliation, and peace with God, the Soul
blessings.

Yea, yo^ will say, there is a great deal of Blessing indeed in this
Reconciliation with God which we have read of, and happy is the soul that is at
peace with him. But how shall we know that we are those that are Reconciled to
God, that so we may enjoy those blessed fruits of Reconciliacion, that is here
treated of? I confess, this is worth the knowing, and worth the searching
after, and it is a good sign if your hearts be seriously inquisitive to know
how terms stand between God and your souls: and this is a thing that does not
usually take up the thoughts of men, and perhaps there are many that scarce in
all the days of their lives had their thoughts seriuosly taken up with this,
to consider, how do the terms stand between God and my soul? I here go up and
down in the world, and busy my self about this, and the other thing, But O! my
soul, how does things stand between God, and you? are all things well there? are
all things quiet there? has not God something against you? has not God
dreadful things to charge upon you? Yea, you will say, God has enough to charg
upon us all. No, but if thou be at peace with God in Christ, God has nothing
to charge thee withal. And it is possible for one to be in such a Condition, as
to know that God has nothing to charge him with, and so he may be able to
stand before the Lord, as freed from any thing that God has to lay to his
charge. This might be manifested further as the excellency of our peace with
God. It is true, none can be in such a condition but that they have sin enough
in themselves to be charged upon them if God look upon them in themselves; and
those solus that charge themselves most, those usually God has least to charge
upon. In themselves I affirm, God has enough against them; but God looking
upon them in Jesus Christ, he has nothing to charge them withal, so as that
they should stand guilty in his presence, or be answerable to his Law which
they have broken. You will say, How then can God afflict for sin? Yes, there is
no such consequence, that because men have nothing to answer unto the Law,
therefore they are not to be afflicted, for afflictions to those that are
Reconciled to God, are not fruits of the Law, but they are dispensations of God
in his ways of wisdom to his people; because he thinks that afflictions are a
fit way to manifest unto themselves, and to the world that he is a holy God,
and that he is displeased with sin, and God wor^s upon them in such a way, but
not as in a way of giving satisfaction to divine Justice, that is not Gods end
in afflicting of them. There is a great deal of difference between a fatherly
displeasure, and a revenging displeasure; God has swallowed up in this
Reconciliation, all the displeasure of a Judge, all his revenging displeasure;
and he has everlastingly swallowed it up, but yet there may remain the other,
he has not swallowed up his fatherly displeasure, but retains it, and that
without any derogation to himself, all tending to the good of those that the
Lord manifests such displeasure against.

CHAP. 8. How to know whether a man's Peace be made with God, opened in seven
Particulars. 1. Every weapon of war against God is laid down. 2. There has
been treaties of Peace between God and that soul. 3. Peace with God will make
thee abhor thy self for thy former cursed ways. 4. It will make thee on Gods
side. 5. It will preserve from evil. 6. It will enable thee to suffer much. 7. It
will make thee highly prise it.
But I say, the Soul should be often inquireing how things stand between God,
and it; Are the terms right between God and my soul? Am I at peace with him,
or am I not? if not, how can I sleep? how can I go about my business, and God
be an enemy to me? And if I do go about my business, it is a sign of a bold,
and presumptuous heart to go up and down merrily, and quietly, and yet this
great question, how terms are between God, and my soul comes not to be
determined of. Would you then know whether indeed the terms are good, and
right, and peaceable between God, and you?

1
First, Certainly, except thou have laid down al thy weapons of war, and
enmity against God, thou art not yet at peace with him. And can thou in the
uprightness of thy heart appeal thus unto God? Lord, thou know there is no
weapon of enmity against thee in my heart that ever I have taken notice of, but
I have been willing, and shall be willing to lay it down, and God forbid that
ever there should be the least weapon of war found in my heart against God.
Every known sin in thee is a weapon of warfare against God, and though thou
should lay down many, yet if that be not laid down; if thou keep any one
known sin within thee, certainly that one sin is enough to make an eternal
breach, and enmity between God, and thy soul. Now, be not at quiet, be not at
rest in thy own spirit, do not sleep quietly this night, except thou can
bring thy heart to this, that thou can go in secret between God and thy self,
and say; O Lord, thou know I have renounced all the ways of sins that ever
thou have revealed to me, though my sins do cleave to me as close as my skin to
my flesh, yet as soon as I take notice of them, as soon as thou make them
known unto me; I cry out and complain against them. As suppose in time of war,
some come into your houses, and you know not at their first coming who they
are: but are afterward by their Carriage, and behavior, and by their speech you
come to take notice that they are of your enemies: Now it after taking notice
of them, you shall make much of them, and Cherrish them, and entertain them, and
supply their wants, give them Money, or Plate, or what else you have, you will
be found to be an enemy to the State. But if as soon as you take notice of
them, you desire them to be gone, and you do what you can to thrust them out of
your doors; and if they be too strong for you, you go and complain to your
neighbor, or to the Officers that are about you, and you desire them to afford
you some strength to apprehend them, this cannot be charged upon you, that you
are an enemy to the state, why? Because though they be in your house, yet it is
full sore against your wills. And so, many men, though they entertain their
Corruptions, and Cherrish them, and fulfill the lusts of them, they think to put
it off with this, what will you have me to do? I cannot help it: But do you
complain of it? do you cry out unto God, and say, Lord here is an enemy, an
enemy to thee, as well as unto my self? an enemy to thy glory, as well as to my
own soul; O that thou would come in and cast this enemy of mine and thine
out of my heart, I cannot sleep quiet, I cannot rest, and be at peace so long
as this enemy is within me, till thou come and cast it out. This is a sign
that thou art at peace with God, if thou have laid down thy weapons of warfare
against God, and art at enmity with every sin: If thou entertainest in thy
bosom no known sin, though never so secret. And this is the most eminent sign
that can be, so that the weakest Christian may be able to apply it to himself,
and come to know somewhat about this peace with God.

2
Secondly, If thou would know whether God, and thee be reconciled, then let
me put this to thee: What Treaties have there been made between God, and thy
Soul? for this you must know, that though there may be a Peace indeed made
between God and thee, in some kind even from eternity (as I shall afterward
show you) yet before it come into thy heart, before thou can come to know
it, there must a Treaty pass between God, and thee. Reonciliation that is from
eternity comes from Treaties between God the father, and God the Son, and that
Reconciliation that in time comes into the Conscience, is a fruit of some
Treaty that has been between God, and thy self. As for example: When God would
be at peace with a Soul, he summons that Soul to come in, he tells it that it is
an enemy to him, and that he is going on in contrary ways to him. As usually
you know when enemies come to a Town, they will first summon the Town before
they storm it: So the Lord summons thee to come in. When did God ever summon
thy heart? Have thou felt the power of Gods summons in thy soul? Then again:
Have thou felt much intercourse between God and thy Soul? Has God been
speaking to thy heart, and thy heart speaking unto God? Has God been working
toward thee, and has thy heart been working toward God? Has the Lord sent
unto thee by his word, and have thou sent up unto him by prayer, and as the
Lord waits upon thee to know what thy answer is when he speaks to thee: So,
do thou wait upon him to know his answer when thou prayest, What have been
the Treaties that have passed secretly in thy closet between God and thy Soul?
Thou do not go on in a dull way, and come and hear the word of God, but never
hear the voice of God, but when thou come to hear Gods word, thou hear
Gods voice, thou hear him speak unto thee, Treating with thee about matters
of Peace, and thou feel Gods Spirit drawing thy heart, and telling somewhat
of Gods mind unto thee: perhaps at this time, and for the present whilst thou
art hearing, thou tellest God secretly by ejaculations. Lord I am willing to
accept of those terms of Peace, and Reconciliation; I am willing to accept of
the Conditions of the Covenant. Or perhaps when thou do not this when thou
art hearing, yet when thou art got alone, then thou openest thy self more unto
God, and sendest a full answer unto God. This is the way of treating, that when
thou come to hear Gods word offering terms of peace, and requireing such,
and such terms, thou at the very hearing sendest up by ejaculations secretly
in answer to God, Lord, I accept of the terms, and when thou art gone, sendest
up a full answer, and then how do thou bless his name that ever he was
pleased to offer such terms unto thee, though they were a thousand times
harder. Has there ever been any such doings in thy heart? has it been one of
the greatest works that ever thy heart has been set upon? has thy heart been
set more upon this work of the treaty with God about peace, than about any
thing that ever concerned thee in all thy life? Then it is a good evidence unto
thee that thou art in a way of Peace, and if thy Conscience speaks peace unto
thee from this, it will be a comfortable evidence indeed. But the truth is I
cannot give you the full, and through evidence, so as fully to sattisfy your
heart til I come to the next point. To show you how the heart is brought to
Christ and reconciled to God in him. But somewhat may be done to help the soul
that way.

3
Thirdly, the Third Sign therefore is this. If thou be at peace with God,
then upon Gods being pacified toward thee, and upon thy apprehension of it, it
will make thee look back to thy former wretched dealings with God, and be
confounded in thy own thoughts, and cause thee even to abhor thy self for that
cursed carriage of thy heart toward him, and dealings with him when thou were
in away of opposition, and when thou were walking Contrary to him. I will give
you a most excellent scripture for that: it is in the 16. of Ezekiel. the latter
end. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more; Why? Because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that
thou have done; that is the time you see when the soul comes to be ashamed of
its wretched dealings with God, and be confounded in the thought thereof, even
when the Lord is pacified toward it for all the evil that it has done toward
him. Lay this therefore, (when you lay aside this Book and are got alone,) warm
to hearts. A man would think, if God should ask the question, that this should
rather be answered when God comes, and reveals the fruits of this wrath
toward a soul, no, but when I am pacified, (says God) toward thee; then thou
shall be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more. So that if thou have
any evidence, any found evidence to thy soul that the Lord is pacified toward
thee for all the evil that thou have done against him, it will make thee look
back to thy former actings, and when thou do remember them thou will be
Confounded in thy own thoughts, and whatsoever God does do with thee, thou will
never open thy mouth any more but be ashamed of thy self for all thy wicked
dealings toward God. Many of your Consciences may tell you that there has been
diverse horrible things acted by you against the Lord, what sins have not many
of you lived in? do you hope that God is reconciled to you, and pacified
toward you for all those horrible things that you have done? If he be, you will
upon this grace of God toward you, look back upon what you have done formerly,
and be confounded in your own souls, and the mroe you apprehend your peace to
be made with God, the more will you be ashamed, and the more will you be troubled
for what you have done. Many a wretched sinner that has lived in ways of sin,
when the fear of death comes upon him will be confounded and ashamed of what he
has done; and then he will complain, and cry out to others, and desire them to
pray for him; but that is not the thing that God here speaks of, for let God
but set such a one upon his feet again, and free him from his sickness, and
fears, he is no longer confounded, and ashamed, but will be as jolly, and as
merry as before. But if God indeed be pacified toward thy soul, thou will then
be confounded, and ashamed for all the evils that thou have done against him.
This is as comfortable an argument that peace is made betwixt God, and us, and
that he is reconciled toward us, as any I know, when upon the apprehension of
that peace and Reconciliation we come to be confounded in our own Souls.

4
Fourthly, One that is at peace with God, will evermore be on Gods side, he will
go which way the cause of God goes, and he will be content though it be never so
dangerous to venture himself on Gods side. As such a one by a secret instinct
from God himself is able to know and distinguish which is Gods side, and he is
not so full of questions as others are: So being once reconciled to God, and at
friendship with him, he will always be on that side. Many will say, indeed if
we knew which were Gods side, we would be of it: friends, the reason why you
find it so hard to find, and discern the side of God, and to know it, it is
because you are not friends to God; if God were thy friend, his secrets would
be made known unto thee: try now whether it be so with thee or no: where ever
thou art; if there be sideing against God, though there be but few that stand
up for him, and his Cause, thou will be sure to join with them that stand for
God, though they be the fewest, and though they be meanest in the Town where
thou live: this is a true argument that thou art one that art at peace with
God.

5
Fifthly, If thou be at peace with God, this peace has a great deal of
power to preserve thee from evil Phil. 4.7. The Peace of God shall keep your
hearts, says the Text, (...) Keep as with aguard, or as in a garrison. Solomon's
Bed was not so well guarded, Cant. 3.7, 8. as a Saint is, by the power of God
without him, and the Peace of God within him.
shall guard your hearts, So the word is, it will guard as a House is guarded
with a Troop of Horse, or Band of Soldiers: if temptations come, the peace of
God will guard your hearts, and keep you in a gracious frame, it will be of a
mighty power to keep the soul from evil, I do not know a stronger guard in the
world to keep a man from the evil of sin, than the peace of God made known unto
the Soul is.

6
Again, if thou be at peace with God, As one that is well booted or buskined
can walk unhurt amidst briers and brambles. So may he amidst Satan's snares that
is fortified with Gospel comforts, whereby God creates Peace.
this peace will enable thee to suffer much in Gods cause. Ephesians. 6.15. Being shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace; that is, the Peace that the Gospel
does bring will enable thee to tread upon sharp stones; for, from thence the
phrase is taken, and signifies as much. In those places they use to go with
Sandals under their feet, it being grievous, and hurtful to them to go
barefoot upon sharp stones. So says the Apostle, you may meet with rough, and
sharp ways in your Christian course, but the Peace which the Gospel does bring
will be as shoes to enable you to go upon those sharp stones. Does the peace of
God enable you to suffer much for God? it is a sign then that you are at Peace
with him.

7
Lastly, He that is at Peace with God, does set a mighty high esteem upon that
peace, he will not easily part with it, he will not easily lose it, that is the
Bird in the bosom that he desires to keep singing, whatsoever becomes of him,
so long as he can keep that Bird singing in his breast, he thinks himself well
enough, though he should meet with never so many difficulties, and hardships in
the ways of God. One that has got this peace with God knows how to prise it,
for the truth is, ordinarily, it is gotten with a great deal of difficulty, it
cost them somewhat, and it cost Jesus Christ somewhat before they could get it.
Have thou got peace with God? if it be of the right stamp, know, it cost thee
dear, and it cost Jesus Christ dear, and surely now thou have it, it will be
dear likewise to thy soul: So that if Sin should present it self to thee, and
go about to withdraw thy heart from God unto that which is evil, this will be
the very thought of thy heart (though perhaps there may be pleasure and profit
in the way which sin presents to thee) this will be the very thought of thy
heart, Will it not hinder my peace with God? If there be the least suspicion of
that, away with it says the soul, I will not buy the pleasure, or the profit of
sin at so dear a rate. It says unto sin as the Figg Tree, and Olive Tree, said
unto the other Trees when they would come and persuade them to rule over them.
Shall I lose my sweetness says the Figg Tree, and my fattness says the Olive
Tree, to come and be King over you? So says the heart that is reconciled unto
God, when sin, and the world presents themselves to it, shall I lose my
sweetenss, and my fatness? shall I lose that blessed quietude that is between
God and me, to come, and close with you? O, God forbid, surely, I will never buy
the sweet of Sin at such a dear rate. It is true indeed, the men of the world
who have a false peace, will venture that peace upon any light occasion. If a
man have a Jewel that is but a false Jewel, such a thing as a Bristoll stone
is, that it may be is not worth two pence, he will not be much careful of it.
But if he have a Jewel that is a true Diamond or that is a right Pearl, he will
not venture that upon a little matter. The Peace that most men have, is a
counterfeit false Peace and they will soon venture it upon any terms. These men
that can so readily yield to the Temptations of sin; it is an evident argument,
that the Peace they have is but a false peace, and that is the reason they can
part with it upon such easy conditions. But the soul that has true peace with
God, looks upon it as a Jewel of an inestimable value, as a precious Pearl:
Here is my happiness says he, you shall not have this away from me with a
whistle, with a light matter, I will not part with this so, which cost me so
dear, and which cost Jesus Christ himself so dear, no less than his own blood.
Most people in the world think they have peace with God, but let me ask, what
did your peace cost you? It cost little, and so lightly come lightly go: that
is the reason of al your loose professors that walk so carelessly in their
ways, the peace they have had comes lightly to them, and so goes lightly away
from them, they have patched to themselves a peace, but they have not the right
understanding of the mystery of the souls Reconciliation to God, and that is
the very ground of the looseness of their conversations.

Thus I have endeavored to help you to examine your peace whether it be true,
or no. If you can upon these signs, or notes conclude your peace to be right;
Blessed are you, go your ways rejoicing, and join with the Angels in their
song; Glory be to God in Heaven, and peace on Earth; glory be to the great God
that is on high, that has not only made peace on Earth, but made peace in my
bosom; and therefore O my soul return unto thy rest. Thy soul may now even
take its ease. You have a notable expression concerning this in Psalm. 25.12.
where speaking of the happiness of the godly, he says, What man is he that
fears the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease; O! it is a blessed thing to have
a soul dwell at ease. You would fain have comfortable Habitations for your
bodies where you may live at ease, and not be disturbed, or be troubled, either
with il neighbors, or with fear of enemies; O! but to have your Souls dwell at
ease, that is your happiness: and therefore, though in many places of the
nation our Brethren abroad can have no houses wherein they may live at ease,
but are always in great streights and dangers, yet by this peace with God, if
it be made sure unto thee, though thou were in the midst of thy enemies, thy
soul may come to dwell at ease. Remember that place therefore, it is a blessed
and a sweet promise, and you should make much of it in such troublesome times
as these are, that he that fears the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease.

CHAP. 9.
Use. 3. To seek to make our Peace with God: five helps thereunto. 1. Keep from
the outward Acts of sin. 2. Labor to set God continully before you. 3. Resolve
not to be at Peace with your selves till you be at Peace with God. 4. Seek
Peace with God on his own Conditions. 5. Prize Peace with God now, as you will
value it at the day of Judgment.
THat we may conclude this particular of the excellency of our Reconciliation
with God: there is yet another Use which we may make of it. And that is this.

Use 3.

If it be of such a great excellency to be at peace with God: O that you would
al be in love with it, that you would al seek to make your peace with him who
is the great Reconciler.

You will say, Can we make our peace with God?

No, you cannot do it, but it is in a great part done to your hands if you have
but hearts to seek after it. It is true, there is another point (but that will
fall in afterward) to show how it is done to the hand of some already. But for
the present, you must know, that you can have no evidence to your own
Conscience, til you seek after this peace: and the truth is if we either knew
the need of it, or the excellency of the enjoyment of it, we would never be at
rest in any thing til we come to be assured that it is ours.

You will say, What shall we do?

I Answer; though we know that it is the great work of Christ to make our peace
with God; yet God requires this, and in requiring it (if you belong to him) he
will convey some secret influences of his grace into you to enable you to do it;
be will give you a heart to labor for it, which indeed is one sign of our peace.

Help 1.
And therefore let me persuade you to do what you can, do but keep (for the
present) from the outward acts of sin; and do not wilfully give way to the
inward or outward acts of sin, labor to get your hearts to this, that may you
say, the Lord knows I do not wilfully yield to any known sin, convince your
hearts, possess your hearts thoroughly with this, that it is the great work that
you have to do in the world, that this is that one thing that is necessary for
your souls, and you shall find, that even this will be a mighty thing to help you
on.

Help 2.
Again, Labor to set God Continually before you; the greatness of God, the
Majesty of God, the power of God, the goodness of God, labor to set these
before you, thereby to draw your hearts to seek after your making your peace
with God. There is an excellent Scripture in Isa. 27.5. That has some
difficulty for the understanding of it, but it is very sweet if rightly
understood. Let him take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me,
and he shall make Peace with me: it is a strange kind of Phrase, and I find a
great deal of difference amongst Interpreters about this text. I find Mr.
Calvin, that usually hits as right as most, carrying of it by way of
interogation, and so he says you may read it thus. Will he take hold of my
strength that he may make peace with me? as if he should have said, what will he
do? will he stay so long till he come to be made sensible of my power upon him,
and of my strength to bring him down? and then it may be he will make peace with
me. Thus many do, they stay til God comes to make them sensible of his power,
and of his strength, and then they will make their peace with God. But I can
hardly think this to be the scope, only it is a very good meditation to set God
before you in his power, and in his strength, and in his glory, and to meditate
with your selves thus: O, if the Lord should come now, and make me
apprehensive, and sensible of that power, and strength of his, indeed this will
stir up my heart to seek to make my peace with him. What is the reason that
there comes so many shreiks, and cryings from souls when they are sensible of
Gods power, and strength? O! they well know what a mighty God they have to do
withal: the truth is the reason why men do not make it their work now to seek
Reconciliation and peace with God; it is because they are not apprehensive of
the power, and majesty, and glory that is in God, how God is above them, and
can bring them under, and make them vile, and base when he pleases. Therefore
it is a good interpretation of the words, Will he take hold, or apprehend my
strength, (so the word signifies) that he may make peace with me? But to me,
the meaning is rather this, will he rather make use of my goodness, and my
mercy, and so make peace with me? For that is the strength that is here meant,
and that I shall show you from the dependence; only first let me tell you, that
in Scripture [Strength] is often used for Gods goodness, and mercy, his power
to do good, as well as his power to inflict misery, and judgment. I will give you
but a scripture or two for that. Number. 14.17. And now I beseech thee let the
power of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is
of long Suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and trangression,
etc. And in verse, 19. Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people,
according to the greatness of thy mercy. When Moses is pleading with God for a
pacification between him and his people, he makes use of Gods power, O Lord
(says he) according to the greatness of thy power, or according to the
greatness of thy strength (for it is all one) do this. So Psalm. 27. The Lord is
the strength of my life; where Gods power, and strength are terms used to set
out the way of God toward David. And here the word does signify such a kind
of strength as is to help a thing that is very weak, that as the Vine being
very weak, and being left to itself, falls down, and therefore you use to put
props under your Vines which have more strength in them than the Vines have in
themselves to keep them up, and that is the very word in the Original which is
translated [Strength] as if God should have said, will he take hold on me, as on
a prop? And that this is the meaning of it, appears by the dependence of the
words, for the Prophet in that Chapter was speaking of the goodness of God to
his Vinyard, verse. 2. In that day Sing you unto her a Vinyard of Red wine, I
the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, least any hurt it, I will keep
it night and day: what a sweet promise is this of God to his Church: Are there
a great many enemies abroad that are strong and powerful, and of swift feet,
ready to shed blood? mark, in one verse you shall read three I's, I, I, I, says
God; I oppose my self to all the enemies of my Church: I do keep it, I will water
it every moment, I will keep it: but what shall become of it in the night? I will
keep it says he, night and day. We have here a promise to help us to sleep
quietly. Well, he goes on, verse 4. Fury is not in me; though it is true, I may
come against you in such ways that you may think I am provoked, but says he,
fuiry is not in me, I am not provoked in a revenging way toward my people. Who
would set the Briers, and Thorns against me in Battle? there are a Company of
wicked and ungodly men that may set themselves against me like Briers, and
Thorns; But says he, I will go through them if they come in my way, I will
consume them, I will burn them together. But my people, they are my Vinyard, I
will deal gently with them, I will be a prop, and a support to them. And then he
comes in with this, let them take hold of my strength that they may make peace
with me: as if he should say, you are pore weak creatures, you are indeed my
Vinyard, and my Vine, but you are weak, and when a storm comes, you are ready
to bow down, and ly quash upon the ground; yea, but says God, though you think
that my wrath is abroad in the world, yet my power and my wrath is against mine
enemies, and al my power, and my strength, are for you, it is no otherwise but
as the seting of a prop under a Vine in a time of tempest when a storm would
beat the Vine to the ground, my power shall be set under to keep it up. Now you
should (says he) take hold of this my strength, as the Vine claspeth about the
prop, and so make peace with me. This is an excellent text to put you on in
these dangerous times to be sure to make peace with God. You that are godly,
and have some hopes that God is at peace with you, it may be you are troubled
with fears of danger, know that God puts under his power, and his strength, and
he would have you take hold of it, take hold of my strength says he, even as
the Vine takes hold of the prop, and so by renewing the act of Faith upon my
power, and goodness, thereby you shall renew your peace with me, that whatsoever
fury is abroad to burn the Briers, and Thorns, yet you shall have peace with me,
and that power of mine that is put forth to destroy them, shall be a prop to
uphold you. So that this Scripture, as it makes much for the openning of what I
said before, so it seems to put you on to a laboring, and endeavoring to make
your peace with God in troublesome times. Set therefore before your eyes the
power of God, the greatness of God: That is one interpretation. Then set before
your eyes the goodness, and the mercy of God, that your hearts may come and
twist themselves about this God, as the Vine does about the prop, or the hop
about the pole.

Help 3.
In your making your peace with God, observe this rule: To resolve with your
own hearts, that you will never be at peace with your selves til you be at peace
with God, that you will never have any peace in your own hearts, til you have
gotten true peace with God. I do not say, that you should resolve never to have
peace with others, but I say, resolve never to be at peace with your selves:
and it is a good controversy when men are at contention with their evil hearts.
Say within your selves, shall I be at peace with this wretched heart that is an
enemy unto God? God forbid, this heart of mine shall be brought down, and be at
peace with God before ever I will be at peace with it. It is that which
destroys many a soul, that they are so indulgent to their own hearts, they are
loath to fall out with them. And the truth is, many keep on in ways of enmity
against God, because they are loath to fall out with their own hearts, we should
be willing our hearts should be troubled al our days, that the foundation of
our peace, and quiet might by this be laid, and accomplished.

Help 4.
And then another way is this. Come in before God, even with a Rope about thy
neck, and with Sackcloath upon thy loins, cast thy self down before the Lord,
and beseech him to write his own terms, give up thy heart unto God as it were
a Blanck, and pray the Lord to write his own Conditions, only that God might be
at peace with thee. And if thou do so indeed, then manifest the truth of it
thus. That if afterward any temptation to any sin comes, or if thou be cast
upon any duty, and find thy heart backward thereto, make use then of the
disposition of thy heart: think thus: Was there not a time when I did seek to
make my peace with God? was there not a time when I did cast my self before the
Lord, and did then give up my self as a blank to God, and entreated him to
write his own conditions? and now God requires this duty of me, and I am loath
to come to it, O, I do not do now so as I said I would do when I was seeking
for peace. Here is such a temptation to sin; O how opposite is this to that
which I promised to God when I gave up my heart unto him. My Brethren, I put
this to you, either you have come into Gods presence, and as poor humbled souls
have given up your hearts to God as Blanks for him to write his own terms
upon; or you have not: If you have not; then you are not at peace with God, and
so you may go away assured that you have nor done that great work which
concerns you ten thousand times more than your breathing in the Air.

But you will say, I hope I have done this, I have been in my Closet giving up
my heart as a Blank to God to write what Conditions he pleases, and I have
professed to yield unto any terms.

Have you done so? Examine then the course of your lives, how answerable your
actions are to such a thing.

You should do this at every fast, for every fast is either to make peace, or
to renew your peace. Now this is one work of a day of Atonement, to come in
before the Lord and to yield your selves up unto him; and at the latter end of
a day of fasting, to enter into Covenant with God, to give up your hearts unto
God as a blank to write what he pleases. Either this must be done, or else you
take Gods name in vain. Now if you do this, or have done this in the
uprightness of your hearts; then make use of this when any temptation comes,
and say within your selves; O! this is suitable for one that has given up his
heart to God.

Help. 5.
O that we could now prize and make as present before us, what this peace will
be to us at the day of Judgment, when the glorious appearing of the great God
shall be; then you think it will be worth somewhat, labor now to make it to your
hearts of as much worth as it will be then, endeavor to realize it now as it
will be then. Certainly that is the reason there is no more stirrings of the
hearts of me^ after their making up of peace with God, because they do not
apprehend really what that peace will be worth another day. You have a precious
Scripture in the 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore Beloved seeing we look for such things,
be diligent that you be found of him in Peace. Do you not believe that there
will be a manifesting of the glorious God one day in another manner than ever he
was manifested here in the world? Do you not look for such things? If you do,
certainly you will be glad to be at peace with God, Seeing you look for such
things (says the Apostle) be diligent that you may be found of him in Peace;
let this take up your thoughts as the greatest business that your hearts can be
set upon, that you may be found of him in peace. Woe be to you if you be then
found enemies to God; what will become of you, if you be not found of him in
peace? it had been better for you, that you had never been born. But how found
of him in peace? mark what follows, without spot and blameless; this is the way
to be at peace with God. But you will say, O Lord, if this be required as a way
to be found of him in peace, that we should be without spot, and blameless,
then we are undone, for who can be found of God without spot, and blameless?
Yet you see, this is the word of God, and this is the truth of God, and truth
must stand, it is a certain truth, that whosoever shall be found of God in peace
when that glorious appearance of his shall be, he must be without spot, and
blameless. If God find any one spot upon you, he will proceed against you as an
enemy. But you will say, How is that? First in Christ, there the soul stands
before the Lord without spot, clear in the point of Justification: and likewise
Evangelically it may be found so in Gods esteem, for God calls the uprightness
of a man's heart perfection in other Scriptures. Be perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect, and let us perfect holiness in the fear of God. God looks so
upon it, because God pardons al in Christ, and accepts of believers in
Christ; and so they are pesented before him spotless, and blameless, and he
gives them a heart too, to endeavor to wash away their spot, and blame, and so
to walk blameless before the Lord, and before men. This is the way of coming to
make your peace with God. And O! that the reading this Book might be a means
that some soul might be reconciled unto God, that was an enemy to him before:
O! that this scripture might be fulfilled in the bosoms of some souls. And
thus, though but very briefly I have passed over the opening of this point of
Reconciliation: with the excellencies, and the blessed fruits of it.

CHAP. 10. God begins the work of Reconciliation with man.
Now the thing which I thought to have finished in this Chapter (but shall not
until the following Chapter) is this. That God is aforehand with his people in
Reconciling himself, he begins the work. To wit (says the text) that God was
in Christ Reconciling the world etc. It is God that begins the work of
Reconciliation, and if God did not begin it, certainly we should never be
reconciled unto him. It is God first that begins to have any thoughts about
Reconciliation, and if he should not have done it, we would never have thought
on it, but have gone on desperate enemies to him al our lives.

Secondly, It is God that finds the way of Reconcilation, we could never think
of a way, or if we did, we could never have found out a way.

Thirdly, It is God that begins to offer terms of Reconciliation, we would
never go unto God, except God came unto us, such is the stoutness of our hearts.

Fourthly, It is God that must not only come once, but again, and again;
after we have refused, God must begin again. Indeed a mong'st men, when an
Inferior has offended one that is above him, he will say, let him come to me,
if he will. God does not stand upon such terms, God does not say, let man come
unto me first, No, says God, I will go unto him. A man will say, if he be the
superior, I will never trouble my thoughts about it; it shall come from him
first. But God does not say so, his thoughts has been toward us, and that
from eternity; the Lord from eternity has had thoughts of peace toward us,
and he has found out ways for it; and he comes first to offer it. But faith
one that is offended with another; I have been content to yield so far as to
come to him, and to offer him Peace; but I will never do it more; if ever there
be any Reconciliation between us, I warrant you, he shall come to me the next
time. God does not say so to us; we were undone if he should; if God should
come once, and offer peace to us, and upon our refusal should stand upon such
terms as men do, and say, well, I have offered peace once; but they shall begin
next, or else there shall be no peace between us. No, says God; though I have
offered it once, and it has been refused, I will offer it again.

Help. 5.
Yea further; God is fain first to yield to his poor Creature. It may be man
may be wrought so far as to say; I will send to such a man the second time; but
when they are at parley, and are together, you shall see them, (if one of them
be superior to the other) stand upon this; who shall yield first, and it will be
hard to bring the Superior to yield. But God is not so. When we come to treat
with God about our peace, and Reconciliation with him, though our hearts stand
against it, yet God yields first. And for that you have a notable Text Romans
5.10. If when we were enemies we were Reconciled unto God; which Phrase does
plainly note, that God is first contented to yield on his part: this is the
infinite grace, and goodness toward man thus to begin with man in the point of
Reconciliation.

CHAP. 11 Uses of Gods beginning with man to be Reconciled. Use. 1. Admire his
goodness in beginning, seeing he had no need of us; and had so great advantage
against us. Use. 2. Begin to seek peace even with our inferiors. Use. 3. The
cetrainty of our salvation being reconciled. Use. 4. Not to be backward and
hang off when God calls to duty.
A Fourth Particular propounded at the beginning of this treatise in the first
chapter, is this. That God begins first with man to be reconciled unto him. In
this great work of making peace, it is God that begins it. God was in Christ
Reconciling the world to himself. In which part of the verse there are these
four things further to be handled.

First, That God begins the work. Secondly, That it is in Christ. Thirdly, That
God was a doing of this, even from eternity. And Lastly. That the Subject of
this is the World.

There was a word or two, hinted of the first of these in the last chapter. It
is God that begins the work of our Reconciliation; and if he had not begun, we
would never have had thoughts of it, we would never have known how to have gone
about to have reconciled our selves unto him, and although we could have known
how to have done it, yet our stout, and stubborn hearts would never have
yielded unto God; it is God that must begin the work. And he does not only
begin with us, but indeed he continues too: although he has begun, yet if he
do not go on, and after our rejecting being reconciled unto him the first, and
second, and third, and fourth time; if he should not still himself begin the
work a new, again, and again, and again; we would never come to be reconciled
unto him. I will but only give you two or three passages by way of application;
having treated somewhat of this already; and so pass on.

Use. 1
First, Let us learn to admire the goodness of God to wreatched man, his
goodness that he should be pleased to begin this work of Reconciliation with
us, for do but consider the infinite distance that is between God, and us. O!
infinite gondness, that so great a God should begin with such a poor vild
Creature as man is. Amongst men if one be but a little inferior to an other,
and if he be fallen out with him that is beneath him, he takes it in scorn for
him to begin to make peace: No, says he let him come to me, and seek me, if he
will. If God had stood upon such terms, all the Children of men would have been
damned eternally. When God saw that we would perish for ever, and that we would
never so much as have thought of being reconciled to him: O, then the bowels of
his Compassion earned toward us; and says he, I will begin with them first,
for I see they wilnot begin. They indeed began to make the Breach, they began
to sin against me and that will be a second Consideration which makes the grace
of God so much the more, that the breach is made on man's part: that all the
wrong that is done, is on man's part. Amongst men, if one be great though he
himself has done the wrong, yet he expects his inferior should come and
crouch unto him; but if his inferior have begun the quarrel, and have done the
wrong he will be sure then to stand it out, and expect that his inferior should
seek after a Reconciliation with him. But here; behold, though we began the
quarrel, though we had done all the wrong, and God never had done us any; yet
so infintly gracious is the Lord, that he begins first. God was in Christ
Reconciling the world to himself.

Yea, further; the Lord has no need of us. Among men; if one falls out with
another, he may happily say, well, I see I shall have use of this man, I shall
have need of him, for this and that business, or for such and such an
employment, and upon this accoumpt, though he be his inferior (for superiors
may have need of their inferiors) he is willing to be reconciled unto him; but
God has no such need of us, God can tell how to glorify his own name, though
we do al perish eternally: it is not for any use that God has of us that he
comes to begin the work of Reconciliation with us.

Besides, God has us at infinite advantage to do with us what he pleases.
Indeed a man perhaps will be willing to be reconciled with his enemy, because he
sees it will cost him much to make his party good against him, it will put him to
much trouble. But there is no such cause between God and us, for God has us
under his feet; for a man that has gotten his enemy under his feet, and has
him at all the advantages that can be, for him to sue to him to be
reconcinciled, you will say it is a rare thing, and where is there such a thing
in the world? But behold, God does this with us, though he have us at infinite
advantage to do with us whatsoever he pleases, and can fetch out his glory
from our ruin, and eternal misery; yet he begins the work of Reconciliation
with us. Oh! admire the infinite grace of God toward wretched and sinful man.
This will be the work of the Angels in Heaven to all eternity, to admire at Gods
rich grace even in this one branch of the Gospel; his beginning the work of
Reconciliation.

Use. 2.
And then, Another Use of it may be this. To teach us not to think much, but to
begin to seek peace even with our inferiors; learn we by the example of God;
that if there be falling out between one neighbor and another, or between one
friend and another, not to think much to begin the work of peace. We think it
would be a dishonor for us to yield so far; we say, what is he not my inferior,
shall I send to him? Why, it is Gods glory to do it; God does not only do it to
us, but he accounts it his glory so to do. It is a great part of the glory of
God that he is willing to yield to us, and to send to us about terms of
Reconciliation. And shall that which makes God to be glorious be accounted a
dishonor to thee; shall it make thee unglorious, when it makes God to be
glorious? If it be an excellency in God, suerly it is no baseness, no dishonor
in thee. What a proud heart have thou that thou should think that that does
debase thee too much which makes God to be a glorious God, that that which does
set so much glory upon God, should in thy thoughts put dishonor upon thee, as
if thy honor were to be higher than the honor of God himself: Certainly those
men that are of such implacable dispositions at least they will never yield to
begin to make up their peace with others, but they will stand it out to the
uttermost, though their consciences tell them, that they themselves have done a
great deal of wrong, and that they could be willing there were a peace, only
they will not begin. This proud and stout spirit in men, is an argument that
they have not been accquainted with Gods reconciling of himself unto them; for
Gods beginning to be reconciled unto thee, will make thee to begin
reconciliation with thy inferior. You will say, why should not he begin first?
It is true why should he not, it is his duty indeed, and so it is our duty to
begin with God: but suppose he does not begin; thou should rather pity him,
and look upon him in so much the more miserable Condition: and know that though
thou have the advantage of him, yet thou art to be like unto God in this
particular.

USE 3.
Thirdly, A third Use of Gods beginning the work of Reconciliation with us; is
the Use that the Apostle himself makes in Romans 5.10. If when we were enemies to
God we were reconciled unto him by the death of his Son; how much more being
reconciled we shall be saved by his life: here you see the Apostles inference
upon Gods gratiousness in himself; he being willing to be reconciled, when we
were enemies; much more being reconciled we shall be saved: as if he should have
said; all the goodness of God toward poor wretched sinful Creatures, when we
were desperate enemes to him, and never thought of coming in to be reconciled
unto him, yet the Lord himself finds out a way; and begins the work of making
peace between him and our souls: surely then, being reconciled unto him, we
shall be saved: What, shall God when we were a going on in a desperate way of
enmity against him, shall this God come then to us, and have thoughts of peace
and Love, and mercy to us? surely when we are reconciled, when we have hearts
in some measure to love this God, and to serve, and fear him, he will not cast
us off; certainly no, it is better with us now than before. When we were
enemies unto him, and desperate enemies, it had been then no wonder if God had
cast us off, and sent us to our own places to lie for ever under the infinite
burden of his wrath; but the Lord had then thoughts of peace toward us, it is
therefore now far otherwise with us; though it is true, we have many
corruptions in us, but we can appeal unto God that our Souls love him, and that
the desire of our hearts are to fear, and serve him; we can in some measure be
able to say; Lord, thou that know al things, know, that there is nothing
in the world our Souls desire more than to overcome these Corruptions; there is
no burden in all the world like unto the burden of sin; there is nothing so
grievous to us as this, that we have such vile hearts and natures that can
serve him no better than we do; and if God should ask us what we would have
from him, we can say in the sincerity of our souls; Lord thou know we would
not ask Riches, or Honors, to be Kings, and Princes in the world; but Oh, that
we might be delivered from the remayner of the corruption that is in our
hearts, from such, and such distempers of our Souls whereby we dishonor thy
name continually: Certainly if the hearts of men be in this disposition, they
may gather a comfortable argument to themselves, and conclude thus: There was a
time that I went on as a dsperate enemy unto God, and I lived without God in
the world, and never minded the power, and the majesty, and the Dominion of God
over me, but as if I were born to nothing else but to sin against God; I
followed my own lusts with all manner of greediness, but behold then, even at
that time the Lord had thoughts of mercy toward me, and he took me perhaps
when I came to the hearing of the word with a purpose to contemn, and despise
it, and to ieer at it; yet at that very time he took me, and spoke to my heart,
and showed me Jesus Christ, and his mercy, and then he broke my heart: now the
Lord knows though when I come to the word I profit not as I should, yet I come
with a heart desiring to profit; and I would fain know the mind of God in it;
and before I come, I go to God, and desire him to show me some part of his will;
Will God now cast me off when being a disperate enemy to him he had thoughts of
mercy toward me? will he cast me off for those infirmities that I have now? I
know I have not a heart opposite to that Grace, though I have a heartful of
distempers: I am not an enemy unto God as I was before, and an enemy to his
people, and ordinances; No, my heart is toward him, my heart is toward his
people, and toward his Ordinances; and was God reconciled to me then, even
whilst I was an enemy, and will he now cast me off for weaknesses; and
infirmities? Certainly it cannot be. O make much of that place of the Apostle.
If when we were enemies unto God we were reconciled unto him; much more, says
he; certainly now God will not cast us off, but we shall be saved. That is a
third use that we may make of Gods beginning the work of Reconciliation.

USE, 4.
A Fourth is this; Was God beginning with us, and did he so begin with us? then
let not us be backward with God, let us not hang off in any duty when God calls
us to do it, but presently come in; let it not be long before we perform any
duty, let us not stand out, and defer with God, and say, I will, and I will
hereafter: certainly that Soul that comes to understand the goodness of God,
how God began with us in making of peace before ever we had thoughts of it; it
will be a mighty argument to put the Soul on to make have to the doing of any
duty which God calls for, and to be speedy in the Service of God, because he
was pleased at first to begin. But we pass that of Gods beginning to be
reconciled unto us, and come to that which is indeed the main in this point of
Reconciliation in the Text; and even the principal of all the Doctrines that are
in the Gospel; To wit, That God was in, Christ Reconcileing the world to
himself.

CHAP. 12. Doct. Our Reconciliation with God is made in Christ. Seven things
propounded for opening the Doctrine.
YOu have read much of the blessedness of Reconciliation, what a happy
condition it is to be at peace with God, especially in these times of war, and
trouble, when there is so little peace in the Land. And you have read that God
begins the work; But how does he do it? observe; it is not God merely
considered as Creator of Heaven, and Earth, that infinite first being of al
things; But (the first thing propounded in the first Chapter to be opened is
this,) It is God [in Christ] reconciling him to the world. God and man were
enemies; an enmity, and a breach there was, and the breach was infinitely wide,
and dreadful; how shall God and man now come to be reconciled? you will say, the
Lord is a God of infinite mercy, and he sees his poor creatures must needs
perish eternally if he come to take advantage against them; therefore it may be
God was willing to pass by all, and so free of himself, and his own free Grace
to be reconciled to such, and such creatures as have sinned against him, and so
Reconciliation was made up; No, this was not the way, there is more required
than this. Let God, and the creature be put together without any Further
Consideration: and all the mercy of God on the one side; and all the Cries, and
tears and repentings of the creature, on the other side, this will never make up
a peace. This you must know is the Doctrine of the Gospel; that man having made
a breach betwixt God, and himself, and consider God merely in himself, as he is
himself, without relation to a Mediator; and then take all the mercy of God on
one side, and all the tears, and repentings, the Cries and Prayers of the
creature, on the otherside; and both these together can never make peace. What
must there be more, you will say? That which we have in the Text, God [in
Christ] reconciling the world. It is not God in himself reconciling the world
to himself, but it is God in Christ. So that there must come something between
God, and us as to the matter of Reconciliation, or otherwise there can never be
a Reconciliation made. This thing I have often had occasion to treat of; and I
am very willing upon every occasion to set this before those that I am to
preach unto; for this is the great truth of the Gospel; and truly al our
preaching should be, even to bring this truth home to the hearts of people; and
whatsoever we preach, if it be not in order to this, we lose our labor, and God
has little glory from what we do, except it be in order to this; or as it may
be some way a fruit of it. So then the point is this.

Doct. Our Reconciliation with God is made in Christ. As we read of Jonah when
the storms and tempests werein the Sea, and when the waves roared, and when the
ship and the Mariners and al were like to be swallowed up, when jonah was cast
into the sea, presently there was a calm. So, the storms, and tempests of Gods
everlasting wrath are up against a Sinner, and the waves of that wrath are
ready to swallow him up; But now Christ is cast into the heart of a man, and
Christ being presented as one standing between God and man, al comes to be at a
Calm. When the Disciples were upon the Sea, and the Sea troublesome; yet when
Christ came, and rebuked the Sea, and the winds, all was still. So when there
are troubles of Conscience, nothing can rebuke those troubles of Conscience;
nothing can bring in peace and quiet into the soul, but only Christ coming into
the heart; God is [in Christ] reconciling the world to himself. There is
nothing more plain in the Scripture than this; that it is God in Christ that
reconciles the world to himself. It is evident enough in the text, but I will
give you a Scripture, or two for it, and then proceed to the opening of the
point. That place in Romans 5, 1. is most clear; Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God; How? through our Lord Jesus Christ: no peace with God, but
through our Lord Jesus Christ. It is an easy matter for us to say so; but to
apprehend the necessity of this, that it must be through our Lord Jesus Christ
that we have peace with God; to apprehend this clearly, and thoroughly, it is a
great matter; and those know much of the mind of God that know this
experimentally, and powerfully. In Ephesians. 2.13.14. In Jesus Christ you that were
far off are made nigh through his blood, for he is our peace: This is spoken in
two regards; he is our peace with God, it is apparent that it must be spoken in
that regard, for so it follows in verse 18. through him we have access unto the
father; but it is spoken of Christ's being our peace in regard of uniting us to
the Church of God, to be made one with the people of God; but no says God here
is a reconciliation, are conciliation with God, and then a union with the
people of God, with the church of God; the partition wall is broken down through
Christ; and those that were as dogs before, are now set up at the table: and
there is a peace made between Gods people and us; for so Christ makes peace
that way in taking away the enmity, that the people of God might be one
together, as well as they are one with God. So in Collo. 1 21, 22. You that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled; How? In the body of his flesh through death to present you holy,
and blamless, and unreprovable in his fight: and that in verse the 20. is
remarkable for this purpose; have (says he) made peace, How? through the blood
of his Cross by him to reconcile althings to himself: [by him] I say. so that
the Apostle would put an emphasis on this, that we are reconciled by Christ, By
him, Says he: and he was not satisfied in saying of it once, but he repeateth
it again, by him, I Say, whether they be things on Earth, or things in Heaven.
There are two difficulties in this Scripture. first in that it is said, God
has reconciled al things to himself in Christ; how does God reconcile all
things to himself in Christ? we are now speaking of reconciling those that shall
be Saved eternally; but here the Apostle speaks of reconciling of all things:
God may be said to reconcile, not only Saints, but al things unto himself in
this regard: In that al things were liable to destruction through man's Sin; and
it is in Christ, and through Christ that any thing in the world is preserved in
a good Condition. When you behold the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and
al these things, and see the preservation of them in any good Condition; you
must know it is al through Christ; and had it not been in regard of Christ, al
things would have come to ruin, and confusion presenly, and so God reconcileth
al things to himself in Christ.

Further; Al things are reconciled in Christ too, in this regard: In that now
al things are through him come to be made Serviceable to those that are his
Saints, and reconciled ones; and in that regard al things may be said to be
reconciled to God; because they are reconciled to Gods friends; whereas before,
al Creatures were enemies t^ us through Sin; and now through Christ they come
to be made useful to us; and so unto God by us. A Second difficulty in this
text is, How God has by Christ reconciled al things in heaven; what things are
there in Heaven that are Reconciled to God by Christ? We must understand that
the things in Heaven that are said to be reconciled, are especially to be meant
of the Angels. But you will say; How can the angels be reconciled to Christ,
there was never a falling out, never an enmity between God and them? I Answer,
That though in a proper sense, as reconciliation Concerns man, there is no
reconciling of Angels unto God; yet because there is a nearer and a further and
a more firm union made between God and the Angels through Jesus Christ than
ever there was before or than ever there should have been, for ought we know,
if Christ hade not been; in that regard reconciliation may be said to be of
things in Heaven; God and them being now by Christ more firmly made one, than
ever they were before. And again though the Angels had never Sinned against
God, and so were no actual enemies unto God; yet they were in a capacity of
sinning, for they being but Creatures, they could not but be frail in
themselves; and so liable to fall from God and to sin against him as well as
those that did fall; therefore in regard of the establishment which they have
now through Jesus Christ, because they are now confirmed in such a condition,
that they are in an impossibility of falling from God, God having so taken them
to himself, and they being so one with God, that they can never fall from him;
in this regard also they may be said to be reconciled. For notwithstanding all the perfection of their Creation, they might have fallen into the same
condition that those did that are now reserved in Chains to the Judgment of
the great day. But now God has so reconciled al things in Heaven by Jesus
Christ, that the Angels themselves are more firmly made one with God than they
were before. And further; the Lord does receive them into a more entire
affection of love, in, and by Jesus Christ, than he did before; the Lord
looking upon the Angels, in and through Christ, there is a more through, firm,
intimate entire affection of God toward them to establish them, and to accept
of them in Jesus Christ. And besides they are reconciled to God, or unto us
rather, because they are come to be our friends, whereas at first they were our
enemies, so that in that regard there is a kind of Reconciliation; but because
I conceive the text does not so much intend that, we shall let it pass. Thus you
see how God was in Christ reconciling to himself, even in some sense the very
Angels themselves. This then is the first thing; the very thoughts that God had
of entering into any terms, or parley with man about peace, is by Christ; that
the Lords heart was inclined to man, it is from Christ; that the Lord would be
willing to accept of any satisfaction, it is through Christ; that we have an
access to God any way, it is through Christ. There is nothing from the one end
of the work of Reconciliation to the other, but it is al through Christ.

For further opening of this great point, there are these things to be
propounded.

First, Briefly, to show you the necessity of Christ's coming in, in order to
our Reconciliation with God, and likewise that it could be no other way, but by
Christ.

Secondly, How Chirst comes to be a fit Reconciler.

Thirdly, What it is that Christ has engaged himself to, and performed
according to his engagement for our Reconciliation.

Fourthly, How that which Christ has done comes to be made over to us, and
that we come to have the fruit of it for our Reconciliation with God.

Fifthly, The Consequences that flow from this; Namely, that our Reconciliation
comes through Christ.

Sixthly, The reasons why God will be reconciled to us through his Son, rather
than any other way. And

Lastly, To make some Application of al.

These particulars might hold us some time; but because we often meet with much
of this Doctrine of Reconciliation, and have diverse times before, and are
likely, if God lengthen out opportunities still to do it; therefore I intend to
present al these seven particulars before you in a very short view.

CHAP. 13. The necessity of Christ's coming in, for our Reconciliation.
FOr the first, The necessity of Christ's coming in for our Reconciliation; and
surely this is that which is to be in culcated, and beaten upon you again and
again, for you neither know God nor Christ, nor your own estates, except you
know the necessity of Christ's coming in to undertake in the work of
Reconciliation. I suppose if we should ask any of you, how you hope to be
saved; you will presently answer, by Jesus Christ. But the understanding of the
absolute necessity that there was of Christ's coming in to reconcile us, and God
together, is not so ordinary; therefore I beseech you seriously weigh it. The
necessity of it in a word is this: There was such a distance made between God,
and his Creatures through sin, as did put a necessity upon a Mediator to come
between; the distance was so great; for God being the infinite first being, and
we being his Creatures, the distance must needs be great; it is sin that made
the distance between God, and us; and that was so vast, and wide, that it did
necessarily require a Mediator to come between, and especially upon this
ground; because the Lord was resolved to have that wrong that was done unto him
by the sin of man perfectly made up; sin had wronged God, and God was resolved
upon it, he was set upon it to have this wrong completely made up, and that he
himself would be perfectly righted; and this Gods Justice calls for; and thus
stood the terms between God, and Man; Man having wronged God, and God and He
are now at varience, and God stands upon it, and is resolved with himself thus;
though I be willing to be at peace with them, yet I will be at peace with them,
so as I will have the wrong that is done made up; my Justice shall be fully, and
completely satisfied; I must be righted, for I am God; and there shall not be
such a flaw remaining in my Justice to eternity, as that such and such
Creatures should sin against me, and I pass it by without having any
satisfaction; for says God, this would be a flaw in my Justice for ever, and
that I will not have, and therefore I will be righted in that wrong that is
done me by the fall of Man. It is true, when one man comes to treat about peace,
and Reconciliation with another, it is sometimes necessary for him to pass by an
offense without any satisfaction at al, especially when that poor Creature that
has offended is not able to make satisfaction; but it is not so between God
and Man; though one Man being at variance with another, when he sees that he
that has done him the wrong cannot make satisfaction, he then is indeed to
pass it by; but Gods mercy did never work after that manner, though the mercy
in a man may work him to such a Reconciliation, and though God be a God of
infinite mercy, infinitely more merciful than any Creature can be, yet the way
of the working of Gods, mercy is a different way from the working of the
Creatures mercy; neither does it argue that there is not as much mercy in God
as there is in the Creature; but that the way of the working of Gods mercy is
different from that of the Creatures, and this is the way of the working of
Gods mercy, not to pass by the wrong done, but to provide some means or other
himself to satisfy that wrong, to the end that he may have his Justice
satisfied; and because that this was necessary, hence it comes to pass of our
being reconciled unto God through Jesus Christ. The necessity of Christ's being
a Mediator is not so much this, that we are grieveous sinners, and so we have
need of abundance of mercy from God; if there were nothing but these two only;
that we are great sinners, and so have need of great mercy, there would not
come a necessity of Christ; But we are great sinners, and we have need of the
mercy of God, and the wrong that sin has done unto God must be made up, and
his Justice fully satisfied, and here comes in the necessity of a Christ. And
thus God was Reconciling himself to the world in this regard. And the truth is,
though some of you have heard the sound of this oftentimes; yet you must know,
this is the great mystery of the Gospel, and by our presenting this unto you
again, and again, perhaps God will give you a further insight into this truth;
It is this that the Angels desire so much to pry into; they know this, that
Gods Justice must be satisfied, but they know it not so, and so as the Church
knows it, and as the Saints know it, and therefore they pry more, and more into
it to see the further depths of it; as indeed there is greater and greater
depths in this mystery which we can never fathom, and which is only reserved
for the time of the Resurrection. Most people think, that when they are to seek
for Reconciliation with God, they have to do with God only as a merciful God;
But you must know when you have to do with God about Reconciliation, you have
to do with more than with the mercy of God; ye have to do with God reconciling
himself to the world in his Son, and you can never seek Reconciliation with God
in a right Evangelical way, unless you seek it in his Son. That briefly shall
suffice for the first; The necessity of Christ's coming in to the work of
Reconciliation.

CHAP. 14. How Christ comes to be a fit Reconciler. Opened in seven
Particulars; 1. Because he is the second person in the Trinity. 2. He has
taken our Nature on him. 3. He knows fully the mind of the Father. 4. He fully
knows what will satisfy the Father. 5. God the Father does infinitely Love him.
6. He never offended the Father. 7. What he does has infinite efficacy and
worth.
THe second thing propounded in the twelfth Chapter is this. How Christ comes
to be a fit Reconciler; it is he who is the great Peacemaker; and therefore in
the Scripture he is called the Prince of peace; it is he that is Melchezedeck,
King of righteousness, and King of peace; But how comes he to be so? by being a
Mediator between the Father and us: and so you shall find he is called in the
Scripture. Heb. 8, 6. But he has obtained a more Excellent Ministry by how
much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, that is, of a Covenant of
grace, and not of that covenant of works. Now Christ he is a fit mediator to
come in, and to mediate between God, and us. As amongst men when there is a
Breach between two, and they are at a Distance; the Breach is such as requires
one to come in, and to mediate between them; It is not always necessary
between man and man where there is a Breath, that one should come and mediate;
but there being a Breath between God, and us, it was absolutely necessary that
a mediator should come in to treat between God and us, and there could never
have been the least parley, the least treaty between God, and fallen man, had
not a mediator stepped in between and this mediator is Jesus Christ, and it is he
that is only fit to be our Reconciler, and Peacemaker.

1. Because he is the Second Person in Trinity, and in that regard he is fit.

You will Say; How does this make him fit? Thus; The Sin that was committed in
the first transgression was more directly against the first Person, God the
Father. Why, will you say, was it against one Person rather than against
another? It was indeed against them al; but it was more directly against the
first Person; and this is the reason of it, because man's first sin was against
that perfection which God gave him in his creation; against that created
righteousness that was put into him which was especially the work of the first
person in trinity; for Creation is attributed to the first person; and man
sining against that work of Creation, hence it comes to pass that the first is
more directly, and immediately offended. Now therefore the second Person in the
Trinity, he comes next in Order, and therefore it is he that is fit to be a
Reconciler between the father and us, because we having sinned against the work
of Creation, God the father unto whom that work is attributed, is more
especially offended.

2 But not only so, for if he had been but only the second person; if he had
been but only the Son of God, he could not have been the reconciler of us unto
God, and therefore there must be somewhat else. When we ask you what Christ is;
you Ordinarily answer the Son of God: but if that had been al, if he had been
only the Son of God, and the Second Person in Trinity, he could not (according
to that way which God has revealed in his word that he will be reconciled unto
Sinners by) have been a fit mediator for us. Therefore in the Second place,
that he might be a fit mediator to make our peace, and to reconcile God, and us
together, he comes and takes our nature upon him, and is made a very man; so
that the same Person is now God, and man; he having taken up the nature into a
personal union with the Son of God; so that he pertakes of both those natures
which is to be reconciled, observe it well. Christ who is to be the Reconciler,
his business is to reconcile God and man, between whom there was so vast a
Breach. Now to the end that he might be fit for this work and reconcile these
two, God and man, he partakes of both natures, and is become, by uniting the
nature of man which he took to himself, into Personal union with the Godhead,
both God, and man, and having the nature of them both, he has interest in them
both; he has interest in God the father as being the same God coequal with the
father, though not the same in a Personal regard, but the same God with the
Father: and he has interest likewise in man, as he has the same nature with
him; and thus he partaking of God, and partaking of man, comes to have interest
in both, and in that regard becomes a fit mediator between God and us. Here is
the great work of God to reconcile man to himself; and in this, God must do a
work that is far greater than the making of Heaven, and the Earth. It had not
been so great a work for God to have made ten thousand worlds over again, as
for God to make a mediator to become God and man in one Person. The union of
the two natures of Christ is the greatest work that ever God did from al
eternity, or ever shall be done, and yet this was required to reconcile us to
himself; and surely you may well conclude, that the work of reconciliation of a
sinner to God, is a greater business, seeing that Heaven and Earth must be
moved about it; and that the greatest work that ever was done, or ever shall be
done, must be done about this, or else it had never been effected. The Second
person in Trinity must come, and take our Nature, and be made in the form of a
Servant, that so he might be a fit peacemaker, or Mediator between God the
Father and us. And then.

Thirdly, Christ is a fill Mediator in this; That he knows fully the mind of the
Father; and thoroughly understands, even to the utmost what wrong the Father
has received by our sin. If one should come to Mediate between one Man, and
another, and should desire the party offended to be at peace; He will say; you
speak thus unto me; but do you know what wrong such a one has done me? if you
understood the wrong he has done me, surely you would not think it so easy a
matter for me to be at peace; and the truth is, if all the Angels in Heaven, and
all the men in the world should come to interpose, and to make peace between
God, and any sinner for any one sin; God would presently Answer them, and say,
what do you do to come to undertake this work of making peace with me and a
sinner; alas you do not understand what wrong is done unto me by his sin; you
know not what injury I have received by his sin, therefore you are not a fit
party to be a Mediator. And in this regard no Angel in Heaven could possibly be
a fit Peacemaker between God and Man, for they know not what wrong sin has
done unto God; But Jesus Christ knows to the utmost, he understands thoroughly,
and fully all the wrong, and injury that is done unto the Father by the sin of
Man; he knows what prejudice his Father sustained by all the sins of all the men
of the world, which no Creature else, Angels, nor Men could ever do. Nay, they
are so far from knowing the wrong that is done to God by the sins of the world,
as they are not able to understand the wrong that is done unto God by one of
the least sins that can be committed.

Fourthly, Christ is a fit Mediator; because he fully knew what would please
and satisfy his father. If a man should come to be a mediator, to reconcile
two that are at difference, if indeed he knew the mind of the Party offended
fully and thoroughly, we would rather choose such a man to make up the Breach,
such a man indeed that does understand to a hair what will satisfy the offended
Party is fit to be a Mediator. All the Angels in Heaven do not know like unto
Jesus Christ, fully, and thoroughly the mind of God, or what it is that will
satisfy him: it is only Jesus Christ who was with the father, and lay in his
very bosom from all eternity, that knows fully what will satisfy the wrong that
is done to the father, and therefore he alone was fittest to undertake this
work.

Fifthly, Christ is a fit Mediator in this, That God the father does infinitely
love him, that he is infinitely dear to the father; and you know that it is a
special ingredient for those to have that are to be Reconcilers, that they
should be dear one to another, especially dear to the party that is offended.
If a poor man has offended a rich man in a Town, and he says within himself,
O! that I were reconciled unto such a one. If he can get one that is the
intimate friend that that rich man has in all the world to speak unto him in
his behalf, he will conclude, that certainly the business shall have good
success, and that this friend will prevail. Thus it is with our Mediator; he who
is our Reconciler unto God, is infinitely dear unto the father, God the father
does infinitely delight in him; and therefore whatsoever he shall say, or do,
must needs infinitely please God the father. This is our Mediator who is come
to reconcile us unto God, he can say, and do nothing but it shall infinitely
please, and delight the father.

Further, He is one that never did offend. There may be a friend that is very
dear to the party offended and yet perhaps he himself has offended the Party.
But Jesus Christ is one that never offended the father, but has pleased him
from all eternity, and therefore he is a fit mediator, he is fit to Speak for
those that have displeased him. As in a family, if a Child have offended, and
another Child come and speak for his Brother, the father may answer, you need
speak for your self for you have offended as well as he: But if another child
that never offended his father in all his life, but has been the most obedient
Child that can be in the world, shall come, and speak, this will be likely to
take with the Father much. God the Father professes before all the world, that
Jesus Christ is his Beloved Son in whom he is well pleased; and it is this
Christ that stands up to speak to God the Father for poor Sinners to be
reconciled unto him.

Lastly he is a fit mediator in this; That whatsoever he shall do has an
infinite efficace in it self: not only is he a fit mediator because God is well
plesed with him; but because that whatsoever he shall lay down by way of
sattisfaction, it has an infinet value in it. There is such an infinite price
such an infinite worth in whatsoever Christ lays down to porchase this
reconciliation, that the infinite Justice of God cannot but say, this is indeed
a valuable Consideration, and I cannot but acknowledge there is efficacy, and
sufficiency enough in this to make up a full Satisfaction had the Sins of men
been a thousand times more than they were.

Now, what a mediator have we to reconcile us unto God; how comes our sins to
make such a breach between God, and us? but because our sins were against such
an infinite God at first; the Person against whom we have sinned is the cause
which makes such a breach; and so the Person who is mediator, that shall do and
suffer any thing for us being such a person as he is; hence comes the efficacy
of all that he shall do, and suffer to satisfy the father to the utmost groat.
All this together, namely Christ that is the Second Person, who is God, and man,
Who knows the mind of the father to the full. Who knows what wrong our Sins
have done the Father. Who knows what will satisfy the Father. Who never
offended the father. Who is infinitely beloved of the father. Al these together
makes it, that whatsoever he does has an infinite efficacy to satisfy Justice
it self; and in this regard he comes to be a fit mediator. Al these things J
name the rather to encourage the heart of poor Sinners to come unto him; seeing
it is God in Christ that reconcileth us to himself.

CHAp. 15. What Christ has under taken and performed in Our Reconciliation 1
to fatisfy Gods Justice 2 To bring our hearts and subdue them to God.
You will say; you have showed us these two things; that it is not God alone,
and us, but in Christ, and us, that is reconciled. And you have showed us what a
reconciler Christ is. And how fit. But for the third thing propounded in the
12. Chapter, has Christ undertaken to reconcile us? Surely this is a great
work to come and reconcile Sinful man unto God; Christ must needs undertake
much in this? I will declare to you what Christ has undertaken.

1 This agreement there is between Christ and the Father, He has undertaken
that he will Satisfy what ever his Fathers Justice shall requier. As for
example. If one should come to make a peace between a couple, and the one party
has extremely injured the other, and he that comes to make peace; he does not
only come and say, Sir I beceech you for my sake, pass by the wrong, and be
reconciled unto him, though perhaps this may do much but this will not do the
deed; and this is not the way of reconcileing God and us, for Christ (though he
be dear to the father) only to plead, and Say, O father these poor Creatures
have offended the, I beseech the O father, be reconciled to them; no this is
not al. But says the Party offended; will you under take to satisfy the wrong
that is done me? I says he, who is the Peacemaker, I will undertake it al; you
shall set it al upon my scor. And certainly you will al conclude, that if he that
comes to be mediator, and is dear unto the Party offended, shall not only
entreat, but undertake, that whatsoever he would have of him, requier what
satisfaction soever he will, he will undertake to under go it al, especially if
he be a man able to do what he promises: You will al conclude that this will
surly make up a peace. This is the transaction between God the Father, and the
Son. God looks upon man as being an enemy to him, and Christ he comes to
mediate, yea, but says the father; what will you do to make peace, will you
undertake for mankind, will you engage to Satisfy that wrong that they have done
me? Yes O Father says Christ, I will do it, I will stand between the and them,
and undertake for them to satisfy al whatsoever thy Justice can require. And
in this regard Christ is not only called a mediator in that place Heb. 8.5. and
so forward; but he is called a Suerty, because he has undertaken to Satisfy
what God the father requred for the Sin of mankind; and as he has undertaken
it; so he has done it now, and the fathers that lived in former times might
look upon God reconciling himself to the world in Christ, as Christ had
undertaken it, but not fully discharged it. But we may look upon Christ, not
only as an undertaker, but as one that has discharged, and paid al.

2 But that is not al; Christ has not only undertaken this; but in the next
place, as he has undertaken to satisfy God on his part; but says the Father;
what shall become of these poor Creatures; they have hearts opposite to me, and
they are enemies to me, and whatsoever you do, they will still go on in ways of
emnity to me? No, says Christ; I will do more then this, I will undertake to
bring them in to you, and to subdue their hearts to you; and whereas they are
now enemies to you; they shall come, and submit themselves; and that wicked
Nature of theirs, I will take away through my spirit, and I will both bring them
into a peaceable disposition toward you; so that they shall love you as a
friend, and love all that belong unto you; they shall love al your ways, and
love your people, and love your holiness; I will undertake to bring them in to
you, as well as to satisfy you for what they have done. This is appearent; for
in the Scripture where ever there is any speaking of Reconciliation, you have
mention of our being reconciled to God, as well as Gods being reconciled to us;
and indeed the Scripture does make more mention of our Reconciling being
enemies to God, than of any thing of Gods working Reconciliation for us. And
that place that I quoted before in the Collosians, is exceedging clear for
this; namely, that Christ has undertaken for our Reconciliation, for you heard
before in, Collo. 1.20. That he had made peace through the blood of his Cross;
He has undertaken to satisfy; and the undertaking of it cost him his blood;
our Reconciliation cost Christ's death. But then in verse 21. He says further;
You that were sometimes alinated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, so
it is in your Books; but in the Original, it is; Enemies in your minds [in]
wicked works; not that you came to be enemies by your works, for that is the
advantage indeed that the adversaries have, and say; it is not a sinful Nature
in us, but we come by action to act wicked habits; but it is, you are enemees
in your minds in works; that is, you did lay out all the enmity of your minds
against God; you have natural enmity in your minds against God: and in your
minds you do lay out; and improve this strength of your enmity in your wicked
works against God; But says he you that were thus allienated, and enemies in
your minds in wicked works, he has reconciled, to present you holy, and
unblameable, and inreprovable in his sight. Here are two ways by which Christ
reconciles us unto God; he has reconciled us by the blood of his Cross; and
then in the Body of his flesh through death to present us holy, and unblamable,
and unreprovable in his sight; he has undertaken this latter, as well as that
other; and he has undertaken, that we shall not remain enemies unto God
eternally, but that there shall be a time when we shall be brought in to God, and
have gracious dispositions put into us, so as we shall become friends unto God,
and friends unto all that are Gods. There are many that speak much of Christ in
regard of his satisfaction, and what the transaction was between God and him;
and they think that because Christ has undertaken to satisfy Gods wrath, what
need we care for any thing? what is it, though we live as we list? it is to no
purpose what we do, whether we do il, or whether we do well, for Christ has
done al in the work of Reconciliation. But my Brethren see the mistake: Christ
has not only undertaken satisfaction, and to reconcile God unto us; but he
has undertaken with God the Father likewise to reconcile us unto him; not to
satisfy God alone, but to bring us into a gracious fram, and disposition of
heart likewise; and therefore except Christ do both, the truth is he does
neither; It is true the one may be done from al eternity; Christ may undertake
the one, and undertake that he will do the other also; but until Christ has
actually done the other, thou can not conclude, that he has done the former.
That man that persuades himself that Jesus Christ has done the former, when as
he has not done the latter deceives himself; and therefore to believe in Christ
as a Reconciler, is to believe in Christ as undertaking these two things. First
undertaking with God the Father to make satisfaction unto him. And then
Secondly undertaking for us, to bring us in to the Father likewise: and as
Christ must do the one, as well as the other; so he will be as faithful in the
performing the Second, as he was in the undertaking, and dischargeing the
First. Few people think of this, they think much of Christ's undertaking to
satisfy Gods Justice, and so to Reconcile them unto God; but they have seldom
thoughts of this, that Christ has also undertaken to chang their hearts, and
to make them friends unto God. But you that go on in wicked works being enemies
to God in your minds in wicked works, perhaps you think God will be Reconciled
unto you through Christ, and when you die you shall be saved through him.
Remember this point. That Christ the Reconciler has undertaken with God the
Father both to satisfy his Justice, and to subdue your hearts, so that you
shall no longer be enemies unto him; and therefore if Christ have not done the
other, in your hearts, it is an evident argument, that for ought that yet
appears he never undertook to satisfy the Justice of God for you. O! what an
argument is here, for men to be restless, and unquiet in their natural
condition; You that go on in a sinful, and and ungodly way, you may certainly
know, that there is for the present no evidence that Jesus Christ has
undertaken with the Father to make any Reonciliation for you, for if he had, he
has also undertaken on your parts to bring in your hearts to the Father and to
make you friends with him, as well as him friends with you. On the other side,
any of you that find the work of the Spirit in your hearts, that begin to find
Christ subduing your hearts unto God; that whereas heretofore you did live in
ways of enmity unto God, but now you begin to find the power of Christ in his
word beating down those proud hearts of yours, you find Christ changing of your
minds, and so bringing of your hearts into subjection unto God; Bless God for
this, and know that this is part of Chists undertaking with God the Father, and
in that he does this in your hearts, it is an Evidence that he has undertaken
to satisfy Gods Justice for all your sins. Thus you see how Christ is a
Rec^^^^^er, and Mediator.

CHAP. 16. How what Christ has done for Our Re^oncilition, come to be made
Ours. 1. Christ the head of the second Covenant.
There is a fourth thing which I propounded in the twelfe Chapter; and that is,
How we come to be reconciled to God in Christ; It is true, Chist has done it
you see: But how do we come to have what Christ has done made ours, that so we
may be reconciled unto God?

In a word thus. Christ is looked upon by God the Father as the Head of the
Second Covenant, and so we are looked upon in him as Covenanters, and as joined
together in one body in him: this is the way of Christ's Reconciling God and us,
and the way of the Conveyance of all the fruits of that Reconciliation unto us.
This is the Council of God concerning the Children of men, that they may come
to be reconciled, and saved. As his Son has undertaken the thing; so it is not
only, that he should stand between the Father and us. Its remarkable there must
be a Union between him, and us, and he must present us to God the the Father as
one Body with himself, and the Father must look upon him as the Head of a
Covenant to which we belong likewise: So that his obedience, and sufferring is
to be looked upon now; not as done by a private person; But looked upon as the
obedience, and suffering of a public Person, of one that Bears our Names
before God the Father. And herein there is a further mystery of godliness. The
reconciliation between man, and man, is only when one that is a stranger, comes
and stands between, and mediateth; there is not required such a union between
him that he mediateth for, and himself. But Christ comes not in merely as a
third person between God and us, but he comes to take our very natures upon
him, and we are made one in the covenant of grace he as the Head, and we as the
members. That look as Adam stood before God as the Head of the first Covenant
of works, and so we were al looked upon at first in him, and dyed in him: So
Christ who is called the Second Adam stands before the Lord as the Head of the
Second Covenant and al those that he does mediate for, and whom he does seek to
reconcile to the father, stand al before the father in him; so that his work is
imputed to be theirs, and the Lord looks upon them in their Head: fulfiling
that Second Covenant of life, and peace that he has made with poor creatures
in him. So that you must not only look upon Christ to be a Savior, as the Son
of God in Heaven; but if you would look upon him with comfort, you must look
upon him as the head of a second Covenant, and upon your selves joined with him
as members of him and so presented unto the father through him. Thus God was in
Christ reconciling himself to the world, God looking upon Christ, and through
Christ, as the head of the Covenant of grace; upon al those that Christ did
undertake for, as Covenanters Joined together with him, comes to be reconciled
to al those which shall be everlastingly Saved. This is the mystery of the
Gospel, God in Christ reconciling the world to himself. What Christ was has
been opened. And what Christ has undertaken. and how God looks upon us through
this mediator. These things you must search into, and cry unto God that by his
Spirit he whuld open these mysteries of the Gospel unto you, and then you shall
see much of the mystery of grace, and of the mind of god; and so come to have
abundance of peace with God, notwithstanding all the present remainders of
uncleannes that are in your hearts.

CHAP. 17. How we come to have intrest in what Christ has done is further
opened:
WE have showed in the former chapter what Christ does for the Continuance of
this peace between God, and us: that he is at the right hand of God, there
making intercession for the Saints continualy; so that if there be any thing,
that might (in its own nature) break the peace between God, and us; this our
mediator sits at the right hand of the Father, and there (by his intercession)
he continually presents himself for the removing of it, and for the continuance
of the peace between God and us; that there may no Breach fall out, for the time
to come; this I say Christ undertakes to do, and this is a special work of his
Mediation; namly, his being Continually at the right hand of the Father, and
there presenting himself unto God for the keeping, and mantaining of this
peace, which he has made between the Father, and us.

Again; if it be demanded; how we come to have an Intrest in this that Christ
does; (which was the fourth thing propounded in the twelfth chapter) in his
Satisfaction, in all that he undertakes?

The Answeer was this: That Christ is made the Head of a second Covenant; for,
as the foundation of the Breach, that was between God and us at the first came
by the first man Adam, who was the Head of the first Covenant, in whom we al
Sinned, and so turned enemies unto God: So Jesus Christ is made a Second Adam,
and the head of a Second Covenant; and al those that are looked upon as the
posterity of the Second Adam, (for so it must be) they are looked upon as one
in him. As all that were of the posterity of the first Adam were looked upon as
one man in him, and so the Breach was made, and enmity came between God, and all that one man's posterity: so, all that are to be of the Posterity of the Second
Adam, that are either actually of him, or are to be born of him by a Spiritual
generation, (which in the Scripture is termed Regeneration); al those are
looked upon as one with him: and hence it is that in the 1. Cor. 15.47. the
Apostle speaks of the first, and second Adam as if there were no more but two
men in the world, for indeed there are no more in that sense; nor ever were. The
first man (says the apostle) is of the Earth, Earthly; the second man is the
Lord from Heaven, Heavenly. here is the first man, and the Second man. Why, you
will say, are there but two men in the world? No, not in that sense; that is,
there were never but two men that did represent al others; and under those two
men are al other men in the world represented before God. All the children of
men that fell from God, the are represented in the first Adam, who was the Head
of the first Covenant, and they stand under that covenant: And al those that
God intends to be reconciled unto, and to glorify; they are represented before
God in the second Adam who is the Head of the Second Covenant. It is true, if
we speak properly; Caine was in order the second man in the world; but Christ
is the Second man; that is, the Head of a second Covenant, the Second man that
God did enter into the Covenant withal for other men, and in that sense he
alone was the second man: As in the same sense Adam is Called the first man so
that God is Reconciled to the world in Christ; that is, as in the first Adam,
the Breach was made between God, and man: so in the second Adam Reconciliation
is made between God, and man. And as God imputes that which the first Adam
did, to his Posterity for Condemnation: so that which the Second Adam did, he
does impute to the Posterity of that Second Adam for life, and Reconciliation.
And that you have more largly discussed in the most part of the fifth Chapter of
the Romans especially from the middle of the Chapter to the end.

CHAP. 18. Eight Consequences of Our Reconciliation being made in Christ. 1. It
is a deep Mystery. 2. It is very free. 3. It is sure and certain. 4. It is
full. 5. It is an honorable way. 6. Yet in such a way as does debase man. 7. It
is firm and everlasting. 8. This Reconciliation was a very difficult work.
THere are yet the Fifth, and Sixth, particulars mentioned in the Twelfth Chapter
that follow in the Explication of this point of Reconciliation with God in
Christ, and when we have done them we shall come to the Application of all the
six thiings.

And the Fifth is, some Consequences that follow from what has been spoken. for
if we be Reconciled to God in Christ, we may from thence draw diverse
Cosequences; I shall not now do it by way of Application, but only show you how
such Consequences as I shall name do naturally flow from what has been said.
For if, the Reconconciliation between God and us be in Christ then there are
these particulars of it; and these things may be said concerning it.

Consequence. 1.
First, Hence it follows, that the Reconciliation of the Children of men with
God, is a very great and deep mystery, it is not a thing that can ordinarily be
undestood, it is not a thing that is wrought in a natural way. But to reconcile
any soul unto God, is done in a way that is most deep, and hidden, and is (of
it self) a most glorious Mystery. And therefore when the Scripture speaks of
our Reconciliation with God in Jesus Christ; it tells us, that it is the hidden
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.7. We speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery; even the
hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the World to our glory. It speaks of
the very same thing, that my Text speaks of; viz. That God was Reconciling the
world to hemself in Jesus Christ, and this he says was the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the world to our glory. And
then again, verse. 10. God has revealed them to us by his Spirit; the particle
[them] is not in the Greek, but only thus. God has revealed to us by his
Spirit; that is, This Mystery, for the Spirit seacrheth all things, yea, the
deep things of God. That is the first thing that follows. It is a Mystery.

Consequence. 2.
The Second is this. Hence our Reconciliation with God is very free, it is a
work of free grace; it is reconciling himself in Christ; it is not reconciling
himself to us: for what we do our selves, or for what we can do; No, there is
nothing that we do, or can do, nothing that Angels do or can do for us, that
can reconcile us unto God, but we are reconciled unto God in Christ; therefore
the work of Reconciliation of us is nothing but free grace, we do not
contribute any thing at al unto this great work, it is al done in Christ; it is
altogether free. If there be anything required of us, yet it must be God and
Christ that must work it; all, every thing of our Reconciliation (whatsoever
particular there is in it) it is al in Christ, and therefore altogether free
Grace toward us; Christ is the gift of God, and every thing that is indeed in
him, and by him, is a free gift to us. That is the Second thing that may be
said of this Reconciliation, that it is free.

Consequence. 3
The third thing that may be said of it, is this; That it is sure and certain,
there is a certainty, a sureness of this Reconciliation; Why? Because God has
wrought so strangly about the work, and he would never work so strangely about
such a work but he would have it come to somewhat; he would not have this work
(after he has done all) to vanish. Those indeed that hold the Doctrine of free
will, and say, that indeed there is a price paid upon condition if we do
believe, but we are left to our selves, either to believe or not believe, and
God only propouds the means; What do they teach but thus much? That after all the Councels of God that are wrought for our Reconciliation, and after those
great things which God has done for us in Christ, it is in the power of man to
make al to be void and of none effect, and that there should not be any one man
in the world reconciled at last; for ir must needs follow, that if it be left
to man to believe or not to believe, and that it is in his power whether he will
or not; then it is in his power likewise to make all the Councels of God, and
the great works of God in Christ to be of none effect at al; that after God
has from al eternity plotted the work, and sent his own Son into the world to
be made a Curse for the sin of man, to die and to make all that ado, and all that
work about the matter of Reconciliation, and Atonement; yet, (if that Doctrine
were true which is a Beelzebub error a false Doctrine of the greatest magnitude)
it had been possible, hat (notwithstanding the doing of all this) all had even
lost, and Christ might have dyed in vain, and not one soul in the world saved;
I say this must needs follow upon that Doctrine. But now if that we hear that
there is so much done, as there is for the making up of our peace and
Reconciliation with God; then on the other side, this must necessarily follow,
and certainly be concluded on, that there are some that are to be reconciled to
God, and that this work shall never be lost; God will never plot so great a work,
and send his Son into the world to do so much as he did for the sin of man, and
at last suffer it al to be lost; but he will certainly bring some unto
salvation. I confess, when a poor sinner, that is made sensible of what sin
is, and of the Breach that sin has made between him, and God; when he thinks
of the greatness of the work, what it is to be reconciled unto God, he
trembles, and shakes in hmself, fearing it were to good news to be true, and
least it were not certain and sure. Yea, but when he comes to understand what
God has done for the accomplishment of that work, how God not only has
promised it; but we can say now, that it is done, that the Lord has indeed
sent his Son into the world and that he is made man, and that he has been
under the Curse of God for man's sin, and he has been C^ucified dead and
buried, and is ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of the father,
and al those glorious Mysteries of the Gospel (spoken of in the Old Testament)
are now fulfilled, and accomplished; when a sinner comes to understand this, O!
then he thinks, surely there is a certainty, a sureness in this work of
Reconciliation with God. And as when Jacob heard that Joseph his Son (whom he
loved) was yet alive, the Text says, the heart of the old man failed, he did
not believe it, he thought it was two good to be true; But when his other Somes
came and showed him the Charriots that Joseph had sent, and gave him such real
demonstration of the thing; not only that he was a live, but that he was the
greatest man in Egypt, and next unto Pharaoh himself; then the text says;
that the Spirit of Jacob revived, and he said, is Joseph my sone a live? I have
enough: So when a Siner that comes to be made sensible of the evil of sin, and
the greatness, and widenes of that Breath that is between God and him; when he
comes and hears one preach of the Doctrine of Reconciliation, and of Atonement
between God and the Soul, and how that al his Sins may be pardoned, and God may
become an entire frind unto him, and he come to be saved, and glorified
eternally in the higest Heavens: The hearts of a poor Sinner beginns to fail;
but when he can tell him what great things God has done to bring this work
about; that God has in his infinite wisdom found out such a glorious way for
reconciliation, that he has sent his son, and he is become man, and has been
under the wrath of his father, and Satisfied for man's Sin, and died, and shed
his blood, and is now assended into Heaven, and is at the right hand of the
Father, and an Advocate, and an interscessor; upon this, the sinner may come to
believe that there is a reallity in the thing, a Certainty in this work of
reconciliation. My Brethren, the work of reconciliation, is a Sure thing
indeed: it is not a notion, fancy, or an imagination, but there is a reality.
and a certainty in it; and all this follows from hence; that it is [in Christ:]
we could never be so ertain of the thing, except we had these real
demonstrations of Gods heart towrads us. Suppose God had sent an Angel from
Heaven to preach to the Children of men the Doctrine of reconciliation, and to
tell them, that God was wiling to be reconcilied unto them; alas, this could
never be made out to be so Certain unto them; but still the hearts of poor
Siners would have been afraid, and would have thought, surly whatsoever is said
unto us, is but a little to quiet us for the present; certainly the matter is
not so, as it is declared unto us, this would not have been so certain, though
an Angel from Heaven had declared it; but when God shall please to give this
evidence to us of his heart being toward us, and of his willingness to be
reconciled unto us, that he has wrought so strangly for us in sending the
second Person in trinity to be made man, and him to do thus, and thus to work
out this work of Reconciliation: Upon this we may come certainly to conclude:
that the heart of God is real in the wo^k. In Rom: 4.16. we have an expression
to this purpose; therefore it is of faith says the Apostle: it is: what is
that? that is the promise of life and peace; for of that the Apostle is
speaking in that place: It is of faith; why? that it might be by grease, so the
end the promise might be sure. Mark here these two properties of our
reconciliation with God, We are reconciled in Christ. Upon that, first it
follows that it is a great mistry. And then secondly, that therefore it is free;
[therfore] (says he) it is of faith that it might be free. It is of faith; as
if he should say; it is from God in Christ; for faith does relate always unto
Christ: It is of faith; that is of faith in Christ: that it might be by grease.
as if it had not been by faith; if it were by any works that we should do, then
it were not free; it were not by grace; but it is by faith in Christ, that it
might be by grace. And then secondly: it is of faith in Christ, to the end that
the promise might be sure you will say: would it not be suer though it had not
been by faith? suppose God had only sent an Angel (as I hinted before) would it
not have been sure? No, not so sure as now it is; for in that it is by faith
upon Christ, we have Christ to pitch upon as the Object of our faith for our
reconciliation with God, and by that it coms to be more sure then it cold be by
any other way. We cannot conceive that it were possible for the Lord by any way
to reveal the reallity of his heart, and the certainty of his work in
reconciling the world to himself so as by this means, in that he has reavled
it to be in Chirst. And that is the Third thing that follows from it.

Consequence. 4.
The Fourth thing from thence is this. That if it be in Christ, then as it is
sure; so it is full. Indeed were it in any other way that God did reveal
Reconciliation to us then in Christ, we might be afraid that there were
something in the heart of God against it, that the heart of God did not fully
close with us, and to be fully Reconciled with us: but when we hear what God
has done to Reconcile us to himself; what a price he has paid for it, what
cost he has been at to accomplish it, and that his own Son has undertaken to
bring us and the Father together, and so to make up this Reconciliation; then
we may conclude it a full, and perfect Reconciliation. Jesus Christ would never
undertake such a work, but he would Complete it, and he has Completed it; and
therefore when you hear this word of the Gospel that we are Reconciled to God
in Christ, we may conclude, that the work is a full, and a complete work,
because it is done in him. That is another Consequence.

Consequence. 5.
Further, if the Reconciliation we have with God be in Christ: hence in the
Fifth place it follows, that God is Reconciled unto man upon very honorable
terms, it is an honorable Reconciliation, for it is such a Reconciliation
wherein God suffers nothing at all, but he has all made up. If God had come,
and only passed by our offenses, and so had been reconciled to us without any
more ado, the Devils perhaps might have cried out against him, and have said:
Where is the glory of thy Justice? these have sinned against thee as well as we,
and the Breach they have made upon thy Justice is no way made up; thou have
been by them dishonored, and that dishonor that thou have receivd by them is no
way answered. But now, Man being reconciled to God in Christ; none of the
Devils in Hell can speak against Gods Justice, or against his Righteousness;
for as God is Reconciled, so he is Reonciled upon honorable terms. Indeed a
man that has an inferior who has offended him, when he can see no other way
to help himself; but that he must put up all the wrong, and injury that has bin
done him. It is a far different thing, then to be reconciled to the party
offending upon honorable terms; for if he could come to have this wrong made up
again, and not only he that has offended come to submit himself to him but all
the injury that he has done him fully satisfied; this were honorable. So is
the Reconciliation between God and us, it is so honorable a Reconciliation,
that it will be the glory of God before the Angels, and Saints to al Eternity
and it is that which God does much rejoice in, as being exceedingly pleased
with it, seeing his honor is made up in this Reconciliation. That is a fifth
Consequence from hence.

Consequence. 6.
Sixthly: Follows this; If we be reconciled to God in Christ, Hence our
Reconciliation is in such a way as does altogether debase man; and though it be
upon honorable terms; yet it is in a way, wherein man has no cause to glory
in himself: It is the greatest way for the lowing, and humbling of man that
posibly can be there could be no way devised, wherein man should be reconciled
to God, and yet be abased so much, as he is in this way of Reconciliation, when
he truly Considers it. For it is true, we are reconciled, but how? we began
it not our selves, we did nothing in it our selves, al was done by Christ:
therefore in Romans 3.27. says the Apostle; where is bousting? It is excluded;
by what Law? of works? no, but by the Law of Faith. God (indeed) has done
great things for us, but all that which is done for us, is not thankworthy to
our selves; it was al done without us. God was [in Christ] Reconciling the
world, to himself; and therefore though it is in honorable terms (in respect
of God) yet, when we seriously Consider of it, we have ground, and Cause
sufficient to be abased in our selves; even to the very dust. And then.

Consequence, 7.
Yet further. Our Reconciliation being in Christ; Hence it follows: That it is
a most firm, and lasting Reconciliation, an everlasting Reconciliation; as it
is in Christ, here is the ground of the Everlastingness of it; Hence it is,
that there is nothing can make a Breach again between God, and us, so as we
should become Enemies again unto him; so that when we understand this
Reconciliation with these properties, and Consequences; then we understand
aright what it is to be Reconciled unto God.

Consequence 8.
There is one Consequence or poperty mor of this Reconciliation that I must ad
to what I mentioned before. And that is this. That if it be in Christ that we
are Reconciled unto God. Then certainly the work of Reconciliation is a very
difficult work; it is a mighty hard thing; Heaven, and Earth must be moved
before this can be done, and God even shakes the Heaven and the Earth in this
work. It was the difficultest work that ever God himself undertook; and the
difficultest work the Son undertook; for when he undertook it; you find that he
did sweat at it, and before he had done it, it cost him his very hearts blood;
therefore it was not an ordinary and slight work to reconcile God and man
together, but a most difficult work, because it was in Christ.

CHAP. 19 Three Reasons why God would be Reconciled to the world in Christ and
no otherway. 1. Because God the Son is most glorified this way. 2. Because God
the Father is most glorified this way. 3. Because there was no such way as this
to melt the hearts of sinners. Or to encourage them to come to God.
BUt there yet remains to show you the Reasons Why God would Reconcile himself
to the world this way in Christ, and no other way. And for that I shall only
give you these Three Reasons.

Reason. 1.
First, Because in this way the Father glorified his Son; had it not been for
this way of Atonement, we had but little understood the glory of the second
Person in Trinity. No, nor indeed of the Third Person; nor the distinction of
the Persons: and therefore, before the Gospel came to be made known to the Sons
of men, the distinction of the Persons in Trinity was very little made known:
And in those places wherein the Gospel is not revealed, and made known; there
is nothing fully known of the distinction of the Persons in the Trinity. Now
for the glory of the Trinity, and more especially for the glory of the second
Person, the Son of God (who is the special Person in the work of Reconciation)
has God chosen this way of Reonciliation. It is true indeed, the Third Person,
and the Spirit, is sent by Christ and in the Consummation of the work of
Reconciliation, the glory of that Person appears; but the main weight of the
work lies upon the Son, and for the glory of the Son of God has he appointed
this way to be Reconciled to the world. And indeed it is such a work, as the
Son himself does exceedingly glory in, and accounts this to be a great part of
his glory, that he is appointed by God the Father to be the Mediator, to
reconcile God and man together. I beseech you observe this; this work of
Reconcilation between God and us, it is that which Christ himself does glory
in, and it is that; which he counts next unto the glory that he has
Personally with the Father, as he is generated of him from all Eternity: next
unto that, Jesus Christ glories in this; that he is appointed to be a Mediator
between the Father, and sinful man. And that Christ himself does glory in this
work, I will give you a Scripture, or two to prove it. That place which we have
in the 13. John, 31. is remarkable for this. Therefore when he was gone out,
Jesus said; Now is the Son of man Glorified and God is glorified in him.
Glorified now, When? It was when Judas betrayed him. and when he was going to
shed his blood, and to die for the sin of man, and to Complete and Perfect this
work of Atonement, or Reconciliation; Now (says he) is the Son of man
Glorified: as if so be he should have said; I was indeed designed by the Father
from all Eternity to undertake this work of Reconciliation, and I came into the
world for this very end, that I might do it, and all this while I have been a
doing of it in a way of preparation, but the main work is still behind for me to
accomplish, and perfect this work of Reconciliotion; but now it is at hand; Now
I am going to die, and this my death will bring an end to the work, and now
(says he) is the Son of man glorified; yea, here is the glory that I expected
from al Eternity; this is the glory that I rejoiced in when I was in the Bosom
of the Father; for then I knew of this; I knew I was appointed to be a
Mediator; I knew it would cost me my Blood when I should come to complete that
work, and now the time is come when it is to be performed: and therefore now
the Son of man is glorified. I say, Jesus Christ accounts it his glory that
he is appointed to stand as a Mediator between God, and us. And therefore you
shall find, that when the Scripture speaks of Christ's being appointed for this
work by God; that he rejoiced in it exceedingly. Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifices, and
Offerings thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened: burnt Offerings,
and Sin Offerings thou have not required; then said I, Lo I come, mine ears
(says he) have thou opened: what is that which God spak to him, unto which his
ear was opened? That which God the Father spoke to him, was this: Son; the
work of Reconciliation between my self, and sinful man, I have appointed, and
designed you to it; I have appointed you to go to be a Mediator between us, and
to undertake to make Satisfaction; and such satisfaction, as that sinful man,
and I may be at peace; as that Mercy, and Justice may be Reconciled together.
For let me tell you, (as I have hinted before) God, and we could never have been
reconciled, except Mercy, and Justice had been reconciled. Now God the Father
tells Jesus Christ, that he has appointed him to this work. And says Christ;
my ear have thou opened: O, I do entertain this work and entertain this
gladly; yea, though I know that I must be made a Sacrifice for the sin of man.
And observe what follows in verse, 7. then said I; Lo I come; I am ready, and
willing to do this work, for in the volum of the Book it is written, that I
should do thy will: that is; in the Scriptures it was written before ever Christ
came into the world, that he should come to perfect this great work. And verse
8. I delight to do thy will O Lord yea, thy Law is in my heart. What was this
will of God? Certainly this will of God here spoken of; was that Christ should be
a Mediator between God and man; and to make up this Reconciliation; and O,
says he, I do even delight to do this will of thine, though it be a will which
will cost me dear. And says he, thy Law; this Law that requires of me to come
thus to be a Sacrifice, and to shed my blood to the end that I may be a
Mediator between man, and God; even this Law, it is with in my heart. This is
one Reason why God Chose this way of Reconciling himself to the world; because
it tended to the glorifying of his Son, and his Son acknowledges it, that it
was his glory: and therefore just when he was going to die, he breaks out
into th^se words; with desire have I desired, to eat this Passover; because
that was to make way for his death, which was the accomplishment of this work
of Reconciliation.

Reason, 2.
A second Reason why God would have this way of Reconciling man to himself, is.
Because, in this way the Father himself is most glorified; the Attributes of
God do shine in a greater luster in this way of Reconciliation, then if so be
God had been reconciled unto man only in passing by the offense, and so no more
to do; for now shines forth the glory of his Wisdom, of his power, and of his
Justice, as well as of his mercy; not only mercy, but the other divine
Attributes of God shine in this way of Reconciliation exceedingly bright; and
there is no such Glass to behold the glory of God in as the glory of the Gospel
in the Mystery of Reconciliation. We indeed behold and see the glory of God in
the Glass of the Creatures; But in the Gospel, in the work of Reconciliation in
Christ, there is the bright Glass wherein all the beams of the glory of Gods
Attributes are united together, and shine with a Transcendent luster. Yea,
there is not only a luster, and a shining forth of them, but a heat, and a
warmth that is reflected in the beholding of them. In this way of
Reconciliation God himself is glorified; and therefore that Text which I named
John, 13.31. You have this likewise said; that as Christ acknowledged himself
to be glorified by this work; so says he, my Father is glorified in me; and
therefore in Chapter, 17. About the beginning; Father (says Christ) the hour
is come, glorify thy Son, that the Son may glorify thee. And verse, 4. I have
glorified thee on Earth; how has he glorified God? I have finnished the work
that thou gave me to do; that work of Mediation; that work of Reconciliation
between thy self and sinful man; that work I have finnished, and in that work I
have g^orified thee upon Earth. And the truth is; this is the glory that God
expects from the Children of men even to be admired, and magnified in this
great work of Reconciling the world to himself in his Son. And that is the
second Reason.

Reason, 3.
A third Reason is this: Because the Lord saw that there was no such way to
melt the heart of sinful Creatures, and to draw them to come, and close with
himself, as this way; no such way to incorrage the hearts of poor sinners to
come in to be reconciled unto God as this; even the Consideration of the great
things that the Lord has done to make peace and Reconciliation between himself
and sinners. God (I say) foresaw this; and because he would have a way to break
the hardest heart in the world, and to draw the most stout, and stubbarne
sinner unto himself; therefore he has chosen this way above al others of
Reconciliation. This the Gospel tells us in that parrable wherein you have the
letting out of the Vineyard unto Husbandmen; and it tells you when the Master
sent one servant and they beat him; and he sent an other, and they beat him;
and at length he said within himself, I will send my Son, surely they will
reverence him; as if he should have said; Here are a company of hard hearted,
stubbarn, stout, wicked creatures in this world, and they have had this
argument, and the other argument to work upon their hearts to persuade them to
come unto me, but so hard are their hearts, as that they give a rebound to all the arguments that they have; and there is nothing strikes into their hard
hearts, there is nothing melts them, nothing persuades them to come unto me,
But I have one argument more, and that shall break the stoutest, and hardest
heart that is; and that argument shall be a prevailing argument if they be those
that are appointed to life; if they be such as are not lost Creatures for ever,
and what is that argument? even this; that I am reconciling my self to the
world in my son; I will send my Son into the world to work out this
reconciliation; and there I will reveal so much of my glory, that when they
come to see this, O, their hearts shall be filled with admiration; they shall
stand and wonder at the goodness and riches of my grace, and their hearts shall
melt before me, and shall at length be gained unto me. when they come to hear
thereof Certainly it is the most Dangerous thing in the world for the hearts of
men not to be melted not to be gained upon with this Doctrine of our
Reconciliation with God in Christ. And remember it; if your hearts when you
come to hear of this Doctine be not gained upon, be not drawn unto God; it is a
shrewd argument that you are lost Creatures; for God himself looks upon this
way of reconciliation as the most gaining and prevaling argument that posibly
he can use to gain the heart of any man. And except you find your hearts
gained upon by this, you may take it as an argument of a most dangerous
Condition in which you are. I dare appeal to those whose hearts God has gained
to himself, let them Say, what was it that gained their hearts, what was it
that broke their hearts most kindly at first and Caused them to fly unto God;
was it not the opening of this mystery of Reconciliation in Christ, was it not
Gods tender of his mercy to the souls of poor sinful creatures in Christ, And
woe to those Persons that shall Sit under the ministry of the Gospel the
droppings of heaven and here the blesed tidings of Reconciliation in Christ,
and yet not find their hearts gained by this argument; for this was one special
end why God those this way of Reconciling himself to the world, that he might
by this gain the hearts of the Children of men to himself for ever.

So that now you have had al these things opened in the point besides the proof
of it in Scripture. first you have had showed unto you, that there cold be no
Reconciliation but in Christ. secondly; That Christ was a fit mediator to
reconcile God and us together; and in what particular. thirdly what Christ has
undertook to do for the Reconciliation of us to God, and what he does to this
very day. Fourthly how we com to have Interest in what he has done for our
Reconciliation. fifthly the several properties, or consequences of this
Reconciliation which does discover to us what a kind of Reconciliation it is.
And then the Reasons why God would reconcile the world to himself in this way
rather then in any other way.

CHAP. 20.
APPLICATION. Use. 1. See the woeful misery sin has brought us unto;
humiliation for sin us full.
THis improvement of al by application to our selves folows. Indeed a great part
of what has been insisted on though it has been by way of Explication, yet it
has been Applicatory. But there are yet further things by way of Application
to be presented to you, al flowing naturally from what has been taught neither
shall I need to be long in it because it is but only a working upon your hearts
the same things which I have enlarged upon in the opening of the Point.

USE. 1
1. then from this point; that God was in Christ Reconciling the world to
himself. Hence is presented before us the woeful misery that sin has brought
us into. There is nothing that sets out the Breach between God and man so much
as this. That the making up of that Breach must be in Christ. There is a great
question now on foot. Whether humiliation be necessary or no; whether men must
be made senssible of their natural condition, and so be humbled, and that way
be brought unto Jesus Christ. There are a great many that Catch hold upon the
abuse of this Humiliation so as wholly to exclude it (but exceeding ignorantly)
because that some would make humiliation as if it were a Condition of the
Covenant, which indeed it is not; and when they hear us say, that it is not a
Condition; they presently Conclude that there is no need at al of it; because
say they, Humiliation does not at al interest us in Jesus Christ. And because
some perhaps will trust two much in their Humiliation, and rely upon it,
therefore others will wholly take it away, and exclude it. But: though
humiliation is not the Condition of the Covenant, though it is not that which
does give us an interest in Jesus Christ; though it is not that which we are to
rely upon; yet there is very much need of humiliation, and that we be made
sensible of our lost Condition by sin; and by that which has been delivered
you may see a necessity of it: for Consider; I suppose if you believe that God
will pardon your sins, and that he will be Reconciled unto you, you believe it is
in Christ: Yea, you will say, that is Certain; and therefore seeing Christ has
wrought our Reconciliation what need we be humbled for sin. Certainly my
Brethren in that which you say, if you understand what you say, there is
implied the deepest work of humiliation, and the strongest argument thereunto
that it is possible for any Creature to be Capable of in this world. How is
that, you will say? Thus. I believe that God is reconciled to me in Christ;
what? has God wrought my reconciliation in his Son? has he brought it about
by Jesus Christ? and chosen that way above all other ways to do it? Then
certainly such was the Breach between God and me through my sin that all the
Angels in Heaven, and all the men in the world could never make it up. Such was
the Breach that my sin had made between God and my soul as it is required so
great a mystery of Godliness to make it up, as the very Angels themselves are
not able to comprehend. And indeed it is the greatest work that ever God did
do, or that ^ver God will do to al Eternity. Consider what it cost to make up
the Breach that sin had made between God and thy soul.

And again; If you believe that you are reconciled to God in Christ; you do
not only see and are Convinced of the greatness of that Breach, but you must be
sensible of it too; for can I go out of my self, and exercise such a gloriouse
act of Faith upon Christ as Mediator, and yet not be sensible of what Christ
has done? Certainly the work of faith can never be raised in the heart, But it
is raised so as the sinner knows what he does when he does believe, and is
sensible of what he does. And if this be so; take but these two things. That
when a man believes in Christ as Mediator, that he knows what he does; when he
believes, and is sensible of what he does; take but these two things for
granted, and I will warrant that foul will be humbled; it follows of it self, and
of its own nature; it need not be required as a Condition, it is as necessary
to the work of faith as light in the Sun when it shines, or as heat of the
fire, and indeed it is employed. As for example. When I am to go to such a
place, or about such a business; it is true, going is not the condition
required; it is not required that I should travil so many stepps by way of
Condition, but that such an act should be performed; that I should be at such a
place at such a day to do such a business; now though this be not expressed in
a condition, that I must go so many miles, and the going of the miles is as
necessary as the other; and though that be not required yet it is employed in
the act that is required; and it is to be looked upon as necessary, as that
which is required as a Condition. So, it is true, humiliation is not the
Condition of the second Covenant, it is not the thing that intersteth us in
Jesus Christ, but it is that which the nature of faith does necessarily imply;
for faith is an understanding Grace; and indeed it is the most gloriouse work
of the soul that ever was: for a soul to believe in God through Christ; to
believe that God is Reconciled to him in Christ it is the most glorious work
under heaven

Now when I believe in Christ as a Savior; what is he a Savior from? a Savior
from my sin, a Savior from the wrath of God, and this the Soul must necesarily
be senssible of, how else can it put forth such an act of Faith; and I know no
faithful preacher in the world that ever pressed humiliation further then this;
that when men believe in Christ, they must know, and be sensible of what they
do; you must know Christ is a Mediator, and if he be a Mediator, what is he a
Mediator for? why, to make up a Breach between God, and you. And then you must
know what that breach is; that is, the breach that your sin has made. And then
you must know what sin that is; Namely, that your sin has provoked the Justice
of God, and put you under the Curse of the Law. So that you see the necessity
of opening the law, though it be not a thing which interesteth us in Christ,
yet it follows of it self as a necessary Consequence without which you cannot
understand Christ as a reconciler. This is therefore the first use If God will
never be reconciled to any Soul but only in Christ; then that Soul that comes
to be Saved must come to see it self in a most woeful Condition; for such a
Creature as has need of such a Mediator must needs be in a most Wretched,
Damnable, Misserable, Cursed condition in it self, for else it could never
requier such a Mediator. And certainly there is no such way to honor Christ as
this. When men speak of Christ, and of free Grace, except rhey instruct people
in this; Namely the breach that is made between God, and them through sin; how
can any of their Avditory understand what Christ is. Christ is a Mediator; what
to do? to save from fin, What? from what sin? from sin. What is that? sin must
be made known if Christ be the reconciler between God, and us; because
Reconciliation implies a breach, and a breach that is made by sin, and if you
know not what breach is that is made, how can you honor Christ as Mediator? So
that you must know what that breach is: that breach is the enmity that is in
your hearts by Nature; you must know what that enmity is, and be sensible of
it, or else you can never give glory to God in Christ. And though many have so
much in their mouths of Christ, and of free Grace; yet it is apparent in their
Course that they do not give glory to Christ; Christ has little cause to thank
them for any glory that he has from them in their Conversation; they rather
blott, and stain the name of Christ: and what is the reason? The truth is,
they never rightly understood Christ as a Mediator; they never knew what it was
to have need of a Mediator between God, and them, and so they having but a
superficial knowledge of Christ; Christ has but a superficial glory from them.
That is the first Use.

CHAP. 31.
Use, 2. Discovering of Mistakes about Reconciliation.
2 IF God has reconciled himself to the world in Christ. Hence we are to take
notice of the great mistakes there are in the world in the point of
Reconciliation with God. Certainly if this be a truth; that the only way of
making up our peace with God is in Christ; then the world does gennerally
mistake in the great matter of Reconciliation with God; and a mistake, in this,
is an undoing mistake, a damning mistake; a Soul may perish eternally merely
thorugh a mistake in the matter of Reconciliation. A man may be troubled for
sin, and cry out of his sin, and may break off the practice of his sin, and cry
unto God in Prayer that he would pardon him, and be reconciled unto him, and
yet mistaking here, and not understanding that it must be God, in, and through
Christ that reconcileth himself: the mistake in this may prove an undoing
mistake to that Soul; and although they should be Crying out of their sins al
their days, they may perish at last if they do not know, and rightly
understand how to close with Gods mercy as it is in Christ: if they do not
understand, that it is God in Christ that reconcileth himself to the world. We
know the greatest part of people look for their Reconciliation with God merely
in a natural way; they have sinned against him, and they will cry unto him for
mercy, and for pardon, and so they think al may be made up between God and
them. I remember Luther has a notable speech concering this in his meditation
about the way which God has appointed for reconciling of man to himself, that
it is in Christ. It is intollerahle and horrible blasph^my (says he) to faigne
any work by which thou may presume to please God; and he gives the reason
of it. It is therefore intolerable, and horrible blasphemy for any to faigne
any work by which they shall presume to pacify God, when they shall see, and
hear that God cannot be pacified any other way, but by such a way, as the blood
of his Son one drop where of is more preciouse then the whole Creation. And
upon this ground being meditating of Gods reconciling the world to himself, and
that it was by such a way as the blood of his Son, and that one drop of his
blood is of more value then all the Creatures in Heaven, and Earth; hence it was
that he affirms is to be horrible, and intolerable blasphemy for any man to
think to pacify God any other way. Nay, when God by such a way has appointed
Reconciliation, for a man to neglect this, and to think, that any work of his
own shall pacify God; especially those that hear the Gospel preached to them,
when they shall think of any other way of their own, and so neglect the way that
God has appointed this is indeed a most intolerable, and horrible blasphemy:
and Certainly it is that which provokes the Lord exceedingly; that when a
sinner shall be made apprehensive and sensible of the Breach that is made
between God and him; for that sinner to think the Breach to be no greater then
may be made up with any work of Repentance, or good meaning or good works; the
Lord disclaineth to look upon that sinner in this his folly; that a man should
think that the Breach between God, and him is a matter of no greater moment.
No, my Brethren, you must know, that the Breach between God, and you by sin, is
a matter of another manner of Consequence then can be made up by prayers, or
fears, or any thing else that you can do all this is untempred Mortar. It is
true, when there is Repennance, and turning unto God, it is a good sign that
God is at work with your hearts; but that cannot do the deed; it is in Christ;
it is the blood of the Son of God that must make Satisfaction for sin; it is
that which must make the Reconciliation. This is that which is indeed the great
doctrine of the Gospel; and til you receive this into your understandings, into
your hearts al other things that we preach are to no purpose at al, it will
never do you good, till you have embraced this, you will never Sanctify Gods
name, nor gloryfy God in your Conversations, nor have any true peace within
your doors, til you come to receive this point into your hearts; that God is
in Christ Reconciling the world to himself. Take heed therefore of any
mistakes in this point. That is the second Use.

CHAP. 22.
Use. 3. To encourage sinners to come to God for Reconciliation: And
discouragements removed.
The Third is a Use of encouragement to sinners to come for Reconciliation with
God. You may remember that one Reason why God did on purpose appoint this way
to Reconcile himself to the world, was, that he might break the hearts of
sinners, and that it might be an encouragement to sinners to come in, Is this
Gods End? O! that then God might have this end in your souls This has bin our
endeavor to open what we could, this Doctrine of the Gospel, namely, of Gods
Reconciling of himself in Christ; and we have not done this only from this Text
but from others: and though diverse other things have been spoken, yet you
cannot but know, that the drift of al has bin to this purpose, that God may
have this glory of gaining our hearts to himself, and that it might be an
encouragement unto you to come in to be reconciled unto God. Are there any that
are apprehensive of the Breach that sin has made between God and their souls?
I suppose there are many. You put up papers of complaints of the hardness of
your hearts and that you cannot be sensible of sin as you desire; it is a sign
that there is some sensibleness therefore of the breach between God and you.
Now the Lord in opening of this Doctrine propounds the way of Reconciliation,
and he would fain draw your hearts to come in and to be reconciled unto him;
what is it that hinders? These two things are the Only hinderance.

First, The great distance that is between God, and a Creature; I am a poor
vile worm, and the Lord is an infinite, glorious, dreadful God. O! but that I
might take off this dreadfulness from you, that that might not skare, and
hinder you, therefore he propounds himself to you in his Son. If God should
indeed speak from Heaven by thundering, and lightening, and call in sinners to
come in and humble your selves, and seek to make your peace with him, that
might skare you, and upon the sight of the distance between God and you, you
might not dare to come in. But says God; I call you now in my Son, my Son that
came to be like one of you, and to be made sensible of your infirmites, it is
in him that I offer you Reconciliation. This takes away the dreadfulness of God
from sinners, and therefore a mighty encouragement. And though there be such a
distance between God and us, yet there is a Christ between God the Father, and
us. Though we be the poorest worms in the world, though we are mean, and vile
Creatures, yet if we were ten thousand times meaner then we are, seeing there
is such a Mediator between God, and us; this makes up the distance. Christ is
such a Mediator as there is enough in him to make up all the distance that can
be between God, and man.

Another hinderance, or discouragement is sin: either the greatness of our sin,
or the multitude of our sins, or the long continuance in our sins is that which
hinders us from coming. O! says the soul, I have been so vile a sinner, and I
have continued so long, and I have multiplied sin one after another, and is it
possible for such a one as I am to be Reconciled? It is true had thou to
deal only with God as he is in himself, thou might despair: But know O!
sinner that it is God Reconciling of himself in Christ; therefore though thou
be a great sinner, and a sinner of a long continuance; yet there being a
Reconciliation with God in his Son; seeing that Christ has undertaken such a
work as to make up a peace between God and sinners, and to mediate for them;
thou may be encouraged to come in, and to lay hold upon this grace of God in
Christ.

If thou say thou art unworthy; and that there is no worthiness in thee for
God to regard the for. All this is still answered with this. It is God that is
reconciling the world to himself in Christ. Indeed were it so that there were
nothing but God and thee to deal together; and if thou were to deal only with
God, himself thou might be afraid but thou have to deal with God not in
himself win his Son, for so he has Set forth himself the to world, he is
reconciled to the world in his son, and herefore that may incorage thee
notwithstanding al thy unworthines.

And what Further have thou to discorage thee?

O! thou will say; God is infinitely Just to punish sin.

Still this point will be Sufficient to remove al discoragements; that he is
Reconciling the world to himself. Though he is Holy; his Holiness is pleased in
Christ: Though he is Just: his Justice is satisfied in Christ. So that there is
enough in this point to take away al objections, to remove al discouragments
that any Sinner in the world has. And therefore as God does propound this on
purpose to draw sinners to himself that they may be reconciled unto him; So
let them know; that the more grace here is received for the taking away of al
objections, and discoragments; the more will sinners be left without excuse
another day if they do not come in and lay hold upon this grace of God in
Christ; God will have his glory that way if he cannot have it the other. God
primarily intends his glory in reconciling the world to himself; and therefore
takes away al discouragments from siners that they may come in and venture
their souls upon his rich grace, and mercy in Christ; But if God cannot have
his glory from that point; then, the more this is preached in any congregation,
the more will God have his glory by the stopping of men's mouths that they shall
not be able to say another day; O, the Lord was terrible, and he was a hard
master, and I durst not go unto him. Indeed my Conscience told me I had
sinned against him, but I durst not go to him for mercy for I was afraid of
him. The mouths of men shall be stopped another day that have heard this
doctrine or God reconciling the world in Christ opened unto them, and have not
come in, and laid hold upon it. Indeed it is the plea of many a servant that
has offended his master, when one comes to him and Says; why do not you go
and humble your self before your master. O, Says he I dare not, he is such a
furiouse man that he will fly upon me presently, I had rather suffer very much
then go to him; and this they think excuse enough; and many poor Servants will
rather wander up and down the Contry, and perish, then go back to their
master? But noe sinner can say so of God, let him be never so vild a siner that
is departing from God, if one should come unto him and say; you wreched sinner
whether are you going? you are departing from God, you are going away from him,
but behold God calls you to come in; O, go, and humble yor souls and lament
your sin, and lay down al those weapons of enmity against God which you have
taken up. This sinner now cannot say; how shall I dare to look upon God, I that
have been such a vild, and wretched Sinner, Surely God will distroy me, and
consume me. No, the Lord propounds himself to you, a God or mercy in his Son,
and tells you, that he has provided a means in his Son to be reconciled unto
you; and that his heart has been so much upon reconciling himself to the
chrildren of men, as that he has sent his son to do this work and though it
cost the very blood of his son, yet he will do it; and therefore sinner if thou
do not come in, but wilt go on in wandering from God and Continuing in ways
of enmity against him, thy blood be upon thine own head. Thou have read this
blessed doctrine of the Gospel opened; that God was reconciling himself to the
world; and that he was reconciling himelfe to the world in his Son; and that
God excepted that when this message was brought to a Congregation; the whole
Congregation should come and fly unto him; and that the world should be filled
with Cries; O! that we might be Reconciled unto him. Our Lotd expects this day
from some of you to hear you reflect this upon your selves by crying unto him
for Reconciliation in his Son; that should be the issue of such sermons as
these are; God ever after such preaching looks to hear some soul repeat in
prayer to God, and tell him what it has heard in the Ministry of the word; and
upon that make a prayer unto him according to what it has heard. As in this
manner; The Lord expects that this day some sinner, or other should get alone,
and be crying unto God in prayer. Lord, I have heard, not only that there is a
possibility for sinners to be Reconciled, but there is such a glorious way of
Reconciliation, that thou have done it in thy Son. Such an honorable way; and
such a certain way of Reconciliation; and that thy heart is much in that way.
And Lord I have heard, that this is a way, that takes away all objections in
the world; all the discouragments that can be immagined; and thou have revealed
it to that end, that is, that thou might break the hearts of sinners, and
draw them to come in, and accept of that blessed covenant that thou have
tendered to them in Christ, and to be reconciled unto thee. Now Lord I desire to
cast my soul upon this free grace of thine in thy Son; O! that I might feel thy
spirit inableing me to such a gloriouse work as this; and O! that the Lord
might hear such things as these from some of your Closets this day; it will be
that which will even cause the heart of God to rejoice that ever he opened the
doctrine of Reconciliation to you; otherwise it will turn to the quite contrary
end; it will only serve to stop your mouths at the great day. That is another
Use.

CHAP. 23.
Use, 4. Despair not of Gods making peace in this Nation.
YEt once more: If there be such a way of Reconciliation between God and us; if
God has wrought it so, that it is in Christ. Truly from hence we have no Cause
to despair in Gods power, and wisdom, and goodness to make peace in this
Nation; God has done the greater work. You see that God is a God of peace and
loves peace; and to the end that he might be at peace with the wretched
Children of men, he has wrought so wonderfully as to send his own Son into the
world and provide such a way that he may be sure that peace may be made, and by
that way he has done it: He has made peace between Mercy; and Justice; there
is peace made between an infinite provoked God and wreatched sinful vild
Creatures. I told you before that this was a mighty difficult work; yea, the
most difficult that ever was, or can be in the world. If God has therefore
wrought such a work so difficult, in a way so gloriouse. Then from hence learn
not to despair, but that God may work even peace for us in this Nation, and
an honorable peace, and a good peace too. We are not only hereby encouraged to
cry unto God for peace between him and our Souls; but we are by this encouraged
to cry unto him for peace in the Nation, and that he would put an end to these
woeful times of destruction, and misery, and war which many of our Brethren have
suffered, and bled under. And indeed those that do understand, or have ever
felt the work of God in working peace between his majesty and their Souls, they
are those that have such intrest in God, as if any people, shall prevail with
him for peace in the land, it must be these; they will prove to be our peace
makers in the conclusion, howsoever people at present cry out of them as if
they were the means and instruments of making the gratest debate, and as if
they were the enemies of peace: No my Brethren, they that have experience of
this great work of God, of making peace between himself, and their Souls, they
are they that he at the Throne of grace continually crying unto him that is the
prince of of peace to make peace in the Land.

We desire peace. But you will say; How can it be done that way? Why should we
say how? when God himself has made peace between Heaven, and Earth. We see
things so intricate, that we know not how it should be done, and we wonder it
should ever be brought about, that the Spirits of men being so set one against
another there should be a Reconciliation: But God has ways in his infinite
Wisdom that we are not able to comprehend, the spirits of any of our
Adversaries are not so desperately bent against us, but there was as much
enmity between us, and God, as there can be betwixt us, and any of our
adversaries in the world: and we have no such exasperated enimes against us, as
we were by nature against God. If therefore God could find a way when we were
such enemies unto him to make peace betwixt us; and him; then has God likewise
a way to make a true settled, and constant peace between our Adversaries, and
us: And we should desire; that as God has made our peace with him firm, and
sure; so that what peace God makes in this land, it may be somewhat like unto
that peace that he has made between Heaven, and Earth. There is a firm peace
made between God, and us, a peace that we may rest upon, and confide in. A
peace between our adversaries, and us, (as things now stand) we cannot count it
sure; you cannot be sure of your lives one night after it is done; as things
now stand. But we must desire such a peace might be made, as there is made
between God, and us; sure, and firm, and stable. Therefore pray much, and
believe much as you are able; and though things be brought to such a strait as
there is no likelihood in the thoughts of men how it should be done; yet they
are not brought to such a strait as things were between God, and us before he
reconciled himself unto us. And there was more required to make up that
Reconciliation betwixt God, and us, then there can be between us, and our
adversaries. And what was it that made our peace first with God? God was in
Christ reconciling the world; it was the blood of his Son that saved our blood,
and therefore let al those that are godly go to this God of peace, and not only
cry to him by Prayer for the making of a true, and firm peace amongst us; but
present unto him the blood of his Son to that end; and say; O Lord; thou that
sentest thy Son into the world to make peace between our Souls and thee; look
upon that blood, and let that blood prevail with thee to make peace in England;
that there may be no more of the precious blood of thy Saints spilt, and shed
amongst us. Here is the way to get peace. And Certainly if the blood of Christ
were able to make such a peace between us, and God as is firm, and lasting: it
will be able also to make peace in this poor Nation; and such a peace as shall be
firm, and lasting too.

Thus we are encouraged in regard of external condition; in regard of the peace
of our land; that seeing God has done the greater, he is able much more to do
the lesser. That seeing God has reconciled mercy, and Justice together, and
made peace betwixt Heaven, and Earth, when the Breach was so great, as all the
men in the world, and the Angels in Heaven could not find out a way to compose
the difference, and make up that breach, yet he has done it: He can certainly
also compose the differences, and make up the breach that is amongst us.

CHAp. 24.
Use, 5. Those that have assurance of their peace with God; highly to prise it.
HEnce then if our Reconciliation with God be such as has been opened, and if
it be wrought after that way; Then an other Use we may make of it is this.
Namely: That al those that have any comfortable assurance that their peace is
made with God, they are to prise it highly, and not easily, and lightly to
loose the assurance of it; Why? Because it has cost so much as it has done,
and it has been wrought for them after such a strange manner as it has been;
the greatest work that ever God made; and wherein his wisdom, and goodness,
and power has been seen; now that which God has set himself to work so
powerfully in, to the end that he might acomplish it; and that which has cost
so dear as it has done; that wherein so much of the mystery of Godliness is
contained; suerly then if we have obtained the assurance of it in our selves,
we should highly prise it, and we should seek to preserve it, and not loose
it; we know not how. I remember when we opened the excellency of our
Reconciliation with God and, what admirable fruits did flow fom it; we had
there a Use like unto this; that because it is so excellent we should preserve
it and not let it go lightly, But now this Use is drawn from the way of
Reconciliation, that it is a Reconciliation in Christ; and in indeed the
argument falls more strongly upon us here then it did formerly, before, the
argument was, that we should prise it because we have such comfort in our
Reconciliation; because such admirable fruits do flow from it; because it is
able to carry us through al troubles in the world. But now we must seek to
preserve it, because we have it in Christ, because it is that which cost more
then ten thousand worlds are worth; because God has wrought so wonderfully to
bring it ahout. Has God therefore spoken peace to any of your souls? take heed
that you turn not again to folly; Psalm: 85.8. I will hear what the Lord will
say, for he will speak peace to his people and to his Saints; but let not them
return again to folly. Have thou gotten any comfortable persuasion that the
Lord is reconciled unto them Christ; and God has made thee to know that
Reconciliation with him was a difficult work? it may be it cost you many tears,
and prayers, and much trouble before you could get it, and a long time you were
seeking of it in a Legal way, and crying unto God for his mercy to pardon your
sins, and Seeking to him in that natural way; but then you could not have peace
spoken to your hearts, but in time the Lord opened the mystery of Christ unto
your souls, and then you sought Reconciliation with him in Christ, and you saw
how that it was in his blood that your peace was made. Have you got peace in an
Evangelical way through Christ? O! Make much of it; it is a precious Jewel in
that it comes to you in such a way as this is; it cost God dear, and it may
cost you dear; but whether it cost you dear or no; you may be sure it cost God
dear, therefore make much of it, do not loose it: to loose it fully so as God
should again be^ome your enemy, that indeed you cannot do; but you may loose it
in your apprehensions; you may loose the comfortable assurance of it.

There are Two ways that Christians may loose the comfortable assurance of
their peace with God. First through the weakness of their faith, secondly
through the sinfulnes of their lives.

CHAP. 25. Christians may loose the assurance of their Peace with God through
the weakness of their Faith. 1. Weakness, When they think the sin they fall
into, does presently cause an enmity between God and them. Object. What need
Believers then be careful to avoid sin? Answered. 2. Weakness, Judging Gods
works as enmity against them.
FIrst, Through the weakness of their Faith; and that in Two ways.

Weakness. 1.
When they shall through their weakness think that that sin they fall into, or
are overtaken with, does presently cause an enmity between God, and them. I
make no question but there are many souls that God is reconciled unto, and
sometimes have had some comfort in the assurance of this reconciliation, and yet
if at any time they be but overcome with the sinful distempers of their hearts,
they presently think, that this puts an enmity between God, and them again, and
they begin to look upon God as upon their enemy, and think that all the peace
is broken between God, and them, and this makes such a Breach between God, and
them, as that all that God has done, is undone again, and now they think that
God is against them in all his ways, and contrary unto them as unto an enemy.
It Is true, Carnal hearts that do not understand what the difficulty is of
making peace with God; or what a breach it is that sin makes between God, and
the soul; they can sin, and sin, and sin, and yet think God will be merciful to
them still, and never look upon their sin as enmity unto God, or upon God as an
enemy unto them in regard of their sin. But take a poor soul that understands
what sin is, and has found it a hard thing to make peace between God, and
himself, as soon as any sin overcomes such a soul, the daily weaknesses many
times make him think that God is an enemy to him; and however he had good hopes
before, yet the breach is again as wide, if not wider between God, and him as
ever it was. Now by this know, you do dishonor much the great work of God in
Christ in the point of Reconciliation. surely it is as great a dishonor as you
can cast upon Christ; when he has come to make Reconciliation between God, and
you, and when he has undertaken it, and done it so thoroughly as he has; and
when it cost him his very life to do it, yet when you apprehend this
Reconciliation to be no otherwise, but that upon any offense, you think al is
undone again: truly this were but a very poor Reconciliation. Suppose two that
were at ods one with another, and a great breach has been made between them;
another comes and reconciles these two for the present, but yet so as that the
one shall watch the other, to take an advantage against the other, so as if
there be but the least offense committed, they shall be as great enemies one to
another as before; this were but a poor Reconciliation. So when you come to
think, that upon every sin you commit, after you have had your peace made
between God and you, though you can appeal unto God in the sincerity of your
heart, that it is the greatest burden in the world to you, that you do thus sin
against him, and you would think it the greatest mercy in the world to be
delivered from that body of sin: yet, when you shall come to think, that upon
this sin you have committed, the breach is made as wide as ever it was with
God; What a dishonor do you put upon Christ? What a Reconciliation has Christ
made for you? O! therefore believe that Christ has made another manner of
peace with God then so; and know, that it is not a peace that can so soon be
broken. If a Bone-setter should set a Bone in your Body that were broken, or
our of joint, and set it so that it is right for the present; but yet so too,
that if you stir your arm, or leg, it is out of joint again; you will conclude,
this is no skilful Bonesetter. Christ came from Heaven for this very end, and
purpose, that he might join God, and us together, that he might make us one
with God. Do you think that Christ has only set us so together, as that upon
every daily infirmity, we should be out with God again? No, certainly he has
set us strongly together, more strongly then ever we were, Adam in Innocence,
when he was without sin, had not such a strong peace with God, as thou have in
the midst of thy sins. It is a truth; and though we cannot speak of such
things without trembling, in regard we know how ready carnal hearts are to
abuse them; yet this is a truth, and so I would have Christians to look upon
it; to look upon the reconciliation that is made between God, and them, as a
peace firmer then ever it was with Adam, and God, though Adam had no sin, and
they have many sins, for Adam had it not in Christ; and therefore think upon it
as such a Reconciliation as Christ has wrought, and so honor God in it, and
sanctify God in it. If indeed it were no other reconciliation then thou have
got by thy own prayers, or then thou have got by thy own tears; then thou
might fear, that, that reconciliation might be broken upon thy renewing of
sin. And the truth is; this is the ground why those that have enlightened
Consciences, are so full of fears, and doubts; those indeed that have no
inlightnings in them, are without any fear but the other are full of doubts,
and fears; and it is upon this ground; because that peace they have, is no
other but that which they have gotten by their Prayers, and by their duties,
and by their tears, and by their good meanings, as they think, and never bring
in Christ; they never have been acquaynted with that great Mystery of
Godliness. Now, that peace with God that thou have got any way but by Gods
revealing the work of his reconciling himself to the world in Christ; that
peace will never hold long; but thou will be ready upon every temptation, upon
every suggestion; upon every new sin committed, to call that peace into
question: But if thou have been rooted in Christ, and thy peace grounded upon
that which is beyond al thy duties, and al thy tears, and prayers, nnd can
look upon God as reconciled unto thee in Christ; this peace will hold, and this
may hold notwithstanding abundance of sins may remain in the soul of one that
is thus reconciled unto God. And therefore for your help, because you may not
upon every sin call in question your reconciliation with God: know this; that
being reconciled unto God, thou art not under the Law so as that every sin
against the Law should put thee under the sentence, of eternal death: thou art
not under the curse that does threaten everlasting death to those that so sin.
Here is the difference between one that is reconciled unto God, and an other
that is not. One that is not reconciled unto God in Christ, is so under the
Law, as every sin he commits, be it little, or great does put him under the
sentence, and curse of eternal death: the neglect of any duty, be it never so
small does it. But now, here is the privilege of a Beleiver; when thou art once
a Beleiver, and so art in Jesus Christ; then the sins thou committest; those
should indeed be for thy humiliation; but there is none of them that do put
thee under the sentence of eternal death; neither upon this ground art thou to
keep the Law: that is, to keep it so, as to think, that if thou do it not, or
that every breach of the Law should put thee under the sentence of eternal
death. Indeed others that are under the Law, they must look to keep the Law,
whether they be able or not; but the Law has no power over thee that way, and
thou art not upon that ground to keep it; and therefore thy sins which thou
committest, do not put thee under the sententence of eternal death, as the sins
of others do: there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ; and it
is true of every moment, and instant of time, that there is no condemnation to
them that are in Jesus Christ. I will give you another scripture for this, that
is as clear as the other, though not perhaps so much taken notice of It is in
Romans 7.5. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the
Law did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. Note the Motions
of sin which were by the Law did work in our members; What did they do? they
brought forth fruit; and fruit unto death; this the blessed Apostle says was
when we were in the flesh. But now being Believers; though we have the
remainings, the motions of sin, yet they are not such as bring forth fruit unto
death. None of the sins of Beleivers bring forth fruit unto death, for they
are delivered from that power of the Law; that the Law cannot come with the
sentence of death upon them. This is an high privilege of Believers; and the
right knowledge of this would help us that we should not think, that our peace
with God is so broken that God is our enemy through every sin which through
humane frailty is committed.

Object. You will say; what need then Believers to be careful to avoid sin; may
they not take liberty to walk as they list?

O! No; there are other arguments besides this. Indeed had they a slaveish
spirit, had they no other arguments to persuade them from sin, but this, that
sin would make God, and them enemies, it were somewhat. Men that object, and
say; that Beleivers may do what they list because their peace with God cannot
be broken: The truth is they themselves have slavish hearts; and they do not
know the strength of other arguments to keep them from sin. I dear boldly
affirm this: that a Believer should not upon the Commission of sin think, that
therefore he is now under the sentence of death, if so be it be such a sin as
may stand with the state of Grace, as many weaknesses, and frailties may; for
there are some sins; as liveing after the flesh, which the scripture speaks
of, which if Beleivers live in they shall die. You will say; what, can they
perish eternally? yet this is made as a means to keep them from living after
the flesh: But if they should come to live after the flesh which Gods grace will
keep them from doing in a constant way; they shall die; and so far they may
apprehend eternal death were due unto them, if it were possible for them to fall
into that condition, to live after the flesh. But it is not true, that a
Beleiver upon every sin he committs should be under the sentence of death; for
being once Believers we are freed from the Law. And therefore the Apostle after
he had spoken of the Law of God to the same purpose in Romans 5. He answers this
Objection. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound? God forbid: How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein:
and then follows. Even as sin has reigned unto death; so grace must reign
through righteousness to eternal life. The Grace of God raigns, domineers over
al things that come to oppose it; even over al our infirmities, over al our
sins; over whatsoever may seem to contradict it; the grace of God raigns; there
is a domineering power in the grace of God over al things that would contradict
it; but this is through Righteousness. Thou have sin in thee that would oppose
Gods reconciling Grace; but it; ^aigns notwithstanding that sin of thine, and
it raigns to eternal life; it has a reigning power to carry thee through al
difficulties, and hindrances to eternal life; and al through the righteousness
of Christ. Therefore Believers that they may keep their peace with God, are to
look upon al duties required in the Law as bound to do them; and that they are
not freed from the duties the Law requires; their relation unto God redeeming
of them, does not take away their relation unto God as a Creator; still they are
bound to God as a Creator; as well as a Redemer: But they should look upon the
Law as comeing to them in the hand of Christ. It is an excellent speech which
Luther has for this O! how sweet (says he) are the commandments of God unto
us, when we receive them, not as they are in the Book; but as they are in the
wounds of Christ? When we read the Commandments of God in the wounds of
Chrst, And receive them there; O! how sweet are they then? then we obey them
out of sweet principles, not out of Legal respects, as if upon every Breach we
should be brought under the sentence of eternal death, as we did before. This I
take to be the meaning of that place in Romans 8.15. For you have not received
the spirit of Bondage again to fear. What is the spirit of Bondage? The
spirit of Bondage that causes fear at first; before one is a Believer, is
this; either perfectly obey the Law, or Perish, says the spirit, even the
spirit of God, whether able, or no; you must obey every thing or die; and if
thou have sinned against the Law, thou art now accursed notwithstanding all the
duties that thou have done; the spirit of God says so to al unbeleivers and
this causes fear; but says the Apostle; you have not received the spirit of
Bondage to fear again; though perhaps thou may fear upon thy weakness,
that God will turn thine enemy upon every Breach: but the spirit of God says
not so, that thou art therefore accursed but that spirit inableth thee to go to
God as a Father to heal thy weakness, and to give thee power against them, and
the Contrary is such a mistake as indeed is a great dishonor to the work of
God, reconciliation of God in Christ. We must put much upon that great work
which God puts so much upon, and if we did, we might go up, and down in the
world, with a world of comfort, and it would increase sanctification. Indeed to
deny al kind of obleigment of the Law to God, and to say that men are not bound
to keep it, as God being their Creator etc there is an exstream vanity in it,
but to give the Law that which is its due, and to give the Believer his due
too; to show how far we are bound to it, and how far delivered from it, this
is a great mystery of the Gospel and people should labor to understand it
aright, and take heed, least out of a desire to apprehend the grace of God in
Christ, we do not go too far in ovrthrowing our obligations to God by the Law.
One would think, that this which I have delivered (if men's spirits were not
very wanton) were enough, namely, that we are not under the sentence of
condemnation, though we are not freed from the Law, and the duties thereof as
God is our Creator, and we should think the grace of God magnified in this, and
therefore thus far take hold, and make use of this Grace of God in Christ, as
not to loose the comfort of it. This is the first weakness that hinders men
from preserveing the comfortable assurance of their peace with God.

Weakness. 2.
The second Weakness is this. When men that are godly are ready to judge of Gods
works through their weakness, as works of enmity against them; not only of
their ways toward God as an argument that God, and they are at enmity; but
they are ready to judge all the administrations of Gods providence, as if they
were the works of an enemy to them; as if God were in them, walking contrary to
them: This is a great weakness, and dishonor unto God. Let the wicked, and
ungodly judge so if they Will. As God says; fury is not in me; who would set the
briars, and the Thorns before him? he will go through them. When God comes in
outward ways of misery; ungodly ones may look upon them as God walking in them
contrary unto them; they may look upon al his works as the works of an enemy,
and as one that intends their ruin, and destruction: they are to look upon
every trouble, if it be but the least distemper of their body as the beginnings
of eternal wrath, and a making way for eternal misery for ought they know. But
they that are reconciled to God, it is their weakness if they should look upon
the greatest affliction they meet withal as a work of Gods coming toward them
as an enemy. No; you must know; that there is this power in your reconciliation
with God in Christ; as

First, That there is nothing that ever God does toward you, that does tend to
everlasting wrath, nothing, whatever it be. Here is thy comfort; that thou
may build upon this; though thy affliction be sore, and though they be long
upon thy body, or estate; perhaps thou loosest all that thou have, and it may be
God delivers thee up into the hand of thine enemies, and they trample upon thee
as dirt; yet nothing of all this tends to eternal wrath. As on the contrary;
though a wicked man may have a great many favors from God, and fruits of his
patience; yet no wicked man has ground to make such an interpretation of any
good thing he injoyes from God, as to think that this does tend to his eternal
good. So those that are believers, though they meet with never so great
afflictions; yet they have not sufficient ground to make this interpretation of
those afflictions; that they tend to their utter undoing. And one would think
that this were enough on the other side; for men to believe; that whatsoever
afflictions they meet withal in this world; the wrath of God in all those
afflictions is taken away; they shall not tend to their ruin, and eeternal
misery: that though the afflictions themselves may remain yet the poison of
every affliction, which is the wrath of God, is taken away by Christ. Nay,
whatsoever befalls us in this world; is so far from tending to eternal misery,
that it is, through the love of God tending to thy good: that which does seem
to be most cross to thy desires, yet, it is such as tends to thy everlasting
good in Christ. And this, one would think is enough for the sattisfaction of
men's hearts in the point of afflictions. As what was delivered before may be
enough concerning our freedom from the Law; So what I have now writ in being
chastened for our sins.

Take but these two things that no evil, no chastisement that shall befall us,
shall tend to our everlasting misery nay, nothing shall befall us, but it is out
of love and tends to our eternal good. These two being granted, one would
thing, one might grant any thing else; that God may show a fatherly displeasure
against us for our sins though not as a revenging judge; that God may exercise
his wisdom that way, to mannifest his holiness, and how he disliks sin etc. One
would think this might safely be granted, granting the other two. And indeed
these two and the other concerning the Law, al our divines that are Orthrodax
grant, and these are enough to satisfy us about the free grace of God in
Christ, and believers be thoroughly revited, and grounded in this, they may come
to keep the assurance of their peace with God; for what shall hinder, either
their sins, or Gods afflictions; now neither of these should hinder a believers
peace, but that he may be able still to preserve it, looking upon God through
Christ. This is concerning the loosing of the assurance of our peace through
weakness.

CHAP. 26. We may loose the asserance of our Peace with God by our sinful
walking.
SEcondly we may come to loose our peace, the assurance of our peace with God,
through sinfulnes; through our loose, and carnal walking with God; by this
means we may come to fear, that such walking cannot stand with the condition of
a Believer; and then indeed a believer is put to a nonplus and it will be a
great while before he can be satisfied. In the other, when it is but a daily
infirmity, and when it is such as he strivs against, he is easily satisfied;
but when it comes to that, that it is very like walking after the flesh; as
indeed many fall so foully, as you can scarcly perceive any difference between
one that works after the flesh, and him; his exceedingly clouds the light of
Gods favor, and exceedingly hinders the Comfort of his peace with God And O,
how justly may the Lord abraid thee, and say what, did I set that infinite
wisdom of mine a work to find out such a way of Reconciliation with thee? and
is it worth no more then so, but that thou castest of the comfort of it, that
thou might give liberty to thy loosnes, and negligence, and to have the
flesh have satisfaction? And so Christ himself may abraid the: what, shall I
come from the bosom of my father, and take upon me the form of a servant, and
be made a curse, that I might make peace between my father and thee, and is it
worth no more but this; that thou castest away the Comfort of thy assurance for
such a sinful distemper of heart, to give thy liberty to live after the flesh?
Yea the Holy spirit may come, and a braid thee, and say. What, shall I come, and
reveal the deep counsels of God toward thee, and show thee what those things
were that God from all eternity has done for thee? shall I open the mysteries
of Christ unto thee, and draw thy heart unto him; and shall I speak peace unto
thee, and yet when al is done, thou should regard this so little as for the
sattisfaction of some base distemper of heart, loose that which I have thus
brought to thee; loose the comfort of all that I have done for thee? both
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, may abraid thy negligence, and the looseness of
thy heart, and life. Yea, and thine own Conscience may tell thee, and say, did
not I often hint unto thee, that if thou did give liberty to thy self to
walk thus, and thus loosely, thou shall loose thy comfort, and thou shouldst'
come to apprehend God to be a terror to thee? and will thou even in these days
of troble, when men cry out of fears, and dangers take such a foolish course
to loose thy peace with God? Is there any thing in the base distemper of thy
heart that can countervail this loss? Look upon those that walk holylie, and
closs with God, and let their Conversations abraid thee; they keep their hearts
clean, and maintain their peace with God, and when they lie down, they lie
down in peace, and they awake in the comfortable assurance of their peace: and
when thy hear of wars, and rumors of wars, yet so long as they can look up
to God as their reconciled Father, their hearts are fixed, and stable; and
though they suffer the spoyleing of their goods, and ^he loss of all that is
dear unto them; yet they know, that within their bosom there is that which will
afford comfort enough unto them. And yet thou, through the giveing
sattisfaction to some base, and sinful distemper, or lust, can not think upon
God without terror; can not apprehend him, but as an enemy. O! unworthy
soul; how should thou be confounded in thy own thoughts, for the looseness,
and negligence of heart in preserving that peace which Christ has wrought
between the Father, and thee, so strangly, and so wonderfully! Work these
things (my Brethren) upon your hearts; any ground all upon this; that we are
reconciled to God in Christ; our Reconciliation was wrought by such a strange
way as by Christ, and it cost his blood to work it: therefore, if we have any
hope of our peace with God, we had need look to it to preserve it.

CHAP. 27.
Use. 6. Give God the glory of our Reconciliation.
Again, we have yet a further Use here If God be reconciled to us in Christ;
it teaches us to give God the glory of this great work; adore the infinite
wisdom, and mercy, and goodness of God in this work of his toward us,
reconciling us to himself in Jesus Christ. When Christ was born, the Angels
Sang; glory to God on high; peace on earth: and it was upon that ground that
they Sang it: as if they should have said. O Lord, what a way is here for thee
to make peace upon earth; that thou should send thy Son? here we look upon
a poor Infant in a manger, and this Infant is the eternal God the second
person in Trinity, that has thus taken man's nature upon him, and here he lies
in the cratch; even the same person that made the world. What a strange work of
God is this to bring peace upon Earth; peace after such a way as this! glory be
to God on high And this is the thing we should spend our days in; to adore,
the infinite wisdom, and goodness of God in this way of his, in reconciling the
world to himself in Christ. God expects, that all the children of men to whom
Christ comes to be made known to, should even fall upon their faces, and spend
their days in adoring and praising, and magnifying this great work of God. God
expects that we should have mighty high thoughts of this work; and if our
thoughts be not high of this work, and be nor lift up above al Creatures, we do
but take the name of God in vain. God does not care for any other glory we
give him, except we give him the glory of this work. It is true when we see the
works of God in the Earth, and in the Seas, we should glorify Gods power, and
Gods wisdom etc. But except your heart be taken with this master piece (as I
may so term it) with this great work of God, of Reconciling himself to the
world in Christ; God will rject al your other gloryfyings of him. I mean so
reject them, as he will not accept of them in comparison: therefore this is the
thing that God accepts above al; and this is the commandment of God, that we
should believe in his son, and that we should give the Father the glory due
unto him for reconciling himself to the world in his Son. This is the work
that shall be done in Heaven to al eternity: This is the thing that God himself
delights in above all that ever he has done; that takes up his heart above al.
And if it do not take up your hearts, but you look upon it as an ordinary
thing, and so indeed count the blood of Christ as a common thing: O! know, it is
a high indignity in that thing in which he does expect most glory from. And let
me say this; Has God revealed this work of his Son unto thee; and is thy heart
taken with this great work that God has done; and art thou continualy adoring
of the greatness of that work of God? peace be unto thee; for this is as Good
an evidence that thou art reconciled unto God in Christ, as any I know. But I
must hasten.

CHAP. 28.
Use. 7. To love Christ, And do or suffer for him.
AGain. Is it in Christ that we are reconciled unto God? O! let Christ be
beloved by us. Let us say with the blessed Martyr Lambert; None but Christ,
None but Christ, which he spoke too when he came to the stake to be burnt for
Christ: a good Lessen for us by the way to take out, that may come to suffer
very hard things for that which we have undertaken to do in obedience to God;
yet for us to rejoice when we come to suffer banishment, or loss of goods, or
life; to rejoice that ever our hearts were engaged in the ways of God; It is a
sign of grace indeed. Many men when things prosper can go on, and rejoice that
they were engaged in such a business, but if they find that it shall not prosper
by outward success, and that there are many miscarriages, they repent of what
they have done; and that is the reason why we have so many run away now, and
have withdrawn themselves from that which before they would spend their lives,
and dearest blood in, and not only withdraw themselves when they see the work a
little hot, but betray the cause: But here is a trial of godliness; that if I
have engaged my self in the ways of God; and God by his providence casts me
into such ways as bring trouble unto me, yet I can rejoice that ever I was
engaged in them. Thus it was with the blesed Martyr that cried out none but
Christ, even then when he was at the stake for Christ. It may be a Carnal heart
might say. Yea, Lambert before you rejoiced in Christ, and talked of Christ,
but what say you now? that you are come to be burnt for Christ; had you kept
Christ within your self, you might have preserved this Body of yours: O! no,
Christ was even then, sweet unto this man, when he was going to suffer for him,
and even then, none but Christ. And indeed there is cause sufficient for Christ
to be dear, and sweet unto us even in the midst of al sufferings. It is true,
it may cause us to have the world to be our enemy; but what of that, when
Christ has made peace between us, and God the father; this satisfies the soul
of a man to the full, and therefore the soul will love him, and will rejoice in
him, and bless God that ever he was engaged in any cause for the sake of
Christ; because Christ is his blessed Reconciler, and because Christ has made
a peace between God, and his heart; although men are his enemies, yet he knows
that through Christ God is his friend. Christ has made men our enemies indeed
but it is accidentally, but he has made God our friend; and he himself says;
Do you think I come to bring Peace? No, I come to bring a sword: through the
profession of the Gospel there is a great deal of enmity amongst men and I
believe this rage, and enmity that is on root here in England, Christ himself
accidentally is the cause of it. On the one side, the desire of Gods people is
for a through Reformation; and on the other side the hatred of men's spirits
against Christ, and his Ordinances, will rather undo themseleves then Christ
shall have any Glory, they will rather put their Necks under an Antichristian
yoke, yea, under the yoke of slavery, and make themselves, and their posterity
slaves, then to be under the yoke of Christ; and this is the very bottom of
that bitter malice and rage that is now in the hearts of men, for there was
never the like example of a people, that should be enraged one against another
for their own mind. We might have peace, and we might have liberry if we would
but unite our selves as one man against Papists, and others that are notorious,
and abominably wicked to subdue them. But now because that peace, and liberty
would bring in Reformation with it, and men should not have that liberty for
their lusts as heretofore they have had, upon that they will have no peace at
all; and they will rather be slaves to the wills and lusts of men, and to the
Devil, then come under Christ's yoke. Thus the Gospel is in great part, the
cause of the sword by accident. What though? Shall we not love therefore, Shall
we say? since there was so much preaching, and profession, we have had such and
such wars, and strifes, and troubles: would men be quiet, and contented, they
might be at peace. O! what is this, but to be contented to be without Christ,
without truth, without peace of Conscience? so that because we would fain have
these; that is, we would fain have Christ, and fain have the Gospel, and truth,
and peace of Conscience, we can have no peace with men, but yet blessed be God
for Christ; for although Christ be as a bundle of mirth, that has much
bitterness in it, yet let him lie between your breasts, let us rejoice in him,
let us love him, let us bless God for him, and be glad that ever we were
engaged in his Cause. O! that great Peacemaker between God and us, how dear
should he be to our hearts? And as that Martyr said when he was to suffer for
him. What have I but one life to lay down for Christ? O! that I had many; So
should we say; what, is our life in danger for Christ? O! that we had many
lives that might be al in danger for him. I heard a credible relation of a young
man that was in the business that was in Kent, and had a shot through the
shoulder, and fell down as dead, and for a while lay as dead, but recovering and
getting up, and having strengh enough to discharg a musket; said, well, I will
spend one life more for this Cause. The truth is, had we one, yea an hundred, a
thousand lives, we might very well bestow them in a cause wherein we might
testify our love to Christ, and bless God that ever we were engaged therein
though it has brought such a disturbance between man, and man. And let this be
one particular wherein you are to manifest your love to Jesus Christ as the
great Reconciler; namly, that you are willing to be reconciled one to another,
to be reconciled to your Brethren for his sake: this is one good way to
manifest your love to Christ. It may be such, and such have wronged you, and
there is a great breach between such a neighbor and you. A natural man may be
willing to be reconciled upon natural grounds; it is a troublesome thing to be
in Contention, and it is more comfortable to be at peace with my Neighbor; and
so through a natural love unto peace some will be contented there should be
peace made between them, and the others they are fallen out withal; and it is
good to go so far: But when you can bring your selves to this; not only out of
love to peace, because it is good for neighbors to be reconciled; but when you
can think thus. Christ has reconciled my soul when I was an enemy unto God; he
has come down from the bosom of his Father, and laid down his life for me: and
Christ is dishonored when there are such breaches between friend, and friend;
therefore out of love to Jesus Christ who has reconciled my soul unto the
Father I am willing out of that very principle to be at peace with others.

CAHP. 29.
Use, 8. In Seeking Reconciliation by Christ.
LAstly; if it be in Christ that we are reconciled unto God. Let us al learn
in seeking Reconciliation to eye Christ, and carry him in our arms. If there
be any of you that now begin to have your consciences stirred, and to be made
sensible of the breach that is between God, and you, do not rest in seeking
peace in a natural way, but eye Jesus Christ; and when you look up unto God for
peace; look unto him in Christ. Look upon Christ as the second person in
Trinity, taking our nature upon him. Look upon Christ as the head of the
Covenant of Grace. Look upon Christ as the Lamb slain from the begi^^ ^f the
world, and having made peace with his bloo^ Look upon Christ as sitting at the
right hand of the Father making intercession.

Thus you should act your faith upon God in Christ when you are seeking peace
with God. The reason why many people ly under the spirit of bondage for many
years together, is this. Because they look upon God merely as he is in
himself, and do not look upon God through Christ, and so do not sanctify the
name of God in this great work of Reconciliation

CHAP. 30 God [was] reconciling the world to himself from all eternity, opened.
ANd thus we have gone through that point of Gods being reconciled to us in
Christ. There is another; Namely. The Sixth thing propounded in the first
Chapter viz. That God [was] reconcileing the world to himself in his son. The
work of our Reconciliation, is not a work of yesterday; it is a work that God
was doing from all eternity; for the point is from that particle he [was] this
work; for God to reconcile us to himself in his son, has taken up the heart of
God from al eternity. That place in Titus, 1.2. Is most remarkable for this In
hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world
began: he not only promised it now; but he promised it before the world began.
who was there before the world began to whom God made this promise? There was
his Son Jesus Christ. So then, that is the meaning when he says God [was]
reconcileing himself to the world; that there was from al eternity, a
transaction as it were between God the Father, and God the son about our
Reconciliation: there was not only a purpose in (...) ^^om al eternity that he
would reconcile the world to ^elf; but there was a real, and actual transaction
between the Father and Son about it; an agreement between God the Father, and
God the Son about it. Gods Wisdom from al eternity was exercised to find out a
way. Secondly, Gods purpose was from al eternity to do it. And Thirdly, There
was a transaction between God the Father, and God the Son from al Eternity for
to do it: they did covenant one with the other: God the Father told his Son
what he required of him; and God the Son promised to the Father to do it; there
was such a transaction as this; and therefore the scripture says, it was
promised before the world began; God the Father did promise to his Son before
the world began what he would do for those that he would die for; as if he
should have said. Thou art content to lay down thy life, and to shed thy blood?
Yea, says the Son, I am: well, says the Father, I will be reconciled unto them,
and I will save their souls; they shall have eternal life for their portion; this
I promise thee; and so, it was promised to Christ first. It is true the
promises of the Gospel are sweet, and they should rejoice our hearts; I had
perished in my affliction says David, had I not had ragard unto thy word:
nothing more sweet to a soul then the promises are; but though the promises
that are made to us in the Gospel are sweet; yet the promise that was made to
the Son of God, is infinitely more sweet. And this is the thing that I should
have showed you: not only how this was promised unto Christ; but the excellent
comfort that this is unto the Saints; that they are now to look upon all that is
done unto them, and upon all the works of Gods grace to them, not as a new
thing; not as an accidental thing that comes. As if we should have peace here
in the Commonwealth it would be pretiouse to us, if it should be upon these
terms, and we would al rejoice much in what should befall us in a way of a
safe peace: But our peace with God is not wrought with God so, as if we were
perishing, and then Gods providence came and turned all about again. No, our
peace with God is a thing plotted from al eternity; God did as it were contrive
it in Heaven before any world was made: God thought of this work of
Reconcileing himself unto the world; yea, unto thee in particular if thou
be a Believer, a broken hearted sinner, before even the Havens, or the Earth
were made, God had actual thoughts of thee still; and there was a Covenant
between God the Father and the Son, for thy soul in particular; and though God
foresaw thou would sin against him, and turn enemy to him, yet there was a
consultation between the Father, and the Son from al eternity to bring thy soul
home unto God, and to pardon thy sin. So that thou art to look upon all the
works of Gods grace toward thee here in bringing thee to his Son, and upon all
the comforts thou have from his Son, as the fruit of Gods eternal plot, of Gods
eternal council with his Son: and that although it does but now break forth,
yet it was that which was in the bosom of the Father, and the Son from al
eternity; and this indeed will sweeten our Reconciliation with God, and al means
tending thereunto. As, does God send but the word of Reconciliation to bring
you home unto Christ? this was that which there was a Contrivance of in the
heart of God from al eternity. That in such a time, such a man should live, in
such a place, and such a Minister should be sent amongst them, and such a text
of scripture should be opened, and such truths should be preached, and if thou
find God bringing of these truths home to thy soul: know, it is a fruit of
that eternal counsel that was between the Father, and the Son before the world
began; and a branch of the promise that God made to his Son from al eternity.
Do thou, when thou come to the word begin to feel thy mind enlightened, to
know Jesus Christ? does thy heart begin to be melted, is thy soul drawing after
Christ? do not look upon this as a mere accidental thing; do not say only, What
a providence of God is it that called me to such a Sermon? at such time I went
for company sake to such a place; but when I came, I felt the Spirit of God
stirring in my Soul; yea, I find a beginning of that which I hope I shall have
cause to bless God for, for ever. Do not look upon this as a mere accidental
thing, or as an act of providence only; But know, that this very work of God
toward thee, is no other then the fruit of the promise that God made to his
Son before the world began. God promised his Son, that it should be so ordered,
that at such a time there should be such a Text, and such a Sermon preached,
and that it should so fall out that thou should be there And so likewise any
peace of Conscience; any work of grace whatsoever, is a fruit of this promise;
and therefore rejoice in this; that Gods heart is broken open unto thee; and
that which was in his bosom from al eternity is made known unto thee.

Those men that are not converted til they be old, have cause to be sorrowful,
and to be troubled for that: It is true I have cause to bless God, that at
length God is pleased to open his heart unto me; But what a misery is it to me
that I lived so long before I came to know God the Fathers purpose to my heart,
had I embraced the Gospel first, I had then been made acquainted with the
council of God from al eternity concerning me. And a mighty encouragement it is
to young people to bless God for this, that God begins with them betimes; it is
a sign that Gods heart is full when he begins with one so early. For the truth
is, Gods heart was toward thee from everlasting, and the business was
transacting from everlasting. Some, though the heart of God be toward them,
yet he keeps it a long time from breaking open til they grow to their middle
age, til old age it may be, and then he discloseth himself. As Joseph would not
open his heart to his Brethren for many days together. So there are many
people, that God lets them go on a long while in ways of sin, he withdraws
himself, and denies himself to open his heart to them, but at lengh he does:
But then how much better is it when God shall open his heart betimes unto a man?
Would not Joseph's Brethren have been glad that he should have discovered
himself unto them and opened his heart unto them at the first coming? So, you
that do begin now to have the day of grace dawn into your understandings, and
God begins betimes to open himself, and those things that were in his heart
before the beginning of the world discovers them to thee; and God cannot (as we
may speak with reverence) stay any longer; but as soon as thou art able to
receive in those thoughts of the heart of God; he lets them out unto thee. O!
bless God for it. And this will prevent abundance of sin and sorrow, and make
thee go on with comfort al thy days. This point also should be a marvelous
Comfort to the people of God. That their peace with God does not so much depend
upon the Covenant God has made with them; but it depends upon the Covenant God
has made with Jesus Christ from al eternity; and that is the root and bottom
of their peace, and Reconciliation with God. Alas were it a dependence upon a
Covenant between us, and God, and what he requires of us; we could not have
firm peace: But when we know this; that the root, and ground, of our peace, and
happiness, depends upon that transaction that there was between the Father,
and the Son from al eternity, and upon the Covenant that was between them: O!
this is that which should rejoice the hearts of the Saints, and be a mighty
foundation of their Faith, and enable them to go through the world, and al
difficulties with Comfort.

CHAP. 31 The work of our Reconciliation with God in Christ has been a doing
from al eternity.
IN the last Chapter we came to the sixth point that formerly has been
propounded in the first Chapter; and that is this. That God [Was] reconcileing
himself to the world in Christ. [Was] and when was he? Even from all eternity,
he was reconcileing himself to the world. That point I did then name, and shall
now a little enlarge it, and so proceed to some other. The point is this.

Doct. That the work of our Reconciliation with God in Christ, it is not a
work of yesterday, it is a work that has been doing from al eternity; it is
not a thing that falls out as it were accidentally, but a plotted thing, a thing
that has been plotted from al eternity. I gave you then but only one scripture
for it: I shall ad some more now, and open it more fully. That scripture I gave
in the 1 Tit. 2. In hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie, promised
before the world began. Now to whom did God promise it before the world began?
The first promise that was made, and that we read of, was to Adam in paradise,
the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. O! but there was a promise
beyond that promise; a promise made before Adam was, or before the Angels
were, or before the world began; a promise of eternal life, which is the
accomplishment of our reconciliation with God; this promise could be made to no
other, but to the Son of God that was with the Father, and the delight of the
Father; not only the delight of the Father as he is the Son eternally begotten
of the Father, but the delight of the Father as he undertook the great work of
Reconciliation between God, and us; and this promise was made to him from the
Father; the promise of Reconciliation, and eternal life before the world began.
So that by that scripture it appears; that there was from al eternity, not
only a purpose, or a determination in God to reconcile us to himself; but
there was an agreement, a transaction between the Father, and the Son about it,
and a Covenant passed between them. God the Father promises somewhat, and the
Son promises somewhat, and so they make up the agreement one with another from
al eternity.

First, There was a transaction of this great work of Reconciliation between
God the Father, and the Son from all eternity; and for this I shall give you a
scripture or two more. 2 Timo. 1.9. Who has saved, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works; But according to his own purpose, and
grace which was given us in Jesus Christ before the world began. Here is not
only a purpose, but here is grace besides purpose; there was not only a
purpose in God before the world began, but there was somewhat more; here is
purpose and grace, and this is given to us too; it is not only intended for us
(that is observeable) but it was given us, and given us before the world began:
how given us? could God give any thing to us before the world began; could God
give any thing to us before we were? It is therefore added; it was his purpose,
and grace, and given to us [in Christ] before the world began. As it is
possible for an Inheritance to be made over to one before he was borne;
sometimes between man and man, there is something made over thus, to our heirs
lawfully begotten, though there be none born, yet it is given them; and there
is solemnity in Law concerning it. Perhaps it is given to some as a feofee;
that if such, and such should be borne, they should enjoy it; or that they shall
employ this for the benefit of such, and such that shall be born; so Jesus
Christ stood before the Father (as we may so term it) as a feofee in trust, as
the head of a Covenant, and there were transactions between the Father, and
him; there was not only a purpose in God to reconcile himself to us, but
there was grace given to us in Christ; there was an actual donation of this
unto Christ before the world began, that so we might come to Enjoy it.

Again, another Scripture for this is the 1. Cor. 2.7. which speaks somewhat of
this also, though not altogether so fully as the former. The words are these.
But we Speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world to our glory. He does not only speak here of Gods
Electing, of Gods ordaining us to Glory; but he speaks of the whole mystery of
the Gospel, which he calls the hiden wisdom of God. Now this doctrine of
Reconciliation which I have been preaching to you, about that we are reconciled
to God in Christ, this is the hiden wisdom of God which was kept hid from the
beginning of the world, and yet ordained before the world to our glory. God had
contrived all this doctrine of Reconciliation, and purposed, that in time it
should come to be revealed to us, as it is at this day.

There is yet another Scripture for this which is very remarkable. It is in the
17. John. you shall find in that chapter many expressions to that purpose; that
those that did believe in Christ were such as God the Father had given him: and
you may find by diverse expressions there apparently, that there was an
agreement, a transaction between the Father, and the son, long before the thing
was done; verse 16. I have manifested my name to the men thou gave me out of
the world; thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
word; he does not speak merely of giving them at this time; but of Giving them
to ^^e son before now, for he makes that to be the ground of their belief; he
does not make their givi^^ ^^em to him to be believing; but he makes their
believing, and the keeping of the word of faith, to be a fruit of Gods giving
them to his Son, the fathers giving them to his Son is the foundation of their
believing, and hence it is that in time they come to believe; because God the
father has from al eternity given them to his Son: that is the argument of
Christ and this indeed makes the difference between some that believe, and
others that do not believe. There are some that are of mean parts, poor people,
and young ones that believe in Jesus Christ, and the great mysteries of the
Gospel; others that have more understanding, that are learned men, they do not
believe. That which makes the difference is this: that God the father gives
some to his son to reconcile, and he does not give others: and this is the
argument of Christ in that 17, John. he makes the foundation of their faith to
be God the fathers giving of them to the Son. So that it is apparent in
Scripture, that there has been (before we come to believe, ye a before the
world was) a transaction between the father, and the Son about our
reconciliation. God was reconciling himself to the world, So that our
Reconciliation with God, and the having our sins not imputed must be
considered in three periods of time. The first is (if we may call that a period
of time, which rather was before time) that which was from al eternity with the
Son; there God was reconciling himself unto us. Secondly; when Christ came into
the world, and was upon the Cross, and suffered; there was an actual imputation
of the sins of all the Elect unto him, and a laying of them upon Christ; there
was then a special act of God imputing and charging upon his Son, the Sins of
all the elect. Thirdly when God calls any sinner to believe; then there is an
other act of God passing the Sentence of absolution upon the Soul, an actual
passing of it, which we call Justification: As it is between man, and man; you
know the law may be satsfied for the prisoner, and yet the Prisoner not
absolved; the ^^^soner is not acquitted, til the sentence be so solemnly
pronounced by the Judge, though the verdict be brought in, not guilty, yet he is
not acquitted until the Judge pronunce the sentence of absolution. So, though
Jesus Christ in his sufferings when he was crucified, satisfied the law for all
that should believe in him; yet there is required a pronouncing of the Sentence
by the Judge for the acquitting of, which is our Justification. And yet sometimes
we know, that after the sentence is pronounced by the Judge, the malefactor may
ly in Prison til the fees be paid. Just thus it is with us: after our
justification, yet we remain in this world, and have the fetters of our
corruption upon us, have the fetters of afflictions, and troubles upon us til
we have paid the dues to nature, and the dispensations of Gods Providence. One
that is Elect, and not a believer, he is as a prisoner that has the Law
satisfied for him, though he does not know it; yet certainly he shall be saved:
One that is Elect, and a believer is as a prisoner that has the Judge
pronouncing the sentence of absolution upon him; yet afterward, so long as the
Believer is in this world, he is like a Prisoner that has had his sentance
pronounced upon him to acquit him, but he lies in Prison til he has paid his
fees. But those in Heaven; they have not only the Law satisfied, and the fees
paid, but they are set at liberty also, and are in their Fathers house. There
are Several times therefore of Gods manifestation of our Reconciliation to us
not imputing our Sins unto us.

But though there be such several workings of God, yet this does not argue any
change in God, which is an Objection that many through weakness make; that
because God does this thing, and the other thing and the other thing that was
not done before, therefore (...) would argue, as if there were a charge in God,
and therefore would conclude; that there is nothing that is now done, but was
done, and that as it is now done, so it was done everlastingly. But we are to
know this; that Gods actual pronouncing of a sentence of absolution now; was
not done before, does no more argue a change in God; than Gods glorifying the
Saints in Heaven now, who were not glorified before. To be Justified in time,
does no more argue a change in God, than to be glorified in time argues it.
The Saints upon Earth are not yet glorified, and yet they shall be glorified,
and that argues no change in God. So the Elect that are not yet Believers, are
not yet Justified in that sense the Scripture speaks of Justification, yea they
shall be Justified: and that argues no change in God.

But that we may further understand this, how God was from all Eternity
reconciling himself unto the world, yet there are several periods of time
wherein there are several workings of God toward a sinner, which indeed are
employed in the words of the Text. God was reonciling the world to himself; he
[Was] a doing of it; and this work before it comes to the accomplishment, has
several periods of of time. And to the end you may understand it the better;
You must know, that there is a great deal of difference between those actings
of God which are in himself, according to his own nature, and those actions of
his toward the creature that are in a suitable way to the Creature; and for
the want of the right understanding of the diffrence between these two, many
people do most grossly mistake and gather many absurd Conclusions. They agrue
from Gods infinite, and unconceiveable way of acting in himself, to those acts
of God that are suitable to the Creature, and received by the Creature; when
they hear of any thing of the workings of God received by the creature, they
would understand that in the same manner, or as if it were to be understood in
the same manner as those acts of God in himself. I will show you how great a
difference there is between them.

First, Take the Acts of God in himself, and this is true, the act of God is
the Being of God himself, Gods Essence, and his act in himself, are allone:
but now the act of God as the Creature receives it, is not the Essence of God,
for the Creature is not capable of Gods essence, for then the Creature should
be infinite. But the act of God as it is in himself, is God himself, and so it
is infinite; there is no act as it is in God, but it is an infinite act because
is is God. As now that which the Creature receives cannot be infinite. So the
acts of God in himself, are al eternal, and there is no difference of time
with God; there is not time past, present, and to come. Look upon the acts of
God as he works in himself: whatsoever act there is in God, even the
glorifying of the Saints; so far as Considered in God, is eternal; And there is
no difference of time at al in the acts of God, as in himself; But if one
consider those acts as the Creature receives them; then we must look at the
difference of time, one, at one time, another at another, and another at
another, received by the Creature. And you must take heed of too much boldness
when we speak of God; when God sometimes manifests his workings as the
Creature receives; we must not then think, that these are the acts of God as
they are in himself, which are infinite, and to be conceived in an infinite
manner, so as nothing but an infinite understanding is able to reach, and to
conceive of. Therefore those men that think to fatham the arts of God as they
are in himself, they are too too presumptuous; for only an infinite
understanding is able to conceive of them; we must conceive of them as the
Creature receives them, and so as they are revealed in the word; and this is
the substance of what is revealed concerning Gods working toward us; namly;
that from eternity, there was a transfaction between him, and the Son in such
an unconceivable manner as we know not of; and that in time the Lord did lay our
sins upon his Son on the Cross, and that afterward when his good time shall
come to call a sinner to himself, then he does justify him, and prononce a
sentence of absolution. But first, he calls them; So the scripture says those
whom he has called, he has justified. The Scripture makes calling of a sinner
to go before justification; therefore whatsoever is in God from eternity; yet
it is apparent that (speaking of justification as the scripture speaks of it)
Vocation goes before, and that justification is no otherwise from eternity,
than Vocation. God may as truly be said to call a sinner out of his natural
estate from eternity, as to justify a sinner from eternity in that sense that
the scripture speaks of it in Romans 8. But, when we speak of justification
ordinarily, we speak of it in the sense that the scripture speaks of it here,
and so Vocation is first, and then justification, and afterward glorification.
So that though the Lord be pleased to reveal much of the mystery of the Gospel
to us, and tell us he has been reconcileing himself to us from eternity, yet we
must understand this in a sober way, and take heed we do not vanish in our own
thoughts when we come to search into it.

CHAP. 32. Five Uses of the former Doctrine.
A Word, or two further for the Application of this (for something has been
already done in the last Chapter) and then we pass to another point.

Use. 1.
Here we see the infinite love of God, that he has been pleased thus to think
of us poor Creatures from everlasting, to make it his work to reconcile us to
himself: and here is the foundation of the sweetness, and comfort of all the
mercies of God, to those that are reconciled un^o him; that they are the fruits
of eternal love of God to us. And here is the foundation likewise of the
establishment of the Saints; that their happiness does not depend so much upon
the Covenant that God has made between himself, and them, as the Covenant that
God has made betwixt himself and his Son. For the covenant is two fold; either
between God, and Christ, or between Christ and us. Now, it is true, much does
depend upon our keeping Covenant with Christ; but our happiness; and Salvation,
and indeed al our good does cheifely depend upon the Covenant between the
Father, and the Son.

Use, 2.
Again, Here we may see how to answer that question of some Atheists; what God
was doing before the world began? I remember it is said, that when that
question was asked by some in the primitive times; the answer was. That God was
making of Hell for such curiouse Inquisitiors. But here we have a further,
answer to give then that; namely; That God was exercised from al eternity in
the business of Reconciling the world to himself. God had (as it were) the
idea, and the platform of all things before him; and saw man how he was made in
his Innocence, and saw him fall, and saw how he should rise again, and how he
should be converted, and glorified. All the platform of al these things was
before God from al eternity. As a work man when he goes to build an House, or
to build a ship, he has the platform thereof in his head, before he strikes a
struck. So the great work of our Election, of our Vocation, Justification,
Reconciliation, adoption, sanctification, and glorification, the Lord had the
platform of al before him; it was all in his Head as it were, and he was
exercised about it before the world began: so that if thou art a Beleiver, it
now comes to be known; that the Lord from al eternity was exercised about
thee, and thy good and about the Contrivance of thy Salvation, and fore saw how
thou would fall from him, and be made a child of wrath, and an Heir of Hell.
And then he saw a way how to recover thee out of that condition, and how to
bring this to pass; how he would cast thy lot, to live in such a place, and in
such an age of the world wherein the Gospel, and the mysteries thereof should
be preached; and that thou should come under such a ministry; and that just
at the preaching of such a sermon, such a truth should be darted into thy
heart, and applied unto thee; and that then he would send his holy spirit to
fasten that truth upon thy heart; the Lord plotted all this from eternity: and
this is that which the Lord was busied about (as we may speak with reverence)
before the world began.

Use 3.
Another Use is this. It is a good establishment for us to help us to believe
that eternal happiness that is to come; that part of eternity that is a part
post; Beca^se we have God revealeing his love to us in that part of eternity
that is a part ante. God has showed, that from eternity he has been plotting
our good: Surely then it is no more for God to make us happy on the other side
of eternity, then it was for him to be plotting our happiness in the former
part of eternity. So that a Believer may see his happy condition in this. He is
now enjoying that piece of Gods love that is between two Oceans of eternity of
love. As if there were a little River, and on each side there were a mighty
Ocean of Water: now the stream of Gods love and mercy runs toward thee, and
thou now do receive abundance of good from God; the Lord sweetneth thy life,
and now comforts, and refreshes thy heart with his grace; art thou glad of
this; and is this piece of the mercy of God sweet unto thee? poor soul, look on
this side, and look on the other side, and see those Oceans of Eternal Love, on
both sides toward thee. Alas, this is a little that thou have now; but if thou
look on one side; there thou shall see that eternal love of God that was
toward thee before the world was made. And if thou look on the other side,
thou shall see eternal life in all that glory which shall never have an end,
which thou shall actually be possessed of; and that which thou art for the
present in the possession of, is a little stream in comparison of these two
great Oceans of love that are from eternity, to eternity. And when thou hear
that God intends to make thee happy for ever, and that thou shall continue a
glorious, and blessed creature as long as God himself shall live; and that thou
shall be happy as long as God shall be happy. Perhaps thou think, how is this
possible, is it possible for such a poor frail creature as I am to live to be
happy as long as God himself shall be happy? Yes, do not doubt of it, though it
be a great thing, for God has had a love to thee from al eternity; therefore,
though it is true there be many frailties, and many sins of thine, yet that
cannot hinder thee of that eternal mercy that God has been plotting for thee.
Methinks the Apostle argues after this manner Galla. 3.17. The Covenant that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which four hundred, and thirty
years after cannot disanul, that it should make the promise of none effect.
Observe the Apostles argument; the (Law says he) cannot disanul the promise of
Grace; Why? Because it was four hundred, and thirty years after the promise
was made, and that which came so long after cannot disanul that which was
before. We may make use of the argument thus. Surely if thou be one that
belongest to this transaction of God with his Son; the sins that now thou
fallest into, cannot take away Gods love from thee, cannot hinder thee from
being happy for ever; Why? Because the Covenant of God with his Son for thy
happiness was not four hundred and thirty years ago, but hundred of millions of
thousands years ago, therefore that which is now done, cannot disanul that
which was from al eternity. ^^mfort thy self with this, when thou hear that
God was reconciling himself to the world, even before the world it self was,
yea, from al Eternity.

USE. 4.
Again; It should stir al to begin betimes to get grace and Reconciliation with
God. You that are young ones, and are now in the flower of your youth crowned
with rose buds. Consider this: God, he was working for your good before the
world; be you working for his glory as soon as you can. Shall not I give the
beginning of my years, my first fruits to God who loved me, and was working for
me before ever I was borne; therefore it is fit he should have as much of my
time as can be,

USE, 5.
Yea, this should also be a mighty argument to put us al on to be constant in
holy walking with God, because the lord has been working from Eternity, and
will be working to eternity for our good, and therefore that time which we have,
we should serve, and glorify God in it. For suppose we should live ten
thousand years, or ten thousand millions of years in this world; Suppose God
should require us to live, and serve him in the way we do now, Eternally; we
should not think much of it, for we serve God but one piece of eternity, that
is, that part of eternity which is coming; But God is merciful to us in both
pieces of Eternity; his mercy is to us on both sides from everlasting to
everlasting; God is before hand with us in his mercy, and in his love; his love
was from eternity, and shall Continue to eternity, and therefore we should not
think much to serve God, and to glorify him in ways of holiness all the time
that we are appointed to live, and when we have don al we cannot com near to
those workings which he has been at for us. But I shall lea^ his point the Lord
seal it with his bleessing upon our spirits.

CHAP. 33. Of Gods Reconciling the world to himself.
THE next point being the seventh propounded in the first chapter is: That God
was Reconcileng the [World] to himself. So the text Says; and so the Point
is. That God has been reconciling the [World] to himself. This which we have
in the text here it is the very same in effect with that we have in John. 3.16.
So God loved the [World] that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish but have Everlasting life.

The world you will say; how is that? did God reconcile all the world, to
himself?

No, we are therefore to understand this saying here as an indifinite
Proposition, and not as if it were an universal Proposition; and the right
understanding of this difference between an universal, and an indefinite
proposition is of great use to us, both in this, and many other points of
divinity. An Universal Proposition, is that, that speaks so of the general,
as it includes every particular under it, An indefinite Proposition, does but
speak of the general, and not include every particular under it, but only
many. As thus. If one should say, that such a man teaches all the Children in
such a Town; we do not mean that there is no particular Child that is not
thaught, for there are infants there; and there are perhaps some that are not
taught at al; but we mean thus; that he teaches, those Children that are
taught; there is none that he excepteth but if they come to him, he will teach
them, he is there ready, and stands prepared to teach them; and in this senss
he may be said to teach all the Children in the Town; that is; there is a
genneral proposition without a particular restriction, though every individual
is not contained in it. This now is an Indefinit proposition, or speech. But
when we Say a general proposition, then we speek of al particulers none at al
can be excepted, But must come under that proposition: and this will help us
much in other Points of divinity. As in the promise: I will be thy God and the
God of thy Seed. We must understand this Promise by the way of an indefinite
proposition, and so al understand it that understand it aright. Many that
understand not the difference between these two, think they have a strong
objection, and say; This promise cannot be made of the godly, for then the
Children of the Godly would be godly too. No, it is not an Universal
proposition that includes every particular, but an indefinite one; that is
thus. God, promises to be the God of his people, and of their seed; that is,
he will show mercy to their Seed, rather then to the Seed of others, and he will
rather draw the line of Election through their Loins then through the Loins of
others, he will take them, not every particular of them, but take them
indefinitly, and not reveal which of them he will take; whether this Person, or
that Person individually; But he speaks indifinitly; and his meaning is, that
those that are the Seed of his people shall be brought into a nearer Pale; into
a nearer limit of Gods Grace, then the Seed of others, and he will be gracious
to their Seed, rather then to others. And so here, God saved the World, and
reconciled the World, the propositions are to be understood alike,
indefinitely; not that he loves, or reconcileth every individual Person in the
world Even as he is the God of the Seed of the Saints. It is not to be
understood that he is the God of every particular one of them; he is pleased to
express himself thus indefinitly, and not generally.

CHAP. 34. Gods reconciling [the World] to himself, cannot be meant of every
individual man; proved by Scripture: And Three Reasons.
BUt for the opening of this. That God is reconciling himself unto the world;
that is, unto mankind, to humane nature, though not to every individual
person that is in humane nature. I shall show you.

First, That it cannot be meant of every individual. And then.

Secondly, Why it is expressed in such a large term as the World.

First, I shall make it appear, That it cannot be meant of every particular man,
or woman in the world: Nay, indeed, the truth is, that there is a great part in
the world and such a part as the world may receive denomination from too, that
Christ has rejected, and shall never be reconciled to: and that is clear in
John. 17. where Christ says, That he prayed not for the World, surely then he
died not for the world: there are some in the world that Christ did not so much
as pray for; How was God reconciling himself to the world then, when as Christ
professes, he did not pray for the world? It appears by this, that we are not
to understand it of every particular man, or woman in the world; there are some
that are in the world that God was never reconciling himself unto.

1. And besides this Text, it appears from hence. Because if God were
reconciling himself to all the world, then al should certainly believe, and be
saved; Why? Because that Christ should lay down a price for all, and the blood
of Christ does as well pardon the sin of unbelief as any other sin. If there be
any one that Christ has laid down his life for, he has purchased at the hands
of God the Father, that this Soul should be delivered from the power of
unbelief; and Faith it is a blessing that comes unto us by Christ, as well as
any other blessing. I appeal to you; Is not Faith a spiritual blessing, as well
as any other Grace? Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ who has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in
Christ. So that al spiritual blessings are in Christ; if they are in Christ,
then Faith is in Christ, for Faith is a spiritual blessing, and then Christ
has purchased Faith, for whosoever Christ has died for, they must believe in
time; Christ has not left the work of our salvation loose upon this adventure.
I will lay down my life, and in case men believe, they shall be reconciled; No,
Christ laid down his Life to purchase of God the Father, that men should
believe, as well as he has purchased eternal life it self; and therefore if
thou beleevest, know, it is the fruit of the purchase of Christ, as well as
Heaven it self is. So then, if God were reconciled to all the world, al should
come, and be actually Believers; But in that they do not, it is apparent, that
Christ never intended it. That is one Reason.

2. And then. Another argument may be this. If this were so, that Christ had
laid down a price for the world in general, and only those that are left to
themselves to believe, or not believe, should come to be saved: Then the great
things that are contained in these great Mysteries of godliness, and the great
works of God, both in Election, Redemption, Justification, and Glorification,
must rather depend upon man's will, than upon any work of God; for say they; God
indeed has wrought all this; but it is in case men believe, he has left it to
them to believe, or not believe, and so all the great councels of God must
depend upon man's will: No certainly, Christ has not left it so, but those that
he has reconciled unto God, he has so reconciled them to him, as that they
shall believe, and this is not all the world.

3. Further: If this were so, that Christ has paid a price, and left it to
man's free will to believe, or not believe; the truth is, Judas would have been
as much beholding to Christ for Salvation, as Peter. But you will say, Judas was
never saved, Peter was; But according to these men, Christ did as much for
Judas as for Peter, for he shed his blood for Judas as well as for Peter; only
Peter by the act of his free will, believed, and the other did not. So that the
truth is, according to the doctrine of these men, Peter shall be no more
beholding to Christ at the day of judgment, than Judas was. Peter indeed must
acknowledge that he was saved by Christ; but if their doctrine be true, he may
well say; Lord; thou have done no more for me, than for Judas, and what was
more, I did that my self, thou shedest thy blood a like for us, but I
believed, and he did not, if he had believed he might have been saved as well as
I; so hereby the grace of God is exceedingly dishonored by these men that hold
universal Redemption by Christ, and make it to include all the world. There are
many arguments that might be used, which because they are not so clear to the
ordinary capacities of people, we shall leave further mentioning of them at this
time; and shall only ad; that it is Arminian doctrine, to teach, that there is a
price paid by Christ for all the world, and it is left unto men to believe, or
not to believe: And that is true evangelical doctrine; That there is a price
paid by Christ, and God has resolved upon such, and such particular ones in
the world that he will be reconciled unto, and that they shall believe, and be
everlastingly saved.

CHAP. 35. Why Gods Reconciling to himself is expressed in so large a term as
the [World.] Six Reasons thereof.
BUt you will say; If this be so, that God has made such a difference; that
there are some that he has been from al eternity reconcileing himself unto,
and not al; what is the reason of this phrase? why does he say that he loved
the world? and that he was reconciling himself unto the world without any
distinction? One would think, God should rather have expressed it thus: That he
Reconciling himself to some in the world, and that he loved some in the world,
and not the world in general. No, God would rather express it in this general
phrase upon these Six Reasons.

Reason, 1.
First, He would say, the World, to exclude Angels that are not so properly of
this world. But this does not come up so fully to the Reason; why God would
rather say the world, than this, or that man in the world. And therefore.

Reason, 2.
In the Second place; another Reason is this. Because he would show the
sufficiency of the death of Christ, and of the work of Redemption; that there
is enough in it, if it were to save never so many worlds.

Reason. 3.
Thirdly, Another Reason of it is this. That God might show, that in the
Ministry of the Gospel, none shall be excluded, No, not the worst of sinners
that are in the world; and therefore God does not say in the Ministry of the
Gospel; this, or that particular man or woman Christ died for; but generally,
he died for the world. Because he would hereby show, that he has not excluded
the worst, and vildest sinner in the world; and that those that are the most
notorious, and the greatest sinners in the world may come in and be Reconciled.
If God had expressed it thus; There are some in the world that I have been
reconciling my self unto from al eternity: Then may a sinner say; surely, if
there be but some, God never intended me that have been so wicked a wretch, so
notorious a sinner. But therefore God would not express it so, but in the most
general terms, to the end that there should not be any one sinner in the
world have this plea: Lord, I was excluded. No, says God, I will have the
Ministry of my Gospel go in such general terms, as that every sinner shall
have encouragement to come in, and receive mercy. Therefore you shall find in
that last of Mark. 15. where Christ gives his Commission to his disciples to
preach. He says; go in to all the world, and ^^each the Gospel to every
Ceature; that is, to man, who is a little world, an Epitome of every creature.
To the Gentiles also, who had been denied this favor of the Gospel, as if they
had been none of Gods creatures. If thou be a creature, the Gospel is to be
preached to thee. There is to be a general tender of Grace, and mercy to every
Creature throughout the whole world, to the greatest sinners that live upon the
face of the Earth. Great sinners, and small sinners, al of them are to have the
offer of Reconciliation with God; And the Ministers of the Gospel are to preach
in the name of God, that the Lord does tender unto every one, this offer of
mercy and Salvation. This to be done ministerially to every Creature we shall
come preach to; not only great sinners, but those that are of the meanest
condition in the world. For some may say; If God will show mercy to some in the
world, sure it must be to some great ones in the world, those that are eminent,
and may do him a great deal of service; alas, what service can God have from me
a poor creature that lives al day long in a poor dark hole, that can do him no
work, or service; will ever God have any thought of me? Yes, if thou be a
creature of God, and live in the world, thou art no more excluded from
Reconciliation with God, than the Kings, and Emperors of the Earth; and it may
be God may think of thee in that poor hole of thine a thatched cottage when he
neglects, and passes by the great Monarks of the world. Therefore this
expression is so large; that those that are the poorest people in the world,
and the greatest sinners in the world, may know, they are not excluded from the
offers of grace in the Gospel. This is a third Reason. And then.

Reason. 4.
A fourth Reason why it goes in such terms as these. That herby the Lord may
show; that those that shall actually come in to be reconciled unto him, they
must come in while they are in this world. That those persons that are capable
of Reconciliation, are only such persons as live in the world: If they be not
reconciled before they are gone out of the world, they are never to be
reconciled: therefore is this phrase, God is Reconcileing the world to himself.
As if he should say: If once you are gone out of the world, and are not
reconcilied unto God before you are gone, you are lost for ever. The object of
this my grace, is only those people that live in the world, if they pass away
this time, and be not reconciled unto me while they live here, they shall never
be reconciled; for God was not reconciling himself to men that are in Hell, for
they are not of this world, they are gone out of the world; they were suffered
by Gods patience to live a great while in the world, and here they filled the
world with sin as much as in them lay; Now they are gone out of the world, and
are gone from the shine of Gods grace, which shall never come to shine upon them
more; they shall never come to hear any offer of the Gospel more. This is a
fourth Reason.

Reason. 5.
A Fifth Reason is this. Hereby God will show his wonderful love, and free Grace
to wretched Creatures; that he should regard such vild Creatures as those that
live in the world; for the world, alas, what is it? It is a dunghill of filth;
and as the Apostle says, 1. John 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness; it
lies as a dead Dog or Carcass that lies in a Common Sewer, Nil mundum in mundo,
nihil aliud est totus mundus ante conversionem, nisi aut hara porcorum aut
collovie, rapidorum canum. Aust. As a filthy hogsty or kennel of mad Dogs.
in a ditch, al in slime, and filth; Now that God should set his heart upon the
world, what an infinite, and wonderful love, and free grace is this? The truth
is, before our Conversion, we do al lie in wickedness, as a Carrion, or a dead
Dog that lies in a Cart-way, al in gore, and mire; So are we in our natural
Condition, and yet that the great God of Heaven should send his own Son into
the world to die for such a one; that he should make such a one an heir of
Heaven, and of eternal life; that such a one should become a member of his Son,
and so have everlasting Communion with himself; and that this should be plotted
by God from al eternity; What an infinite love of God is this? And again; that
the world lies in wickedness; the world that is so vile, and so unworthy a
thing; that yet the Lord should be thus reconciling the World to himself; What
an infinite, and unconceivable, free Grace of God is this?

Reason, 6.
The Sixth Reason is this. They that shall live in the world shall generally come
in to God; and indeed be actually reconciled in time. Though the world for the
present be not so generally reconciled unto God: yet the Lord has his time
when the Jews shall be called, and the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in,
and we shall see further Reason of the generality of this expression. God has
promised that Christ shall possess the utmost parts of the Earth, and that the
Heirs of the promise shall inherit the World. I understand it literally. Romans
4.23. God made a promise to Abraham, and to his Seed, that he should be the
Heir of the World. And this Promise is yet to be fulfiled in a literal sense.
In some spiritual sense the Saints may be said to be Heirs of the world: for
indeed the right especially belongs to them (I do not say but ungodly men have
right by gift, he gives the Earth to the Children of men) but not by
inheritance (as the Saints have) as Servants have a right to their meat, and
drink, and what is given them: but the Children have a right by inheritance, so
the Saints have a right to this world as well as to Heaven, and there is a time
a coming when they will be possessed with their inheritance. Then the Text will be
true literally.

And thus you have had the Reasons given you of this Phrase; and this may
suffice for the opening of the Point. That it is the World that God was
reconciling himself unto.

CHAP. 36
Use. 1 Seeing God has excepted none from Mercy, let none except themselves.
BY way of Application now; and that very briefly, only two particulars.

First, Seeing God propounds Reconciliation thus in such genneral, and large
terms to the world. Then, if God have not excepted any, let none except
themselves. Art thou a man that live here in the world? there need be no
further qualification for the tender of Grace, for the offer of the gospel to
thee, but this; that thou live in the world; God does not call for such
qualifications as these; That they must be such, and such men, of such and such
ranks and dignities, or men of such parts; or that they must be such as have
not committed such, and such sins; Or that they must be first terrified, and
so, and so humbled; No; we have Commission to preach the Gospel to every one
that has no other quallification than this, but that he lives in the world.
Indeed if thou were gone out of the world; although thou should have but one
sinful thought to answer for, we could not preach the Gospel to thee, though it
were possible for an Angel to come to thy soul after it is gone out of this
world, yet it cold not, nor dare not preach the Gospel to thee. But while thou
are in this world, we are appointed to preach the Gospel to thee, and to hold
forth the tender of Grace, and mercy to the. There is no council of God
revealed either to Angels, or men, that has excepted any one in the greatest
Congrigation of people from Reconciliation with God: and thou that hear or
read what I now say; thou may bless God, that thou art one; bless God
when thou hear and read this; that there is no council of God against
thee made known, either to angels, or men whereby thou art excepted from
Reconciliation; But every particular one, for ought we know in any congregation
may be reconciled unto God, and have eternal life. O; Only take heed of abusing
this grace of God; look to it, that you make a Good use of this grace of God:
this is that which we are bound to tell you, and in the name of God, we do
declare it to you; and God propounds this Gospel to us in these large terms,
that you may be left utterly without excuse if you perrish. There is none of
you if you perish can say; I was so vild a siner, that I was afraid I should
never be received by God, though I did humble my self, and come unto him; for
God will answer you, Were you such a vild Sinner; Did not I reveal my gospel in
such genneral terms, that none might exclud himself? did not I say, I was
reconciling my self to the world? And did I make any exceptions of thee in
particular? Thou ought to have come in amongst the rest, and have ventured
thy soul upon the offer of the freeness of my grace. Indeed there can be no
other incouragment but this for the first work, whosoever does believe at any
time, he is not to believe because any qualification of his gives him a right
to it, but upon these terms, that God has reconciled the world to himself;
and that he has offered the promise of grace generally; and that he has Said;
whosoever will come may come in, and believe; whosoever is a thirst may come and
that word of his is my warrant; that endifinit Promise that God has made, is a
Sufficient encouragement; and if I can roll my soul upon this it is that which
gives me right and interest in the grace of God; and whosoever has been saved,
has been saved upon these terms. The first work has been a kind of venturing
work, they have ventured their souls upon this grace of God thus generally and
indefinitly offered, and do you retire into your closets and do so too. You
whose consciences condemn you of great, and notorius sins, when you hear of
this genneral offer; though you do not know wh^^ (...) be elected or no;
trouble not your selves with ^u^h thoughts, but venture to cast your souls upon
this free grace of God in Christ, with resolution to give up your selves to the
service of God for the time to come. ^and though you have not abillity in your
selves; yet who knows, but upon such a work as this, Gods Spirit may come, even
at that instant to enable you to do it. This is that which God requiers; and if
God persuade thy heart to this; it is a good sign, that mercy is intended to
thee. When at every time God shall make an offer, and tender of the Gospel to
thee, it does stir up thy heart thus to conclude; well, I will adventure my soul
upon this offer; God has not excepted me; why then should I except my self?
God has not cast me away why should I make my self a castaway? do not despair
But believe.

CHAP. 37.
USE 2.
SEcondly: Hence then it concerns us al to look about us while we live in this
world; that there may be some work of God upon our hearts while we are here;
that while we live in this world, we may be reconciled unto him; for if the
third of our life be once cut asunder, and we be noe longer in this world, but
go out of it without being reconciled unto God; we are undone creatures for
ever. We say of men when they are dying; alas such a one is now no man for this
world; well, they had need then to look to themselves that the work of
Reconciliation be done before, for when thou art no longer in this world, then
thou art gone for ever. O, then apply thy self to this work whilst thou have
time, and tak hold of the means, and oppertunities which God affords unto thee
while thou art a man of this world, loose it not; and know, it is a great mercy
of God to thee to continue thee in this world; because here thou art under the
power of grace; thou art under that genneral grace of God that is indefinitly
tendered unto every man; under that grace which has fallen upon as great
Sinners as thou art; and therefore so long as there is life there is hope. This
point I have diverse times made use of; to show, that this time of our lives, is
the time of grace, and salvation; and it follows naturally, and fully from the
expression in the text; therefore I shall leave it. Only let me tell you thus
much, That though God expresses this grace of Reconciliation here to the
world; yet if ever thou be actually, and indeed reconciled to God, before
thou do leave the world, God will make thee to be a man no more of this world,
and though thou art in the world, yet thou shall not be of the world but above
the world. Therefore in john 17. you shall find when Christ speaks of those
that his father had given unto him, and had believed on him; he says verse
14. and 16. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the World, even as I am not of the world; I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world but that should keep them from the
evil. It Is true, when men have believed on Christ, they are in the world, and
Christ does not pray that God should take them out of the world, but preserve
them in the world. It should teach us by the way, to be content to live in the
world though it be a dangerous, and an evil world; for it was as dangerouse,
and as evil a world wherein the disciples and Christ lived, they were in danger
of death for the profession of Religion; and yet though Christ loved his
disciples, he would not pray they should be taken out of the world.

You have a great many discontented people, that will pray, that God would take
them out of the world; No, says Christ; keep them in this world. And then he
says, they are not of the world, Indeed God is reconcileing himself to the
world; that is, to those that are in the world, but being reconciled to them,
they are no longer men of the world, though in the world; therefore if thou
be one that God the Father and the Son has agreed upon from al eternity to
be reconciled unto him in time, thou shall be brought to be one not of the
world, even whilst thou live in the world. Therefore you that are not only
in the world, but are worldly men, and mind only the things of the world; know
that the work of Reconciliation is not done with your Souls; what God has
done concerning you in his eternal purpose from al eternity, we know not, but
as yet the work is not done upon thy soul, thou art not reconciled unto God;
that is; thou art not brought into such a disposition in thine own heart, as to
be at peace with God; and if ever thou shall have any peace at al, know it must
be done here in this world; the work of Reconciliation must be done here. Thus
much for that point. That God was in Christ reconcileing the world to himself.

CAHP. 38. Not imputing their trespasses; Opened And 3. Notes on the text.
NOw follows the Two other Expressions. Not inputing their trespasses to them.
And has committed to us the word of Reconciliation. The first; I may finnish
in a few words, not imputeing their trespasses; meaning, not reackoning, not
setting their sins upon their own score; so the word is. As a man that is in
debt; we say there is so much standing upon his Head; so much upon his score.
Now, when God is said not to impute your trespasses; the meaning is; your debt
comes to be cancelled and to be reckoned the debt of an other man; he sets your
sins no longer upon your score, but upon the score of Christ: this is the
happiness of Believers: that those sins of theirs that stood upon their scoor
are now taken off and set upon the score of Christ. This is a blessed doctrine,
and we cannot speak of this without trembling of heart; because we know how
subject men are to abuse it; but the Children must have the bread given to
them, though it tend to the ruin, and destruction of others. You that are
sinners and go on in sin, though you see it not, you run every day upon the
score, like some Gallants that come into an Inn, or into a Tavern, and there
call for Wine, and good cheer, never thinking that one is all the while they are
eating, and drinking, and merry, behind the door with a piece of Chalk scoring
up al, and at last will call in for the payment of it. Every sin we commit is
upon the score and there is a time when God will call for payment. You will say,
how is it then that God says, their sins shall not be imputed? Why, it is
because Christ comes, and all that is upon our score is taken off, and set upon
his, but yet the score must be paid. So that this phrase notes; That the
Salvation of man is not from such a free pardon, as a man that is in debt
should have his Creditor come, and say, I will quit the score, I will wipe off
al, and pardon it al: No; But the way of the Salvation of man is thus; Here is
a debt, and paid it must be: Only Christ the suerty comes, and he pays for
some, and others are cast into the prison of Hell, where they must lie till they
have paid the uttermost farthing; for the debt must be paid. And here is the
Reason of the difference between Believers, and others. Those that are damned;
all the time they live, they run upon the score, and at last God comes, and
reckons with them for all; and then alas they have nothing to pay. Says God
to the Devil; take him Jailer. Death is Gods Sargant to arest him, and the
Devil is his Jailer, and they have him to prison, and there he must lie til he
has paid the uttermost farthing. But now Believers that have run upon the
score: In the days of their youth, they were so much upon score. When they
were Apprentizes; so much upon the the score. Since they were married; so much
upon the score. Yea, but when divine justice is ready to seize upon them, and
arest them; Christ comes in, and says he; let the man be freed, I will pay the
score for him. As if a spend-thrift should run upon the score, and when he is
arested, and ready to go to the Jayle, there comes some friend, and says;
deliver him, and I will pay the debt. So Christ does. So that when our sins are
forgiven, they are so forgiven, as that it costs much; our deliverance costs
much. And this I note from the phrae in the Original text; for there it is
thus; not reckoning, or accounting it upon the score: I have in many sermons
opened the doctrine of the pardon of sin: therefore I do not intend ^o dilate
upon that. I will only give some few notes from hence that are most proper to
this text.

Note, 1. And the first is this. That there may be sin in the soul, and yet not
imputed, Therefore there may be a righteousness imputed which is not our own,
there is the same ground of both. Many of our adversaries do cry out of
imputation of righteousness: say they, how can that which is none of our
righteousness, be made ours? for so it is if we believe, the Righteousness of
Christ which is none of ours is made ours, how can that be, say they? Yes, as
well as that which is our sin shall not be made our sin, if that which is our own
shall not be imputed, then that which is not our own may be imputed likewise.

Note 2. Secondly: (Which is a note of marvelous Comfort) There may be a
Reconciliation with God, even while there remains much sin in the Soul. It is
not said thus. Reconciling the world to himself taking away their sins, purging
out al their sins, as if there could be no Reconciliation til al their Sins
were taken away; But he was reconciling the World to himself, not imputing,
that is the Phrase. As if he had said. O! you Sinners, so long as you live in
the world, you will have sin, and therefore do not think that God is not
reconciled unto you, or that you are not reconciled unto God; No, though sin be
remaining in your hearts, yet God may be reconciled unto you not imputing your
sins. This should be an argument to you, to labor to purge out sin as much as
you can, seeing the grace of God is such; that sin remaining in you, yet God is
still reconciling you to himself: it is not so much to think, that God should be
reconciled to the Angels in Heaven that have no sin in them. O! but God to be
reconciled to his Saints upon Earth that have so much sin in them; that is
much. There are many of the people of God that cannot distinguish between the
not imputing of sin and being of sin in them; they think because they have much
sin in them, the Lord will not be reconciled to them. But know thou; though sin
be in thee, yet the^e may be no imputation of sin to thee, and therefore learn
to distinguish between sin being in thee, and sin being not imputed to thee.

And this should be of Use to us likewise to teach us to be willing to be
reconciled to others, notwithstanding there are many weaknesses in them; and
though they still continue to offend us. Be reconciled to your Servants, and
reconciled to your Childdren, and to your Neighbors; and say not; I could be
reconciled to them if I saw them changed indeed: What meanest thou by that?
Do thou mean that thou may see no more weaknesses in them, or that there
may never be any thing in them more that offend thee; will thou stay so long?
God does not stay so long for thee, til he brings thee to Heaven, and
perfecteth thee; he does not stop his Reconciliation with thee til thou come
there, and be perfect; No, he is reconciled to thee here; even here whilst
thou have a nature in thee that bubbles out nothing but sin against him; and
notwithstanding the in-being of sin in thee; yet God can distinguish between
the in-being of sin in thee, and the imputation of it.

Note 3. We see here is the bottom of al our Reonciliation; the non imputation
of our Sins. It is no argument that God is reconciled to a man, because he lets
him prosper in the world; or because he has been at Sea, and has got a great
deal of Riches in his Voyage; perhaps the man blesses himself, and he
thinks, O! now al is well between God and me, for he has given me so much
riches; and he blessed me in such a Voyage: alas thou mistakest if thou
think that this is an argument of Reconciliation; No, the bottom of
Reconciliation, is non imputation. Have thou an evidence to thy Soul, that God
has revealed Christ to thee, and that in his Son he has imputed thy sin to
thee; and do thou build thy peace upon that? This will hold. Many build their
peace upon this; that their sins are not so, and so great as others are, What
of that; if it be but one sin that thou art guilty of, though it be of the
least nature, yet if it be imputed to thee; it is enough to make thy Soul and
God eternally enemies. Others there are whose sins were committed a great while
ago, and they have worn out the trouble of them, and now they are quiet and at
peace; But O! let them know there is still the debt, remaining upon the score,
it is not taken of. And as a man that may stay a long while before he calls for
his debt, may call for it when he pleases, and first, or last will do it; So,
thou have gotten thy self into a kind of peace and worn out the trouble of
thy conscience; yet know, that so long as thy sins are upon the score, and are
not wiped off; God will call for payment sooner, or latter; therefore pleace not
thy self in any things in the world as the ground of thy peace, but thy being
reconciled unto God in Christ he not imputing thy sins unto thee.

CHAP. 39 The Ministers Commission to Preach Reconciliation to the World.
We now pass on to the next thing. And that is the Commission for declaration
of this Doctine of Reconciliation with God in Chrst, in the last words of the
19. verse. And has committed unto us the word of Reconcilation: God has
committed unto us. I find the words in the Original different from that they
are read in your English Bibles, the word [Committed] is, and put into us, so
the words are; put in this word of Reconciliation: so if you read it word for
word according to the Original Text it is thus. And he has put in us the word
of Reconciliation. But because this kind of reading would seem to be something
harsh in our English phrase, therefore the Translators have translated it thus:
And has committed to us, but the Original exprsses it in this manner, to show
what it is that is needful to a Minister of the Gospel, that he should have the
Doctrine of Reconciliation to sink deep into his own heart, first, that so when
he comes to speak to the hearts of other men, he may speak from the heart and
so to the heart, the word that comes from heart (we say) goes to the heart,
therefore it is of great use, that one that is a Minister of the Gospel should
have the word of Reconciliation, the mysteries of the Gospel deeply rooted in
his heart, that when he comes to speak to the people he may speak it not merely
from his tongue and head but from his heart e^perimentally that his heart may
be in his ministry, that so it may be more effectual to go to the heart of the
people to whom he speaks, and that expression is somewhat like to this 1. Gal.
16. verse. in the 15. verse it is said But when it pleased God who separated me
from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace to reveal his Son in me. To
reveal his Son [in me] he does not say to reveal his Son [to me] but [in me] so
the words are: so that indeed it does befit a Minister of the Gospel to be a
profitable Minister when Jesus Christ comes to be revealed [in him] And so much
for the expression [hath committed unto us] that is, put in us the word of
reconciliation. As if the Apastle should say whereas the Lord has been from al
eternity plotting as it were the great work of reconciling the world unto
himself, in that great mystery of godliness, doing of it in Christ, and this is
the work that above al things concerns the glory of God and the good of Souls,
and the Lord has been pleased to appoint some select messengers for to carry
this his name about the world, and to show unto the world what those glorious
counsels of his will has been from al eternity concerning the Children of men,
this great Doctrine of reconciling the world unto himself in Christ, is the
very buisness that we are sent about the world for, and are as the Ambassadors
of Christ to come, and in his name to treat with the world about Reconciliation
with God, about making up their peace with God, so that here you have the work
of the Ministers of the Gospel, and what great things are committed to the
Ministers of the Gospel, He has committed unto us the ministry of
Reconciliation, that is the work, so that from hence the point is this
according to the words of the text.

Doct, That the Ministry of Reconciliation with God is committed unto the
Ministers of God to preach unto the World. The Ministers of God have a
commission both from the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; to preach the Doctrine of
Reconciliation to the people, for here we have it in the very words which
follow. We are Ambassadors of Christ as if God did beseech you by us, we pray
you in Christ's stead be you Reconciled to God, for Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
is likewise in the commission of Gods Ministers, when they come to preach in
the name of God, and that you have in Nehem. 9.20. Thou gave thy good spirit,
It was the Prophet that came to instruct them, it was the Spirit of God in the
Prophet that did instruct them, So that the Ministers of God have their
commission from the Father, from the Son, and from the Holy Spirit, to come to
the people and to reveal the great counsels of God unto them, they are sent by
the whole Trinity unto the people, here is their commission, you have it
clearly, But the commission is more imediately from Christ (though there is the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in it) yet it is more imediatly from Christ,
because Christ is the great Prophet of the Church, and it is part of the
prophetical office of Christ to have the great counsel of God his Father in the
mystery of our Reconcilliation to be opened to the people, Christ was first
anointed, and then he does as it were, anoint other officers to this great
work, in Isa. 61. There you shall find the great Prophet, he is first anointed,
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, To
what? To Preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the
broken heart, to proclaim liberty to captives, and the opening of the Prison to
them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of Vengence of our God, to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that
mourn in Sion to give unto them beauty for ashes, the Oil of joy for
mourning, the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might
be called Trees of Righteousness, the Planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified, that is in effect the same with this, the Ministry of
Reconciliation, that is but a large expression of the Ministry of
Reconciliation, and as you see here, it is a prophecy of Christ, that first
Christ is annoyinted, this Christ is appointed by God the Father and the Holy
Spirit, for the Spirit of God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed ^e,
there is the holy Spirit in it, God the Father appoints him, he only may be
said to be the appointer, and the Holy Spirit going to anoint Jesus Christ to
be a preacher of the Gospel, and he being the prime, and the chief Prophet of
the Church, he does appoint others to exercise as it were some work of his
prophetical office, that is, to preach the great Doctrine of Reconciliation,
has committed unto us the Ministry of Reconciliation, and this you shall see
is the commission that Christ gives in the last of Mark, 15.16. verses And he
said unto them, go ye into all the world and Preach the Gospel to every
creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that
beleiveth not shall be damned, Go ye says he, and preach to every creature, he
that beleiveth and is baptized shall be saved but he that beleiveth not shall be
damned, this is the Gospel, the doctrine of Reconciliation by Christ, he does
not give them a bare commission, but he joins his own power together to this
commission, and tells them that his power does go along with them in it Math.
28.18. And Jesus came and speak unto them saying, All power is given unto me in
Heaven and in Earth, What follows in verse, 19. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations baptising them in the name of the Father, Son and Holy-Spirit. What a
commission is here, what a preamble to the commissions is here? I have received
all power both in Heaven and in Earth, And than he tells them, Go and teach al
nations, as if Christ should say you are going about the greatest work that
ever any creature has been employed in, in this world, for so it is certainly,
The Ministry of Reconciliation is next to the work of Redemption, that Christ
was employed about is the greatest work that any creature in this world was
employed about, whatsoever the world thinks of it, no Angel in heaven was ever
employed about a greater work then this, and therefore being of so great
consequence, Christ makes this preface; Al power is given unto me in heaven and
in earth, go ye therefore, as if Christ should say, Be it known to you now,
that the power that is given to me by the Father, shall go along with you and
therefore be encouraged, but they might well have said, who is sufficient for
these great things? But be not discouraged says Christ my power shall go along
with you to assist you, to comfort you, to encourage you, it shall go along with
you, to make your Ministry proffitable unto them that do belong unto my
election; It shall go along with you to defend you from al adversaries, The
world will be enraged against you, When you come to preach this Doctrine, But
now my power shall go along with you, to defend you from them al, to strengthen
you against al oppositions in the world, and to enable you to suffer whatsoever
shall be brought upon you; and further says Christ, I am with you [Alwayes]
even to the end of the world. One would have thought that that should have been
sufficient that Christ should have said I am with you to the end of the world,
But there is something more in this, I am with you [Alwayes] even to the end of
the world, (that is) I will not be only with you, so as not wholly to leave you,
but there shall be no one moment of time to the end of the world, but in it I
will be with you, I will not only overshadow you and send my presence with you,
but every moment, every day, every sermon you preach, and then, I will be with
you to the end of the world, those were dead above 1500. Years ago, and yet
Christ says he will be with them to the end of the world, that is with those
that should succeed them in the Minnistery of Reconciliation, This is the
commission, And when they come to any house they are to begin thus, You shall
say Peace be to you when they come to any place, that is the peace of God in
Christ. Now this doctrine of Reconciliation is that that must be understood by
preaching. We can read but very little of it, scarce one letter in all the book
of the creature, we cannot come to understand it by any knowledge of our own,
but it must be taught us, no, nor by the creature, But thus much may be
understood by the creatures, Gods continuing to the world, and shining upon the
just as well as upon the unjust, and abundance of Mercy here does this declare
with a loud voice, that there is some possibility for men to be reconciled
unto God, there is mercy for mankind, there does seem to be a loud voice in
the goodness of God in the creature to sound out in the ears of all the world
that man is in a better condition than the Devils, for certainly, if God had
no intention to do good unto mankind, he would not continue so many Mercies as
he does; But now this cannot show us what is Christ; but it may show us thus
much, that God has a way of mercy for the Children of men, and I think in
part, that text may be meant of this that we have in Romans 10.18. Where the
Appostle speaks concerning the Gospel, but I say have they not heard? Yes
verily their sound went into all the world, have they not heard of the Gospel
that is here spoken of, Has not Israel heard the Gospel? Yes verily, their
sound went into all the Earth, and their words unto the end of the world. And
this text if you compare it with the 19. Psalm. We may have cause to wonder much
at the quotation of it, and there you have it a little different, as in the
verse. 4. their Line (that is, the great characcter of the Grace of God that is
written in the book of the creature, as it were in a line,) that is gone out
throught the earth, and has a kind of sound in it, at least we may see it
written, but hence you see in the 19. Psalm, It is clerly spoken concerning the
works of God, In the Sun, and in the Heavens, The Heavens declare the glory of
God and the firmant shows his handy work. The creature has a loud voice to
call us to God by repentance, now there can be no calling of us to Repentance,
but it is a voice of the Gospel, And the Apostle says plainly in the 2 of Romans
That the patience of God calls us to Repentance, in verse, 4. whatsoever leads
to Repentance has something of the Gospel in it, Patience and goodness, though
we never come to hear of the Ministry of the Gospel, yet it is that that
calls us to repentance, and it is clear in this, because that is spoken of in
the creature; the loud voice in the creature in the 19 Psalm. it is applied to
the Gospel in Romans 10. and except you understand it so, we cannot tell you that
the sound of the Gospel has gone to the utmost parts of the earth. We cannot
understand in the Apostles time, how the Gospel went to the utmost parts of the
world, for there are many places that are not found out yet, but this kind of
sound of the Gospel goes throughout the earth, that by the voice of the
creatures men ought to come to know thus much, that surely there is some way
for God to be pacified toward sinful men, though they cannot tell which way,
or what way, suerly there is some way, and many of the Jews knew no other way
but this, they knew there was a Messiah to come, but what he was; or who he
was, they know very little of him. Now the Devils have no such work of God
toward them, nor such bounty and patience and goodness toward them whereby
they can conclude that God has any thoughts to be reconciled to them, Though
its true, they are not yet fully under the torment that they shall be, yet they
are under so much torment as they are said to be reserved to the great day in
chains of darkness, whereas wicked and ungodly men are preserved by the bounty
and patience of God, and the cords of Gods bounty and mercy is toward them,
and therefore they are not reserved in chains of darkness as the Devil and
damned are; So that by the bounty of God in the creature we may gather such a
conclusion, that surely God has some way to show mercy unto mankind, But we
can never have any thoughts by any works of God in his creature, that God
should send the second person in Trinity to take man's nature upon him, to die,
to suffer for man's sin, to tender up satisfaction to divine Justice, and then
al must be brought into this Covenant, and then he must be the head of the
second Covenant, and they must be made Members of his body; now the Creature
has no such misttry as this, and therefore in the 3 Ephesians. 8. verse, says the
Apostle (speaking what his ministry was) unto me who am the least of al Saints
is the grace given that I should preach amongst the gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ, (...), investigabiles divitias, not to be paced or traced
out: (...) of a and (...) Vestigium, qui nullis vestigiis indagari potest. It
is used also Romans 11.33.
they are unsearchable, speaking of the riches of Christ, as they are of Christ
they are unsearchable; the word is there, the Riches that are without
footsteps, there is no foot steps of the riches of Christ, if we speak of the
Doctrine of Christ the Mediator as it is indeed in the Gospel there are no foot
steps of them in the Creature, therefore, though there be some kind of sound in
the Creature, that it is sure, that God has some kind of way to be reconciled,
but now the sound of the Gospel, this is committed to Ministers to Preach, and
therefore in the. 1 Cor. 1.21. the Apostle says, That in the Wisdom of God,
the World by Wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that believe. (Mark) the world by Wisdom knew not God,
certainly, the world did know there was a God, and that he was infinite in
power and goodness; but the Text says, they know not God, (that is) they knew
not God savingly in Christ, they might know that God had some kind of way to
show mercy to sinners, but what way they knew not, and by [Wisdome] that is, by all the Wisdom that was revealed by God in the Creature, and by all the Wisdom
they received from God, they knew not God by Wisdom; true there is an
abundance of the Wisdom of God in the Creature, several acts are no other then
several beams of Gods Wisdom shining in the Creature, and the knowledge of
these acts, are no other but the several beams of Gods Wisdom shining into
men's understandings: take either of both them, and by both these it could not
know God in a saving way, but by the Foolishness of preaching, that is; by the
preaching that the Men of this world do account foolishness, the Lord is
pleased to save those that believe: so that it is evident that the Ministry of
Reconciliation is committed to the preachers of the Gospel.

CHAP. 40. Why God chose Men rather than Angels to dispense the Mystery of
Reconciliation. The Reasons thereof.
NOw it is to be enquired after, First, why God would choose men rather, to be
the dispencers of of the great Mystery of Reconciliation then the Angels? God
has not committed unto them this word of Reconciliation (though it is true the
Angels they do go about, and they sometimes witness to the Gospel) as you may
read afterward) But they are not chosen by way of office to the Ministry of
the Gospel; that is not the office they are appointed to, so as the Ministers
of the Gospel are; God has not chosen Angels in an ordinary way to come and
dispense those great and glorious things unto the Children of Men.

Object. You will say, had it not been better that God should have chosen the
Angels to come in and preach Jesus Christ, than men? for they are poor weak
Creatures, and like our selves, and now when they come to stand up and Preach
Jesus Christ, the great things about reconciling men to God, should we think
that they know more then we ourselves?

Answ. You must not think that there is no good to be done till one comes and
tells you that you never heard of.

But you must know; that it is by virtue of the ordinance of Christ: because he
has appointed a Minister of the Gospel to come, and in such a way to preach,
though the instrument be like your selves, and perhaps may not have a deeper
understanding then some of you, yet you are to look upon it beyond the matter
that he speaks, you are to look upon it as the ordinance of Christ, and so to
expect, and look at al means whatsoever. But now the great standing ordinance
in the Church of God is the Ministry of the Gospel, It is this that is
committed to us to Preach, and this therefore is to be looked upon as the power
of God to salvation in those that God intends Salvation to: God has not chosen
the Angels, but Men, and upon this reason, because we are not so capable of
conversing with Angels as men; we are not able to stand before them; when an
Angel has sometimes appeared to a gracious Servant of God he has not been able
to bear the glory of it, but to fall down, and when the Angels came in the 2 of
Luke and said, Glory to God on high etc. The Angels struck the Shephards with
amazment.

And in the second place, the Ministrey of the Angels could not be so
effectual, Angels do not so fully understand the windings and turnings of the
hearts of men so as men do, A Man is more conscious to the turnings and
windings of his own heart then any Angel can be, he may know his own heart more
then Angels can, and by knowing his own heart he may be able to speak more
suitable; we do not in read the word that Angels knew the thoughts of the heart
of men any further then they are some way expressed; nor the Devils. That is made
to be the property of God, to be the searcher of the heart; but a Man may
search his own heart in a great measure furthen the Angels, and so they may the
better speak unto the hearts of others, and so God in Wisdom rather commits
the Ministry of Reconciliation to men then Angels.

But a third is this, and that is a special one, that the power of God may the
more appear in the conversion of souls unto Jesus Christ; and in this one
thing, the power of God does appear a great deal more then in making Heaven,
and Earth.

First, The Doctrine of Reconciliation, is the most high supernatural thing
that is in the world, it is above the reach of a creature.

Secondly, It is that that does beat down man's nature as much as can be, But
now that a few poor fisher men at first, to whom was committed the word of
Reconciliation, and a few of the Apostles that were in a poor mean
contemptible condition, that sometimes had scarce rags to hang upon them, were
whipped up and down, and put in the stocks as if they had been the vilest Rogues
that had been in all the world, and yet that God should subdue so many nations
upon the face of the earth, and in time should bring the whole world in general
to receive this Doctrine by such poor and weak means, O! the infinite power
and glory of God that does appear. In this God uses weak means, to show the
greatness of his power, and for that you have a clear text in 2 Cor. 4 7. But
we have this treasure in Earthen Vessels, that is the Ministry of
Reconciliation. O! it is a treasure indeed in earthen vessels, the word is in
the greek, in vessels of shells, there were some rich shells, that had on the
outside a plain shel, that when you came to the Seashore you should look upon
them, and they looked meanly as if they had not been worth a farthing, but
within the shel there was a precious Pearl that was worth many thousands of
pounds, so says he, we have this treasure in a shel, that is in a poor weak
frail vessel man, a contemptible vessel we have this pearl, And why so? the
Apostle gives the reason, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us. There is a mighty power of God that goes together with the Ministry
of Reconciliation. Whenever any soul is brought home to be reconciled unto
God, certainly there goes a mighty power, yea, there goes an hyperbolical power
together with it.

Object, But how will this appear, that there is such a mighty power of God
that goes with the Ministry of Reconciliation?

It appears in this, that there is such mighty things done by such poor weak
and contemptible means that men should be willing to part with any thing in the
world, yea their very lives, and bear the greatest torments of the most cruel
Tyrants, and that for the witness of this truth. Now this appears to be the
mighty power of God, and this seems to be a secret answer to any objection in
3 Cor. Is it so that the Ministers of the Gospel are far more Glorious then the
Ministers of the Law? What is the reason that the Ministers of the Gospel are
in such a mean condition, so much meaner then the Ministers of the Law? There
was an high Priest, and he had glorious Robes, and had precious stones upon his
breast and shoulders, now we have no such things, Here is a company of poor
Fishermen, weak mean men that the world regards not, suerly the Ministers of
the Law were more Glorious then these Ministers of the Gospel. No says the
Apostle for all this, we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the
excellency of the power of God might appear, and not of man, and we are
willing (as if the Apostle should say) that the power of God may appear more,
that the glory of God may shine bright, we are willing to be Earthen Vessels.

Another Reason may be this, why God committs this Ministry to poor [Men]
rather than to Angels; surely God has a further end then we imagine, it is
(in just judgment) to be a stumbling block to wicked, and ungodly men, whose
hearts are opposite unto the Glorious Gospel; that (as we know) Christ said he
preached in parables, that in seeing they might not see, and in hearing they
might not understand; as a just judgment of God against the Pharisees, and
others whose hearts were wicked, and unclean, and opposite unto Christ, that
the glorious things of the Gospel might be hid under those parables. So I make
no question but the means of the Ministry of the Gospel, (which the world
counts Foolishness) and the mean condition of the professors of the Gospel is
made by God as a stumbling block to ungodly men, who God intends should perish
eternally, because their hearts are wicked and perverse, and I hate them (says
God) therefore will hide this rich treasure from them; But those that I love, I
will open the inside unto them, but others shall have nothing but the outside,
they shall only have the visible part. But now there are others whom God intends
to save, and they come, and the Lord (together with their outward Ministry)
speaks to their hearts, and opens the inward treasure to them, and they se the
Glory of it, and admire at it, and they come to taste the sweet promises of the
Gospel, and they adore God in receiving such things as these are: so that God
fetches about his ends this way, but (in his just judgment) hides his Gospel
from some, and reveals it to others, and therefore says the Apostle in 2 Cor.
4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, the ministry of the
Gospel it is hid to some, but it is to those that are lost; he hides it from
them by this outward means, the outside; Thus you see why God does commit the
Ministry of Reconciliation unto men rather then unto Angels.

CAP. 41. Why God will not himself immediately dispute this Gospel Reconciliation.
BUT further, it may be said; why will not God immediately himself preach this
Doctrine of the Gospel, The Mystery of Reconciliation? we see many infirmities
in men; Men are ready enough to stumble at al infirmities of the Ministers of
the Gospel (which by the way should teach Ministers of the Gospel to have a
care how they walk) but because there are so many things to be excepted against
men we would be ready to think, if God would himself preach the gospel from
heaven men would regard it more.

No, but God will not do so, though God will assist the Ministry to make it
effectual in the hearts of those that shall be saved; yet he will not speak
himself from Heaven, but he will send men like themselves, and let men hear or
not, and howsoever, (though men think, if God should speak himself they would
hear him) yet if they hear not men, they would not hear God. God spoke himself
from heaven in the delivering of the Law, but men did not keep the Law; but now
God will rather speak by men; because he does delight to make use of every
creature according to the capacity of it. The Lord takes a wonderful delight in
the use of almeans that is suiteable to a creature, And therefore you shall find
(which is very observeable) that though God did begin to speak from Heaven to
Saul that he did convert (who afterward was called Paul) Christ spoke at first
from Heaven, but mark, he would not do the whole work himself immediately; but
before the work should be accomplished there should be means used in Acts,
9.4. There Christ speaks from Heaven; but I beseech you observe it, what does
Christ speak from Heaven? he does not preach the gospel; it is only the word of
conviction Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? This was enough to strike Saul
with astonishment so that he fell upon the earth, and said Lord, what will thou
have me to do? But mark, what answer is given him? Go into the City and it
shall be told thee. You must not think though I begin to speak from Heaven to
you, but that you must be content to set upon means, and so he did with Saul,
he arose from the Earth in verse, 8. God made him stay a good while before he
would tell him what he should do; he was three days and nights and eat
nothing, and was praying all the while unto the Lord, and then in verse, 10.
Says the Lord to Ananias (a Minister of his) Go to such a place, and there
thou shall open to Saul my Mercy: this Doctrine of Reconciliation. It is true,
I begin to think upon him; but I will not go on in the work; you shall do it, and
he shall attend upon your Ministry to let him know, what my mercy in Christ to
his Soul is, and I will bless your Ministry unto his Soul.

And thus you see how God stands upon the making use of the means, I make no
question but it is something like to Gods dealing with many of you; though God
at first begins himself, and strikes some terror into your hearts. A man when
he is going about his business, he has some sudden thought dents into his
heart, Lord where am I? What if I should now die? how can I answer for such and
such things before God? And thus perhaps he comes to be troubled in his
Conscience by some immediate work of God, but he will not go on in this work
immediately, but he sends him to the Ministers of his word, and there he shows
him what he must do concerning his good; I will give you a notable text to show
you how God stands upon means; in Act. 10.2. He had some kind of the fear of
God, but understood little of Christ; he was a soldier, a Centurion of the
band called the Italian band; he had a great many soldiers that were wicked,
but yet he had some that were godly: But though he was in that place, yet he
was a devout man and full of prayer, (as it is commendable for Soldiers to be
much in prayer,) because carrying his life in his hands, he had need carry
Grace in his heart, and then in the 3. verse, (it is a very observable
Scripture) first, God accepts of his prayers, and appears in a Vision to him,
and sends an Angel to him, and tells him that his prayers were accepted well, but
God had revealed so much of Christ to him which he was very ignorant of.

Object. You will say, seeing God did send an Angel to him, why did not God
reveal Christ by the Angel? No, he would not, he sends an Angel to Cornelius to
this end, to bid him send for Peter that was a Minister of the Gospel; This
should be the message of the Angels, to tell him that God regarded his prayers,
and alms. I but, as if the Angel should say, God has other things to tell you;
but the truth is I have no commission to tell you, my commission is to tell you
that you should send for a Minister, he sent for Peter, and Peter came and
Preached Christ unto him; as you may see in verse, 34. so that you may see that
God does use to work upon men by means, and surely, herein God will honor humane
nature in taking it upon himself, and for Gods honoring of the Minister of his
word, take this one note (which is likewise very observable) that Christ
himself when he Preached upon the Earth, we never read that his preaching was so
efficatious to convert so many Souls, as the Ministers of the Gospel did; Peter
when he came to preach the Gospel, Converted three thousand Souls at one
Sermon, and you never read that Christ converted so many at a Sermon, Christ
himself preaching immediately the Gospel did never convert so many as Peter did;
The reason is to show, that we must not expect so much the immediate preaching
of God unto us; as God and Christ preaching to us by the Ministry of Man; that
is the meaning of it: so that now you have had the point opened unto you; that
God committs unto us the Ministry of Reconciliation.

I shall endeavor to apply it.

CHAP. 42.
Use, 1. The sending of the Ministers of the Gospel is to be accounted a
glorious blessing.
FIrst, If this be the great work of the Ministers that are sent amongst you to
dispense the Ministry of Reconciliation to you; O! then certainly the sending
of any of the ministers of the gospel among you, you are to account a glorious
and a wonderful blessing of God upon you at any time; why? what is their
errand? They come to treat with your souls about Reconciliation with God, and
God has appointed this the great means of bringing souls unto himself, to be
reconciled unto himself, and therefore it is one of the greatest blessings in
the world to have the minestry of the gospel in any congregation. Blessed be
your eyes says Christ that you see such things, and your ears that you hear
such things, that God has disposed you to live in those times wherein you have
the mighty things of the ministry of the gospel showed unto you; it is a good
argument that god has many souls to be reconciled unto when he sends the
ministers of the gospel unto a place, and therefore when Paul was going from a
place, God appeared to him in the night, and bid him be of good courage and
says unto him, I have many souls in this City. When God in a special manner
sends the preaching of the gospel into a place let them bless God from their
souls, and take it as an argument that sure God has many souls in this place
that he intends to be reconciled unto, for the minnistry of the gospel is the
minnistry of reconciliation; it is the fruit of the prayer of Jesus Christ, and
for that compare those scriptures together and it will be clear; in Esaias. 49 8.
this is quoted in Cor. 2.6.2. now what is that? that is, when Paul was
preaching to them, and he makes this the fulfilling of that prophecy in Esaias.
49. now it is clear, that, that prophecy is a prophecy of Christ's praying to
God the father; for those that did belong to his election, that in due time
they might have the doctrine of reconciliation opened to them; now says God I
have heard thee in an acceptable time, and says Paul, now is the acceptable
time, so that at any time when you come to hear a sermon, and hear the
doctrine of Reconciliation opened to you; you should think thus much, This
morning, or this day have I had the fruit of the prayer of Jesus Christ for
this congregation, and for my part in particular Christ was praying unto his
father for this long before I was borne, and now do I come to have the fruit of
the prayer of Jesus Christ; This very sound of the gospel in my ears this
morning, it is no other but the fruit of the prayer of Jesus Christ unto God
the father long before I had a being and the world was.

CHAP. 43.
Use, 2. The Great honor of Ministers that are Faithful.
SEcondly, Hence appears the great honor of the Ministers of the Gospel in
their Ministry; we will not attribute to our persons, but to our work,
certainly, if they are committed to the Ministry of reconciliation, they are
sent about the most honorable business that ever was in the world; to dispense
unto the Children of men the great mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ. So if
a Minister be faith free in it, it may be said of any one that God uses in
this; Happy that ever he was born, and blessed be the womb that bear him and
the paps that gave him suck, if so be he be faithful in this his work; for he
is employed about the greatest business that is in the world; never did God
employ Angels in a work of greater consequence, and in a work wherein they are
more honored they are called in scripture Angels of the Churches, for indeed
their work is Evangelical, and when he speaks of them in 1 Cor. 4.1. Therefore
let a man account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God. Brethren, we could be willing, that for our persons they
should be never so contemptible before you if so be the contemptibleness of our
persons might further the glory of our work, But we know ordinarily, that the
contempt of persons hinders the honor of the work, and therefore says the
Apostle, let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and stewards
of the Mysteries of God: we are appointed stewards of the mysteries of God, we
are stewards to deal out unto you the mysteries of life, and Salvation, Joseph
was accounted highly off, when he did deal out the Corn in Egypt, and now
this work of reconciliation is that that the Angels pry into, the Angels
learn instruction from this mystery of reconciliation, it does, not only
beseem the greatest men in the world to attend upon it: but the Angels
themselves honor it, and learn by it. I will give you a text for this because
it may seem to be hard unto you, the text is in Ephesians. 3 verse, 10. To the
intent, that now unto Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly places might be
known by the Churches the manifold wisdom of God; that (not only men) but the
very Angels in heaven might come to understand further the wisdom of God in
Christ, made known to the Church, certainly; if the Angels come to know
further by the Church, then specially at their Church meetings when they are
together, and when there is the dispensation of the Ministry of the Gospel
among the Saints; then when the Church is in their exercises of the ordinance
of the Church; then they come to know the manifold wisdom of God (howsoever
some think it is foolishness) yet God says, it is a manifold wisdom of God and
the Angels think so too. Certainly, there is no place so full of sinners, as of
Angels heareing; therefore, you may well come to hear, for the Angels they come
to hear, and therefore the Apostle says to women, that they should beheave
themselves well because of the Angels, and the scripture tells us, that the
Angels pry into this mystery of the Gospel. Ministers need not seek honor to
themselves any wai^^, but by their faithful administration of the Gospel, and
therefore in the primitive times, the Ministers of the Gospel were mightily
honored of the people, let a soul come to understand what it is to have peace
with God through Jesus Christ, through any Ministers, Ministry, and that soul
will honor that Ministry enough; he needs not call for any honor and respect
from that poor soul, It is said, that in the former times there were wooden
challices and golden Ministers: but afterward there were golden cupps, and
wooden Ministers. It was a great deal more honor to the Church when there were
golden Ministers, but afterward when there were golden cups and ministers were
gallants, and had great means, may they not well be called wooden in respect of
their opening of the mysteries of Salvation to the pople? It is not now so much
for to preach morallity, (these are good things to be preached on) but where is
the great point of reconciliation? The great point that al Ministers ought to
aim at is the great point of Reconciliation, and that is to be preached, and it
is their commission to preach that especially. Oh, how is it to be received, to
be accepted? To us is committed the ministry of reconciliation; what is it? It
is such a ministry, of no less consequence then your reconciliation with God;
Oh how gladly should you take in this ministry? for they come about a work
that is worthy of al acception, as the Apostle says Tim. 1.1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of al acceptance that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners; This is the sum of the ministry of reconciliation, when
we come to bring this unto you, we do not expect al acceptance, to open your
hearts and hands to receive in this work of reconciliation into you: as we read
of Noah, when he was tossed up and down the Sea) after many days he put forth
a dove, and she brought in an Olive branch, Now this you know is an Emblem of
peace, Noah opened the window of the Arc, and took in the Dove with the Olive
branch, and al those that come to preach the Gospel unto you, they come with
the Olive branch in their mouths, and the truth is, you are, as it were upon
the Sea floting up, and down, and we come unto you: with an Olive branch in our
mouths like Noah's Dove, Oh, then open your windows and receive it, says the
prophet, Oh how beautiful are the feet of them that bring good tidings of
peace, and as you read in Romans 10.15. Their very feet should be beautiful unto
you; It is so prophesied of among the Prophets, and it is made use of in the
new Testament, and if you find your hearts opened and accepting of it, and
rejoice and bless God for it, then you fulfill that prophecy, and then the feet
of those messengers are beautiful in your eyes; that is the work that you
should come for when you come to hear a Sermon; You should think, this day am I
coming to hear somewhat of the work of reconciliation between God and my soul,
and when people come to the word to expect something concerning this peace with
God, and when they hear any such thing, Oh, then they should bless the name of
God. Some come to the word to hear some witty sentences, and for discourse
(though the maine thing is that you should come to hear something about the
reconciliation of God to your souls, and you should watch for such a word al:
the while the minister is opening the point, Oh! but when will the word of peace
be opened from God to my soul? And when you hear that word, Oh! you should
embrace it, and receive it as in Psalm. 58. I will hearken what the Lord will say,
for he will speak peace unto my soul; so should every poor afflicted conscience
say, I will hearken this day when Christ will speak peace to my soul. The Lord by
his word speak peace unto you and make that which we preach in opening the
things of the Gospel to be a powerful ministry of reconciliation unto your
souls.

CHAP. 44.
I have treated about what commission is given unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, and there is one great thing that I would have you observe, that we
take no notice of; how the Apostle again and again speaks of this, as making
account that it is one of the greatest things that concerns the world that ever
was; for says he in v. 18. Al things are of God; who has reconciled us unto
himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of
reconciliation. But he had not enough of that, but he comes over it again to
wit; that God was in Christ reconcileing the world; that God reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of
reconciliation that is in the 18. v. that is; God is reconciling himself unto
the world in Jesus Christ, again the same is in the 19. verse, And has
Committed unto us the word of reconciliation, showing, that it is a matter of
great consequence; it is a great trust that is committed to the Ministers of the
Gospel, the word of Reconciliation; and there I showed you, how you were
(therefore) to enertain the Ministers of the Gospel; beautiful should the Feet
be of those that bring glad tidings etc. That comes from God with this
Commission, this Doctrine of Reconciliation in their mouths as Noah put forth
his hand and took in the Dove with the Olive branch: So when a Minister comes
with this Olive leaf in his Mouth, the Ministry of Reconciliation, you must
open your hearts, and take it in. A word or two more about this, This (you have
heard at large) is the great work of the ministers of the Gospel; to bring unto
you the Doctrine of Reconciliation: howsoever it may be folishness before the
world, yet it is the great Ordinance whereby God will bring men to be reconciled
unto himself; those that he has a purpose to save. Here is now a work, to
treat with you about reconciling your Souls to God; to open to you the Counsels
of God about bringing you to be at peace with him.

Use. 1. See what a wicked wretched world this is, that cannot bear the
Ministers of the Gospel.
Hence then see, what a wicked and wretched world is this, that cannot bear the
Ministers of the Gospel? When this is all the work that they come about; this
errand unto them in the name of God, to treat with them only to make peace
between God and their Souls; here is all the Errand, and yet the world cannot
bear this. If they came as the Messengers of Gods wrath against them, then
indeed the world might look sourly upon them, and seek to avoid them; but when
they come about no other Errand, but merely to treat with their Souls about
terms of peace that the world should not recceive them, but reject the Gospel,
and despise it, and look upon the Ministers of the Gospel as if they were their
greatest enemies. This is a most wretched wicked world, and there is nothing in
the world that can aggravate the sins of menmore then this; that they should
reject the Ministry of the Gospel. Says God, What? when I shall send the
Minsters of the Gospel, my servants to treat with these wretched Creatures
about making peace between me and them, and they shall reject this; certainly
God expects that wheresoever he sends the Ministry of the Gospel, generally al
people should admire at the grace of God, that is made known to them in Christ,
and they should al come in and even cry to God; Lord, What is it thou do
require? what? Is there any Messenger from Heaven come? Now let us give up our
hearts as a blank paper; let God write in them whatsoever he pleases, (he does
not expect that men should rise in a rage against the word, and cast it of as
that that brings trouble upon them) how infinitely are men mtstaken in this? to
think that the preaching of the Gospel is a trouble to the world, to whom it is
the greatest happiness that can be in this world. And if you knew it, you would
bless God for it; even with your faces grovelling upon the ground, that such a
commission was given to your brethren to come from God, to treat in his name
about terms of Reconciliation with you, the Sons of men, What hurt is it the
Ministers of the Gospel do unto men? that they should be so troubled with them?
as to say, that the Town or place is troubled and we could never be at quiet,
since there was such and such preaching, were there not infinite malice; it
could never enter into the hearts of men such a conceit as this is.

You speak about treating of peace with God; but they are severe, and denounce
the Judgments of God against us.

I appeal to you how do we denounce them? do we denounce them absolute? or
only in order to the bringing of the souls to faith and repentance? what do we
plead against? It is but against your sin that is your enemy, your deadly
enemy; that would certainly undo you; that would destroy you eternally. Ahab
speaks of the prophet, he never speaks good unto me; and yet says Ahab,
have I found thee O mine enemy? he looks upon the prophet as an enemy; so,
wicked carnal hearts, (though we come to open the mysteries of the gospel to
them; yet when we show them upon what terms it runs) they think we do not
speak good unto them. Certainly (whatsoever your thoughts are) we are enemies
to nothing but your sins, that would destroy you; that is your enemy, and would
any one think it hard, to have his deadly enemy to be hardly dealt withal? All that we desire, is; but to break the league between your souls and Sin, that
there may be a league between God and your souls: certainly love of sin, and
peace with God they cannot stand together at the same time; it cannot possibly
be that there should be a league between sin and your souls, and yet a league
between God and your souls; now which of the two do you think is the best,
and who is your greatest friend? either he that seeks to maintain a league
with sin or to break it that you may have a league between God, and your souls?
this is the intention of the gospel.

But you will say, if this be the commission of the ministers, that God has put
into them the word of Reconciliation; why do they preach the law so much as
they do? why do they preach terror so much? for this is their commission; the
word of Reconciliation.

To that I answer, certainly he is a minister that knows not his commission
that preaches the law, or any terror any other way, but in order to this word
of Reconciliation, any other way but to make you to understand this word of
Reconciliation, (though there be (in some respects) a great deal of difference
between the law, and the gospel) yet most people think it greater than it is,
for the substance of the law, (is that that is employed (at least) in the gospel
[implied] as thus) when we say [the word of Reconciliation] it is impossible to
open this unto you without showing you something that the law tends to,
[Reconciliation] why? Because that we are enemies to God. Enemies to God? How?
how can we be enemies to God? yea by your sins.

How shall we know that sin does bring enmity between God and us?

The Law tells you, cursed be every one that abides not in every thing that is
written in the book of the law to do it. When we speak of Reconciliation
there is implied enmity. I appeal to any of you (considering that God works
with creatures according to the nature of creatures, he does use to work
(though above reason) yet in a rational way; he begins the work with those whom
he intends to save: therefore how can we (in a rational way) tell what
Reconciliation is; until we understand what an enmity sin has made between
God, and our souls. Is it possible to understand the sweetness of peace with God
until we understand the danger of our estats that that we speak of the law, it
is that? that is employed in the gospel, and that the revealing of the gospel
may come with a more sweetness, and fullness into your hearts; O! that you would
but carry this along with you ever when you hear any of the ministers speak any
thing to you that has any terror in it; do but persuade your souls of this; O!
but this is in order to my peace with God; in order to show what a blessed and
sweet savior Jesus Christ is.

But others will say, the word of peace is committed unto you, why do you speak
of war then?

T^ that I answer but in a word, when we speak to you concerning war, what is
our aim? what does it tend to? But only this; that you may be willing to
venture your selves, your lives and estates to maintain among you this word of
Reconciliation; here is the end, were it not for this, we could quickly hold
our mouths, we should not hazard our selves so as we do to speak to you of
such an argument; we are apparently, and any man (whose eyes are but half
open) may see that if we be sluggish, and cowardly now, farewell the word of
Reconciliation, the word of the Gospel is gone, we must not expect that that
must be amongst us, and the posterity that is coming after. It may be some of
you may know, that since God has called a Parliament, and blessed it, as he
has don, never was the word of Reconciliation opened so clearly as it has
been: there has Been some kind of preaching before with a deal of mixtures:
but for that clear way of Reconciliation, your consciences may tell you that is
has not been so clearly opened.

Obj. But you will say, the Apostles they had the word of Reconciliation, and
preached it to the people; but they did not preach to the people that they
should maintain it by force of arms, But they taught people to suffer, and to
lay down their lives, and not to take the sword into their hands.

Ans. This has been answered again and again, and it is a most vain objection
of the people. This objection seems to be strengthened partly from the thing it
self: They say, religion should not be maintained by the sword, and secondly,
the example of the primitive tims.

First for religion, know, that the maintenance that is now by the sword in
this cause, it is not merely for religion, but it is for our civil right, that
we have to our religion. And this answer will answer both.

For the Objection, that Religion should not be maintained by the sword, and
that of the primitive time, I say, [the maintenance now of Religion] it is not
for that (only) that the sword is taken up; the sword is not taken up merely
for that, (as Religion) but for the civil right that we have to our Religion,
which in the the primitive times, the Apostles had not, nor the Christians
then: but now we live in such a Country wherein we have civil right unto our
Religion, as well as to our estates; we have not only right unto the profession
of our Religion, (because God gives it us out of his good will) but we have it
too by virtue of a civil right; by virtue of the Law of our common wealth: Look
what right you have to your Houses, Lands, and Estates; you have the same right
to your practice of Religion; This is the mercy of God toward England, rather
than to other Countries; Now we take up Arms to defend our civil right, and let
it be in what it will be, either to our Estates, or Houses, or Religion, or
whatsoever it be, still it is a civil right; this is that that justifies this
quarrel, and this is enough to stop the Mouths of any in this point, and to
answer that argument about the primitive times. But I let this pass and come
unto the next verse.

CHAP. 45. Verse 20. Opened, and Five Doctrines propounded
VERSE 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be you reconciled to God.
NOW we are Ambassadors. Mark, what rise the holy Apostle takes, says he, God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing their trespasses
unto them, and has committed to us this word of Reconciliation. Now then we
are Ambassadors. His spirit seems to be much moved in this; What? God
reconciling the world unto himself? not imputing their trespasses unto them?
[Now then we we are Ambassadors for Christ] now then we have a great trust; now
then we have a great charge; now then we are Ambassadors, not from any earthly
great Prince, but from Jesus Christ himself. So that in these words you have
these several points of Doctrine. I might cast them into these several
conclusions.

Doct. First, That the Ministers of the Gospel are Ambassadors of Christ.

Secondly, What they do in this their Embassage; It is as if God, and Christ
did it, as though God did beseech you by us, so we pray you in Christ's stead.

Thirdly, The Consideration of the Excellency of their Commission, and
Embassage makes them wonderful careful to do what they are sent about, and very
earnest in plying the work they are sent to do; Now we are Ambassadors, and as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled.

Fourthly, That God and Jesus Christ are exceeding willing to be reconciled
unto Sinners.

And that is the Fourth thing which is indeed the principal thing in the Text
that is recorded. Now as the very ground of all that is intended in the Text.

That God and Christ is exceeding willing that sinners should come in to be
reconciled to him, for they do pray and beseech you.

Fifthly, That the work of the Ministry of the Gospel, it is (by all the means
they can) to labor to draw a people by entreating and beseeching them, and to
take no nay of the hearts of the people until they do get them to come in, to
be reconciled unto God.

These are the five things of the 20. verse.

Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ. etc.

I shall but briefly treat of the first three, for indeed the two latter are the
chief, which I chose this text for, To show you the willingness of God that
sinners should come in and be reconciled to him, and the work of the Ministry
is to draw the hearts of the people; But the other three I shall speak of but by
way of preface unto these.

CHAP. 46. The Ministers of the Gospel Are Ambassadors of Christ, Opened in six
particulars.
First, That the Ministers of the Gospel are the Ambassadors of Christ.

Not Ambassadors for Belial, or for Antichrist as many Ministers have been, to
plead the cause of Antichrist, as if they were sent as Legates from Rome; and
to plead for superstitious vanities; we are not Ambassadors for Belial, for
sin, for wickedness, for many times you hear pleading against Godliness, and
for wickedness: No, we are Ambassadors for Christ, we are sent Ambassadors;
this is something more than messengers; this is a higher degree than to be a
bare messenger, an Embasdor is more than a steward; in 1. Cor. 4. Therefore let
a man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and dispencers of the
mysteries of Salvation. I only will show you a scripture for that, and a little
open it, and soon pass by this point.

We have it often in scripture, this word Ambassador, In Ephesians. 6.2. There you
have it to the same purpose as it is here; For which I am an Ambassador, and he
is in bonds. He was not used like an Ambassador, you know, [Embassadors,] First
they are such as are sent from Princes and States, to other Princes and States:
it is not a private man. If any of you send a messenger about a business, he is
not said to be an Ambassador; but one that comes from a Prince, or State from
other countries, he is said to be an Ambassador. So the Minister of the Gospel,
he is not sent to deal between man and man: but between God and man, in
matters that concern the great God of Heaven, and Earth; and sent from him,
though designed to it by men, yet their calling depends upon God, upon Christ,
only here is the difference; when Princes, and States, send their Ambassadors;
they send them to other Princes, and to other States: But now God sends
Ambassadors to poor wretched, sinful men, and herein he does honor man, that he
will send a messenger from himself to them to be an Ambassador. When a Prince
does send a messenger to a person, you do not say, that the Prince does send an
Ambassador to them that are in prison, that he may execute when he pleases,
rather an Executioner, than an Ambassador: So we might al have expected rather
that there should an Executioner have been sent, but God is pleased for his
elect ones to send an Ambassador. And besides, Ambassadors are not sent about
every trivial business, but when an Ambassador is sent, it is about a public
business, a State business of some great consequence: so when you hear that God
sends his Ambassadors to the world, you must know that it is about a great and
a weighty business, about a State business, it is about that that does concern
the very state of Heaven, the God of Heaven, it is that that concerns God
himself more nearly than any thing in ^^^s world concerns him, It concerns God
next unto his own being, and unto his Son, the nearest of any thing that is
without that belongs to a God, therefore we are called Ambassadors.

Thirdly, They are called Ambassadors because they must look to this; that they
do not the least thing but by Commission, it is as much as his life is worth to
go beyond his Commission in any thing: so the ministers of the Gospel they must
keep close to the Commission which they receive from Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, when he goes to any place, he does represent the person of the King
himself from whom he came, and what wrong is done to him is done to the Kings
person; Let the Ambassadors be never so mean: so all the Ministers of the
Gospel, they come to you in the name of the King of Heaven, in the name of
Jesus Christ, and there is a kind of a representation even of the person of
Christ in them. And that will appear more fully when we come to the next point.

Fifthly, An Ambassador must give an account of his Embassage; he must
(according as there is occasion) send to the country from whence he comes of
what business he has done: so the Ministers of the Gospel coming as
Ambassadors, they are ever and anon to send to heaven to give an account how
they speed in their Embassage, and when they come to declare any message to the
people, they are to send to Heaven, to tell God whether it be received, or
rejected, and it is a very sad thing to any people, when a minister of God shall
have any Just cause to send up to Heaven his complaint, and say, O! Lord, thou
have sent me with a blessed Embassage of peace and reconciliation to this
people, but Lord they reject it, they will rather have their lusts, than all that
Glory of thine in Jesus Christ; Heaven, and eternal happiness is a light thing
unto them. When a Minister makes this complaint, do you not think it will be a
hard thing to those that do reject it? And al faithful Ministers do this. And
if he be a faithful Minister, he is sollicitous about his Embassage; he looks
whether it be entertained, and accordingly he gives notice to heaven, not only
weekly, but daily, how his Embassage is entertained, and at the last day he
must give a full account before the Lord and Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, And Lastly, it is against the Law of al nations to abuse an Ambassador
though he should come upon never such a threatening message, yet you must use
the Ambassador civily; So it is against al laws of religion that can be to
abuse a minister of the Gospel, though he should come with a threatining, But
much more when he comes about an Embassage of peace; then they are to
entertain him. It is against al sense and reason and against al relegion, and
those people are most profane, and reprobate to every good work, that shall
abuse an Ambassador coming from Jesus Christ unto them.

Now a little by way of application.

CHAP. 47.
Use. 1.
The Ministers of the Gospel are sent from the greatest Prince in the world,
and so they are to be looked upon. Now then if the feet of those that do but
bring glad tidings of peace should be beautiful; how much more the feet of the
Ambassador of peace? An Ambassador, is another manner of thing than one that
brings good tidings. O! my brethren do not give cause for any complaint to be
made: but rather give you cause to those that come amongst you to send up a
comfortable account unto God, and to tell God, Lord! thou have been pleased to
send to such a place; to preach peace to such a people, and Lord! how readily,
yea how greedily do those poor souls receive this Embassage? Lord! never did
any Minister come into any place where this Embassage was so entertained; Oh!
they cry out for peace with thee, and above al things in the world this is the
desire of their souls: that they long after is; that they might have peace with
their God. Oh! this would be a joyful account, if we could send up our account
thus unto God, Oh! let not any that come to you as the Ambassador of Christ, be
like unto those in Isay. 33.7. The text says, (it is spoke of I confess in
another case) but we may apply it here; truly there is cause in many
Congregations, that the Ambassador of peace should weep, and that bitterly, the
Lord keep you from giving any such occasion; (though it would be sad to their
hearts) yet it would be more grievous to you. Thus much from the Metaphor.

CHAP. 48. The second Doctrine, (Propounded in the 45. Chapter) prosecuted.
Doct. 2. That a Minister of the Gospel when he comes, is an Ambassador; he
comes in Christ's stead, and what he shall deliver (according to his Commission,)
is to be looked at as if God, and as if Jesus Christ did preach unto you.

For want of the right knowledge of this point it is that there are so many
sermons lost. If people had but this text in their hearts, and looked upon all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel as if God and Jesus Christ were present
speaking; how much good would be done? When God does intend good to any Soul he
will cause it to look upon the preaching of the Gospel, as the very voice of God
and Jesus Christ to the Soul. Though many a poor creature that (perhaps) has
heard a thousand Sermons) looked upon preaching as what a man would say) but at
length when the time of love came, he saw an authority, and majesty of God
himself, and of Jesus Christ in the Ministry, and did feel God speaking to his
heart and then it did prevail; that is plain in the text. As though God did
beseech you by us, that; that we do, it is as if God did it; and do we pray
you? It is in Christ's stead. Now this is not only the Ministers of the Gospel
since Christ's time: but formerly what was done. Those that were sent by God to
be his Messengers, it was as if God and Christ did it. You have that proof of
it in the 1 Peter, the 3. Chap. 18, 19. verse. For Christ also has once
suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being
put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the spirit, by which also he went
and preached to the spirits which are in Prison. That is vainly made use of by
some, to prove that Christ's Soul did descend into Hell, to go and preach to the
damned in Hell, but certainly that is a vain conceit, if you observe the text,
you shall find that this is the meaning of it, observe the 20. verse, It was to
those spirits which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of
God, waited in the days of Noah. Those Spirits that did live in the days of
Noah, and Noah's preaching unto them; Now (says the text) they are in prison,
Jesus Christ went and preached to the spirits that were disobedient in the
times of Noah, that now are in prison. How did he go but by his Spirit? by his
Servant Noah, [by Noah] The preaching of Noah was the preaching of Christ. As
if he should say, There is such a Congregation so many a years ago had a
faithful Minister; Christ was preaching so many years to those Souls that are
now in Prison: now alas they are gone, they are in Hell: but there was a time
that Christ was preaching to them. I see I must not Name many texts. I will give
you one text or two more; in the 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. You did not receive it as the
word of Man; you looked beyond man: But how did you receive it? from God; and
therefore it does effectually work; that makes the effectual working upon the
heart: when the people receive the word as the word of God. And the 4 Gal. 14.
Mark how the Galatians received the Apostle, says he there, And my tentation
which was in my flesh you despised not, nor rejected: but received me as an
Angel of God; even as Christ Jesus. Here he speaks in way of commendation of
the Galatians, you receive me as an Angel of God, even as Jesus Christ, as if
you had received Christ Jesus; and mark, the Apostle was in a poor mean
condition in respect of his outward estate. [My tentation that was in my flesh]
In my outward man I was very low; and this might have been a tentation to you
for to have caused you to have rejected me when I spoke. Oh! this has been a
tentation to many men because the preacher is an Earthen Vessel, though he has
brought the right treasure of the Gospel, yet this has been a tentation. But
says he, it was not so with you, you received me; though poor, weak, a mean
man that had scarce bread to eat: yet you received me as an Angel of God, yea
beyond that: as Christ Jesus himself. But yet you shall observe in the next
words, that it seems their hearts began to be drawn aside; i^ the 15. verse.
There was a time when I came first amongst you, when you were ready to have
pluct out your very eyes for me, and you cried out; O! this blessed doctrine of
the gospel that we now hear! but where is the blessedness? It seems that some
falls teachers had come, and inveigled them, and had taken them off from the
Apostle. Oh! Where is the blessedness you spoke of? as if that were now gone:
but that is the Duty of people, and then, and only then it is like that the
Ministry of the word can do any great good: When, the people look upon it as if
God spoke, and Jesus Christ spoke unto them. I will only conclude with this one
thing; that til you do come to apprehend this, it is not like that ever any
great good, to any purpose will be done; Its like it will be with you, as it was
with Samuel; you know God called to Samuel; Samuel, Samuel says God, he runs
to Ely; says he, my Son, I did not call thee, well, he went again and slept and
God calls again; He did not know it was Gods voice; he runs to Ely again: but
then the text faith, that Ely perceived that God called the Child, and Ely gave
him this instruction that if he called again, he should say, Lord speak, for
thy servant hears. And then he went and slept again, and the Lord came, and
called to him, and then he said, speak Lord thy Servant hears: And then God
opened his heart unto him. Oh! God called the first time, and he thought it had
been Ely, and looked no further. God said no more to him but left him, and so
again, the second time: But when he came to understand that it was Gods voice,
then you shall observe; that God opened himself wonderfully to him, and showed
him [then] his mind to the full. So just thus it is with people, they come
[now] to hear the Ministry of the word; they hear a sound in their ears, and
what they hear is very good: but they look only at a man; the man speak, and
they may perhaps commend the man, and commend his Sermon, and all this whil God
speaks not to their hearts. And then they will go the second time, and it is
true, God does speak to them: but they do not know it is Gods Voice, and
because they do not know it is Gods voice, God does not make known himself unto
them: But when the time of Gods Love comes, this is the great Embassage that is
sent to the Children of men, And when he pleads with you, you should think that
it is Christ that is pleading with you; when he is opening of any Scripturre to
you, you should think that it is Christ that is pleading with you; when he is
opening of any scripture to you, you should think that Jesus Christ is opening
that Scripture to you, and when you com with such a heart, then God opens al
his mind to you. I appeal to you whether it has not been just thus; the
dealings of God with you as it it was with Samuel; you have come once and again
to a sermon, but have looked no further then Ely; to the minister: but when you
have come to the word with the disposition, and said Lord speak for thy
servant hears, Lord reveal what thou will; I se it is thine one ordinance, and
the minister, (though he be but a poor weak man) yet he comes and stands in thy
stead, and speaks in thy name, and I say, when you come thus you shall find more
in one sermon let out to you, then in a thousand before, and here is the ground
that many have lived thirty or forty years under a powerful ministry and it
has sounded in their ears, but they never have heard the mind of God savingly
revealed unto them. Because they never have fallen down, and said, lord speak
for thy servant hears O! do this, and thou shall hear the great message from
God: then you shall have God oppening himself unto you to the full.

CHAP. 49. The Second Doctrine (propounded in the 45, chapter) further
prosecuted.
I Have made some entrance into this second point. Doct. That God and Christ
does speak in the ministers of his word. What the minesters of God do (acrding
to their rule and Word) it is to be looked upon as if God and Christ did it.
This is Clear in the text. As though God did beseech you, we pray you in
Christ's steed (says the Apostle).

For this I gave you diverse scriptures; and I might ad many more, ct thought to
have added some more clear scriptures to show you that what the ministers do,
it is as if God and Christ did it, I might name forty places that are clear in
this point but shall not that I may proceed. What the minister; of God speak
according to the ruls (I say) it is as if God and Christ spoke, and it must
needs be sure, if we consider of the power that there is of Christ in the
ministry: we have had experience of it, that there is such a power of the
ministry of the word that it co^ld not be but only by the speaking of God, God
and Christ in It: the which has power to inlighten, to awaken conscience, to
terrefie the conscience, to humble, to bring down the stoutest proud heart in
the world, yea, and to convert souls, in John. 5.25. the text says of the word
of the son of God that brings life, Verily I say unto you, that the hour is
coming, and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God and
they that hear shall live. (...) certainly this is spoken not only of the voice
of the son of God at the general resurrection, but (says he) it is now; the
hour is coming, and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of
God and they that hear shall live. It was at the time, and is continually in the
ministry of the word; There is the voice of the son of God that makes the dead
to hear and to live.

And further the word of the Ministry, must be looked upon as Gods in this
regard; because otherwise there could not be any ground or bottom for faith by
any thing that is delivered in the Ministry of the word. Now we know that the
ministry of the word is the special ordinance that is appointed for the
begetting of faith. faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word preached.
It does not come so much by reading; no, not by reading of the book of God; by
reading of the scripture: but by hearing, and hearing the word preached. Now
then you will say, indeed, The word in the Bible, that is the word of God; God
speaks there, and Christ speaks, and we may bottom our faith upon what we read
there, but we must have something to bottom our faith upon when we hear it
preached by man, as well as when we read it, and it is clear by scripture; that
God does rather work by the hearing of it preached, than by the reading of it.
Except we look upon it as the word of God and Christ, we have nothing to bottom
our Faith upon, (for nothing that is humane can be the bottom, and ground of
any ones faith.) It is not, what is the judgment of such a man, though he be
never so learned, never so holy a man) that can bottom or ground my faith. But
when I come to hear him, (so as I can hear God, and Christ speaking in him)
then have I something, to ground my faith upon what he says, therefore, here is
the reason why so many go away, and are only taken at the present hearing, but
their hearts are not grounded, and bottomed in the truth, because they hear man
only, and do not hear God: But when people can say as those men that came
forth from Samaria to the woman, in John 4. about the middle of the Chap. said,
that when the woman came and told them; Here is a man that has told me all that ever I did; is not he Chyist? And they went out to him: But at length say
they to her, (when they had spoken to him) Now we do believe; (not because thou
have told us, but because we have heard him our selves.) So may many a soul
say, I have been often hearing of sermons, and I have been taken with the
preaching of such a man, and I did believe what he said, and it went into my
heart in some measure: Oh! but now says a soul, I do not believe because he
tells me this, but I have heard in his preaching, God and Christ himself, it
has not been he; but it has been Jesus Christ that has spoken to my heart.
There could be no grounding of our faith (except that which is delivered in the
Ministry of the word) be looked upon as God and Christ speaking in them.

Object. You will say, must we bleeve every thing that the Preacher speaks, as
if God and Christ spoke it? men may err.

Therefore you must compare what you hear with what you read, and as those
noble men of Berea did search the Scripture to see what Paul himself preached;
they were not to take Paul's preaching, but to compare it with other Scriptures,
and they were commended for it, and God forbid that we should think it much
that people should examine any thing we speak. Try all things, and then keep
that which is good; search the Scriptures, and compare what is delivered by
Scripture, and then so far as that is according to the rule of Scripture that
is spoken, (though it be not directly the words of the Scripture, yet when it
is spoken in the name of God according to Scripture) it should be received as
if God and Christ spoke it. We challenge no such infallibility as the Papists
say the Pope has: but we give unto al people liberty to examine our Doctrine
by Scripture, and then God expects, and Christ expects that it should be
received as if God and Christ spoke.

CHAP. 59.
Use 1. Answering the Objections of the Arminians. And the Wantons of our Age.
NOW then briefly, Hence we have a Use of instruction, where we have an answer
to the Objection both of the Arminians, and of our late Wantons; Arminians they
make this Objection; when we preach (sometimes) that al men naturally are dead
in sins and trespasses, and there is no free will in man, but man is as void of
Grace as the dead Carcass that lies in the grave is void of natural life; Now
they say, If men be so dead in sins, Why do you preach to them? Were it not a
vain thing to go and preach in the Churchyard? Would they regard what you say?
you preach that al are dead, and that there is no life at al in men to do any
good, Why do you speak to them? This point answers that Objection.

Though it is a truth that al men naturally are dead in sins, and are before
the Lord as a dead Carrion; there is no dead Carrion more loathsome in the eyes
of us, than every natural Soul is in the Eyes of God: but yet we come and
preach to them. Why? because that in our preaching, it is God; God and Christ
speaks, though our voice have no power to raise from the dead: yet the voice of
God has power to raise from the dead. If Christ will speak to one that is dead,
he shall come forth; as you know in the 11. of John. when Christ came to
Lazarus, says Christ, I say to thee Lazarus arise. It were a vain thing for
any of us to go to the grave, and say, arise; but if Christ come he can raise
them presently: So we preach to a congregation that are mixed; some that have
lain in the grave of sin forty years perhaps together, yet when we speak in the
name of Christ, and Christ speaks together with us, we may speak to dead Souls:
for together with the word that is spoken there does go a power and a life, for
it is the word of God (and not the word of man) that breaths forth life.

And again, it is an answer to the Objection of our late Wantons, they cry out
against Ministers calling to men for duties, and account them duty-mongers: Say
they, What do you call to men to do? you tell them that they must do thus, and
thus, and they must perform duties, and humble themselves. They think they have
got a great Objection in this; that because men have no power naturally:
therefore it is a vain thing to call upon them to perform duties

This answers them; We call upon them, so as the voice of Christ; though they
have no power themselves, yet we call upon them to set upon such duties; we call
upon them to believe, and to repent. They say it is in vain to call upon them to
believe, and repent: But that way that God has to work Faith, and Repentance
in the heart of man; it is, to conveigh a power through his own voice in the
ministry of his word; and therefore we speak to them to believe and repent, as
if they had power: because we know that those which belong unto Gods election,
the Lord will conveigh power to them through this word of his. It is not our
voice, but it is the voice of God, and of Jesus Christ. We would have you to
carry this meditation along with you, at any time when we speak unto you, and
exhort you that you would come in, and repent, and believe; Carry this
meditation with you, and then you shall understand us aright. We would not have
you to think, that we conceive, you have power to believe, and repent because
we call upon you: but this we expect; that, while we are speaking to you that
God and Christ will speak to your hearts: so that there will be power conveyed
through that word of ours, and though it be not conveyed this Sermon, yet it
may be the next, or the next, and hoping in the end that will give repentance
unto life.

CHAP. 51.
Use. 2. Ministers ought to speak as the Oracles of God. The manner of their
preaching Opened.
THe next use that arises from hence is that the Apostle Peter makes in 1 Pet.
4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, mark it, here is
an exhortation to those that have to deal in the ministry of the word, that
they must (when they speak the word) speak it as the Oracles of God; so that,
that is delivered in the word; you see it to be as the Oracles of God,
whatsoever a minister speaks (according to scripture) it is to be looked upon
as the oracles of God. Now therefore if this be so, that the word that is
spoken (according to the rule,) is the Oracles of God. then it is the duty of
all that do speak the word of God to speak it in such a manner, as it may appear
to be the Oracles of God. I have not now to speak to many ministers, and
therefore I shall not enlarge my self in this as I should have done. Oh! with
what a reverance should ministers speak, for they come to speak as in Christ
stead? and therefore they should speak in such a manner as becomes the voice of
God, and of Jesus Christ; as the Oracles of God, and not think to speak
according to their own fancies, and their own humors, and in their own ways:
but to speak as those that are sent in Gods place, to speak to the people as if
Christ were speaking to them: and therefore to consider they are in the place
of Christ, so to speak with all authority as from Christ, as in Math. 7. verse,
the last, It is said of Christ, That he taught them as one having authority,
and not as the scribes; for a minister of God, he is to preach in Christ's stead
(for so the Apostle says) therefore he is to labor what he can to express the
very authority of Jesus Christ in his Ministry, and there is a ministry that
does carry authority with it in the very consciences of men, I have known of
some that have come proudly into a Congregation to scorn at the word; Profane
Russians that have come on purpose to outface the Ministry, and to out face
the word, and yet they have met with that authority in the word, that their
hearts have been danted, and they have fallen under the power of the word, and
there is a great deal of difference in the manner and way of preaching the
word; some have authority, and others have no authority at al in it. [That kind
of preaching that is to please the humors of men] you, shall have some kind of
preachers to dandle men's fancies (as it were;) that have some fine quaint
words, that there sentences shall be very smooth, and (as they say) come off
bravely, and this is a dainty preacher, and he shall have many fine latin
sentences, and witty speeches, and come into a pulpit and acts as if he were to
act a part upon the stage: these are the fine quaint preachers, the Court
preachers (as they call them) But this is not to preach as in Christ's stead. It
is very like that this was the preaching of the Scribes and Pharisees. But when
Christ: came to speak, he spoke as one that God had authority, and not as the
Scribes: There was a great deal of difference between his preaching, and that
of the Scribes, he came with the authority of God, he came to preach to the
consciences of men, and not to the fancies of men; and the difference, as there
was in him, so there is in some measure and degree now; There are some that
preach (to this very day) just as the scribes; but there are others that preach
as Christ did; that preached to the conscience, and to the hearts of people, and
their words do stick in the consciences of men, though they fret, and vex, and
go away in a rage; yet there is somewhat that sticks to their consciences: so
that they are either forced to yield to it, or fly from it. And here is the
reason that many a man will cry out and say, I will never hear such a minister,
Why? What is the reason? his corrupt heart cannot bear that ministers
preaching; the word comes with power to his heart, and his guilty conscience
cannot bear it, now watch but whether there be not some vile guiltiness in
their spirits, that say of such men, they will never hear them any more: because
their corrupt hearts cannot bear the authority of the word, that preaching that
is as if God and Christ speak it, is with authority, and not with fine quaint
words: To this purpose you have an expression in 1 Cor. 1.17. [for Christ sent
me] he was to go in the name of Christ, [not with wisdom of men] Christ did
never send me to preach with the wisdom of men. What a text is here? How will
many men be able to answer this one text? that make it their great study to get
Wisdom of words? But mark the danger of this! [Least the Cross] of Christ be
made of no effect. There is a most hiddeous wickedness in this; that a man
should regard more to be commended for a fine, Witty, neat, smooth preacher,
than he should have regard to the Cross of Christ to take effect, to have
Christ to be honored. We find by experience that such preaching scarce ever
stirs the Soul, seldom or never works upon the heart. It was a speech that
once even a Prelate that was not the best, but one ill enough, and known to
many (I suppose here,) I heard it with my own Ears, he said, That he was
convinced so far; that when he came to present one to such a town, he asked
whether there were not some in the place that desired some others? Yes said
they, there are some that desire a university man to come to them, but says
he, the preaching that is there will not humble a Soul, does not tend to
humiliation. I heard this even from one that I know was not a friend to
powerful preaching, and yet his conscience was so far convinced from it;
because the wisdom of words and learning is there showed: but that kind of way
of preaching the Gospel, it makes the Cross of Christ to be of no effect. Your
flaunting preachers, when do they convert a Soul? therefore (says the Apostle)
if we preach so as to do good, it must be such a preaching as is in the 18.
verse. It must be foolishness to (wicked) men, but to these that are saved it is
the power of God, and the Wisdom of God. wicked carnal men will say, here is no
Schollership, no learning in such a Sermon, Well, it is foolishness to them, but
to them that are saved, it is the power of God to Salvation. but such a poor
man says, I know not what they say, But I find a power in it, my Eyes were
never awakened til now, my heart was never wrought upon til now; to those that
are saved it is the power of God. If you find a power in it, that which wicked
men call foolishness; it is a good argument that you are one that shall be saved
when it quickens you. And again in the 19. verse. For it is written, I will
destroy the Wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent. Al their bravery shall come to nothing, and then in the 23. verse.
But we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness, And then again the 2. Chap. verse. 1. And I Brethren when I
came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of (man's) wisdom. You will
say, it was because Paul could not; No, Paul was an admirable Scholar, a most
Eloquent man, he was brought up under the feet of Gamaliel; And yet this man
came not with excellency of speech, or Wisdom of words declaring to them the
excellencies of God, for says he in the 2. verse. I determined not to know any
thing amongst you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, etc. This makes the
word powerful; when it comes in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit,
and not with entising words of man's Wisdom, that your faith should not stand in
the Wisdom of man, but in the power of God: howbeit we speak Wisdom amongst
those that are perfect; There is Wisdom in preaching.

You will say, why? should preachers be fool?

No, God forbid, there should be the greatest Wisdom that can be, and this is
no warrant for one to come into the Pulpet, and to speak extempore, we do not
come to justify a raw and empty discourse, that has nothing in it but mere
words, and a noise, but has no solildity; No, let Ministers study, and Labor
to be as sollid as they can, and search into the mysteries of the Gospel, and
open the secrets of God, and so it will prevail with the consciences of men, and
if Ministers have any parts, there is matter enough to express the parts of
those that are most able, and that which requires their study; and so the
Apostle would have Timothy to study, and therefore it is no justifying of those
that do not study.

But we must remember we come to speak in Christ's steed; Christ certainly did
not come with empty words, but he came to open the counsels of his Father, and
he did reveal the, great Mysteries of the Gospel, it was in a sollid way, and
so the Apostle, that which they spoke was weighty and sollid (though it was not
with vain words and phrases as I spoke before.) But this I name the rather,
(not that I direct my speech so much to Ministers as to you people; seeing you
hear that this is our point; that God and Christ speaks in the Ministry of the
word, that therefore you should desire, and affect such a kind of Ministry
wherein God speaks most, wherein Christ speaks most; wherein you can hear the
voice of God, and of Christ, And I know no one argument that does more fully
evidence the difference between a carnal heart, and a gracious spiritual heart
than this. What Ministry does thy heart most savor, and relish? ^hereby you
may know the temper of your hearts, One may know the temper of the body by
knowing what food one does most savor: so we may know the temper of the heart,
by knowing what food it does most relish; if thou do relish frothy food thy
heart is according to it* but if thou do relish and Savor a spiritual
Ministry that comes in the power and authority of God and Christ, that speaks
to thy heart and conscience; this is an evidence, and sign of a gracious
disposition in thy heart. And the truth is, in one that is fallen (or in a
great measure) from God; if there be any sparks of grace remaining, they will
appear in this as much as in any thing; that though his heart be grown more
loose than it was: yet still he cannot but acknowledge he does find more power in
such a spiritual Ministry than in another. But your carnal hearts they will
savor and relish of a Ministry, that is a mere word ministry, that has least
of God and Christ; where there is but little of God and Christ in the heart,
there the Ministry that has least of God and Christ is most rellished. Some
Women, and some that are ignorant; if they hear a Sermon that has a great deal
of Greek, and latin in it that they cannot understand; they go away and commend
his Sermon though they understand not any one thing of it. I have heard of an
excellent story of a poor beggar (in Queen Blizabeths time) who heard a Sermon
at the Court, and heard a great many Latin Sentences, and Eloquent speeches,
and the poor beggar, he follows the Minister when he was going away, and
blesses God, and says, Oh! Master Doctor; I bless God, and thank God at my
heart. The Minister turns about and asks him, what the matter is? Oh! Master
Doctor says he, I hope the old Religion is coming in again.

But have not the Prelates Silenced those men that wrought most upon the heart,
and conscience? If any did preach so, as that their Ministry came to be
powerful; end to prevail upon the hearts and consciences of men; the Prelates
would not let them stand.

CAHP. 52. How to know what kind of Ministry God speaks most in.
NOw you will say, How shall I know, what kind of Ministry it is wherein God did
speak most?

For the Answer to that, I appeal to your consciences; what kind of preaching
do you think in your consciences there would be if Christ himself were
preaching to you? How do you think that Christ himself would preach if he were
here upon the Earth? That which comes nearest to what Christ would preach; that
you must favor cerrainly. Christ would not preach to defend superstitious
vanities; for Christ (when he came to preach) preached so, as the people many
times derided him, and scorned him: One time when he had done his Sermon they
carried him to the brow of the hill of the City, and would presently have broken
his Neck. Do but read that Sermon of Christ in the 5, 6, 7. Math. What
preachers would you think your Courtiers to be if Christ were preaching to you?
that, that comes nearest to that; that Christ would preach, that you must most
favor, and affect.

Secondly, That kind of preaching you think in your consciences does most
prevail in the authority of the word, has humbled most hearts, and converted
most souls, that Christ has set his seal unto. I appeal unto you, what kind of
preaching has humbled most souls, and done most good? Has not some poor
country preacher, that has preached in the evidence, and demonstration of the
spirit, converted more souls unto God than an hundred Bishops? so that he may
be able to say, at the great day of judgment (according to his measure) as our
blessed Savior said, Here am I, and those whom thou have given me.

Thirdly, Examine of what side you be; those that be of Gods side, they know
his voice; (my sheep hear my voice) but a stranger they will not follow, take
any town, and divide the people, and see how the Minister is liked, some are
for, and some against him. But now look into the difference of their lives; of
both these kinds of men of those that are for, and those that are against the
Minister; see their different walkings; come into such a place as this,
(Because they say there is a thousand alehouses belonging to this place, of
Stepny; I think there be hardly five that do savor the Ministry of the word,
and al your profane ones (generally) they speak against the Ministers. Now I
appeal to your consciences, (if you were to stand before God at the day of
judgment) of which side would you be? either of the side of those that are
drunkards, swearers, unclean persons, and raylers at the Ministry of the
word: or of the side of those that are willing to take pains to hear the word
of God, and bless God for the Ministry of his word. Certainly, that preaching
has most of Christ in it that those that have most of the Spirit of Christ do
most savor; fot they know the voice of Christ, and a stranger they will not
hear; they can understand it, though wicked and ungodly ones cannot. That is
the Second use.

CHAP. 53.
USE 3. We should delight in the Word.
A Third Use of the point is this; Is the ministry of the word such, as has
God and Christ speaking in it? Oh then! How should we delight in it? How should
we bless God for it? With what greediness should we come to hear at any time?
What? is not the voice of Jesus Christ sweet unto us? We have Christ wooing of
us, Christ exhorting of us, and Christ comforting of us. When we come to the
Word, O! with what readiness, and cheerfulness should we come to hear the voice
of Christ? [If you be Godly, Christ does delight in your voice] when you are
gotten alone in your Closets, and can speak but brokenly, O then! your voice is
delightful to him: Therefore the voice of Christ should be very delightful unto
you. I will give you a Text or two for proof of this; Cant. 2.14. It is a speech
of Christ to the Church; O my dove! that are in the clefts of the rock, in the
secret places of the stairs: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice,
for sweet is thy voice and thy countenance is comely. O! let me hear thy voice
my dove; O! thou that art in the secret places of the stairs; Art thou got
alone into a hole to prayer? got alone behind the door in the secret places?
(for it is spoken here of the estate of the Church in times of persecution that
they dare not come together openly, (howsoever wicked men will rail at them,
and say, they get into corners to do thus and thus) but says Christ, thou that
art in the clefts of the rocks; in the secret places of the stairs, let me hear
thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is comely. Against in
the 4. Cant. 11. Thy lips drop as the hony-combe, O my Spouse! When the Saints
speak of Christ, or speak to Christ, their lips do drop before Christ as the
honeycomb. Now what an argument is this? Shall thy lips be so sweet to Christ,
and shall not Christ's lips be as sweet to thee? the Ministry of the word is as
if Christ did entreat thee, and beseech thee; O! how sweet should it be to thee
if thou have the Spirit of Christ? the Church of Christ does answer what Christ
said of her lips, and of her Voice, and of her Mouth: so the Church does answer
to Christ in the 5. Cant. mark what the Church says of his Mouth, what an
Echo is here, and an answer to prayer? says Christ to the Church, Thy lips (O
my Spouse) are as the honeycomb: And thy mouth (O my Savior) is most sweet. In
John. 3.29. he says there, That the friend of the Bridegroom which stands, and
hears the Bridegroomes voice, rejoiceth greatly. If thou be the spouse of
Christ, thou will rejoice to hear the voice of the Brdegroom, and every time
thou come to hear a conscionable Sermon, thou do come to hear the very
Voice of the Bridegroom, and thou can not but rejoice in it, O! how sweet is
one word of Christ to a gracious heart? and the spiritual communion with Christ
here upon earth; it is in his ordinances; we shall hereafter be always in his
presence, and see his face: But if he would have any evidence that we shall have
communion with him in heaven, we must Rejoice in the hearing of his word.

CHAP. 54
VES. 4. If God and Christ speak in the word how, dreadful ought it to be to
the Neglectors, Disobayers, and Contemners of the word?
IF God and Christ do speak in the ministry of his word; Then O! what a
dreadful point is this to all the neglecters, disobeyers, and contemners of the,
ministry of the word? Thou neglectest the word; O! what do thou do when thou
neglectest the word? thou turnest thy back upon Jesus Christ, and wilt not
hear him: and therefore I suppose you know the place; He that turns away his
ear from hearing the law, his prayers shall be abominable: what do thou turn
away thine ear from hearing the word? God professes that he will turn away his
ear from hearing thy prayers, and thy prayers shall be abominable, for thou
turnest away thine ear from hearing of Christ speak to thy soul. For it is in
Christ's stead (says the Appostle) There will be a time when thou would fain
have the ear of God to hear thee. As you would have God to hear you then: so
do you hear him now; mark that text in the 1. Prove. 24. against those that
turn away their ear from hearing God speak. Because I have called and ye
refused; I have streetched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at
naught al my councels, and you would have none of my reproof: howsoever you
thought it was but the word of such and such a man: yet you have set at naught
al my councels, and you would have none of my reproof; your hearts fretted,
and vexed that such a man reproved you: no, it is my reproof, (says God, and
mark what a doom follows in the 26. verse. you you shall call (Says God) and I
will not hear. There was a time friend when I called to you by such a sermon, and
you know that I spak to your hearts, and you turned a deaf ear to me; you shall
call your hearts out and I will not hear you, and there will come a time that you
shall call to Gods ministers to pray for you. What? would you have God to hear
his ministers for you, and will not you hear his ministers from God? It was a
speech of Ambrose to Theodosius the Emperor, says he, will not you hear me?
seeing you desire that I should be heard for you? you desire says he, that I
should be heard for you, and therefore be you willing to hear me: now that was
the speech to Theodosious after he hade fallen to a great sin, coming to
reprove him for his sin; what (says he) will not you hear me? you would be
willing that I should be heard for you; therefore be you willing to hear me: so
say I to al men that live in any way of sin; Hear Gods ministers now, for a day
will come, when you will be glad that God should hear his ministers for you; O!
hear us when we come in the name of God; we would not have you to hear us if
we speak our own fancies; This concerns those that neglect the word.

Now a word or two to those that disobey the word; they will set their judgments
against the judgments of the ministers, and let him say what he will, it is but
his opinion. Do you know what you say? this rebellion is against God and
against Christ: as if there were this language in your hearts; Christ says, I
will have this done; thy lusts say they will have this done: O! this will be
charged upon thee one day; that the voice of the devil was more strong with
thee than the voice of Christ: but specially it is to contemn the word, to set
at naught Gods councels; to go away and contemn the word. Do thou know what
thou do? let me apply but these two scriptures to thee, thou that Despisest
and Scornest the word, that can go to company, and there talk of what thou
do hear in a contemnning manner; consider but of these two texts; I pray,
first Consider of the text out of which the Point is Raised of Gods Speaking to
thee, thou do despise, and do thou so? Consisider what the text in Isa.
39.23. Says, when thou gettest into company, and there art warm with wine,
Oh! then thou liftest up the voice, and laughest; against whom have thou lift
up thy voice? thou think it is against Hezekiah; No, it is against the Holy
one of Israel; thou think it is against such a man that preaches such a
day; no, it is against the Holy God, and Jesus Christ, and this is upon thy
score written in Heaven; here is one that has reproached the Holy one, and
Jesus Christ, In Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me, etc. That is true
(not only of the desciples, that were there for the present upon the earth) but
of all the faithful ministers to the end of the world, for Christ says, when he
sends them out, I will be with you to the end of the world. They were dead more
than a thousand years ago, and Christ yet had promised to be with them, that
is, those that should succeed them; he would be with them to the end of the
world. And this Text concerns every faithful minister as well as the disciples
of Christ; all that time you despise Jesus Christ, and God his Father, when you
despise the ministry of his word; for the Lords sake take heed what you do;
when you have to deal with the word, you have to deal with an edge tool; it is
that, that will either save you, or destroy you for ever. You that have been
guilty of neglecting the word, the Lord strike and humble your hearts, and for
a Cordial for time to come I will apply but one scripture further to you, and
that is that, in Heb. 12.25. What is that? that in the faithful ministry of
the word, God and Christ speaks unto people. Then take this exhortation; So
that ye refuse not him that speaks. If they escaped not who refused him that
spak on Earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away him that speaks
from Heaven. The Ministry of the gospel, and the Ministry of the Law are
compared, One speaking from Earth, the other from Heaven; though the truth is,
they were both from Heaven. But now in the Ministry of the Gospel, God has
sent his own Son to you. In the latter days, he has spoken by his Son says
the Apostle in 1. Heb. the beginning; God who at sundery times spak in times
past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last times spoken to us by
his Son etc. In former times God spoke by his Prophets; there was the voice of
God (but it is not so clear that there was the voice of God, though it is true
Christ did speak then by the prophets) but in comparison Christ is not said to
speak by them) But now in these days, God has spoken by his Son, and God has
reserved the Ministry of his Grace, and his eternal counsels concerning the
Children of men; God has reserved this for his Son; and not only his Son
personally, but his Son in the Ministry of his word. Now you will say, If
Christ did preach (as you say he does) there would be more power. We find that
when Christ did preach that the Pharisees derided him; in the original it is;
they blew their noses at him, and mark! they that were covetous they derided
him, they even derided Jesus Christ himself. A worldly heart that is grown
rich; that has gotten from a low estate to a far greater; he will deride the
most excellent preaching in the world. Take heed that you do not despise the
Ministry, for certainly the voice of Christ will prevail one day. If it does
not prevail here in the word; it shall prevail one day when Christ shall say
depart from me ye cursed; though thou do not obey the present voice of
Christ, yet thou shall obey the other voice at that day. I must wind up this
point with a word of Exhortation.

CHAP. 43. How we ought to have the word.
Use. 1.
SEEing God and Christ does speak to us in the Ministry of the word: Let us
come with other manner of thoughts to hear the word, than hertofore we have
done. I remember I spoke before that the word cannot be effectual til we come
to know the voice of Christ in it; as in that of Samuel; I will give you another
text to show what an admirable effect it will work upon the hearts of men, and
women; if they come to hear the preachings of the word as the voice of God and
Christ: and that is in Acts 10.33. You shall find there; that Cornelius had sent
for Peter to come to him imediately: Therefore I sent to thee, and thou have
well done that thou art come; Now therefore are we al here present before God to
hear althings that are commanded thee of God. Here is a gracious disposition of
heart in Cornelius a soldier, and other Soldiers, and friends that he had.
Presently when Peter came, now says he are we here al present before God, to
hear al things that are commanded thee of God, and we al here entertain
whatsoever thou shall reveal to us from God, as the word of God: then Peter
(indeed) preached with a courage, and when people shall (by their behavior) with
that reverence, and affection attend, as if they did attend to know something
of the mind of God; this encourages a preacher, and then as soon as ever Peter
had done his Sermon, nay before he had done his Sermon; (the text says) in
verse, 44. That while Peter yet spoke these words, the holy spirit fell upon al
them which heard the word: No marvil, they came with such a disposition of
heart. We are here al of us to know, and hear what is commanded of God;
(coming with such a frame of spirit.) Now, while Peter was yet speaking, the
holy spirit fell on them which were to hear the word, and so it will be with
you; when you are alone before you come, say, Oh Lord! that thou would speak
to my heart, even so as you have it in Isa. 2. Come let us go up to the house
of the Lord. An excellent speech for those that are coming to hear, in Isa.
2.2. There is a prophecy of the times of the Gospel, there is an excellent
resolution, an excellent temper of heart for people that are going to hear
sermons; come ye let us go up to the mountain of the Lord; to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.
[We are al here to hear what God will say to us;] when at any time there is any
truth made known to you, you should receive it with such an affection. God this
day has revealed some part of his mind that I did not find to be so before,
and when you hear of any sin revealed; you should bless God, and say, the Lord
has met with my heart this day; Oh! think it not an evil, but bless God that
Christ will think of thee: And so thou should behave thy self. Is there an
exhortation to any duty? God and Jesus Christ has exhorted thee this day; thou
should look upon it as if God and Christ has been a persuading and
exhorting thee; and is there any word of comfort and promise applied unto thee?
thou should look upon it as if God, and Jesus Christ had spoken a word of
comfort to thy heart this day. Oh! if you would come with such a disposition as
to receive al from God, and Jesus Christ, then you may expect that the Holy
Spirit should fall upon you. No marvail though when people come through custom,
and merely because others come; or through some other vain respect: that then
they come, and go away, and never feel any work of the Holy Spirit. But such as
come with teachable hearts, they may expect that the holy Spirit should come
and fall upon them. When the very people of Niniveh did repent, they believed
God, so then the stoutest and proudest heart; yea and the hardest heart in the
world, if it comes to believe God, then it will repent. I am the willinger to be
the more large in this, because this Sermon may make profitable many other
Sermons, and for want of that true work of this point upon your hearts, it is
that so many Sermons do so little good.

CHAP. 56. The third Doctrine (propounded in the 45. Chapter) prosecuted, Viz.
The excellency of the Gospel make the Ministers earnest in their Ministration.
THe former part of this verse treated of several Conclusions in it. A third
Doctrine propounded in the 45 Chapter is,

That the consideration of the excellency of the Gospel that is committed to
the Ministers of it to preach, makes them that are faithful to be very earnest
in their Ministration.

Now unto us is committed the word of Reconciliation. Now then we are
Embossadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ stead etc. Now then upon this that the word of Reconciliation is
committed to us, and we pray you in Christ stead, O! it is this that puts us on
to the earnestness that you see in us.

First, that the consideration of the excellency of the Gospel that is
committed to the Ministers of it, is that that should make them earnest in
their ministration, and to labor with all their might to draw people to that
love of the Gospel.

The same that you have heard in this Chapter, you have it again in the
beginning of the next Chapter. The Apostle having the word again and again;
that it is the Ministry of Reconciliation that is committed to them. After that
he tells them, that he beseeches, and prays in Christ's stead and then he comes
over it again in the beginning of the next Chapter, as if he had not done
enough. O this Ministry of Reconciliation! it is the Garce of God unto people;
O we beseech you says the Apostle, Do not recive this Grace of God in vain,
the Apostles, and so other faithful Ministers satisfy not themselves merely in
performing a task (yet they can come and speak an hour, and speak to people
such things as may please their Ears) but they look after what they do to be
solicitous, and earnest for fear it should be in vain. O! then we as
Ambassadors etc. And I will show you another Text that is very remarkable, in
the 1. Col. 25. I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God
which is given to me for you to fulfill the word of God, and then he falls a
commending of this Ministry of his in the Mystery that has bin hid from ages,
and from generations, but now is made manifest to the Saints. It may be carnal
hearts look upon it as a mad and unsavory thing: But it is made manifest to the
Saints; to whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of this
Mystery amongst the Gentiles. Now then mark how our point comes in, in the 28.
ver. the Apostle would fain gain every man; he is loath to lose any one of his
Auditors; every man, every man, every man, three times in one verse, Whereunto
also I labor striving according to his working which works in me mightily.
What Phrases are here heapt one upon another? I do not make the work of the
ministry an idle work; as if I went about all the day from one company to
another; from Tavern, to Tavern all the week, and then think to come and preach
upon the Lords day to you, and so make it an idle business: but it is my labor,
and not only so, but I strive, and how does he strive? (not merely according to
humane strength, he strives beyond that) I labor striving according to his
working; It is the word of God I confess, and my labor, and striving, it is
according to his working. Yet still this is not enough, according to his working
which works in me, Which works in me mightily. The work of God that works
in me mightily according to that I labor, and so again writing to the
Thessalonians in the first Epistle, 2.2.4. O! this is the trust that is
committed unto us; we are allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel;
even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, we are upright in that we dare
not be but faithful in so great a trust which is committed to us, and then upon
this he tells them in verse 8. we were willing to impart our own souls; because
this Gospel, we knew it would be to excellent. We might be very large in this;
I will give you the ground of it in a very few words.

CHAP. 57. Reasons of Faithful Ministers earnestness, 1, their love to God. 2,
their love to Jesus Christ. 3, their love to their souls to whom they Preach.
4, a kind of love to themselves.
FIrst, those that have committed to them the Ministry of Reconciliation, as it
is of the Appostles (having it put into us) [the Ministry of Reconciliation]

Reason. 1.
First, that that makes them so earnest, it is the love they have to God: for
they know that this is the great glory of God; this that shines in the Ministry
of Reconcilliation in that that they go to declare to the world, and except
that the Lord have his glory in that, (the truth is) he has his glory in
nothing in Comparison, and the^e^ore that they might testify their love to
God; that the God whom their Souls love, may have his glory, in that which is
indeed his glory, and his Masterpiece of al his works. O! this it is that
makes them earnest; they think if the lord has not his glory here, where shall
he have his glory? O! it is infinite pity that so great a work (wherein so
much of the glory of God does appear) that the Lord should have no glory in
that work.

Reason. 2.
And again, their dear love to Jesus Christ, every faithful Minister of Christ
does bear a deer affection toward Jesus Christ, and their souls would feign
that Jesus Christ might be lift up in the world: now there is nothing that
lifts up Jesus Christ in the world so much as the Ministry of the Gospel, those
that have any love to Christ that know what Christ has done for them, they
desire to lift up his name: and besides the honor the work puts them upon, it
is the Ministry of Reconciliation, and an honorable work it is; and therefore
the Apostle Paul Romans 15. has a notable expression for that purpose; honor of
the work, it is the Ministry of the gospel, in verse 20. the word in the Greek
(...), signifies to love the honor of it; those that understand the language it
is a word that signifies to love the honor of a thing: I was ambitious to
preach the gospel, (that is the phrase) and so it may be translated, I was
ambitious to preach the gospel. So that Paul was not ambitious for a great
living, or to be brave, or in power, or a Justice of peace, or a Lord, and the
like, (as many ministers of late have been) but his ambition was to preach the
gospel; looking upon that, as the greatest preferment that any of the sons of
men were capable of, or that he could desire in the world.

Reason. 3,
And then again, besides, the Consideration of the Ministry of the Gospel makes
them earnest in love unto their Brethren, and to the souls of the people to
whom they pre^ch: for they know that souls are utterly undon except they come
to know God in Jesus Christ; except they come to have the mystery of the Gospel
revealed: whatsoever excellencys they have in this world; what parts of nature
they have: yet they are lost, undone, miserable creatures for ever, and better
they had never been born; better they had never breathed in the air except
Jesus Christ be revealed unto them. Now it is impossible for any man that knows
the necessity of the Revelation of Christ: but that if the Ministry of the
gospel be committed to him, he must needs be earnest and faithful in the work
of the ministry.

Reason. 4.
And there may be some argument from love to themselves, those that have the
Ministry of the gospel Committed, to them, (some way) God gives them leave to
love themselves, they cannot love themselves any way so as to be earnest in the
Ministry.

First, If they be faithful in the Ministry of the Gospel, and God go along
with them (as he will if they be faithful) then Oh! how many souls should bless
them if at any one Sermon; if perhaps they go into a strange place and work
upon a few souls, they shall hear their souls blessing God for them every time
they go into Gods presence. Now what a wonderful encouragement is it for a
Minister to be painful in the work of the Ministry of the Gospel. This is a
greater matter than to have a Bishopprick, to have but one soul bless God for
one that God has been pleased to work upon, and this is no other than we
challenge to be our due, if we by any means may be poor instruments of God to
reveal Christ to any of your souls. This is due in justice that you should ever
mention us before the throne of Grace, and that the blessing of your prayers
should be upon us; and this is a mighty encouragement to make them earnest (not
only to make a Sermon) but to be striving to reveal the mysteries of Christ to
their souls, and as they will be blessing of Christ here, so (by this means)
those that are faithful, they should give a good account at the day of Jesus
Christ, and they shall be able to behold the face of Christ when he shall appear,
who is the great Bishop of their souls. He will come with his visitations one
day; and when that is come, then they shall not have encouragement that have
read Service, and wore Su^plices every day: But they shall be able to look upon
his face with joy that have been faithful in the work of the Ministry of the
Gospel, and those that they have done good unto shall be their joy, and their
Crown at that day. In 2. Phil. 16. Says the Apostle to the Philipians (amongst
other exhortations) he exhorts them that they should hold forth the word, the
word of life; do thus, and thus (says he) Oh! manifest the power of the Gospel
in your lives, that I may rejoice in the day of Jesus Christ that I have not
run in vain nor labored in vain. It is an argument to prevail with people to
embrace the Gospel that they may recompense those that labor amongst them with
this recompense that they may have joy in the day of Jesus Christ, that they
may be able to come to Christ, and say, blessed Savior here am I, and those
whom thou have given me; here are reasons enough. I will pass therefore brethren
from the point, only thus much.

CHAP. 58
Use, 1. The horrible wickednss of those that are idle in the Ministry.
FIrst, you may see what an horrible wickedness it is for any that take upon
them to be the Ministers of the Gospel, and yet be idle: to be an idle
shepherd, to be unfaithful in this, it is a most detestable wickedness; of all
men in the world those men have given up their spirits to wickedness that have
the weight of the Ministry of the Gospel, to lie upon their charge, and yet
they are idle. Oh! it is woeful that ever that man was borne, that should take
upon him such a glorious Ministry as the Ministry of the Gospel, and therein
be negligent of preaching, or by a scandalous life do mischif unto others: It
had been better that he had never been born, says the Apostle. Woe to me if I
preach not: So may they say, woe to us if we be negligent in it, and woe to us if
we (by our scandalous lives) hinder the fruit of our own preaching, and of
other men's preaching also. But we shall let that pass.

CHAP. 59.
Use. 2
IN the second place, labor you to inform your selves in this; when you see any
faithful Minister earnest in this work of his ministration, know what the
ground is (perhaps some of you wonder at it, why he cannot content himself as
some others) know where the ground lies, In this; from whence it comes, it is
the Ministry of the Gospel that is committed to him, and he knows it is a
Glorious Ministry, and he sees much of Jesus Christ in it, and the Glory of
God shines in it, and if he be faithful, and has any love to Christ, and
Saints, and their souls; it is impossible but that he must needs be earnest in
it. Paul was so earnest that the people thought him mad, and that in this very
Chapter where my text is verse 13. You may think we are besides our selves; well
it is for your cause, and it is the love of Christ constrains us; we cannot but
do that we do, as the Apostle Peter, says in another pleace. So says any
faithful Minister (think of it what you will,) we cannot but speak what the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ is; what it is that we have seen; and
what it is that we have heard out of the Ministry of the Gosple our selves,
and the love of Christ constrains us, and then in verse, 11. knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord (then much more the grace of the Lord) we persuade men.
If so be that God would but convince you of this, that when you hear any thing
of the mystery of the Gospel opened to you, and any earnestness of spirit
manifested in it, I say, if you were convinced that the ground, and principle
of it is this; the apprehension of the glory of this ministration (as it is
such in an excellent Ministry) Therefore it is that all faithful Ministers of
God are so earnest in the ministration of it) It would prevail more with your
hearts to receive what is delivered in such a way. But we let that pass, and
come to that which is the mai^e in the text.

CHAP. 60. The fourth Doctrine (propounded in the 45. Chapter) viz. That God
and Christ are exceeding wiling and desirous to be reconciled to sinners.
As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God.

You have not in any scripture (that I know) more fully set out a more earnest
desire of Jesus Christ to be reconciled unto sinners than here is; this
expression is (after the manner of men) to express the earnestness of Gods
heart in his desires to be reconcilced to sinners, and that is our point of
doctrine, our doctrine shall be the scope of these expressions; (not the very
words) but the scope, and the ground of it. It is this.

Doct. 4. That God and Jesus Christ is exceeding willing, and very desirous to
be reconciled unto sinners.

Now the thing that I am to open to you, is to show this in the several
manifestations of it, several demonstrations of the willingness, and desire
that is in God and Christ to be reconciled unto sinners: and then answer a
question about it, why they are not reconciled to God, if God be so willing,
and the like, and then for application of it.

The next point will come in stead of the Uses. That therefore the Ministers of
God, they should entreat (likewise) and beseech you, and by all means labor to
draw your Souls to be reconciled unto God.

CHAP. 61. The First Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to
be reconciled to sinners.
FOr the First, The willingness of God for Reconciliation with sinners; Why God
manifests this, To begin a little low, and then to rise higher; God ministers
this, first by his patience toward sinners, in that the Lord is long suffering
toward sinners, he does manifest thereby that he is willing to be reconciled:
the Scripture draws an argument from thence, in Romans 2.4. as if the Apostle
should say, the patience of God holds this forth unto you; that you should come
in, and repent, that so you might obtain mercy from God, or otherwise it does
lead you to repentance. Except it should hold forth Gods willingness to be
reconciled, it could not draw the heart to repentance; but it leads: and this
has a great deal of force to draw the heart of man to repentance, Because it
holds forth the willingness of God to be reconciled unto sinners. If God were
not willing to be reconciled to you, he would take you off, and there were an
end of you, or at least he would exercise such patience that should not lead
you to repentance: as he did with the Devils, as soon as they had sinned, he
clapped his chains upon them, and reserves them in chains of darkness; there is
no such patience of God toward them as to be any argument to draw them to
repentance: therefore they cannot draw any encourageing conclusion from any
work of Gods patience, as to bring them toward God again: But al sinners may
do it that are the sons of men. Has God spared thy life at such, and such a
time? know that in that work of his, he does manifest his willingness to be
reconciled unto thy Soul; as if a man has an enemy at an advantage, and he will
not take it: Does not this signify that he is willing to be at peace with him?
And that is the first thing.

CHAP. 62. The Second Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
and Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
SEcondly, God has manifested himself very willing to be reconciled unto
sinners in this; that he has made it to be the great Masterpiece of al his
works to provide a way for Reconciliation of thee unto him. The Lord has
wrought so wonderfully for the children of men, rather than for Angels, in
sending his Son, and making of him a curse for our sins. In this the Lord
proclaims a loud voice to all the world; O! be it known to al you sinners that I
am willing to be reconciled to you. We need not name Scripture for this, for
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel is full of this; O! the heart of God is much in
this work of Reconciliation; all the arguments in the world, all the expressions
that possible could have been, could never have held forth this, so much as
merely this proclaimation that God has sent his Son into the world to die for
man's sin: this holds it forth, and proclaims it (with the loudest voice that
possible can be) that God is infinitely willing to be reconciled unto sinners.

CHAP. 63. The third Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and
Christ to be Reconciled to sinners.
AND then thirdly, after this work of God sending his Son, mark how God does
express himself to the Children of men! he does profess that there is nothing
wherein he does more glory than he does in this; to show mercy to sinners: he
does make account that the chefest glory he has in the world it is to show
mercy unto siners. Certainly that that his soul is so well pleased with, and
that that he accounts himself most honored by, is; when sinners shall come in
unto him to repent, that he may be reconciled unto them. If a man should do
thus that has an enemy, and should manifest this to some of his friends that
sit at his table, as to say, such an one is an enemy to me: but O! how fain
would I have him come in, that there might be peace between him and I, and I
would count it as great an honor as ever I had in my life; would not any one
say, this man were willing to be reconciled; certainly God does so, and
therefore in Exodus 30. the place you know about the 6. verse, the Lord, when he
was proclamming his glory that Moses desired, and the Lord promised, he
promised Moses in the Latter end of the 33. Chap. that his glory should pass
by him, and he caused his glory to pass by him, as in Chap. 34 and what was
that glory? The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and precious, long sufering, and
abundant in goodness, and mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgrossion, and sin; as if God should say, Moses, would thou see my
glory? this is it, that I am merciful and forgiving iniquity, transgression,
and sin; here is the height of my glory; in this is my magnificence made known.
And another most remarkable place, we have in Esa. 30.1^. I shall make use of
the beginning of the place: And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious, and therefore will he be exalted. How will God be exhalted? That he may
have mercy upon you: Therefore he will be exsalted that he may have mercy upon
you; and so he goes on, For the Lord is a God of Judgment, Blessed are al they
that wait for him: so that God accounts himself an exalted God, when he has
mercy upon a sinner. Surely he is very willing to be reconciled to a sinner
when he counts himself an exalted God, when a sinner comes in, and believes in
his on. Now am I exalted, says God, this is that my soul glories in; this I
account to be a happiness to me; God is exalted in showing mercy, and that is
the conclusion of this argument.

CHAP. 64. The fourth Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
and Christ to be reconcilled to sinners.
FOurthly, the Lord expresses this his willingness to be reconciled to sinners
with a sigh, as when he expresses his desire after sinners with a sigh, which
is a note of earnestness of desire, and that you have in Deuteronomy. 5. and 24.
verse: O! that there were such a heart in them. When we express our desires we
say, I would there were such a thing: But when we express our most earnest
desire, then we express it with an O! O! that there were: so says God, O! that
they had such an heart; that they would fear me, and walk in my ways, and why
does God express this? It is that it might be well with them, and with their
children for ever: therefore O! that there were such an heart. It is
observable, if you turn your eyes to the former part of the Chapter, you shall
find; that this people did say, that whatsoever God had spoken, that they would
do: But the lord saw that there was not a through coming off of their hearts
unto him to resign up themselves wholly to him: and therefore the Lord does
(as it were) fetch a sigh in the earnestness of his desire; O! that there were
such an heart in them. If a man that were fallen out with another, when he were
in his Bedchamber, or at his Table, he should fetch a sigh, and say; O! that
such an one would come in, and be Reconciled to me, how glad would I be to be
Reconciled to him? how does my soul long after him? would not every one say
that this man earnestly desiers Reconciliation with that person. But thus does
God, he sits (as it were) and says; O! that there were such an heart.

CHAP. 65. The Fifth Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and
Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
Fifthly, the Lord does not only express his desire by a sigh, but by an Oath;
he takes a solemn Oath upon it; how willing he is that sinners should come in,
and be reconciled unto him, and it is the greatest Oath that ever God took (it
is about sinners coming in) to profess his willingness that sinners should not
die: but they should come in, and be reconciled to him, and that you have in
the 33. Ezekiel. 11. Say to them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of a sinner, etc. As I live, says the Lord God. They
were pineing away in their wickedness, lying down in their sins now as I live,
says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should turn; and therefore turn, turn, O! turn; Why will ye die? As if a poor
sinner should lie down, and say; the Lord is provoked against me, and he will
not be reconciled to me; No, the wrath of God is out against me, and he will
revenge himself of me; the Lord looks upon a sinner lying in this manner, and
he bids his servants go, and say to him; the Lord swears by his own life, and
says to this sinner; As I live, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, I
swear by my self because I have no greater to swear by.

CHAP. 66. The Sixth Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God and
Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
ANother Argument is this, wherein God does manifest in his word that above al
works that are pleasing to him, and that he would have people most to respect
in this world, is the work of believing in his Son, and laying hold upon him,
and so upon that mercy of his, that he does offer in his Son, and that is the
great work that he is more pleased withal; then all the works they do; and not
doing that, it is the greatest offense whereby they can offend God, they cannot
offend God more in doing any thing in the world. And this shows the willingness
of God to be reconciled unto sinners, God being pleased with a sinner that does
come in to take hold of his mercy. And that you have in John 6.29. This is the
work of God that ye believe on him, wh^^ ^^^ch sent, (by way of excllency above
all other ther^^^^; (as if God should say) If you should do the (...) famous
work that ever man did in this world, I would not delight in it; I would not
care for that in comparision of this work of coming in, and believing in my
Son. Is there a man that should be the great Conqueror of the whole world? a
man that were famous in all the world. Let a poor Soul, a penitent heart come
in, and close with Gods grace in Jesus Christ, and roll it self upon mercy in
Christ for Reconciliation; this poor Soul, (though the meanest that were
possible to be immagined in the whole Nation) is a more glorious work in Gods
Eye; then the most glorious work of the greatest Conqueror of the earth. If
thou were able to rule the Sea; if thou were able to govern all the world; if
thou were able to command the Heavens, it would not be such a glorious work in
the Eyes of God as that is to come and lay hold upon his Son, as he is tendered
in the Gospel. If you should give al your Alms to the poor, and your body to
be burnt: yet it were nothing to the work of believing in his Son. In John 3
God is most displeased with not believing in his Son. As if God should say,
it is true, you are naturally enemies to me, and you have lived in ways of
enmity against me; O! you have provoked me al your days; when you were young, a
drunken, unclean, profane Youth; a Liar, a Swearer, a Sabboth-breaker etc. but
yet you live to hear the voice of the Gospel sounding in your ears, and to have
the offer of Jesus Christ to your Souls for the pardon of your sins: Now be it
known to you; all the Oaths that ever you swore, al your Blasphemies, al your
Drunkenness, al your Uncleaness, al al your Sabboth-breaking, (put them
altogether) they will not provoke me so much: as rejecting of my Grace in Jesus
Christ, that I tender to you. That is the condemnation of the world; all the
other iniquities will not sink you down so deep in Hell as not coming to believe
in Jesus Christ; to lay hold upon the Grace of God, that is tendered to you in
the Gospel. Now is not God very willing to be reconciled, when he shall manifest
himself thus unto sinful men?

CHAP. 67. The Seventh Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
and Christ to be reconciled to Sinners.
YEt further, God manifests himself willing to be reconciled in this; that when
he sees that (notwithstanding al these expressions that have been before that
we have spoke of) if sinners will not come in; God he will seek them seeing they
will not seek to him, God seeks himself to sinners. First that is a point that
you have heard before, that God is aforehand with us; God comes to us because
we will not seek to him. If a man be fallen out with another he should come and
seek to him: but he will not, because he has such a stout heart. Well says he,
that I may convince him that I am not such an austeer man as he conceivs me to
be, I will seek to him first, and I will not only seek to him, but I will go to
him, and beseech him, and that you have in the Text; Christ is said to come to
save, and to seek that which was lost, we were al lost and we would not seek to
him: but he was fain to come, yea, he came from the bosom of his Father. He
came into the world, and his great Errand was to seek those that were lost, and
when he had found them he beseeches them to be reconciled unto him.

CHAP. 68. The Eight Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to
be reconciled to sinners.
FUrther God manifests himself willing to be reconciled in this; in the ways
of his dealing with wretched sinful men; in sending his Grace to allure the
hearts of sinners: the Lord sends his mercy, to spread all the beauty; and
luster thereof before the Sons of men; all the excellency, and Glory of it
before the Soul, that it may entice the Soul of the sinner to come in unto him,
(he does not merely send and seek to him) but that he might overcome the hearts
of men with love and mercy; this is Gods way, to cause his mercy to stand
before the Soul, and to spread the beauty, and excellency of it, that it move,
and entice, and allure the hearts of men, that so God (as it were by coards of
Love) might draw the hearts of poor sinful men unto him. If God did but scare
men so come in to him, it were somewhat; but it is this which we have cause to
bless God for; if the Lord come in never such a terrible way to force us to
come in, that so there might be made up peace between God, and us, the Lord
(besides that way of terror and wrath) (though sometimes he will use that way to
stop men in the course of their sins, and to force them to come in) he goes
forth, and does send his mercy, to stand before the Soul, and to spread the
beauty, excellency, and glory of it before the heart of the sinner, that so it
might allure the sinner to come in: so God speaks of his people in the 2 Hosea
the 14. There was a great breach between Israel and God at the time, and God to
make up the breach, (when he would be pacified toward Israel) he expresses it
in this manner; Therefore behold, I will allure her, and in the 11. of Hos. 4.
mark! I draw them with the cords of a man, and with the coards of love; I dealt
with them in a suitable way, because that man's Nature had rather be drawn, than
driven) and cannot so well bear to be driven with violence as to be drawn by
love: Therefore (says God) I will deal with them according to their own Nature,
and in a suiteable way. I draw them with the coards of a man and with bonds of
Love; here are the gracious expressions of God unto wretched sinners, to break
their hearts that they may come in, and be reconciled to him: God takes away
the terror of his greatness, and comes in loving, and sweet ways to draw the
hearts of sinners. I appeal unto your consciences, have not you that know what
it is to be reconciled unto God, had the Lord setting the riches of his Grace
before your Souls? have not you seen the alluring attributes of God presented
before you to gain your hearts unto himself.

CHAP. 69. The Ninth Argument. Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God to
be reconciled to sinners.
ANother is this; that the Lord is willing to yield unto his creatures, (as
far as may be) to yield to the creature (I say) (as far as he can with honor)
for such is the way of the Gospel in bringing sinners to God; that God has
yielded to his creature^ as far as can be conceived to be done with honor (he
cannot deny himself; and his Glory:) But take it thus far, that God must have
his Glory; it is impossible that God should yield further to the creature than
he has done, Whereas God might have required satisfaction in our own persons,
he has yielded to this; I will take it in another; this is the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, from that of the Covenant of works; the covenant of works
required perfect obedience in our own persons: so that if we did not obey, it
required saitsfaction of us. Now in the covenant of Grace there is a high
consideration, (as it were) God is content to take it in a suerty; He will be
content for our parts if there be uprightness, if there be but endeavors, if
there be but willingness of heart, (though he sees that we do provoake him day
by day) well says God, (whereas I stood upon perfect obedience in the Covenant
of works) now says God, I will he satisfied with the will for the deed, if there
be but uprightness of heart, (though there be many weaknesses) yet I will be
willing, and content with that. Now does not a man show himself willing to be
reconciled unto another, when he shall say, well let there be any terms,
propounded that can be, I will yield to any terms so far as I can with honor? I
must not dishonor my self: but so far as can be I yield. God has done thus;
he professes to the world, that so far as he can he has yielded to us; Now if
we should not except of the terms that he requires (for they are such terms,
so reasonoble, so equal, that cannot be imagined less) there cannot be less
required of the Creature, then is by the Creator.

Object, You say, believing is a great matter.

But consider it in its self, it is not such a great matter but only in
relation unto Christ, in its own nature, it is but as a poor beggar that puts
forth his hand to take the alms, and it is God that gives it to us two: Now if
we do any thing, what can we do less then receive, (espe^ially when we have a
hand given us by God wherewith to receive) as if a beggar had an alms promised
him if he would come and take it. Oh! but says the beggar I am lame, I cannot
go, and my hand is withered, I cannot stretch it forth. Well, he that would give
the alms says, he will help the beggar thither, he will help him to legs to go,
and he will heal his hand and give it strength whereby he shall put it forth to
receive the alms; only do not strugle against me, do not resist me: I will be
with you, you shall lean upon me, I will give you stilts. Is not here as much
consideration as can be? and so it is in the work of reconciliation of sinners
unto God; he gives alms, and he gives the hand wherewith to receive it.

CHAP. 70. The tenth argument: Manifesting the exceeding wilingness of God and
Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
And then, the Lord manifests his willingness to be reconciled unto sinners in
this; he does profess unto sinners, that the greatest sins that ever they have
committed shall not be a hinderance to bear of this work of reconciliation: The
Lord I say professes this to sinners; he sends his messengers to tell them; that
though (perhaps) they may be conscious to themselves of some vile thing that
they have committed, whereby they may think that God will never pass by that
sin: But God to take away the objection that they shall never be able to say so;
he does make that as clear as any thing in this world; that there is not the
greatest sin that ever thou have committed (except that one against the Holy
Spirit) no other sin shall bar or hinder the work of thy reconciliation: and
certainly where that sin is committed, the heart will never desire to come in to
be reconciled to God, but flies in the face of God to revenge himself upon God.
But if thou have a heart that desires to come in to God, that is an infallible
argument that thou have not committed that sin. I might give you a great many
Scriptures for this; to show that God professes that there is not any sin that
shall make the bar in the way between him and thee; in Isa. 1, 18. Come now let
us reason together says the Lord etc. Yea, come now let us reason together.
Thus God deals in a familiar way with sinners, as if a Malefactor were before
the Prince shaking, quivering, and trembling, fearing that the Prince would
have his life; being conscious to himself of abundance of evil that he has
been guilty of, and the Prince should go and take him by the hand, and say,
Come let us rise up; let us reason together; though your offenses be great; yet
that shall not be a bar between you and me. This is that we have authority to
proclaim even in the name of the Lord God of Heaven; and to every poor soul,
and to the worst of sinners, and to the greatest of sinners that are here, or
can be here now, before the Lord, in his name, this we say, there is nothing
past between God and you; no sin that is yet past that shall be your undoing,
and the eternal destruction of your souls: But it will be some sin that is yet
to come; somewhat that is yet to come will be the eternal destruction of every
sinner in this Congregation. Its true, if God smite thee now it will be the sin
that is past: but if God let thee live this day, it is rather for something
that is yet to come, than for any thing that is past: for the continuance in
the hardness of heart, and your unbeleife from this time forward; rather then
for what is past. If one had run in arrears, and incurred a great deal of
punishment, enough to his undoing; if this should come to be said unto him;
Thus far you have run: But here is a proclamation; there is nothing that is
past that shall be charged upon you but look to it for the time to come: I do
not say, that all the sins that are past God will never reckon, but thus, that
he will never reckon with any of you for what is past, but for some cause of
evil that you shall be guilty of for the future; that must go along with it, and
that may cause God to bring that, that is past over again: but that that will be
your undoing, and destruction will be something that is to come, and if you
continue in your wicked ways, then that will bring al over again. But now if
you had a heart this day, at this present, to fall down before the lord, to
seek to make up your peace with him, and to close with the grace of God in his
son: I can bouldly pronounce that al your sins, that are past, are done away;
O! remember this, this gracious offer of God in Esa. 1.18. whatsoever you have
been before, yet that needs be no discouragement unto you; it is the
continuance in your iniquity that will undo you; and now will not this soul
justify God at the great day? must not God needs be justified if any sinner in
this congregation be awakened at last? I say this argument shall rise up against
them, and shall justify God against you. Now God will say, you that lived a long
time in sin, you heard that after so many years sinning, that whatsoever your
sins were before, yet some things that were then to come would be your
destruction, or else you should never be destroyed: and yet you would venture
for the time to come; you would be bold to add to that heap of your sins
that have been so long a making, and thereby bring al your sins upon you that
you had committed before. And therefore righteous is God in the Condemnation of
this sinner, (we speak of the willingness of God to be reconcilled unto
sinners) to that end that you might come in, and be reconcilled, or otherwise
that the justice of God may be clear at the great day, and this is a special
end of all the manifestation of Gods goodness unto sinners; that he might clear
himself at the great day in those that shall perish. There are a great many
things yet more behind, where in the willingness of God to be reconcilled unto
sinners is further to be set forth: yet I know there are Objections that ly in
your minds. How can we come? And if God be so willing, he may bring our hearts
to be willing to be reconciled to him; we shall discourse these more at lardge;
only for the present, I desire to present, before you this; the manifestation
of the goodness of God toward sinners to gain upon their hearts; that they
might be reconciled unto him, and I should be very sorry to open al these things
in such a congregation as this is, if it were not to gain some souls: (for it is
like enough that some will be hardened) and now if some should be hardened, and
others should not be gained: what a miserable thing were it? I might make this
as an evidence, how willing God is to be reconciled unto siners; that he would
have the riches of his grace thus manifestd to gain siners to himself, though
he knows that it will be a means to harden others; he knows that it will cost the
eternal damnation of many souls, and though he do know this: yet for all this
says God, let my wilingness to be reconcilled be opened unto poor sinners by
the preaching of the gospel, though it costs many souls very dear, yet (for the
love I bear to poor souls) let it be made known to the face of them al. Now if
God were not strongly set to do good to souls, suerly he would not venture the
damnation of other souls so much. But says God, let their souls go, rather
than my willingness to be Reconciled unto others, should not be declared unto
them.

CHAP. 71. The eleventh argument: Manifesting the exceeding wilingness of God
and Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
THe next argument that shows the willingness of God to be reconciled unto
sinners is this; The Lord in his word, does use very powerful, and strong
arguments to draw the heart to come in to be reconciled; this is that evidence;
(I say,) that the Lord is willing, by the strong reasons that God does use in
his word to gain upon the hearts of sinners, to bring them in to be reconciled,
he does not merely offer mercy; he does not merely set before the soul his
mercy. But the Lord labors with strong reasons, motives, and arguments to
persuade and gain the hearts of sinners unto himself; to come in to be
reconciled unto him; as now when a man does offer peace, it is somewhat, and
when he does it in a generous loving way of courtesy that is more: but then,
when he does send strong arguments, to perswad, and will not readily take a
denial, but sends such and such arguments, and does consider before hand what
will be most likely to persuade the heart of such a man. What can I conceive will
gain his heart most? What can I think? Suppose there should be a man, between
whom and you there has been a falling out, and you should know that when he is
alone in his closset, he is thinking thus with himself; What arguments can I
conceive may take the heart of such a man to persuade him: to come in to be at
peace with me? what can I think may be the most prevalent? That will I certainly
use to persuade him. But undoubtedly it is so with God. God looks upon the
Children of men, and does consider what argumentt will take their hearts most?
the scripture is exceeding full of prevalent, and powerful arguments, to
persuade the hearts of men to come in, to be reconciled unto God: [Arguments]
sometimes taken from the equity of Gods ways toward them, and their unequal
ways toward him; Are not my ways equal says God, and your ways unequal? Is
there any thing that I require of you but righteous? do not I speak righteous?
Sometimes he uses arguments from the absolute necessity that lies upon sinners
to come and be reconciled unto God, showing them that certainly they will be
lost, undone, and eternally damned if they do not come in. He that believes
not, the wrath of God abides upon him. You are lost and undone creatures except
you do come in. And sometimes arguments taken from the excellency of the
benefit, and profit that there is in coming in to God, and being reconciled
unto all the Glorious promises of the Gospel, are so many powerful arguments to
draw the hearts of sinners to run in to be reconciled unto God. I might be very
large in this; in showing of the particular arguments that God does use: but
take that one full argument that we have to persuade sinners to come in, In
Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof; behold I will pour my spirit upon you; I
will make known my word unto you: He speaks here to simple ones, Scorners,
Fools; [Turne you at my reproof; behold, I will pour my spirit out upon you]
(says God) as if God should say, though you are Scorners: yet the truth is; my
heart works toward you, my heart does yearn toward you, and if you would but
turn to me, I would pour forth my heart to you: you shall have my very spirit,
my very heart let out unto you, if you will turn unto me. What an argument is
here to prevail with the hardest hearts in the world? For God himself to come
and say unto a sinner, to one that has Scorned him and his ways, and to a
Fool that has gone on in ways of folly, and wickedness; for God to come and
say unto him; Oh wretched sinner! come in, come in, turn to me, turn to me,
for my heart is full, my heart is top full, turn to me; I will pour forth my heart
to thee; Al those promises of giving rest to thy soul; of giving life eternal,
eternal salvation, Glory, Peace, and Comfort, and a Kingdom, shall al be made
good to thee. The Lord therefore suites himself unto us in such arguments, so
close as may out-bid other comforts that we have in the word in any ways of
sin: and therefore tells them of Honey, and Milk, and Raiment, and Gold, and
Silver, and al such things as are precious in the eyes of men; such as are of
esteem with us, and tenders his Son unto us upon such kind of notions that
every one of them might be prevalent arguments to gain the hearts of sinners
to come in unto God: this is the way of God; that he comes into the hearts of
his people, with the most prevalent arguments; such reasons as one would think
were impossible to be gainsaid. I appeal to the hearts of those who have been
acquainted with the work of God upon them. How did God come to your hearts? did
he not come with mighty strong arguments to you? The Devil he tempted, and he
comes with strong arguments, and God he comes, and tempts with strong
arguments; the Devil draws, and God draws; Gods mercies draw stronger than the
Devil can: Oh! it was mercy to that soul, and (the truth is) when the Lord
pleases to work effectually upon the soul, he can present stronger arguments to
draw the heart of a sinner to him, than it is possible for the Devil to
prevail against.

CHAP. 72. The Twelfth Argument: Manifesting the exce^ding willingness of God
and Christ to be reconciled to sinners.
ANother way is this: in answering al Objections that lie in the hearts of
sinners: whatsoever Objections lie in the hearts of sinners, God has ways to
answer al those, and he does it in his word, and by his Spirit; As now, What
would a sinner object? If you object your unworthiness of such mercies as God
does offer unto you, and therefore it is unlikly that ever God will bestow that
mercy on you: observe, Esa. 55. there is a place that God intends directly to
answer that objection, that it may never hinder any sinner from coming in unto
him: says God, Come ye to the waters, and he that has no moneys, come ye, buy
and eat: yea come buy Wine, and Milk without money, and without price. Note in
one verse there is three times Come without Money; he that has no Money come and
Eat, and then, buy without Money, and then without price, What is the meaning of
this? here you are to know; that the promises of the Gospel are set out to you
by Wine, and Milk, and so by bread, afterward by those things that are most
delightful and most useful for the nature of man; the Gospel is set out by such
things, and so it is in Scripture by things that are the most excellent of al.
Sometimes by a Kingdom; for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: there is the
argument; the Kingdom of God is at hand. and sometimes by a marriage; when God
sends to people to be reconciled, he sends to them with this Argument; that it
is to marry them to his Son. And sometimes by a Supper; that God the Father
invites too; a Supper wherein there is al kind of dainties: the great King
makes a Supper at the marriage of his Son, and there are powerful Arguments
that God uses.

O but I am unworthy says a poor soul, What? that such a one as I, so vile, so
wretched, and every way unworthy should have such things? this was the policy
of the Devil at the first, the Devil labors to make sinners to slight the
Gospel, to set at naught the counsels of God: so you have it in Prove. 1. to
account the blood of the Covenant a common thing: that is the first way. But if
he cannot prevail that way; but the Lord does shine through al mists, and il
conceits of the Gospel, and shows unto the Soul the excellency and beuty of
his Son, and of the glorious things that are in the Gospel: then the Devil
comes the other way. Indeed says he there are glorious things, but thou art
unworthy; thou art a wretched, base, vile Creature, and can thou think that
God should grant such things as these to thee? now the Lord answers this
Objection; What says God? Come without Money; What is that? that is; though
thou have no worthiness in thy self, though thou have no a, bilities to buy any
thing that is good; yet come, come yet and close with my Grace; that shall make
thee rich enough; thou shall have money enough that way: Come without money and
without price, let never that Objection hinder thee; that thou art unworthy and
unable to do any thing: the Lord calls thee without Money, and offers freely to
thee, and therefore in the latter end of the Book of the Revelation it is said
in the last Chapter the 17. ver. And the Spirit, and the Bride say Come, and
let him that hears say Come, and let him that is a thirst, Come; and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. How shall I ever think
to have it? It is free, so that this Objection cannot hinder.

Obj. O! but there may lie another Objection; Thus, it may be, the Lord will
require, though he requires nothing that I shall do before hand, but will grant
his mercy freely: but when I am come, then perhaps things that are hard, will be
required at my hands: O! the ways of God they are hard ways, and then I must
live so strictly, then I must make Conscience of my ways, and so abandon al my
sins and Lusts, and wha^ says the Devil to a corrupt heart? What? will you
leave al such pleasant ways? and be so straightly bound? Then you must do
nothing but according to the word of God, and of Conscience; farewell all the
Comforts and Joys of your life i^ you come once to be religious, and godly,
these are the tentations that do keep of the hearts of men. I appeal to you;
have not some of your hearts been kept off from Jesus Christ, and the ways of
God merely upon some such temptations as these? and indeed perhaps at first it
may be so til the nature of a man is changed.

But mark how this objection is taken away, when sinners are called to Christ,
(I suppose you know the place) Come unto me, ye that are weary, and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.

But that concerns the former, and then afterward when Christ had said so;
come to me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my
yoke upon you, my burden etc. It seems then we must be yoaked and burdened:
But mark what follows in verse. 30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light (as if Christ should say) never harken to such a tentation of any
difficulties in my ways: I assure you beforehand you will find that the Devil
does but gul you, deceive, and cozen you, I will warrant you that beforehand;
that I will lay no yoke upon you, but you shall say when you come to bear it, it
is an easy yoke, and though it be a burden, yet you shall acknowledge it is a
light burden. This I dare say in the name of God unto al; come in all you that
stand off from the ways of God; though the ways of God may seem hard to you
at first, yet I dare say from God unto you, that you will find the ways of God
more easy to you at last than ever you did in the ways of sin: For certainly
there is more trouble in the ways of sin than can be in the ways of God. And
when God calls upon you to come in to be reconciled, he does profess this to
you; that he will require nothing of you but that which shall be more pleasant to
you than any ways of sin that you lived in before: there be more comforts, and
joy, and that for the present, than ever you had in the ways of sin, do but
ask any one that has made trial of this, and desire them to speak their
consciences to thee (I mean those that have had any apprehension of the love
of Christ to them) yea have you began to walk in wisdoms ways, which are
pleasantness, and to tread in those paths which are strowed with roses, and
paved with peace? pray then speak plainly, how do you find your self? is it not
better now than it was before? do you not find more ease, more comfort, and joy
in these ways of God than you did before in any way of Sin? Oh such a one will
profess unto you that they find more comfort than ever they did before; they
find more sweetness in communion with God in his ways in one day, than they
found in the ways of sin in all their lives before, the Holy Spirit in pleading
with the hearts of men says the same Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and her paths are peace. If you will believe the spirit of God,
the ways of Godliness are ways of pleasantness, and al her paths, are paths
of peace. What should hinder you then? It is neither your unworthiness that can
be any hinderance nor the hardship of the way. These are the two great blocks
that lie in the way; and God does fully take away these in scripture; and if
there be any other objection, I dare undertake bring what objections you can
(give me but a little time) to find out some manifest word, or other in the
scripture that shall meet with the very objection. Then how does this argue Gods
exceeding willingness to be reconciled to sinners? If a man send his messenger
to such a one to offer peace, and he thinks beforehand; Oh! but he will have
this and this objection against me; but says he to his servant that is
employed in the business, you shall answer this objection thus, and the other
objection thus.

CHAP. 73. The thirtenth argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
to be reconciled to sinners.
ANother evidence of Gods willingness to be reconciled is this; that God is so
importunate with sinners, he uses such strong arguments, that he first takes
away objections, and then he is so importunate, he does not merely satisfy
himself with offering of mercy: but he is very importunate in the work, and the
importunity of God appears. First in this; that the scripture expresses God
crying out after sinners: not only seeking out after sinners, but calling, and
crying: so the words in the Original are, of Gods beseeching to be reconciled,
of God calling to sinners, in Prove. 1. It is said of wisdom, that it cries, the
Lord cries out, and that in Isa. 55.

When he makes a proclamation he begins first with, Oh! yes, Oh! every one that
thirsts come to the waters, and he that has no money, and there is the offer
of Christ with a proclamation.

Further, Gods importunity is manifest in this; that he comes over again with a
thing, and is not content with the expressing of himself. But he does it again,
and again, and again he is at it, as in Isa. 55. verse. the first, Se how many
times there is crying in one verse, Ho! every one that thirsts come ye; and
he that has no money come; and come the third time; three times in one verse
says God come to sinners, and then in the third verse, Incline your ear, and
come unto me (says God) and hear, and your souls shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you; there is another promise; Even the sure mercies
of David: so hear in one short scripture four times come, says God; O! how
importunate is God with sinners? God does not do with us, as commonly we do
with him, God seeks after sinners more earnestly than sinners seek after God;
thus we seek to God for mercy; we pray to God for mercy; we content our selves
with praying once, and seldom look after our prayers what becoms of them; but
God he cries to us to come and if we do not come the first time, then he cries
come, come, and come four times together we are ready to think if our petitions
be repeated twice in prayer, it is atautology and this shows the earnestness of
the spirit of God in it, and he is exceeding willing.

CHAP. 74. The Fourteenth Argument: manifesting the exceeding willingness of
God to be reconciled to sinners.
ANother evidence is this; when yet siners do not come, yet the lord leaves
them not; but he does then appeal to the very conscinces of sinners, and deals
with them that way; and that is very powerful; he deals with sinners that way
to break their hearts: (when after al his arguments they com not in) then the
lord appeals to their own consciences, and then will plead with them in a way of
appealing to their consciences, why they should not come in and yield unto him;
and this way is verry powerful to prevail with sinners. If you would go, and
prevail with any one for a thing that you have a desire to accomplish, what
course do you take? either you send to them, or go to them, and then you open
the case to them, and yet they are not moved and then you bring powerful
arguments to perswad them, and yet they do not move them then you take away al
their objections, and yet that does not prevail upon them; then you do
importune them, and if that do not overcome them, what is the next way you
take? then you appeal to their own consciences, then say you, nay, I appeal to
your own conscience, whether I have said it or no; I will even leave it to your
conscience, and judge of it in the presence of God let your own conscience be
your judge, and sometimes this prevails more than all the arguments in the world.
When you appeal to a man's one conscience, that he does deal unequally, and very
il; that he does not yield: but God does thus he does apeal unto men's
consciences I will give yo suome scripture for it in the 43. Esa. 26. Put me in
rememberance; let us plead together; declare thou that thou must be justified;
come (says God) let us hear what you can say; let us plead together; Declare
thou that thou may be justified; declare it, say what thou can, try
whether you or I be in the right way, I will even be contented to leave it to
you (only let us plead, and declare what we can) But that place seems yet to
be more full that you have in Jerem. 2, 3, you have often expressions of Gods
pleading with his people in the ninth verse, and then you have it again at
least three times in this Chapter that the lord says he will plead in v. 23.
you have it again, wherefore will you plead with me? etc. and then in the 35.
verse. Behold I will plead with thee says God, but now God pleads thus in his
pleading, he will leave it, he will appeal to the very consciences of men, and
that you have in Exek. 18.25. verse. yet you say, the way of the lord is not
equal, hear O! house of Israel, (as if he should say) conscience answer, Is not
my way equal? will not your own consciences answer you thus? that his ways are
equal? the lord is content to plead with his people, and the conclusion of his
pleading is a leaving it to their consciences, to the people, (as if God should
say thus) as he does often) God comes by his spirit in the ministry of his
word. I appeal to you, (has he not often done so)? and says, do you think in
your very consciences that these ways that you walk in are right? and my ways
are they good? is it any way equal that wretched sinful creatures should take
their liberty to go on al their days and please themselves in the lusts of
their own vain hearts, and now, when they can sin no more nor longer, that
then they should cry to God for mercy, and that then he should pardon them, and
accept them unto his favor? Is this equal? is not the lord infinitely more
worthy of all the strength thou have if it were ten thousand times more than it
is, than that thou should have given it up to thy lusts and vanities?
Conscience, speak whether God be not most worthy of al? and what were thou made
for? no other end but merely to eat and drink and satisfy thy flesh, and have
thy lusts here for a while? do thou think in thy concience that God did
intend no other end for thee when he sent thee into the world? you have been
upon your sick bedds and cried to God, and have promised to God better
obedience, now are your ways equal to take your liberty to sin after God has
thus delivered you, and after God has preserved your life when you were at the
very brinke of death, and that death was ready to deliver you up into the hands
of eternal misery; and do you think that this was Gods end in preserving your
life that you might have more time to sin against him, and might spend the
latter part of your strength in bringing dishonor to his Name? was this Gods
end in preserving your life? God might have struck you one blow more, and sent
you down to eternal misery, and then God should have had no more dishonor of
you, but should have had the Glory of his Justice upon you: Now do you think
that this is the end why God did preserve you, that you should have more years
added to your life, that you should have more time to sin against him? This
argues Gods willingness to be reconciled, that the Lord is thus pleasing with
you: and let me speak to every one in this place that has felt God pleading
thus with them, know, that the Lord by this work of his, does strive with thee
to bring thee to be reconciled unto him. This is no other thing than the
striving of the Spirit of God himself with you, though perhaps you think this
is troublesome to you. Many men and women when they have their consciences
pleading thus, they think it is troublesome. Oh wretched man or woman that thou
art, this work of Conscience is nothing but God pleading with thee to save thy
Soul: Thou have stood against his Word that has been preached to thee, and now
God seeks to thee the other way by his Spirit to strive in thy Conscience, he
appeals to thy own Conscience, that so thou may be brought in to be
reconciled unto him. But when God has no mind to be reconciled, then says God
to Conscience, let him alone; and then the sinner goes on with a hard heart,
and blesses himself that his Conscience is quiet: Oh no, no, Conscience is
quiet, but God has left laboring any more with thee.

CHAP. 75. The Fifteenth Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
to be reconciled to sinners.
BUt further, the Lord shows his willingess to be reconciled to sinners in
this, that when this way will not prevail you will think there were never another
way to be found, yet there is another way when God does deal in a familiar way
as man to man, when he has brought his Arguments, and answered Objections, and
been importunate, and pleaded, then truly sometimes, (if it be a tender hearted
man) perhaps his heart does even break within him, and he is ready to burst out
with tears, because of the stoutness and frowardness, of such a one, that will
ruin himself and stand out against so much reason, and that prevailing more
than all the other arguments, especially when he is to speak to one that he has
any reference to, as a Father, the Father perhaps persuades the Child, and
answers what the Child has to say, is importunate, appeals to the conscience
of the Child, yet he stands out stubbornly, and at length the Father or Mother
can hold no longer, but burst out in tears, lamenting the hardness of heart of
such a one. Now if a Child that is stubborn should look in at a keyhole, and
see his Father, or Mother, shedding of tears, because of his hardness of heart,
then the Child will certainly be convinced of this. Now certainly my Father
loves me, and al he does, it is but for my good, certainly thus did Christ,
when he came to Hjerusalem he wept over it, Upon what ground? O! that thou
had known in this thy day the things that concern thy peace: O! that thou
had known, and Christ fell a weeping. Now we are to know this, that the tears
of Christ at that time concern sinners now, as verily and truly as they did
concern sinners at that very instant, and we are to look upon Christ's cariadge
of himself to sinners in former times, as at this instant, concerning us, and
amongst us. Now I would appeal to you; suppose Christ were born in this world
in the flesh again as he was, and should come and look toward this
commonwealth and should come hither; and say, O! England, England, O! that thou
had known the things that concern thy peace, and should weep over London, or
weep over Westminster, as he did over that City of Hjerusalem, Would not this
break our hearts? Would not we take this as a great Argument that Christ was
very dersirous of the peace of this City or place? Now concerning every
particular Soul, it is true, and every one should make use of that Scripture,
and apply it to themselves, as if Christ stood weeping over it, and say, Oh
that thou had known at least in this thy day the things that concern thy
peace, Would not this break your hearts? this Town that Christ sends his Gospel
amongst. And suppose you could see him bodily, Jesus Christ standing here, and
one tear trickling down after another, and saying, O! that this people did but
know the things that concern their peace, at least in this their day when they
have a price put into their hands, before the Gospel Sun goes down, or is
eclipsed, surely we should say that Christ's tears argue the rolling of his
bowels toward them, it may be their time will not continue long. O! that they
knew it now. If you did see Christ thus weeping; I suppose this would be a
mighty argument to you, that Christ were willing to be reconciled to you. We
are I say to make use of that Scripture as if it were now. And though Christ
does not shed tears now in Heaven, yet there is as much compassion in the heart
of Christ now, as ever there was here upon earth he has lost no compassion by
going to Heaven, and therefore know that Jesus Christ does look at this day
upon this Congregation, and many particular Souls (it is propable) Christ more
specially eyes and says in his very heart, Oh! that such a Soul, such a
Servant, such a Youth, Oh that they did but know the things that concerns their
peace, for now the Gospel is opened to them, and a day of salvation is made
known to them, and they are labored to be drawn from their evil ways to
embrace me; and Oh that they did know these things that concern their peace.
And thus it appears how willing God is to be reconciled.

I shall afterward show somewhat about Christ in a more special manner that
sinners should come and be reconciled unto God.

CHAP. 76. The sixteenth Argument: Manifesting the exceeding willingness of God
to be reconciled to sinners.
FUrther, there is an other evidence of the willingness of God to be reconciled
unto sinners and that is this. The Lord does foresee, that after he has done
al to be reconciled unto sinners, let him do what he can, the Lord foresees
what a little honor he shall have (for the present at least in this world by
them) he sees that after they are brought in that yet still there will be
abundance of corruption and they will dishonor God extremely now, and will
grieve the Holy spirit that does thus draw them; he sees that they will walk
more offensively, and it may be, Scandalously toward their brethren, and
dishonor the profession of religion. God sees what a deal of do, and stir, he
shall have with those that he does bring in to himself, and yet for all this he
goes on with his work and labor with the hearts of sinners, notwithstanding all that he does foresee. And then the last of al is this; that after the Lord has
used al these means to bring sinners to come in, and break their hearts that
they might be reconciled to him, (though they that stand out against him, and
plead, and weep over them, and mourn) yet the Lord is content to wait, and yet
a long time upon sinners, and not to take advantage against them for their
rejecting of this Grace of his that he tenders to them. That scripture I named
before is sufficient for that, Isa. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait that
he may be gracious. Oh! how many years has the Lord waited upon some of you?
We have cause to stand and admire at the Grace of God that ever he would once
offer mercy to us; that after so many offers and such importunities to prevail
with our hearts, and we frowardly have rejected this Grace, that now God should
wait upon us to heal our souls, and at length to overcome us; Oh! this
manifests the goodness of God, and the tenderness of his heart to be willing to
be reconciled unto sinners, and therefore in Jer. 13. Mark what God says unto
sinners in the last verse; I have seen thy Adulteries, and thy Neighings, and
the Lewdness of thy Whordomes, and thy abominations; Woe unto thee Oh Jerusalem!
will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Says God. Oh! that once it
might be; I am content to stay again, and again, Oh! when shall it once be? Let
not al my labor be in vain; Oh! here is the fullness of the expressions of
God, and that place likewise in Isa. 57. Is observable for this purpose the 17.
and 18. verses, For the iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth, and Smote
him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heat,
I have seen his ways and will heal him etc. Though he went on, and was worth;
yet (says God) I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will not take
advantage; I will be content after al their froward rejections of all the offers
of Grace, yet I will heal them for all that. The frowardness is that that has
reference (not only to unprofitableness under afflictions) but when one is
dealt kindly withal, and does not answer according to his kindness, but will
have his own will such a one does go on frowardly. Now then if we could put al
these together that have been named of Gods willingness toward sinners to
bring them in to be reconciled to him; Oh Lord! how infinite would the Grace,
and goodness of God appear? How were God to be glorified in his Grace?

I see I cannot possibly come to these things, that I have heretofore
propounded; As what needs all this and the like? But that must be done, or the
reasons why God does deal thus.

A word or too at this time for that; why God does do all this, why does God
deal thus with sinners in such a manner?

First, It is because mercy pleases him Micha. 7.18. there God makes a large
promise of pardon of sin, because mercy pleases him. Now that that is pleasing
unto any creature; that the creature loves to do it, and loves to do it to the
full, to the height, as al pleasure you know, to enjoye the creature; to eat,
and drink, and sport is very pleasing to a voluptuous man, and therefore he
does desire to have this to the full: a large bag of Gold pleases a covetous
man, therefore he is never satisfied, but would have it to the full; Honor
pleases an ambitious, man, and therefore he never has enough: so mercy it
pleases God, and therefore (as I may with Holy reverence speak) God scarce
thinks he has ever done enough to show the riches of his Grace.

Secondly, God does it; because the blood of his Son does cry continually in
his ears for mercy, and it is of such infinite worth, and value and the
obedience of his Son in shedding of his blood it has been so acceptable unto
God, and is; that whosoever this blood is pleaded for, the Lord must needs
grant it to the utmost. Now it is the blood of Jesus Christ that is shed for
sinners, that does plead with God the Father; that all this mercy might be
showed. It is said in the scripture, that the blood of Christ speaks better
things than the blood of Abel; the blood of Abel cries loud for vengeance;
vengance Lord against sinners: But the blood of Christ cries aloude merrcy,
mercy, Lord for sinners, and God hears the cry of his Sons blood. What is this
that recries? The blood of my Son for mercy for sinners: let them have mercy,
yea let them have mercy to the full. Then the fludgates of mercy come to be
opened, though (if it were not for the blood of Christ) the patience of God
would let out some common favors: but when God comes to satisfy the cries of
the blood of Christ for mercy says God, open all the fludgates now, and let in
streams of mercy for sinners; let mercy be showed to the highest degree that
can be, if the blood of my Son cry for it, it must be, (though it requires
wonderful mercy) it must be great, rich, glorious mercy, it is not a drop, but
had need of a Sea, of mercies to anwswer it.

I but says God, the blood of my son cries for mercy, and though there be need
of an infinite Ocean of mercy for to cleanse the soul of such a sinner, it must
needs be granted; because the blood of my son cries for it. When you find God
manifesting himself to your souls in ways of mercy, it comes from the blood
of Jesus Christ that cries to God the father for mercy to be bestowed on you,
and this is the sum and substance of al these expressions of Gods grace toward
sinners. (We think that so be very strange that ever such an infinite God
should condescend to sinners, but when we come to examine the reason, we need
not wonder at it; we see now from whence it al coms; it springs al from the
ever living fountain of the unsearchable rich grace of God in Christ, though
(at the very reading) we may wonder that ever God should do so; and perhaps
some men may think these are but the straynes of ministers to make it so: but
when we come to understand the bottom, the ground of al, then we must
acknowledge the reality of it: no wonder, God shows mercy to such souls so
unworthy and so vild; why? Because the blood of his son cries for mercy.

CHAP. 55. Christ's willingness to be Reconciled to sinners, further Opened.
NOW before we come to answer the Objections, or to any application; there is
yet something more to be opened unto you. [ as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in CHRIST'S stead] as the heart of God is so set upon it to be
reconciled unto sinners: so is Jesus Christ; it is true, Christ is God: but
Christ, and God are here spoken of severally; Christ is the same God with the
father: but he is God and man; God incarnate; God the mediator between the
father and us: so that it will be exceeding useful to show how the heart of
CHRIST is set upon Reconciliation of sinners to God (for the Apostle does come
in the name of Christ, as well as of God the father) now that the heart of
Christ is in it; that appears in the understanding of the great work of
Reconciliation. That he has undertaken it, and that so willingly as he has
done; Certainly if Christ had not been much set upon this work to bring sinners
to be reconciled unto the Father, he would never have undertaken such a work,
which he knew would prove so difficult to him, and he knew what it would cost
him: but yet he took it willingly, and delightfully, and for that compare those
two Scriptures the first in Psalm. 40.7. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the Volume
of thy book it is written of me. It begins in ver. 6. Sacrifice, and offerring
thou did not desire, mine ears thou did open: burnt offerring, and sin
offering thou did not require: then said I, Lo, I come: in the Volume of thy
book it is written of me; I delight to do thy will Oh God. It is a Psalm of
Christ, and a Prophecy of him, and that it is of him it appears plainly if you
compare the Scripture in Heb. 10. at the beginning, and so on; there you have
the Apostle quoting this very Text (only with a little difference in the word.)
Now there are three, or four things that are here to be observed of Christ in
his willingness to come, and undertake the great work of making Atonement
between God and sinners. Mine Ears have thou opened; that is one. Lo I come:
and then, I delight to do thy will, and thy Law is within my heart. There are
these four. Lo I come says Christ to do it. It appears plainly that there was
a Covenant between the Father, and the Son from al eternity that Christ should
come in due time into the world, and take our natures upon him: Now the time
was for Christ to come. There is many that will agree to do such a thing
beforehand: but when it comes to be done (if they see there will be any
difficulty in it, and that they shall endure some hardship) they hang back. But
Christ had agreed from al eternity with his Father, that at such a time he
would come into the world, and take the nature of man upon him, and be in the
form of a servant, and be made a curse for man's sins, and all that he might
reconcile sinners unto himself. This was the agreement. Now the time approaches
for him to come, and undertake this great work; when the time came, Observe now
how Christ's heart was in it. He did not hang back; he did not repent him of the
Covenant: But I come, I come, (says Christ) as we use to express our selves
when we are called to do a thing that we love to do; we say; I come I come: now
the time is come for you to do that which you undertook to do; to go into the
world, to take the nature of man; be made in form of a Servant, and to bear my
wrath and to satisfy my Justice for the sin of man. I come, I come says
Christ and he does not only come: but come with delight to do thy Will, and
what was this will? It was that Christ should be humbled to the death of the
Cross, Though I knew it would cost my life: yet I delight to do it: because my
heart is so much set upon reconciling Sinners unto thy self, and not only so
but thy Law is in my heart, it has gotten a deep impression in my heart; thy
Law; that i^, that Law of thine whereby I am tied to this that I have
undertaken; for it is within my heart, in the very midst of my bowels that I
should do it. And then Fourthly [Mine ears have thou opened] the words are;
mine ears have thou boared. The meaning of that Phrase must be understood by
comparing it that way which was of God in the time of the Law, commanding that
if a servant would not go out of his service in the years of Jubilee that his
master should take an awle, and boar his ear and so he should be a servant
forever. This Phrase has allusion to that; as if Christ should say thus, I am
content that I might do this work to be as a servant whose ear is boared, who
must be a servant for ever: so says Christ, that I might accomplish the work
of reconciling sinners to thy self, I am content to be as a servant whose ear
is boared: thereby signifieing; that he would be willing to listen to any thing
that should be commanded him. His masters commandments are not grievous, but
it is his meat and drink to do the will of his Lord.

Well might the Apostle say, As in Christ's stead we beseech you as if he should
say, Christ's heart is much toward sinners that he might bring them to be
reconciled unto God, and we in his name come to prevail with sinners no get
them in unto God.

Secondly, Observe what was the first Sermon that ever Christ preached; [For
the the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand] that is the first Sermon, calling sinners
to repent; because the Kingdom of grace wherein the Gospel of God should
reign, that is at hand says Christ, and then Christ would preach so as to gain
most, when he had the greatest Auditors; What was it that he preached? when he
was amongst the Jews at the Feast of dedication, In the great day of the Feast
(says the Scripture) Christ lift up his voice, and cried; Hoe every one that
is a thirst. A Minister when he is to preach to a great Congregation, and he is
not like to come to them again, he should speak on such a subject that his
heart is most in. Now Christ at the Feast of dedicaton he was not like to come
to them suddenly again to use such an argument to them; he cried, Hoe, every
one that is a thirst, come, and Christ further does profess that it is the end
why he came into the World; To save, and to seek that which was lost: Not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. That is the great end that he
came into the world about; it was the great subejct of his preaching, the great
errand that he came into the world about.

And further observe, with what lovingness, gentleness and sweetness he does
it; what a gracious invitation we have in Math. 11. Come unto me al you that
are weary, and heavy leaden, and I will give you rest: and he professes in John
6.37, None that comes to me will I cast of. I will not cast of any that do come
to me: Yea he tells us, that he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the
bruised reed; to encourage sinners he tells them if there be but any stirrings
of the heart unto him, but as the smoking flax, and as the bruised reed; yet
he will not break one, nor quench the other: but he will encourage new beginnings
though never so small in sinners coming unto him. These are the expressions of
Christ toward sinners to show them how tender he is over them, and when the
time drew near for Christ to suffer, then (if ever) one would think (if the
heart of Christ were not much in it) Christ would draw back; not only when he
was to come into the world: but in the work of his Mediation when he was to
suffer the violence of the wrath of his father; to be poured out upon him. But
mark how he does express himself in Luk, 22. verse, 15. And he said unto them,
with desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Why
did Christ desire? he desired, that is, strongly desired to eat this passover;
why? because he knew, that as soon as ever he had eaten it, he should be called
to suffer for man's sin; and to accomplish the great work of redemption for
sinful men. Then it was to be done, Why? Was there any such cause that Christ
should be so strongly upon it to desire this passover? One would have thought,
that above al passovers Christ should have been afraid of this: because this
was to put a period to his life: for then Christ was himself to be made the
passover to suffer: when this passover came once, he knew that he was to be
made the paschal Lamb, and yet he does desire above al to eat this passover,
thereby showing, what a mind he had to finish the work whereby sinners might
come to be reconciled unto God. And another expression there is, I have a
baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?
Christ was straightened in his heart til the work was done. You may see how much
the heart of Christ was in it to be reconciled unto sinners, when became to do
the thing indeed, when the wrath of God was even just coming upon him, then
(though nature had some kind of reluctance) he saieh, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, to show how sensible his humane nature was of it, yet
presently, Not my will but thy will but thy will be done. And the scriptue tells
us that he did make his soul an offering for sin, and that he laid down his
life.

And further after that Christ had laid down his life and risen again, mark
one expression more that shows how willing Christ is to have sinners
reconciled, and brought in unto the Father, and to be at peace with him and
that is very remarkable in Luke, 24. verse 46. And so on, note what was that
first preaching of Christ, repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. So here
in this world in his bodily presence, this may seem to be his last sermon, What
was it he said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer. Well, in verse. 47. And that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name amongst al nations beginning at Jerusalem, and ye are
witnesses of these things, and then by and by he was caught up into heaven.
That which I note this scripture for is this; that after Christ had been so
notoriously abused in his sufferings, yet this did not hinder his earnest
thirsting after reconciliation of those that had put him to death, and had so
abused him: says he it is written, that it behoved Christ to suffer etc. To
begin at Jerusalem, and that is that that I would have done, The repentance
should be preached to al nations, but begin at Jerusalem. Why begin at
Jerusalem? Because Jerusalem was the place where Christ was put to death;
immediately bef^^^ he was crowned with Thorns, mocked, a Reed put into his
hands, spit upon, The Children of Barrabas rather than him, yea and they cried
Away with him, they carried him to the Cross, and there nailed him til he was
dead, and thus they dealt with Christ there, yet Christ would have repetance
preached to al Nations, but says he, above al, think of Jerusalem, and begin at
Jerusalem let them have it in the first place, Jerusalem that took away my
life, that killed me. If any thing in the world could take of the heart of
Christ from being reconciled to sinners, one would have thought that that which
he had done to him at Jerusalem, should have taken of his heart, but he would
have them begin at Jerusalem. It is a notable Text of Scripture to us, and you
shall find it the most remarkable conversion and bringing in of sinners, was at
that Sermon of Peter, when Peter charged them that they had crucified Christ,
the most famous conversion that ever was made of those people that put Christ
to death, the most famous work of Gods reconcling sinners to himself, of Christ
bringing in of sinners by the preaching of the Gospel it was by bringing in of
those sinners, and therefore in the last Sermon that Christ preached from
Heaven, as the first Sermon upon Earth, and the last Sermon upon Earth, and the
most solemn Sermon that was at the dedication of the Temple, is altogether
about bringing in sinners to be reconciled to God. So the last Sermon that he
preached from Heaven, or that ever he will preach til he comes again, so in
Revel. 22.17. And the spirit and the Bride said, come, and let him that hears
say, Come, and let him that is a thirst, say Come, and whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely. These are the last words in effect that are at
the conclusion of the book that ever Christ would speak til he came to
Judgment, never would he speak more in that way to the children of men until he
came in a new world: But in this word here is the last in this expression; Let
him that is athirst, and whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of
life freely. Now the Objections they will come in, as first:

CHAP. 78. Objections Answered concerning the willingness of God and Christ to
be reconciled to sinners.
OBject. You will say, Why should God do all this? and Christ do all this? you tell
us that God is so willing to be reconciled, and has so expressed himself, and
Christ so willing to be reconciled, and has so expressed himself, by entreating
and beseeching; but both God and Christ knows, we can do nothing of our selves,
and therefore to what end is all this that you have spoken? as if we should go
into Golgothus or burial places, and entreat the dead to rise out of their
graves, To what purpose would it be? we are dead in sins and trespasses, and
now if we can do nothing, all that you have spoken is but to little purpose.

To that purpose I answer. First though it is true, we are dead in sins and
trespases and are not able to perform any true saving work by our own
strength, yet first al those expressions of God and Christ in his word, and so
of the ministers of God in their names, it may be of this use to stir up common
gifts and graces of the spirit of God in us, and that is for to have them
stirred up to the utmost that possible may be, people must not think (that
because they cannot do any work that is indeed saving in it self, any work of
spiritual life) that therefore there is nothing to be done by them, we are to
know that though the saving works of God be more rare, yet there are common
works of the spirit, that God does dispense to many, yea to most, and in some
degree or other to al, especially to those that live under the sound of the
Gospel, there are none that live under the sound of the Gospel but they have
some common gifts of the Spirit of God, in one degree or other. Now the Lord
would have these stirred up to the utmost, (though it cannot be in a sanctified
way) and these expressions of God and Christ to sinners, have a great deal of
efficacy in them to stir up what common gifts of Gods Spirit you have, and if
sinners do not this they cannot expect that God should do much toward them.
Consider what power God has given them, and what common gifts they have
already, and let that be acted to the utmost, and then they may wait still for
more from God. This is a truth, that there are none that do perish, but God
has this to charge them with, that they did not stir up the common gifts of
Gods spirit. Secondly, (though we cannot do any thing of our selves) yet God
knows that that is the best way to conveigh true saving Grace unto them, a
spirit of life into them, it is by this means rather than by others, the Lord
chooses this way rather than others. You have received the Spirit, says Paul
to the Galatians, And how have you received it? by the preaching of the Law, or
by the preaching of the Gospel? Which way was the conveighance of the spirit of
God to you? Was it by the preaching of the Law, or the preaching of the Gospel?
not by the one but by the other. (Though there be a great deal of use of
preaching the Law) yet that which does conveigh the Spirit and grace into the
Conscience, it is the opening the riches of the treasure of the Grace of God in
the Gospel, therefore this Objection has no strength in it; to say, we have no
power in our selves. God does entreat and beseech because by this means he
puts forth a power into the hearts of those he does intend to save
everlastingly. If we should entreat dead men to rise, it were a folly for us,
because we cannot conveigh any power into them, but it is not in vain for God,
because he is able while he is entreating and beseeching to conveigh a power
into them.

Obj. But you say in the second place what need the Lord do all this? God might
work it by a word from himself, God might presently show forth his almighty
power to bring in sinners to himself, he need not stand praying and entreating
and answering Objections, bringing of arguments and the like: because he can by
his almighty power bring in sinners; he can break the stoutest heart that
lives upon the earth, and pull down the proudest spirit, and therefore what
need God do all this.

Ans. I Answer who a^t thou O man! that reasonest against God? but if you will
have reasons, there are many to be given.

First because God having to work with a rational creature, he will work
suitable to the nature of that creature that he is working upon. If God were to
work merely upon stones, to raise out of the stones children unto Abraham,
then God would but only speak the word and say let it be done, and it should be
done, but the Lord loves to do it in a way sutiable to a rational creature, now
that way is this.

First that the understanding should be enlightened, and the heart should be
gained and wrought upon, they knowing what it does, it should come to do what
it does freely and wilingly (though we have no free will at the first) yet when
we do embrace the gospel, then the Lord does cause the hearts of men to
embrace it wilingly, and this is a great part of the gospel of God to show
himself to his creature, he will work his own work: but such a way as shall be
suitable to his creature. Again, (if the Lord should bring in sinners to
himself by his almighty power) then there would not so much of the beauty, and
riches of his grace appear as there does this way. If God should effectually
work it by his own hand (I say) the glory of his grace would not so gloriously
shine sorth. Now it is the special design that God has in all his works about
redemption; that the glory of the riches of his grace might appear to men, and
Angel's that they might magnify it. Now what can be more to magnify grace? then
when a sinner shall come to vieu the several workings of Gods mercy toward him;
how the lord has provided a way of Reconciliation, and that (though the soul
were backward, and hung of) yet the Lord still followed on, and put on the soul,
and would not suffer the soul to die, and perrish in the sins of it. What will
magnify Grace more than this? the way of bringing in sinners to be reconciled
unto himself will be a principal subject for the Saints to be blessing of God to
al eternity. And therefore you Christians that have found the work of God
bringing in your hearts to himself, observe what Gods work is; mark the
several ways of Gods working with your souls! For know that those several
ways of Gods working with your souls now, will be the subject of your eternal
praises in Heaven. And hence it is that God does go on in such several
expressions, that the riches of his Grace might appear the more fully. Yea, and
further, that by this means he might gain the hearts of sinners everlastingly
to himself; there is nothing will gain them so unto God, as this declaration of
the riches of his Grace in the Gospel. And when the sinner shall see, (not only
that God is reconciled) but how God has set his heart upon it, how earnest God
has bin in it, this will engage the heart of a sinner for ever unto God, and
hence it is; that those sinners that have felt most of the Grace of God
bringing them in to be reconciled are those that keep closest unto God. As for
such as are only stopped in the way of their sins by the terrors of the Law, and
are not acquainted with the mystery of the Grace of God in the Gospel, they
seldom hold out, though for a while out of slavery to their consciences they do
not commit such and such sins. This I make no question one may be brought to
do; that has no true saving Grace; that they may not dare to commit a sin in
secret for a while (merely our of terror of conscience) But now these men, they
are only wrought upon by the terrors of the Law; they seldom hold out, but
(though conscience bear a strong hand to keep them from sin for a long time,)
yet at length they break those bonds: But now those that have not only
conscience enlightened, and do not see the danger of sin only, but come to have
these beams of the Grace and goodness of God let out into their hearts, and
their hearts are so gained unto God by this; that they will never depart from
him: but their hearts will follow to the bountifulness of God. The difference of
these two may be expressed by this similitude. Look how it is in frosty wether
when the water is frozen; there are two ways to come by the water, the
Husbandman goes in the morning, and sees the water frozen, and beats it to
pieces, and breaks the ice. but though he does so the next morning he comes,
and sees it frozen as much as before: but when there comes warm weather, and
dissolves the ice then it quite goes away in flakes: so hence the hearts of al
sinners are frozen, and God comes with the terror of the Law, and beats them in
pieces, and breaks them that way, I but at last they freeze again, and grow as
hard again as ever: But now when the Lord comes with the beams of his Grace,
and shines upon them: then their Hearts thaw, and the ice goes away, and their
hearts come in flowing to God in another manner than when he comes by his
strokes. Now because the Lord sees that this is such a way to engage the hearts
of sinners to come in unto him, therefore he does not only put forth such an
almighty power: but comes in such a way as this; when the sinner cannot be able
to perceive the hand of God, that is the almighty power that does the work: yet
the sinner can perceive the shining of Gods Grace, and his goodness, and the
expressons of his love, and the like: this is apparently before the Eyes of the
sinner to admire, and works upon the heart, when the other is more secret.

Obj. Thirdly, If God, and Christ be so willing to be reconciled unto sinners,
then you will say, what is the reason that there are no more reconciled? One
would think that al sinners in the World should be reconciled to him, he may
reconcile al; Is it not as easy for God to reconcil one as well as another? God
many times tells us that few shall be saved: Yea, Christ himself tells us so. Now
this that you have preached about Gods, and Christ's willingness to be
reconciled; One would think that all the world should come in to be reconciled,
otherwise how will it appear that they are so willing?

Ans. For the answer to that, the heart of God and Christ are much set upon
Reconciliation with sinners; (but so as may be suitable to other ends that God
has: God will not have the work of his mercy manifested so as it shall cross
any other work that he has to do,) so far as the Glory of his mercy may be
manifested without crossing of some other work that God has to do, so far it
is let out, not to al. Why? Because it will not be suitable to some other ends
that God has to bring about; that he should be reconciled unto al sinners.

Object. You will say, to other ends; Why? Do Gods ends cross one another? If
Gods Heart be for Reconciliation with sinners, how should this Cross any other
thing that God has to do?

Answ. For answer; (though things may seem to us, one to be cross to the
other:) yet there is a blessed concord in Gods ends, and his ways, and it will
appear plainly one day before the Children of men, and Angels, and it will be
the great work of God, hereafter to manifest that those things that seem most
to be cross one to another: yet will be very Advantageous and assisting to the
Promoting, and Coronation of this blessed work.

As it is in the Heavens, there is the motion of the Heavens; they have one
motion by which they are carried one way, and there are the Stars, they have
another particular motion of their own, and yet there is a concord in the
motions of the Heavens. In any work that a man does, as in a Clock, there is
one wheel that runs one way so far, and another meets with it, they seem to
run quite contrary ways, and yet take them altogether, and they do al run to
the end that the work is intended for, and yet seem to go contrary; the Cross
going of the wheels is the right going of the Clock: So God seems to work in
the works of his Grace one way, and in the works of his justice another way,
and they seem to go quite contrary one to the other: But the truth is, they
work al to the end that the workman makes it for; here is the Grace, and mercy
of God thus manifested in entreating, and beseeching sinners to be reconciled;
It goes thus far, and then when it has had its ends, then comes the stroke of
Gods justice, and that striks another way, and al makes to the beauty of the
work of God, that he might have glory in all; So though God be thus earnest,
(yet it is no Argument that al sinnners should be reconciled:) because it
appears to be the beauty of Gods work which shall appear another day; the work
of mercy thus far, and the work of justice so far: this we are not able to
understand thoroughly now: but it is left to the great day to be understood.

Further, It may be answered, that these expressions are chiefly intended
toward those that belong to his eternal election; but revealed in such a
general way as none should exclude himself: therefore the charge of the
Ministers of the Gospel is to preach to every creature, because we do not know
who they be that do belong to the election, but it is for the sake of Gods
elect ones that these things are reconciled in such a full way as they are; such
things should be taught in a Congregation where there are many thousands: but
if there be but a few that belong to the election of Grace, God aims at them
most: though he may aim at the other too for to lessen their sins, and
sometimes to aggravate them: Yet know, if there be but a few, that it is for
you, and for your sake that these things are preached, and these may serve to
answer to those objections.

CHAP. 79.
Use, 1. Admire Gods infinite Grace in enterating to be reconciled to sinners.
Considering. 1. What it is God entreats for. 2. Who are entreated. 3. By whom
you are entreated. 4. What need has God of you?
USE.
IN the first place upon al what has been said of the willingness of God, and
Christ to be reconciled unto sinners, that they thus do entreat sinners we are
taught; First, to stand and admire at the infinite riches of the ^^ace of God,
and espeically you who have felt this work of God effectually upon your Hearts;
You who have found God wooing, and suing to your hearts: give God the glory of
his Grace, and admire at it. It were mercy for the Lord once to offer upon any
terms to be reconciled unto sinners, or to show them any favor. Merely to offer
it, that is grace; that is to be admired, and that is more than God has done
to the Angels; he would not do so much to them: But now that God should, not
only offer: but send to feek after thee; to cry after you again, and again; to
be importunate with you, to entreat, and beseech, not only by his Ministers:
but by this own spirit (for there is the work of that) the spirit of God comes
and woos, and beseeches sinners to come in and be reconciled) Oh stand and
admire at this forever: Let it take up your hearts to give glory to him and the
rather if you consider these four things.

First, What it is that God does entreat and beseech for? What is it that you
are entreated to do? That that shall deliver you from the greatest evil that any
creature is capable of, and that whereby you would receive the greatest good
that any creature is capable of; you are entreated not to be miserable: but to
be happy, and not only that you should serve God, and not sin against God, and
do the works that God requires of you for his glory: but you are entreated to
be reconciled, to deliver your Souls from that depth of misery, and to be
brought unto happiness, and glory.

Secondly, Consider who you are that are entreated. Were there any great worth
in you; Then you might expect to be entreated, as men that are of great
estates, they must be entreated: But who are you wretched Caitiffes? in your
selves damned Dust and Ashes, firebrarnds of hell, such as have made your selves
fuel for the everlasting wrath of the eternal God to burn upon; such as
deserve to be cast out as an everlasting curse; enemies to God: you are
entreated.

And by whom are you entreated? Even by God himself, and Christ that is God
blessed for ever. Even that infinite glory before whom Angels adore; before
whom they cover their faces: even him, who by one word of his mouth is able to
send you al presently down to Hell; even this God comes to entreat, and that
Christ whom Angels do Adore, even that Christ comes to entreat. For the
Servant to entreat his Master, for the subject to entreat the prince, is not
so much: but for the Master to entreat the Servant, for the prince to
entreat the subject, this is that that should fill our Souls with a spirit of
admiration, at the unspeakable condescentions of the most blessed Majesty.

Thirdly, what need has God of you? though you should perish, and die
eternally, it is no great matter to him; God might have his glory out of your
eternal ruin: But to that end that he might break your Hearts, therefore he
does entreat and beseech. Oh admire! at the riches of his Grace, and give him
the glory that is due unto him; begin to do that here that you must do to al
eternities when you come into his glorious presence in Heaven.

CHAP. 80.
USE, 2. And 3.
SEcondly, The more God does manifest this his grace, the more desperately
wicked is the heart of man to stand out against God. Oh! wretched, cursed heart
that can stand out against God; that can stand out against the the offer of
grace in the Gospel; I say, this is a cursed heart to stand out against the
offer of grace though it were no more. If this should be but declared; that
Christ is come into the world to save sinners: God expects, that al those to
whom Christ is so revealed, that they should come flocking unto him, and cry
mightily unto God for mercy in Christ: but when God does not only offer his
son; but comes by the Ministry of his word, and by the work of his spirit to
draw your hearts unto him, and ye thou do stand out against God; against al
these gracious beginings, drawings, and melting expressions of God; thou do
stand out; Oh! Cursed stubborn hard heart, that should stand out against al
these. Thou can not now plead; Oh! tentation was strong to draw my heart
from God to such and such sinful ways. Was tentation strong? Why did ever
tentation draw more alluringly than God has drawn alluringly by his gospel? It
is impossible that the Devil, and all the world should draw more alluringly to
any sin, than God does draw unto him. Oh! these entreatings of God, this
gracious way toward sinners, is that that will be the greatest aggravation of
the sins of men that ever was or can be imagined. Only (for the present) know
thus much; that the mercies of God, that shall be the subject of the Saints
rejoicing, and blessing of his name to al eternity; that mercy will be thy
greatest misery, and that is a sad thing for any sinner to think on, that that
mercy that the Saints shall be eternally admiring, and blessing God for, that
that should be my misery, and secret wound, and my greatest terror, and that is
the second thing.

USE. 3.
Oh! rebuke thine own wretched heart that has stood out so long against God as
thou have done al thy days. Certainly the consideration of this; of standing
out against any command of God when God comes to enlighten a man's Conscience,
and the Soul does come to understand with whom he has to deal, it has a
mighty power to break the heart of man. That when I come to see that I have
stood out against al those loving drawings, al those woings of the Gospel, it
is that that will rent your hearts; Rent your hearts and not your garments, for
the Lord is merciful; that is not only a breaking of the heart but a rending of
the heart when the Grace of God does appear to it.

CHAP. 81. Use. 4. To strengthen our Faith; if God were reconciled when we were
enemies, he will not cast us off for every infirmity. Objections Answered.
FOurthly, The Consideration of this, may be a mighty strength to the Faith of
those sinners that have (in some measure) been wrought upon by the Grace of
God. Thus, if the Lord has manifested such abundance of strength of Spirit in
seeking to sinners to be reconciled, then certainly, when sinners are
reconciled, the heart of God will forever be with them; he will not lose the
fruit of such Grace as this; if once he has brought in, and that in such a way
of mercy (Christ having brought it) it cannot be any easy thing that shall take
off Gods heart from thee: there was the goodness of God toward Adam in
Paradise. I, (but it was not so much goodness of God unto him, as could not
admit of any breach beween God and him. But the heart of God is so much in this
work in bringing sinners to be reconciled unto him, as it is impossible that
ever there should be such a breach between them, and him again; that ever they
should prove to be enemies. Therefore let this strengthen thy heart; when at
any time thou begin'st to have jelous thoughts of God, have recourse to thy
first calling to God. I went on not many years ago in a wreatched sinful way;
but God came to me, and showed me my evil way, and showed me his Grace: Yea,
when I stood out against his Grace, he followed me, and would not let me be at
quiet, but manifested it more and more, and has overcome my heart unto
himself. How can I think that God that has done so before, that now he should
take advantage upon every infirmity? that now every sin that he sees in me
should make such breaches between him and my soul; that he should cast me from
him? Can I think it? Certainly it is a wrong to the Grace of God in the Gospel.

Object. I, but you will say here is the evil, That upon my loose walking I
cannot think that ever things were in truth; that I was truly converted.

Answ. To that I answer but these two things. First, that if thou can but be
able to say thus in the presence of God; the Lord knows that there is no weapon
of enmity in my heart that is against God; that God reveals unto me to be a
sin, but I know my heart is against it; I can appeal to God so, and there is no
duty that God requires of me, but I know my heart is with it, if the Lord will
but reveal to me. Now in this case, having before felt the work of God drawing
thee to Christ, and if thy heart be thus kept to God: this is one good Argument
that certainly God, and thou are not enemies.

Secondly, if thou can but say thus; there is no Argument that is so
prevalent with me to make me not sin as this; for fear of breaking peace
between God and me; this is the thing that makes my sin sting my Soul indeed:
because by that I come to lose some of that sweeness of the assurance of my
peace with God. Can thou say so? keep thy heart but in such a frame (though
thou have many weaknesses) that thou can say; whatsoever sin the Lord reveals
to me yet my heart is against it, and whatsoever duty the Lord requires of me
yet I know my heart is with it, and if there be any thing that I do not know,
Oh! that I knew it more and more, and there is nothing that I fear sin for so
much as this, because that I see it breaks the peace between God and my Soul.
Is it so with thy poor soul? I pronounce in the name of God Peace be unto thee.
Though thy heart be not as thou would have it, thou may conclude this
certainly; God that has manifested such Grace in drawing thy heart unto
himself at the first, will not cast thee off. Certainly, God had some greater
end in working so wonderfully toward thee, than to throw thee off; except the
Lord had some great thoughts of heart in glorifying himself in thee, and to do
thee good, he would never have wrought so upon thy heart as he has done. There
are others that live under the light of the Gospel, but the Lord does never
come to their hearts to speak to them as inwardly to draw their hearts, and
that by his own Spirit as he has done to thee, the Lord has not had so great
thoughts of heart to glorify his name upon them in the day of his Grace, as
toward thee in the working of his Grace: So certainly to thee the Lord is
about to do great things; that grace of his that has been so strong upon thee
as it has been, it will carry thee through al difficulties. Certainly the Grace
of God has been strong, and it will be strong and therefore build upon it. If
thou have an hard heart, do not say; thou have an hard heart, and therefore
Gods heart is not toward thee. No, but rather say, thou have an hard heart and
therefore thou will look toward God to break thy hard heart, and bring thy
frozen and cold heart to these Beams of Gods Grace, and stand under these
Heavenly influences. If thou be sensible of the hardness of thy heart, and
then to sit down sullenly and heavily, and think because of this God will reject
thee; this is not the way to get thy heart softened: but rather call to mind
what the grace of God has been toward thee, and how the heart of God is
toward sinners to be reconciled unto them, and what he has done for the like
such sinners as thou art, and so keep thy heart under the warm beams of the
Gospel, and thereby thou will gain a great deal more than sitting down in a
sullen way. Those kind of Herbs that grow under the warm Sun grow the better,
and the Fruit ripens better than those that grow out of the Sun: So the Heart
that can keep it self continually in the Sun of this mercy and goodness of
God, thus expressing himself in the Gospel, willing to be reconciled to
sinners; this heart will thrive more abundantly, than those that shall ly down
sullenly, and discontentedly, This is a mighty encouragement for all sinners to
come to be reconciled; a mighty strong encouragement to them, the Lord invites,
and beseeches in the Gospel, and sends his ministers to do it, and requires
them that they should do it in his name. What should hinder them, but that any
sinner (none excepted) should come, and be reconciled? We cannot tell who they
are that shall not be reconciled, and therefore we may say concerning any
particular sinner; What should hinder thee but that thou should come in to
be reconciled? And if God entreates, and Christ entreates and Ministers
entreat, and thou entreatest: What letts thee but that thou may be
reconciled: As, the Eunuch said. Here is Water enough, why may I not be
baptized? So here is mercy enough, why may thou not be reconciled? Have thou
such thoughts as these are? See that God is willing to be reconciled to sinners
well, when I get home I am resolved to throw my self before the Lord Christ, and
I am able to cry to him for reconciliation, for I am damned and undone for ever
else, and and I hear that there is a way to be reconciled to him: well, this
shall be my work now; I will set upon it presently, I will never leave crying to
God til I have found Gods Grace coming to me. Art thou resolved upon this? Well
go on; and fall down in thy crying to God for mercy; make this point part of thy
petition; Lord, I have heard that thou art willing to be reconciled; now Lord
here is a wretched sinner comes in to be reconciled to thee what hinders now
when both shall entreat? Suppose two were fallen out one with the other, but
now when both sides are wrought upon, and one, he professes himself not only
willing, but earnestly desirous to be reconciled and the other he comes, and
expresses himself so too, surely both these will agree. Now it is true many
times between man and man, their expressions are but very slight, and there is
not that at the bottom of their hearts that they express with their mouths.
When two are fallen out, and one comes to them, and says, why, will you not be
at peace with such a man? Oh! yes says he I am willing. So, come to the other,
and he says the same, he is willing; and yet their hearts are not right
(perhapps) one to the other. But now in this case between God and thy poor
soul, be confident that on Gods side, it is most real, and do thou but make it
out that thy heart is real in desiring after peace with God, and fully
understand what thou do when thou do desire peace with God, [So] that thou will not be at peace with any sin, and desire it fully and then when thou shall
get it, then thy heart shall be praising God, and say, I shall live to the praise
of God for ever; and that shall be my endeavor. I would feign have at, but will
God be at peace? Yes, God shall get as much as thou shall by it, he shall thereby
get that that he did especially intend and aim at in making the world. The
great design that God had in making the world was to magnify the riches of his
mercy, and if thou be one that God has fastened upon to show the riches of
his mercy, and Grace, he shall get that Glory thereby to his name, that he did
most intend when he made the world. Therefore, though thy soul be precious unto
thee, know that Gods Glory is more precious unto him than thy soul can be to
thee, therefore God is more desirous of thy life (with those that shall be saved
hereafter) than they can be desirous to be saved themselves; this is a certain
truth, because that God shall get more by the salvation of that soul than the
soul shall get. You get something, but God gets much more; now then if God be
seeking after that that does so much concern you, and you know this day that
Gods heart is more strongly set uppn it than yours, one would think that this
should be a mighty encouragement for any sinner to come in to be rconciled. And
therefore go on in thy way, let not tentation come take off thy heart (though
yet God seems as an enemy to you.) We know that Joseph's heart was as much
toward his brethren, as his bretherens hearts were toward him; Joseph dealt
in a rugged way, as if he had been their enemy, yet then was his heart toward
them. And so go on in thy way of seeking the Lord, and though God seem to be
as an enemy, yet know that the heart of God is as much toward thee as thy
heart can be toward him, and Christ looks upon thee as one that he shall get
glory to himself by for ever. The good Lord say Amen. It shall be so.

FINIS.
GODS PRESENT MERCIES TO HIS PEOPLE, Are Arguments of FUTURE MERCIES. Preashed
at Saviors Southwark; May, 2. 1641.
Hosea, 2.14. And so on, Behold I will allure her, and bring her into the
Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her, and I will give her Vinyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing there as
in the days of her youth and as in the day when she came up out of the Land of
Egypt, and it shall be at that day says the Lord, that thou shall call me Yshi,
and shall call me no more Baali.
THis Prophet was sent to the ten Tribes, to apostate Israel; God threatened
dreadful evils against them, and yet from the beginning of this 14. verse to
the end of the Chapter, makes Gracious promises unto them. I shall only thus
premise, that the scope of the Holy Ghost here is to show mercy to discover the
Mercy of God to Apostatizing Israel in a way of conjugal union, that though she
had gone a whoring from God in regard of her idolatrous worship, yet God was
contented upon her repentance to take her again, and to marry her unto himself,
and therefore al along the Prophet suits himself with such expressions, that
signify Gods willingness to marry himself unto her again, in that way as they
did use to manifest their conjugal love unto their Spouses, and that being
premised will help us to understand many expressions both in the words read, and
in the succeeding part of the Chapter, that otherwise would be very obscure to
us, and especially that in verse, 14. I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her, this may be taken for bringing her
into affliction, and then speaking comfortably to her, but that is not the
scope of the Holy Ghost here, it was only taken from the way of Marriage, to
carry the spouse out of the City into the field that was a heath and a common,
and so had the term of a wilderness, and there rejoicing, and so bringing of
her into the City and carrying of her to his Fathers house; and that I might
show out of diverse places of scripture, especially out of the Canticles, who
is this that comes from the Wilderness, The Holy Ghost taking this allusion
from thence, so that the meaning of this expression is nothing else, but I will
deal graciously with her, as one that Marries a spouse, and carries her out of
the City into the field, and there rejoices with her, and speaks comfortably
to her; The main doctrinal conclusion which I intend to go through, shall be
raised from these words, I will give her the valley of Achor for a door of hope,
for I shall speak to no more then one point of Doctrine, raised from those
words, I will give her the valley of Achor for a door of hope* It will be
necessary therefore before I tell you the doctrinal point to open these words
unto you, The valley of Achor. It was that valley where Achan was stoned, the
story of which you may read in the 7 Chapter of the Book of Joshua, and upon
that occasion of the troubles that the people of Israel had by Achan, this
valley was called the valley of Achor, for the valley of Achor is nothing else but
the valley of trouble, valla tribulationis, the valley of trouble; so alluding to
that name Achan. Now it is true that generally, or by very many, these words
are carried thus; That God will so work things about, as to cause the troubles
of his people, to be but doors of hope to let in Mercies to them, and there is
a truth in that doctrinal point, but not a truth in the grounding of it upon
this text, for the meaning of the text is otherwise. The valley of Achor. Though
the name signify trouble, yet the truth is that this valley of Achor was a
delightful valley, a very fruitful valley, it was just after the entrance into
the Land of Canan that God gave it, and God here does allude still to the way of
marriage, expressing his love to the ten tribes, that he would receive them
again, and marry them unto himself, in that way that they did use to marry
amongst the Jews, and the way was this, amongst them, when they did marry any,
according to the state of the husband he used to give her gifts; commonly some
field or piece of Ground, and if he were a rich man, then a larger piece of
ground, or a more fruitful piece of ground, and so according to the height of
his condition was his gift, So says God. I will give you a valley of Achor for
a door of hope, as you when you take a spouse to your selves, then you use to
indow her with some piece of land, or ground, according to your estate, and
that you give to her as a testification of that Love, she is to expect from you
for the future. So I will give you a valley of Achor, I will bestow fresh and
choice mercies upon you for the present, and these mercies shall be in a way of
dowry, as a testification of abundance of future good you shall receive from
me; this is the scope and sense of the Holy Ghost in these words. As when God
gave the people of Israel the land of Canaan, he gave them this Valley of Achor
as the entrance at the door of Hope unto that Mercy, that they should enjoy
from him in the Land of Canaan. That this Valley of Achor was a delightful
fruitful Valley, it appears evidently from that Text in Esa. 65.10. And Sharon
shall be a Field of flocks, and the Valley of Achor a place for the Herds to
lie down in, for my people that have sought me: Here God promises the Valley of
Achor as a blessing to the people that did seek him, and the Herds should lie
down in it, it was a very fruitful place, and therefore God makes such a
promise; Now though it has the name of trouble, yet we find that God promises
it to his people as a token of his Mercy, and so it is to be understood in
these words, therefore having the meaning of it, now we come to the Doctrinal
Conclusion, that is to be grounded upon this Scripture thus opened unto you;
the Doctrine then is this.

Doct. That the Mercies that God bestows upon his Church and his people, are
doors of hope to future Mercies

Present Mercies that God grants unto his people, are doors of hope to future
Mercies; Al Gods Mercies to his Saints are inlets unto further Mercies. This is
the high privilege of the Saints of God, it belongs not to every one. The
wicked indeed when they receive any thing from God, they may write their Ne
plus ultra upon it, this is like to be their PORTION, and they may wonder that
they have any thing at al; but the Mercies of God unto his people may be al
called doors of hope; the name of Joseph may be written upon them: as we may
read in Genesis 30.24. When Rachel had once conceived, and did bear a Son, she
called his name Joseph, and said, The Lord shall add another; when she had one
she made it a pledge of another, the Lord shall another. So it is with Gods
mercies to his people, they are Joseph's, may conclude, that God shall add
another; when God delivered his people out of Egypt, Exodus 13.15. says Moses,
Thou have guided them unto thy holy habitation; thou have guided them, that
deliverance Moses took as a certain Argument of Gods further Mercy toward
them; thou have guided them. When God did but begin with David in 2 Samuel 5.12.
to show but a little Mercy, an outward Mercy to him, David did conclude that
God had established him in the Kingdom. How so? God had showed a great favor
outwardly unto David, and David could conclude, that that favor he did receive,
was bur an inlet unto more, an argument of establishment of him in his
Kingdom; God has delivered, and he will deliver (says the Apostle.) As God
makes way in his wrath by lesser judgments upon the wicked, in Psalm. 78.45.
so God makes way for his Mercy, by present lesser Mercies unto his Children.

But now in the prosecution of this point, we shall discover to you, 1. The
Reasons of it how this comes to pass. 2. We shall answer a question about Gods
interuption of his Mercies. 3 Discover unto you how we shall come to know, when
Gods present Mercies are but preparations unto future Mercies, what kinds of
Mercies those are, and how to be known, that are but inlets unto other Mercies.
And then. 4. Come to the Uses of the Doctrine; that Gods Mercies to his people
are but in-lets unto greater.


Reason. 1.
That comes hence, because of the fullness of mercy that is in God, there is
such an infinite Ocean, and stream, and treasure of Mercy in the Lord, that
hence it is that when it comes and begins to run unto the Saints, to the
people of God, that the beginnings of it are but preparations, to let out more;
the Scripture says that God does delight in mercy, in Micah 7.18. now that
that a man delights in, if he once begin, that that he does is but to draw on
more; Gods Mercies are called his Riches, God is rich in Mercy; the Wisdom of
God, the Power of God, and the Justice of God are not called Gods Riches, they
are called his Glory, I will make my Glory to pass by, and God proclaims his
Mercy; now then because the Mercies of God are his delight, his Riches, his
Glory, when he has fit subjects to let out these upon, when he begins once
to let them out, these beginnings are Testimonies of a Fountain that is to be
communicated.

Reason. 2.
Al Gods Mercies to his people they come out of love, Amor nescit nimium; Love
knows not too much, it knows not any such expression as too much, there is
nothing too much for Love, Love it must not be limited, if Love begin to be
shown, that that comes out of Love w^l have no bounds; Now all the goodness
that God shows to his people, it comes out of Love, out of infinite Love, and
therefore one Fruit of goodness is but a drawing on of another; Indeed when
Gods goodness comes out of general bounty, then it is in another manner, it
stops soon, but when it comerh out of entire Love, the infinite Love of God, it
stops not. But Thirdly, There is another Argument that added to these two
makes it strong indeed, and that is.

Reason. 3.
That the goodness of God unto his peopel is a fruit of the covenant; it comes
not only out of love, but it comes unto them as the fruit of an everlasting
covenant that God has made with them, a sure covenant; now in the covenant of
grace that God has made with his people, there is a connection of al mercies a
concatination of all the goodness of God there, the treasure of mercy is in the
covenant, and an exceeding strength of mercy in the covenant, to bear down al
hindrances and oppositions, there mercy is tied unto them by truth, and as we
read of the covenant between Jonathan and david, in 1 Samuel, 20, 15. That David
made a covenant with Johnathan, that he would never cut off his loving kindness
from him, nor from his house after him; such a covenant has God made with all
his people, that he will never cut off his loving kindness from them; he has
made no such covenant with the wicked, no, God may show them some favor for
the present, yet he has not made a covenant that he will never cut off his
mercy from them; you may have abundance of favors this day, but you may have
them eternally cut off from you, but the saints of God are in such a blessed
condition, as God does not only show them mercy for the present, but he has
made a covenant with them never to cut off his loving kindness from them and
upon this covenant though there he many weaknesses and, many distempers in them
frailties and infirmities, yet God will never cut off his loving kindness from
them;

Reason. 4.
Because that the Goodness of God to his people, as it comes from an eternal
fountain, so it is let out for the accomplishments of eternal ends; Gods
intentions in his Goodness to his saints, it is to raise up to himself an
eternal name of praise and honor in the world, and not only here, but in
heaven, in the highest heavens eternally, that is Gods scope not only in some
mercies, but observe it in every mercy that God bestows upon a saint, upon his
children, (I say) every mercy every outward mercy God has this end in it, to
raise up him self a name of eternal praise by it, and therefore despise no
mercy though it be never so little, for Gods end in the least mercy thou have,
in every crum of bread thou eatest, it is to raise up himself an eternal name
of praise, even from that mercy, but take the greatest mercy that God bestows
upon the veriest worldling through his general bounty, God has not such an end
in it as he has in this? God may take notice of them for a while, and there is
an end of them, but in his Goodness toward his people, there God intends a
glorious edifice, to raise up a building that shall be to his eternal praise,
and therefore when as one lays a stone to raise up a high building, he lays
it so as he fitteth it for another stone to be laid upon it, if I lay some
ruins of a building, but only a heap of stones, I care not how I lay them, but
if I intend to raise up a building, then I lay one stone as it may prepare for
another; So does God in his dealing with the wiked, he heaps his mercies upon
them, let them come as they will, but when he dispenses his mercy to his
people, then he intends a building, and he lays them in that order, and in
that rank, first one and then another, so as when he has laid one, if we
understand what that mercy is, one may see an empression in that mercy for
another, as it were caling for another mercy to be laid upon it. These are the
special grounds why Gods mercies to his people, are but preparations for
further and further mercies; but because I would not be hindered (especially in
the close of this) I will pass by any thing that may be further spoken
concerning the grounds.

Obj. But you will say we see it otherwise, and we find it otherwise, that there
are usually interruptions in Gods mercies even to his peopel, when God comes
to deal in a way of mercy to his Church, he goes a little way and then he
stops, and then there comes heavy Judgments after them heavy afflictions
presently.

Ans. Now for the answering of that.

1. We are to know that we must of necessity grant, that there may be some
interruptions for the present in Gods mercies to his people, but there is a
difference between interruption and cutting off, it may seem for the present to
be interrupted, but it runs under ground still, and has it is course, as they
say there is a river that runs fifty miles under the ground, and there comes
up again, so it may be with Gods mercies toward his people, though they see
them not. His Children have their portions in his Judgments, many times God
comes in a Judgment, and then he lets the wicked prosper, I but his Justice
has it is course under ground, and runs out of sight, and comes up again, that
is very observable and may concern our present occasion, for our instruction
in Gods dealing with his peopel, in bringing of them out off captivity, and
repairing the wall and the Temple, God had made many glorious promises to his
people, what he would do for them, in returning them from captivity, and
building of their city again, well, after the seventy years came, God did begin
to work wonderfully gloriously for them, but if you observe a little and read
the story you may find that between their beginning to return from the
captivity and the finishing of Gods mercy in building the Temple and the wall,
they were as long a time as they were in their captivity, That was seventy
years, they were seaenty years in captivity, and from the beginning of the
work of their restoring to the end of it, they were seventy years more, but
still the goodness of God ran along, there was an eye of mercy and goodness upon
them, though it seemed to cease for the present, yet it carried it through at
the last. It may much concern us now we are ready to be discontented and
troubled, when God is in a way of reformation, because we have not al
presently, al is not come now just when we would have it we are ready to
complain, O! How long has the parliament bin set and little has bin done, why?
it was Gods way with his own people, though they had such particular promises
of that glorious deliverance, yet it was seventy years before it was fully
accomplished, and if God be but in a way of mercy toward us, but a going on,
you have but a little now now and a little another time, yet we are not to
repine at this, for still mercy is going on, though there may be interruption
for the present. But further.

2. Many times we think there is an interruption, when indeed there is none at
al, but our mistake, if we did but understand things, we should see a most
beautiful concatination of mercyes and connection of mercies there is no
interruption; yea further.

3. The very interruption that we think there is, may be one of our greatest
mercies; Gods ceasing in comunicating one kind of mercy, may be but a
preperation for another kind of mercy, for a greater mercy, and therefore we
are not to be discouraged.

4. We are to consider, that though this be the goodness of God to his people,
yet he does expect that his people should go on with him in the way of his
goodness, should close with him in the way of his mercy, or otherwise there may
be a great interruption for the present, in Hosea. 7.1. God complains thereof
his people, says he, when I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of
Ephraim was discovered, when I would have healed them, God many times is in a
way just of healing his people, and when he would have healed them when he is
in a way of mercy, and he expects that they should follow him in this way of
Mercy, why, then their iniquity is discovered, and then they break out into
notorious iniquities, and sins, and they come and make a stop, and shut the
door of mercy against them, so that (I say) as we are to be warned in regard of
our public sins, now God is in a gracious way of public mercies, there was
never a time wherein we had need of more warning to be watchful, to take heed
what we do, that our iniquity may not be discovered, for now God is about to
heal us, he is thinking to heal us, Oh! let us now take heed of our lives, and
so it should be particularly the care of every soul. Is God about to heal, is
God in a way of mercy to thy family, to thy body, to thy soul at any time? now
take heed to thy self, that thy iniquity be not discovered, for now will the
devil come, and tempt thee to break out in some notorious sin, that he might
cut off the way of Gods Grace, that he might shut that door of mercy that God
is now opening to thee; in Zachary 8 15.16. Says God there, So again have I
thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah,
fear you not, (mark you what follows) and let none of you imagine evil in your
hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oaths, for all these things are
the things that I hate says the Lord, mark the expression of God, it does very
nearly concern us, now we may well apply that 15. verse unto the condition of
England at this time, I thought in these days to do well unto this people, and
to the house of Judah, but in these things that I should do (says God) look to
your selves, you must not think that when I am going on in a way of mercy, you
may do what you list, but these things I will do but it is upon this condition,
that you follow God on in that way, if God does open a door to us, if we would
not have it shut, he expects that we should come and enter in at that door,
that is, close with him in that way of mercy he is doing; well, but then seeing
that our sins have made the interruption, and it is not always that Gods
present mercies are certain arguments of further mercies.

How shall we know when we may draw an argument, to assure our selves from that
mercy we have now, that there is further mercies intended for us? This you may
remember in the beginning of the point, I told you it was a privilege of Gods
saints, and yet every one will be ready to snatch at it, and to conclude to
themselves; well, God is a God full of mercy and therefore because he begins
to show mercy to me, he will go on, surely I shall find favor, it has been his
way and course to deal thus with his people and therefore seeing he has
delivered me from one evil, he will deliver me from another.

(Brethren) it is the usual way of wicked men to catch at the privileges of
the Saints, as if they were their own, we have a notable example for this in
the prophecy of Jeremiah, that is worthy of our observation, in Jer. 21.2. It
is an example there of Zedekiah, Zedekiah was a wicked man, and yet he
flattered himself in this, and promised to himself, that what privileges the
people of God had in former times, he must needs have the like, mark what he
says now; Inquire I pray thee of the Lord for us, Nebuchad-nezar King of
Babylon, makes war against us, if so be the Lord will deal with us according to
al his wondrous works that he may go up from us, Mark (says Zedekiah to
Jeremiah) Oh! inquire, Oh! let us know the mind of God, whether he will deal
with us according to al his wondrous works; God had dealt with his people
according to his worderful works had dealt wonderfully for his people, and
Zedekiah a wicked man, and the wicked people that were with him, they were
ready to flatter themselves with hope, that God would deal with them as he had
done with his people heretofore, worderfully, but they were deceived. And so
people when they hear of a privilege of the Saints, for them to promise to
themselves, that they shall have the like from God, that his peopl have (I say)
they will be mistaken, for the promises that are made in Scripture of Mercy,
they are the inheritance of Gods Saints, Isa. 54.17. This is the inheritance of
my servants (Says God.) When God made a promise to his people of Mercy there,
I but (says he) this is the inheritance of my Sarvants, it belongs not to al,
it is their inheritance, their portion; what have others to do with the
inheritance of Gods people? When a Saint of God looks into the word of God, and
reads the word, he may see every promise, every expression of Gods goodness, as
a part of his inheritance, and take it, it is thy inheritance, though thou
inheritest not worldly riches, thou may have short or little comings in, yet
know thou art an heir of all the glorious promises that are written in the Book
of God, they are thy inheritance. A wicked man when he reads in the Scripture,
he can take no such delight in it: for indeed he may read many promises, but
they are none of his inheritance, they are the inheritance of Gods people.
There is a great deal of difference between an heir riding through his Fathers
ground, and a strangers riding through it: just the like difference there is
between a carnal man reading the scriptures, and a Saint: An heir rides
through his ground and sees fruitful fields, and pleasant meadows, and says
he, this is my ground, and a stranger rides through them and commends them, I,
but they belong not to me; So a Saint reads the scripture, and the expressions
of Gods goodness there, and says they are my inheritance and a carnal heart
says no such matter; and therefore Gods Mercies to his people are inlets to
further, if they are not so to thee thou can not conclude and say, Oh! I was
in such a danger, and in such an extremity and God delivered me from that
extremity, and therefore if I come into the like he will deliver me again, no,
thou can not say so. It was a notable expression of Hezekiah, Isa. 38. When
God there delivered him, from the sickness, as its thought by Divines it was
the Plague, and God delivered him, he concludes, In love to my soul have thou
delivered me from the pit of corruption; this is an excellent couclusion that a
child of God may make, if ever he were delivered from the danger of the Plague;
in love to my soul (Lord) thou have delivered me, and I shall go to the house of
the Lord, I shall yet have further mercy; It may be some of you have had the the
Plague in your houses, it may be upon your selves, and God has delivered you,
and you will take it as an argument that God will diliver you again, because he
delivered you from that: yea, but unless thou be a Hezekiah, a Gracious man or
woman, thou can not conclude that God has delivered thee from that pit of
corruption, for Gods preservations of wicked men, are many times reservations
for greater evils; as I might show you but that I see that I must hasten.

Well, but then still how may we know, when we may draw an argument from Gods
present mercies to future.

The first discovery whether Gods present Mercies be in-lets to future.
When in a mercy there is some special discovery of God unto his people,] (I
say) some special and glorious discovery of God in a Mercy, As in his Mercy to
Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Solomon, David, etc. There were glorious discoveries of
Gods presence, when as Jacob was delivered form Esau, says Jacob, I have seen
thee as the face of God, it may be read thus, I have seen thee after the face
of God, after I have seen the face of God I have seen thee; I, that is sweet
and comfortable indeed, when we can see a mercy after we have seen the face of
God; we can se the face of God in the way of his Mercy, and after we see the
face of God, then look upon the Mercy, and then gather this argument, If thou
have an eye that in a Mercy thou can see the face of God there, and after the
sight of the face of God in the mercy, then it is somewhat. Thus in Isay,
26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us, [thou wilt,] for thou also have
wrought al our works in us, mark the argument, Lord, thou will ordain peace,
Why? For thou have wrought al our works in us: This scripture is spoken
concerning the deliverance of the people of Israel from their captivity, God
did begin to deliver them, and those that were Godly were sure to have
deliverance complate, Thou will ordain, we are sure of that (say they) why? for
thou have wrought al our works for us, for it is not Cyrus, But it is a
remarkable hand of God upon the spirit of Cyrus, and all that is done in our
deliverance, it is done through a mighty hand of God; [Thou have wrought al our
works in us;] The work it is a work above Nature, it is a wonderful work of
God, and therefore we are sure that thou will ordain peace for us; When God
appears wonderful remarkably in a Mercy to his people, then they conclude of
further Mercies: A most excellent place for that likewise in Psalm. 75.5. Unto
thee (Oh God) do we give thanks, for that thy name is near thy wondrous works
declare, mark, [for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare,] Oh
Lord! (as if they should have said) we se thy wonderful works, we see thy face,
thy Power, thy Glory, thy Mercy, and thy Goodness; we se thy Mercy a creating
Mercy and therefore thy name is near, O! thou art good yet more and more, for
that thy wondrous works declare. Brethren, when Gods mercies are creating
mercies, then we may expect that they will be perfect mercies, for though in
generation there may be a defect, yet in creation there is never a defect: many
times there may want a Limb, a member in generation, but all that God creates,
he creates perfect: Now when the mercies of God are as it were created mercies,
not generated out of second causes, but we see a kind of created power, then
surely it will be perfect. Now (Brethren) before we come to Application to our
own hearts, we cannot but apply this as a strong argument to raise up our
thoughts, to make account of the mercies this day we enjoy, to be a door of
Hope unto us; for if ever people have created mercies we have; if ever a people
could see the face of God in a way of mercy, then we may at this day; if ever a
people could say, Thou (Oh Lord) have wrought al our works for us, we may well
say it: and therefore we may draw that coclusion that the Church did, Thou will
ordain peace, for thou have wrought al our works for us. Surely (Brethren) Gods
name is nigh, God has seemed to be afar off from England for a long time, God
is coming nigh, his name is nigh, for his wondrous works that he has done of
late declare it. But that is the first.

The Second discovery whether Gods present Mercies be in-lets to future Mercies.
When Gods Mercies are Spiritual Mercies, then they are certain in-lets to
further Mercies. a Spiritual Mercy never come alone, but make way for further.
I will give you but one Text for that, because I see time outruns me, in Ezekiel.
39.29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them (says God) Why? For I
have powered out my Spirit upon the House of Israel, saitth the Lord God; Mark,
I will hide my face no more from them, Why? for I have poured out my Spirit upon
the House of Israel, says the Lord God. Brethren, if ever any Nation had the
Spirit of God poured out upon them, certainly we have; God pours out his
Spirit unto his people, upon private Christians, and upon Ministers in a
wonderful abundant manner, and how has he poured out his Spirit upon our
Worthies assembled in Parliament? Now let this be a good Argument, neither will
I hide my face any more from them, for I have poured out my spirit upon them;
then it is an Argument for us this day that God will not hide his face from us,
because he has poured out his Spirit upon us; If there be any people under
Heaven that have the Spirit of God upon them, certainly the people of England
have it at this day, and this is Gods own promise and Argument, you may plead
it with God in prayer, that he will never hide his face from them, that he has
poured out his Spirit upon, not only in general may you make use of it, but for
your selves in particular. Has God poured out his Spirit upon any of your
Souls? you may make this conclusion, it is Gods own conclusion, he will never
hide his face from you, because he has poured his Spirit upon you; that is the
Second,

The Third discovery whether Gods present Mercies be in-lets to future Mercies.
Then is a Mercy a forerunner of further Mercy, when it is obtained by Faith
and prayer in the Covenant of Grace; That Mercy that prayer and the exercise of
Faith does obtain, is certainly and infallibly, a forerunner of further Mercy.
God has not done with that people, and that Soul in a way of Mercy, where he
bestows a Mercy as a fruit of prayer, an exercise of Faith in the Covenant; If
prayer be the Key to open Heaven when it is shut to us, much more then will it
keep Heaven open when it is once open, but that we know to be the excellency of
prayer, it is the great Key of Heaven that golden Key of Heaven that opens it
when it is shut, then surely prayer can keep Heaven open; If ever a Mercy were
obtained by prayer, certainly that Mercy that we have now for the present here
in Edgland, is a Mercy obtained by prayer, if ever there were a Parliment
obtained by prayer since England was a Nation, certainly this Parliment was; we
may call the name of this Parliament Samuel, asked of God, and what have been
the earnest cries of Gods people, of many that are dead and gone, but for these
times: Now that that is a fruit not only of prayer of Gods people for the
present, but is the Harvest of so many prayers of the Saints of God, and
Worthies of God in former ages that are now gone, and their Souls are
triumphing in Heaven, (I say) that that is the Harvest of al their prayers,
surely cannot be one single Mercy, but is a Mercy to let in others, it is a
Mercy that is a door of hope to further Mercies; and that is the Third Note.
Again Fourthly, a Fourth Note of a Mercy that is a making way to further
Mercies, is this,

The Fourth Discovery whether Gods present Mercies be in-lets to future Mercies.
That Mercy that leads us to the God of Mercy, is certainly an inlet to further
Mercies; whatsoever it is that leads our Souls to the God of Mercy, we may
conclude that this Mercy will bring abundant good with it: I must not build upon
diverse Sccriptures, only read that of David, in 2 Samuel 7. the whole Chapter you
may read at your leisure, how Gods Mercy to him lead him to the God of Mercy,
upon which there was such a promise of continuance of Mercy for so long a time.

The fifth Discovery whether Gods present Mercies be in-lets of future Mercies.
That Mercy (I beseech you observe it) that is to a Soul, to a people an
engagement to duty, is certainly a door of more Mercy; whatsoever Mercy God
bestows upon you in particular, or upon a Nation, if the Mercy be made an
engagement to Duty, certaitnly it is a door to more Mercy; take it thus: As so
we may, when we do account our duties to be Mercies, then our duties will hold:
so when Gods Mercies are turned into duties, then Gods Mercies will hold; it is
a most infallible sign of one that will persevere in duty, that will never fail.
If thou would know whether thou art like to persevere in duty or no, O! I am
afraid I shall fall off, (saysome) O! if I were sure that I should persevere to
the end, it would comfort me, Would you have an infalliable sign that your
duties will hold to the end? take this for one, If thy Soul look upon every
duty as a Mercy to thee, every command to a duty as Gods Mercy to thee every
day, thus I dare pawn my soul that soul will persevere: so far as any soul shall
account a duty to be a Mercy, so far that soul shall persevere. As it is a
certain Evidence of perseverance in duty, when a duty is accounted a Mercy: so
(I say) it is a cerain Evidence that there will be a perseverance in Mercy, when
Mercy is turned into duty; when Mercy shall be an engagement to duty, and turns
into duty, then it is a certain sign there will be a perseverance in mercy; as
when duty is accounted mercy, there will be a persevernce in duty. Again another
may be this.

The Sixth discovery whether Gods present mercyes be in-lets to future mercies.
That mercy that humbles the heart, that mercy is an inlet to further mercy;
And it is very observable that place in Sam. 2, 7. you may read that Chapter in
two or three several places, when God had promised to David great things; mark
you, David's spirit was as low then, never lower, what am I? says David; and
David cries out, Thou art great, O Lord! he cries not out thou have made me
great, but thou art great, O Lord! and in the 26. verse. Let thy name be
magnified for ever; he was low in his own spirit; What am I? but let thy name
be magnified for ever; David's heart was not taken up about this, Oh! God has
promised to me a perpetual Kingdom unto my posterity, and now I am great, and
God has magnified me, no, but what am I? and let thy name be magnified, and be
thou great, O Lord. When this shall be the frame of a soul, of a people, when
God advances them in a way of Mercy, and they cry out, Oh! let me be low, and
be any thing so Gods name be magnified, certainly this Mercy is a forerunner
of further mercy. As it is a great argument of the strength of faith, and
acceptable to God, when as in one adversity, when God seems to come out against
him, that a guilty heart can believe, and the heart can be raised, and not
sink in the depth of adversity; I beseech you observe it, as when the heart
can rise in the depth of adversity, it is a strong argument that there is an
enduring faith, and a precious faith: so when the heart can fall in the height
of prosperity, and be low, there is abundance of grace in that soul acceptable
to God, and God intends much good to it;

The seventh discovery Whether Gods present mercies be in-lets to future
mercies.
When as we are careful to consecrate the first fruits of our Mercies to God,
when the first fruits of the good we do receive, are ever consecrated to God,
then it is but an inlet of further Mercies; for so it was here. This valley of
Achon you know it was by Jerico, as an evidence unto them that they should have
all the Land of Canan, now what did they at Jericho? they did devote al to God,
the whole City to God with the suburbs of it were devoted to God, they
consecrated the first fruits of Canan at their entering into Canan, where
Jericho was, and this valey of Acon was just by it; when God did begin to give
them possession of that good land, they did devote the first fruits to God, and
so it became an evidence to them, that they should possess the Good land
afterward; So when God begins in a way of mercy and goodness, then if a
people, or family or particular man or woman, begineth to devote that first
fruit of mercy to God, it is evident it is a door of hope of further Mercy.
Thus I have done with the explication, I am sorry I have no more time for the
application, I will pass over things as briefly as I can, it is the last of al
I most intend. for the First therefore.

USE. 1.
If this be so that Gods Mercies, and even present Mercies are inlets to
future, when God is in a way of Mercy, then his people may expect greater to
follow. hence folows this consequence upon it that therefore those men and
women that are only careful to seek God in time of affliction, are much
mistaken, and it is a vile wretched folly for any to think, that that is the
only time to seek God, the time of affliction, that is confuted from this
point thus, for if when God is in a way of mercy, then Gods people they argue
that more mercy is coming, then this follows, that when God is in a way of
mercy, then it is a fit time to pray to him, that is the fittest time to pray
to him, when God is in a way of goodness and Mercy to them, when Mercy is
coming, then it is a time for thee to be praying; But now the case is quite
cross in the world, they will pray to God indeed; when? when God has them at
the advantage, in a time of sickness and affliction, and upon their death beds,
when Gods justice is out against them, and Gods wrath upon them, and they see
themselves plunging into the bottomless gulf, then they will pray and cry for
mercy, Oh! thou show thy self to be a stranger to the ways of God, and to
the mind of God, and to the covenant of God, if thou were one of Gods people,
then thou would know that when God is in a way of Mercy, then is the best
time of praying, for one Mercy lets in another, and then is the best time of
praying; I would argue thus, Is it more likely that God when the day of his
patience and long sufering continues to thee, that then he should deny thee
mercy? (I say) is it like he should deny thee mercy then? and yet when the day
of his wrath and justice comes, then he should bestow Mercy upon thee, what an
absurd apprehension of things is here? Thou criest God will deny thee Mercy and
grace now, and now is the day of his long-suffering and patience, and will he
deny it now, and yet is he like to give it thee, when the day of his wrath and
justice comes, upon thy sick bed, and death bed, that may be the day of
vengance and of wrath; If thou have wisdom to thy soul seek God whilst Mercy
is coming, and while he is in a way of Mercy that is the fittest time to pray,
and therefore take it this day and be convinced you carnal hearts that have no
mind to pray, but when they are in their afflictions: but those hearts are
most spiritual, that can pray most when God is coming most in mercy to them,
but the time of affliction is the most unlikly time of getting any thing from
God, I had thought to have spoken diverse things about that.

USE. 2.
If this be so when God is in a way of mercy, one mercy will let out another,
hence all the Saints of God are taught and admonished to observe, and take
diligent notice of the connection of Gods mercies toward them, for certainly
this is Gods way to them, one mercy makes way for another, and if thou
belongest to God, that has been his way to thee, all thy life time even from
his Electing thee; only now it is thy duty to be observant, how God has made
one mercy a door of hope to another mercy, and it is a special work to observe
Gods ways toward a Christian, a special work of the Sabbath, many of you
(especially you that are not book-learned) you say you know not how to spend
the Sabbath after the public exercise is done, but must walk up and down the
streets etc. here is a work for them that are not book-learned to spend the
Sabbath in; If thou be godly, then sometimes every Sabbath recollect all the
ways of Gods merciful providence toward thee, ever since thy Youth and
Childhood, and how one has had a connection to another, how one mercy has let
in another mercy, and that lets in a third, and that third a fourth, and you
shall see how the track of Gods goodness has been toward you al your days,
and that will be a most sweet meditation for you, wherein God shall have a great
deal of Glory; the 92. Psalm is a Psalm appointed for the Sa^^ath, and you
shall find that it is a Psalm of contemplation of the works of God, and the
ways of Gods mercies trwards his people; it is a special way to understand the
connection of things, and the connection of causes, how one cause has dependence
upon another cause, and that upon another, and that upon another, and this is
the difference between Sense and Reason, the bruit Beasts that have only sense,
they taste the sweetness of a thing, but they never enquire after the cause,
but now the more rational any man is, the more desires kindle in him to find
out the connection of causes. If this be a sweet thing to a soul in a natural
way, to find out the connection of causes. O! how sweet is it to a gracious
soul, to find out the connection and concatination of all the mercies, and
goodnesses of the Lord toward him, in all the passages of his life; and do it
the rather because that the truth is (Brethren) this that I am speaking of now,
it is that wherein a principal part of the glorious inheritance of the Saints
consists in the glory of Heaven, wherein the happiness of the glorified souls
there shall consist, it will be this, that eternal Sabbath that shall be spent in
Heaven will amongst other things be spent in this work that I am speaking of, in
a contemplation of all the connection and concatination of Gods merces toward
those that are now in Heaven. Now they have been connected and concatinated
ever since they have had a being, and so brought up to that height of glory,
Oh! what an infinite content the Saints shall have when God shall reveal al, when
they shall see into the councels of God, and the will of God so freely and into
al his ways, how they were chosen from al eternity and so to eternity, and
there they shall see every passage of Providence that they did not understand
the meaning of before, how it made way to such a mercy and that to another, and
that to another, and so til they were brought to that fullness of glory, they
shall (I say) be eternally contemplating thus of the connection of Gods mercies,
and praising and blessing of God, that did thus work and coennex things
together for their good; If thou hopest to come to Heaven, to be thus
excercised, to give God glory there, Oh! begin this work here for we pray Gods
will may be done on earth now, as it is done in Heaven. As on the contrary, it
will be a great part of the torment of the damned, that they shall there see how
one work of Justice made way for another, how one passage of Gods Providence
made way to one Judgment, and that to another, and that to another, and so til
they were plunged into the bottomless pit for ever, and the very sight how God
wrought from one to another, will be torment enough to them; Well, that is the
Second, to consider of the connection of Gods mercies. A Third Use of the Point
is this.

USE. 3.
If this be so hence we are taught to entertain every mercy of God kindly, and
to make much of al Gods mercies, if we belong to God, every mercy comes but as
a Messenger of further mercy, Oh! entertain it well, entertain it kindly,
embrace it, make good use of it; Indeed when the Prophet Elisha knew the
Messenger of the King came to do mischief to him, he bids them entertain him
roughly at the door, hardly at the door, but (Brethren) every mercy that comes
to us if we be godly, it comes as a Messenger of good tidings, it comes to
bring more mercy with it, and therefore let us entertain it kindly at the door,
let us entertain it kindly, for certainly it will make way for further mercy;
that shall be the Third. And then the fourth is this.

USE. 4
The consideration of this point may cause abundance of humiliation to our
hearts, cause exceeding sad thoughts, if this be so that one mercy of God makes
way to another, one mercy if it be sanctified, and have the blessing of God
with it, it is a door of hope to another, hence when we look backwards to these
ways of Gods mercies, that have been heretofore toward us, and look to the
oppertunities that we have had of obtaining further mercy from God, and
consider how we have lost them, when God was in a way with us, Oh! that should
draw tears of blood from us, look back to thy life. I suppose there is never
one in this congregation, but in looking back to the ways of Gods providence
to them, they cannot but cry, Oh! the Lord was once in a way of mercy to me,
there was a time that certainly God was merciful to me, Nay, not only in outwad
mercies, such and such deliverances I had at such a time, Oh! had I followed
those mercies, What might I have gotten? when I was crying to God for
deliverance, God heard me, God has delivered me, delivered my family, now God
(as it were) was in a way of mercy to me, O! had I followed that then, what
might I have gotten? but I neglected the opportunity, I lost it, and now God is
in another way with me, but especially when you look back to the opportunities
that you have had for the good of your souls, has not God many times bin in a
way of mercy to your souls? Oh! was not there such a time when you began to
have frequent workings of Gods spirit in you? you began to have light darted
into your Consciences, to have the spirit of God drawing your hearts, that when
you came to the word, you found the word coming with power, and the spirit of
God sealing it, and your hearts did begin to yield, and to melt before God, Oh!
what might you have gotten if you had gone on, if you had followed God in those
convictions of conscience, and in those beginnings of troubles you had, and
workings of Gods spirit, what might you have come to now? There was a door of
hope, but fools and wretched men to stick in the birth and come not forth; and
alas! May not many say, Oh! that I had a door of hope, there was such a mercy
of God toward me, but woe to me the door is shut, I find my heart shut up, and
my conscience shut up, and my heart now is hard, but it was beginning to be
softened? but Oh! how hard it is now, God was opening my heart, but now it is
otherwise with me, and for ought I know God is gone, and Christ is gone? I had
a day, if I had known it, Oh! it had been happy for many in this place, if
they had at such a time followed God, when he was in a way of Mercy. If (it may
be) when God was in a way of mercy to thee, thou had had a heart to go into
thy closet, and there cried to God to follow on that Good work that he had
begun, and to make it effectual to thee, this had been a gracious work to thy
soul, but thou wentest away into thy shop, into thy calling, perhaps into the
Tavern or Alehouse, to thy gaming, to thy company, and so n^glectedest the day
of Grace, there was a door of hope, but there was another door thou had a
mind rather to follow, than to follow God in the way of mercy, I will not say
that there is no door of hope for thee, for there may be a door of hope, but
this I will say, that thy condition is a lamentable and most grievous condition,
and thou had need look to it, for this consideration sinketh the hearts of
men and women afterward; If thou should come to thy sick bed, or death bed,
perhaps thy conscience will preach that to thee that now I am preaching to thee,
and then thy conscience will give ananswer, it is true there was a door of hope
opened to me, and then if any Minister come to offer Mercy, I (you will say) it
is for those that have a time of Mercy, but God did open my heart, and I did
shut my heart against him, and these thoughts and conclusions are the
despairing and sinking thoughts of men and women upon their sick beds, and if
God never had been coming toward me, there might have been some hope, but what
hope is there now for me? Oh! take heed for time to come, any of you, if God be
coming in a way of Mercy if this day by the word at this time he begin to open
any of your hearts labor to follow him, to go in at this door of hope. Well that
is the fourth; again fifthly from this point learn this.

USE, 5.
If one Mercy be but an inlet to another Mercy, then this should teach all the
people of God, to be content to bear one affliction, though it be but a way
making for another affliction; the argument runs thus, It is true there comes
an affliction, and by and by another, and that makes way for another, and so
the clouds rise after the rain, and how many poor weak hearts are plunged and
dejected, they can bear one affliction, I, but when another comes, and another
comes, at length they fall down under the weight of their afflictions, but if
thou be one that belongest to God, and have the assurance of this point that I
have this day been preaching to thee, then use it as an argument to uphold thy
heart, It is true one affliction comes after another, and one affliction
makes way for another, and has not one mercy come after another too, and has
not one mercy made way for another too? I am sure I have had mercies thick and
three fold, and one has made way for another, and though I have new
afflictions making way one for another yet let me bear them, considereing how
long a time I have had mercies making way one for another; yet further in the
sixth place, the sixth Use of this may be of great conscequence too.

USE. 6.
That if this be the way of God toward his people, that one mercy shall make
way for another, then it should be the way of the people of God toward him
again, that one duty should make way for another duty, there is a great deal of
reason for it, If God be thus gracious to us, that one mercy makes way for
another, then we should be so thankful to him, that one duty of ours should
make way for another duty, and this (brethren) is a most excellent thing, that
one duty makes way for another duty; as I told you before, when a duty is
accounted a mercy, then it will certainly persevere, and so take this second
note of persevering comeing in here, when one duty shall make way for another
duty, certainly that soul will persevere in Duty. But here is the difference
between that which is done by the strength of a natural conscience, and that
which is done out of a principle of true sanctifying Grace; I beseech you
observe it. There are many I suppose are much troubled in this case of
conscience, they say, that one that has but the strength of a natural
conscience he may perform duty out of this strength of a natural conscience
how can I know then when I perform duty out of a gracious principle, a
principle of sanctifying Grace, and that my duties are not out of the strength
o^ natural conscience? If I would give but one note and were to study never so
long of it, I would give this note rather than any one, and that is this use I
am now upon. If one duty that thou performest give strength to another duty,
and make thee fitter for it, and inable^h thee to another duty, this is a sign
that it is not merely out of a natural conscience, for a natural conscience
though it puts me upon the doing of it, yet it puts not strength in me to do
it, but a Gracious principle puts me upon the doing of it, and puts strength in
me to do it, therefore when I am put upon a duty upon conscience, and I find
that one duty does fit me for another, this is surely a gracious principle, not
only fitteth me in the same kind, for so you may say, merely through use I come
to be more perfect, but when it fits in another kind, in another way, by
exercise we come to be more fit for that habit, but here now in spiritual
duties, one makes way for another, though it be in another kind, in another
way, this certainly comes from Grace, therefore if you mark this argument, that
Gods mercies but makes way for another, therefore you will have one duty make
way for another, this is a certain sign of continuance of mercy to thy soul.
Again seventhly.

USE. 7.
It should be a use of reprehension of our unbeleeving hearts thus. It is the
way of God when he comes in one mercy, that we should look upon it as a door of
hope for further; but yet (mark ye) our unbeleeving hearts will usually draw
consequences from Gods mercies to nourish unbelief, quite contrary to the
raising hope and faith, not to make Gods mercies a door of hope to let in
mercy, but make it a door of unbeleif to shut out mercy, as you shall find an
unbeleeving heart working from mercies thus, I, they are mercies indeed, but
they will never hold, they are mercies, but they are to prepare me for greater
Judgments: and thus an unbeleeving heart will work out arguments of unbeleef,
from the very mercies of God themselves; This is a great sin, for God bestows
mercys to raise up hope, and to help thy faith to work, not to help thy
unbeleef to work, and yet (brethren) there are many christians that make no
other use of Gods mercies, but merely to nourish their unbeleefe, and to
strengthen their unbeleefe, whereas they should make them a door of hope.
Again, an eight Use should be this.

USE. 8.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful does one mercy of God make
way for anorher? let one good action (I mean of Mercy to your brother) make way
for another, do not say I have done so much already, and therefore I may now go
on in my covetousness, no, if so be thou have gracious principles, one action
of Mercy must make way for another, one forgiveness of thy brother in one thing,
must make way for another, one action of liberality must make way for another
thus God deals with thee, and do thou so with thy brother, for so is the
command, Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful. Now the last Use
which I intended most of al, and is the chief Use of the point, is this.

USE. 9.
A Use of Exhortation to us al, to follow God on in the way of his Mercies,
when God has opened a door of hope to us, let us follow on after God; 63.
Psalm. 8. the Psalmest there speaks of God unto them, but mark what use he
makes of it, my soul (says he) follows hard after God, O! this should be our
course, does God come at any time particularly to us in any way of Mercy? Let
our soul follow hard after God, when Jacob was wrestling with the Angel, and
day began to dawne, the Angel would have been gone, O! strive and wrestle the
more. What! does the day dawn? many times thou art wrestling a long time with
God, and still there is nothing but darkness in thy soul, but thou do hold on
through Gods Grace to thee, at length the day begins to dawne, God begins
to let in some light to thy Soul, and yet (it may be) even at that time, God
seems as if he would be gone, O! stir up thy self then, and wrestle indeed,
when the day begins to dawn, O! that thou might have more might then, as
(you know that place that) God bids David and his people, when you hear the
noise (says he) in the mulbery trees, bestir your selves, for God is going out
before you then; So I may say, when you feel God stirring in your hearts, and
have some impressions of God upon your spirits, O! bestir your selves, follow
on the good work of the Lord. I remember we read in the gospel, of the poor
blind man crying after Christ, O! Son of David have Mercy upon me; some would
have had him hold his peace, but at length Christ pitying of him, asks who
it is that cried after him, and those that were by came ^o the b^ind man, and
said thus to him, be of good comfort, for he calls thee; I have observed that
he went as fast as he co^ld then, and ^eared no danger of stumbling at any
place. So I may say to many of your souls, it may be your case at this present
thou have bin crying for the sight of thy eyes, O! that he would show me his
truth, and open the gospel, and the mysteries of it, O! that he would open my
heart, and give me a soft heart, and a believing heart, whereas I have an
unbeleeving heart: well, be of good comfort, he calls thee, now he works by his
spirit and calls thee, O! now bestir thy self, and go on after God in this
way. It is a special part of the wisdom, and duty of Christians, to observe
what are the ways of Gods mercy toward them, (as I told you before) the
connections of them, so I mean the beginings of them, and therefore take this
one note, It is a great reason why many Christians are so long time in
darkness, and under the spirit of bondage, because they do not observe the
beginnings of Gods mercy, how God begins with them, because they have not all the mercy they would have, therefore they neglect the observation of the
beginnings of mercy: but now if thou had a heart to observe the beginings of
Gods mercy, and to pray when he begins to open the door, and let in a little
light, and so to follow God, thou might have been free from the spirit of
bondage long ere now. But I must leave particular applications now, and come to
the more general, and therefore seeing that this is the thing our condition
requires, we must venture upon it at least now, though I should never do any
other thing, I could not forbear at this time, that God has opened a door of
mercy, a door of hope to us, to al England, I suppose every one sees it, and
among the people of God it is the matter of their discourse, when they come
together. Now what is it that should be our care? O! that this door be never
shut, that now our iniquities lock it not, now to follow God on in the way of
his mercy; that is (brethren) a blessed door of hope, and I may compare this
door of hope, to that door that leads into the holy place, 1. Kings. 7.50.
the text says, That the hinges of gold for the doors of the inner house, that
door that went into the holy place, it had the hinges of gold. Brethren, those
worthies of our land, that God has called unto our Parliamentary Asembly, they
are the hinges of our door, and blessed be God they are not iron hinges, tha^
they have not rigid and rugged spirits, not at al to regard the cries of the
oppressed, no, they have been unto us as hinges of gold, our door of hope does
hang upon hinges of gold; If I were at this time to speak to that Assembly,
those that are the hinges of our door, to those that are our door-keepers, the
door-keepers of this Door of hope, yea, rather those that are even this door
it self unto us, were I to speak, to them I would seek to lay the great
charge, of that mighty trust that is committed unto them upon them; never any
Assembly in the world had opportunities of greater mercy from God to his people
than these have: were I to speak to them, I should seek to persuade, that as
ever they would have God open to any of their souls, for themselves or their
posterity, when they shall knock at Gods door of mercy, that they would be
faithful in keeping the door of hope open unto us, and that we might enter
comfortably into it; I should cry unto them, that they would set open their own
hearts, open ye gates, and be ye opened ye everlasting doors, that Christ the
King of Glory might enter into your hearts and families, and be set up there
but because I am not to speak to them, but to you this day, I shall direct my
self unto you in that that is suitable to this auditory I am preaching to. The
exhortation of God to you is; that you would take notice of the great work of
God in this door of hope, that you would give him the glory, that you would
praise his name for his wondrous works, declare that his name is nigh, and
therefore praise him, that you would seek God now earnestly, when he is in a
way of mercy. O! that you would seek to praise him now, and praise him as much
as ever you can, that you would close with God in the great work that God is
about, that according to your several places and ranks, you would further the
great work that God has opened a door unto, that now you would bestir you:
while God is stirring in a way of mercy, be you al stirring in a way of
endeavors, according unto the mercy God has sent, that your hearts might be
up and kept up, as Gods heart is up at this time, and be kept up for ever, and
to that end that your hearts might be a little stirred to further the work of
God, and toward keeping open this door, take these Considerations.

1. That door of hope that now we have, Oh! it is a door that God has opened
after much knocking; Oh! there has been rapping at Heavens gate, mighty
knockings there before this door was opened; Oh! the prayers of the Saints that
have been put up for to get open this door! they have knocked again and again,
and it has seemed to be barred against them, at length prayer has got open
the door, as God promised, Knock and it shall be opened; This day that word is
^ul^illed toward us, we have knocked and the door is opened: now that door
that is opened by such knockings, O! wha^ great pity it were it should be shut
again through our ^emissness.

2. It is a door of hope opened to us now, when as but a little while since we
have h^d a door of fears, and miseries, and wrath, and wickedness,
superstition, and Idolatry even set wide open, this was a door not long since;
Oh! did not God open a door to us so, as if he would let in all wrath and
miseries? What fears had we? What kind of communion had we when we met
together? What shall we do? Where shall we go? the hand of God is against us, you
were afraid that God would let ih a deluge of misery, and at that door let in all his wrath upon us, and not only so, but a door open for all kind of
wickedness, al superstition, Idolatry, cruelty; What a door was there open not
long since? we may apply that place of Jer. 23.15. where the Prophet says,
Profaneness is gone through the whole Land from the Prophets, from wicked and
scandalous Ministers and others. Oh! what superstition and profaneness went
throughout our Land, there was a door open from them to al wickedness, such a
door as might bring al kind of wickedness. Now that we that had the mouth of
such a door laid open upon us, should now have a door of hope opened to us, Oh!
praised and blessed be the name of God! shall we be unfaithful now to God in
this way of mercy toward us?

3. Consider that we have this door of hope opened to us, after that we have
been unfaithful, after the opening of other doors, how many doors have we shut
to our selves hertofore? We have had many doors of hopes, other Parliaments
before and yet we not following of God, we did wretchedly and wickedly shut
these doors upon God, and upon our selves; and yet that God should open yet
another door unto us, Oh Gracious God! as they cried at the laying of the
foundation of the Temple, Praise, Praise; so we may say now, though the work be
not done as we desire, yet at the beginning of it we may cry, praise; praise.

4. This door of hope was opened to us, when in our own thoughts we give al up
for lost, when we even thought in our selves, that God had for eternity shut
the door against us, Oh! how have the ministers of God in former times been
crying up judgments, and our guilty consciences did close with those truths,
and say, surely now God is gone, peace is gone, Christ is gone, hope of God for
posterity is even gone, we are made a prey to their teeth, and even swallowed
up and now after that we gave up al for gone, and did conclude that God had
shut the door for ever against us: yet now for God to open a door of hope, this
may work upon our conscences to sanctify the Lords name, and to follow the Lord
with all our might in this way of mercy. Yea, shall I say further in the fifth
place.

5. Consider with what a mighty hand this door of hope was opened to you; I
remember I have read that Josephus speaking concerning the destruction of the
Temple, he says that at the time a little before the Temple was destroyed,
that the Temple door that refused to be opened by thirty men, it was so great
that it required the service of thirty men every mornning to open the door, and
every night to shut it, yet a little before the destruction of the Temple, that
door flew open alone of its own accord, and they took it as a mighty ominous
thing, as the hand of God. Surely this door of hope could not have been opened
by all the skill and power of men, they could not conceive the way, God came by
his immediate hand and opened it, a mighty hand, an out stretched arm of God
has taken the bars away, and opened this door of hope, now to abuse it, or
not to thank the name of God in that, in which Gods hand has feemed
remarkable, Oh! this is a greivious sin, and a mighty provoking of God, since
this is the door that Gods mighty hand has opened. Again further.

6. It is a door that many adversaries have labored to shut a long time, Oh!
what devices, councels, plotts, all the ways that possibly could be devised to
shut this door, but God has kept it open, and put in a bar to keep it open
notwithstanding our adversaries; We may say of this as Saint Paul in another
case speaking of another door, in 1 Cor. 16.9. There was an effectual door
opened, and there were many adversaries for it, so we may say that here is a
door opened, and many adversaties there be. Yea further in the next place.

7. This door, Oh! it is a door of mercy by mercy, and therefore be thankful,
(I say) it is a door of mercy by mercy. Brethren, had God opened a door of
hope, though it had been the valley of Achor in the other sense, though God had
given us the valley of Achor for a door of hope, in the other sense that the
words are ordinarily taken in, that is, the valley of trouble, if God had
brought never such troubles upon England, and we had been in never such trouble
and confusion for the present, yet if God had made this a door of hope to bring
in mercy, we had infinite cause of thankfulness. But yet this is his goodness,
that we have a door of hope of mercy by mercy we may say of this door, as the
scripture says of that door in 1 Kings, 6.31. And for the entering of the
oracle he made doors of Olive trees, two doors also of Olive trees and carved;
The doors of the Temple they were made of the Olive trees, and the Olive you
know is a symbol of peace; our door of hope it is made of Olive trees, Oh! we
might have had iron doors, and gates to rend our flesh, and we might have
passed through fire and water to have come at mercy, but (beloved) we have a
door of Olive trees, of abundance of mercies, yea, such a door in the entrance
of which we find abundance of mercies, at the very threshold of the door, Oh!
what mercies have been found already (I say) in the beginning of the endeavors
of those that have been our door keepers, or rather our doors of hope, what
abundance of Mercies have been found already? so that I may say of the
endeavors of those assembled now in Parliament, as it is said there in the book
of the Canticles, of the Churches endeavors in the time of reformation, for so
that place is by many understood, in 5 Canti. 5. I rose up to open to my
beloved, what then? And my hand dropped with Myrrh, and my Fingers with sweet
smelling Myrrh, upon the ^andles of the Lock; what is the meaning of this? The
Church of God when Christ had called by his spirit, afterward stirred by his
Grace, began to endeavor reformation, and the very first indeavoring of
reformation, when they were but entered upon the door of reformation, Oh! it
was very sweet in the Nostrills of God, very savory, my hands dropped with
Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh upon the handles of the lock,
when I was but indeavoring to open and to reform, then my endeavors were very
savory to the Nostrills of Christ. So the very fingers of our worthies, do they
not smell of sweet Myrrh? Are they not savory in the Nostrills of God, and in
the Nostrills of his Saints? They are savory when their hands are but upon the
very handles of the lock; therefore seeing we have such a precious door as this
is, we are bound to seek God for the opening of it, and the continuing of it
open; but yet further.

Considering (brethren) the wideness and the largness of it; every one that
does but know how the constellation of things are abroad in the affairs in
Germany, in France, and Spain, and the Low-cuntries, and every where; they see
that God is (as it were) conspiring together, to make this door of our hope
wider and wider to us, and to enlarge our opportunities, God in this bids us
come and ask what we will and we shall have it, such a wide door that our fore
fathers never knew, Oh! how would they have rejoiced to see this wide door of
hope opened? Oh! how unthankful, unworthy wretches should we be, if such a wide
door of hope as this should be neglected? Nay,

Consider not only (brethren) the wideness of this door, but the treasures
into which this door opens; to what does this door open? if it open to that
that has no great treasure in it there needs not so much striving to get in;
but if it open to rich and invaluable treasures, then there is need of striving
to get in; surely (brethren) this door of our hop^ opens into unvaluable and
Glorious treasures; what treasures? the liberty of our estates is a great
feavor, deliverance from oppression of wicked and unreasonable men is a great
feavor, Oh! much more is our liberty of conscience; Is our liberty of
conscience oppressed? That is the oppression that cyeth in Gods ears; The
oppression of the poor, the oppression of bread, that cries, but when the
children of God shall cry to their Father, Father, these proud prelatical men
are those that take away our bread, they have cried up to God, and God has
heard their cry, and now has opened a door to deliver us from conscience
oppression, and to grant us bread again, to grant bread to us, not only so but
it opens to this treasure too, it opens to the treasure of the purity of Gods
ordinances, and deliverance of us from those burdens. If I should name but
this one burden that is upon the Ministers of God, and that woeful burden that
is not upon their shoulders only, (if it were only so it were enough) but upon
the consciences of men, and that is the admitting of so many profane wretched
creatures to the Sacrament; it is an insupportable burden to any conscientious
man, that has to do in such a thing as that was; those that are opposite to
God, in the way of prophanness, that we must come and tell them here, take the
body of Jesus Christ that was given for thee, no conscientious man but was
oppressed by this and not only this, but for you also, for certainly
(brethren) there should be an excluding of such from those holy things, and to
whom has God committed the trust of this great ordinance of his? certainly he
has committed the trust to the Church; wheresoever there is a true Church,
there this trust is committed, that if you will own your selves for a true
Church certainly you are trusted with it. But you will say, we have no power to
do it; plead not so, you have a power, Christ has given a power to every
Church to do it, to purge out the old leaven, and therefore know when there is
nothing between your power, and the the exercise of your power, but only
suffering and affliction, your power is no power if you exercise not that
power that Christ has given you, the sin will lie upon you, and this is no plea
that there is a suffering between your power and the exercise of it. Now if
God open a door this way, and we see some light to deliver our consciences from
snares, and from these burdens, Oh! it is a blessing and mercy; it makes a
door to open to al Gods mercies, for this is the reason many separate from your
congregations, not because they judge your Church a false Church, or your
Ministry a false Ministry. But

1. Because they have not all the ordinances; of God in the purity of them,
there are such corruptions that they cannot meddle with all.

2. They cannot enjoy al Gods Ordinances; though the Church be true, and the
Ministry true, yet certainly those that are conscientious, and look upon them,
they cannnot but be afraid, therefore if there be a door of hope to let in our
brethren the outcasts of Israel, and to join with them in communion, certainly
every gracious heart cannot but think this a precious mercy, that God should
open the door of hope, and this should be your prayer and endeavor to the
utmost you can, that this door of hope may be so wide, that your Brethren may
come and enter in with the peace of their Consciences; As heretofore it has
been the honor of England, that others have come out of other Countries for
their Consciences, and have been sheltered here, that now it be not the
dishonor of England, that her own children should be driven out from her;
because they cannot have liberty of Conscience, and that in things which some
think they are but of an indifferent nature; if I say that now it should be
dishonored by casting out, and contemning your Brethren, because they cannot
have peace of Conscience, Oh! what a dishonor will it be if it continue?
therefore if God be opening his door, this ought to be your endevor to seek
God, and to endevor that it may be so wide, that those that you Judge in your
Consciences to be faithful and godly, may come in and enter in at this door,
and enjoy peaceable communion with you.

10. This door it may further the setting up of Christ in his Kingdom of
Glory, Christ has been set up much in England in his prophetical, and Kingly,
and Priestly Office, now that Christ may be set up in the Church to rule upon
his Throne, to have a door of hope to open to that, that shall have an influence
to the general reformation of all the Christian Churches in the world, for the
beating down the Kingdom of Antichrist, such a door of Hope have we opened to
us. Yea, and further besides this,

11. Consider what a dreadful thing it will be, if this door of Hope should be
shut; though it is true, we have some comfortable Evidence it shall not (as I
shall speak more by and by) yet who knows but that through our wretchedness, and
want of preparation of the hearts of the People of this Land, but that this
door may be shut again: Oh! the dismal darkness if once it shut again! Oh! the
contempt that will be upon all the Saints of God! Oh! the pride, and Rage, and
Insolency of the Instruments of Antichrist against them, if this door be shut
again! Oh then, if we should once again say, We looked for light, but behold
darkness; Oh! it would be blackness of darkness then; what Flies would come out
of the Land of Egypt then? How would all Superstition and Idolatry flow in upon
us? what would become of your Posterity, and little ones? How would they ever
be nourished up in the Knowledge of God and Christ? And you are not likely to
enjoy your outward Estates neither: if any of you think you have back doors to
get out from Religion to keep your Estates, you may be mistaken, if this door
be shut: therefore you have need to follow God all you can in this way to keep
it open.

12. Had we hearts but to be faithful with God, though it be not much we can
do, yet there is a Promise God made to the Church of Philadelphia, in Revel.
3.7. To the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, write these things, says he
that is Holy, he that is True, he that has the Key of David, that opens, and
no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens: I know thy works, and
behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; surely
these are an excellent people: and mark what follows; For thou have a little
strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my Name: Behold I will
make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but
do lie: Behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to
know that I have loved thee. God opens a door, and says that no man shall shut
this door; and yet truly (brethren) it is very observable that we have from
that famous instrument of God, that brought a great deal of light unto this
book, namely Mr. Brightman, that I name for honors sake, you that are
acquainted with his writings upon this book, shall find that he applies every
one of these Churches, unto the Churches that should follow after to the end of
the world and the estate of them, and makes it not only litteral, but Tipical
to tipify Gods ways of dealings with other Churches to the end of the world,
and it is very observable that he makes the Church of Sardis, to answer to the
Church of Germany, just according to his opening of Gods dealing with the
Church of Sardis, he prophecies what God should do to the Church of Germany,
and so it came to pass, and this Church of Pihladelphia, he did interpret it
thirty or forty years ago (so long it is since he wrote it) of the Church of
Scotland and see how far God has made it good: God has opened a door to them,
and certainly such a door as shall never be shut; that which is opened to them,
and they not only will have it themselves, but God will make them instrumental
for others, and mark how they are described, for thou have the Ministry, every
one looked upon that Church with contempt, a very poor beggarly nation and an
ignorant people, had little knowledge of any thing at al, had but little time,
but yet thou have kept my word, though they have little knowledge, yet they will
keep his word, yea, mark and consider how far he goes on, behold I will make
them of the Synagoge of Satan, which say they are Jews, and say they are the
Church of God, I will make them to say they are not Jwes, they are not the
church of God, but they do lie, behold I will make them to come and worship
before this people, and to know that I am God, even to worship before their
feet, and to know that I have loved them; do not those that cried out of them
before, and? rayled upon them, do they not now begin to be convinced that God
was with them, and therefore now we know how they are called by others, what
titles now they have different from their former, thus God has fulfilled it in
part upon them, and believe it we shall have a share in that mercy even that
door that is opened to us in that way, is so opened as it shall not be shut
again; wherefore then to conclude al.

1. Let every one take heed, let the fear of God be upon every soul, especially
any of you that are more eminent than others in any place, take heed, as from
God this day take warning, that thou be not the least interruption in the great
work that God is about; certainly if you be, if you will stand in this door to
hinder the good that God is letting in, you will certainly be overcome, you will
certainly be vanquished, you can never hinder the work God is about, and
therefore those men that are superstitous, Antichristian, and would uphold that
work (I say) those men are in some respects more unhappy, than the
superstitious and Antichristian men in former times, because that those that
before did seek to maintain superstition, and popery, and the like, then it was
a time that God was peacable, and suffering toward the enemies of his people,
and was content it should come in then, I mean content by way of permission,
not by way of approbation, and did suffer it, but now is the very time that God
is quite rooting it out, it is the very time that God is seting himself against
it, and therefore they that shall now seek to uphold it, they are men that are
most unhappy; because at that time they stand in the door, just when God is
coming with his power, and with his stength. O! take heed you have no hand in
interupting the great work God is about, and (my brethren) that we may give God
the honor of this door of hope.

2. Let us consider with our selves, what we would have given heretofore, that
we might have had such a door of hope, I am persuaded many of us would have
laid down our lives, O! Lord if we might have purchased so much good as now is
come to England, we would have counted our dearest heart blood well spent. Now
seeing we would have given so much heretofore, O! what shall we render now? that
strength that we should have spent under the cruel rage of our adversaries, O!
Let that strength be now spent to the praise and honor of our God under his
mercies: there is a notable place of scripture for that in the 119. Psalm.
134. God had delivered him from his oppressors, and therefore he would keep
his statures; Thou have (O Lord) delivered me from my oppressors, therefore will
I keep thy statutes; So that strength that we should have spent under the
cruelty of our oppressors, now should be spent in the keeping of Gods statutes,
and following the ways of God.

3. Let our hopes now rise higher, God would have our hopes raised higher,
seeing he has opened a door let us stand in the door, and let us not be
discouraged, though we think perfect reformation a difficult thing, yet
(brethren) perfect reformation now is not more difficult, than that we have now
was difficult a year or two ago; a year or two ago that we now have was as
unlikely, as perfect reformation now is; and therefore we are to raise up our
hopes to higher and greater things: and therefore the King when he smote the
ground twice or thrice, he should have smote seven or eight times. And
(brethren) we have to deal with a great God and his design is to magnify his
great name in the good of his Church, in the 17. Psalm. Thou have showed thy
marvailous loving kindness, The word as is is taken by some may be read, Lord,
make thy loving kindness wonderful, miraculous. God loves to make his loving
kindness to his Church miraculous. Now (brethren) we may hope to have that from
God, that shall make God appear a wonder-working God, that shall set up God in
his glory, now this reformation in our land, it shall set up God in his glory,
that we hope for, our hope is at the lowest except we hope for such great
things, as may set out God to be an infinite and great God. An ordinary
reformation in deliverance from the oppression of the state, it is not enough
to set out the infinite pardoning and loving kindness of God, wherefore then for
the conclusion of al, O! let every one therefore now go on in the name of God,
and stand in the door, and look how God is coming, and close with him, and
meet God in every way of his mercy, in Reve. 4.1. the text says, There was a
door opened in heaven, (brethren) certainly there is a door opened in heaven,
let us encourage our hearts, and do what we can in our places, and with the
strength that we have, let us open our hearts, and open our desires to him, let
him know that we are willing to venture our estates, our liberties, our lives,
and all that we are or have to maintain a good cause, God has done much, he will
do much in Psalms. I have brought you out of the Land of Egypt, open your
mouth wide that I may fill it, I have done great things, brought you out of the
land of Egypt, open your mouth wide that I may fill it. Certainly God he has
dilivered us from the Egyptian bondage, let us open our mouths, and our hearts,
and our Arms, and our hands wide, and the Lord will fill them, and now the Lord
grant to every one of you as he did to Lidia, the text says, the Lord opened
her heart, and so the Lord open your hearts. And as ye read there was an
effectual door of faith opened to the Gentiles, so let this be the conclusion
of al, I pray that at the last there may be a door of faith opened to this
Congriation, to receive these truths that have bin delivered by faith.

OLD AGE IS A Crown of Glory, Especially When found in ways OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Preached before the Company of Mercers at their Chapel. May, 20. 1641
Proverbs, 16, 31. The hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the
Way of Righteousness;
I Have lately in this City Preached unto Young men, and at this time supposing
this auditory to be intended chiefly for grave Citizens (though others come in)
I have prepared to speak suitable unto them; Psalm. 148.12. Young men and Old
men are called to praise the name of the Lord; as it was a blessed time when
the children cried Hosannah, upon Christ's coming to purge the Temple (for that
was the occasion) so it shall be and is a blessed time, when Old men are coming
into God, in the praise of his great works, when God shall reign Gloriously
before the ancients of Israel: we have such a prophecy in Isa. 24. verse the
last. When the Lord of Hosts shall reign in mount Zion, in Jerusalem, before the
ancients Gloriously; A blessed time when the ancients shall behold the Glorious
reign of Christ, and be joyful in it: and in Revela. 4. It is prophesied again
of the Elders (in the latter end of the chapter) that the Elders fell down and
worshipped him that lives for ever, and cast down their crowns before him.
This text of mine it is a proverbial sentence, setting out of the Glory of Old
men in the ways of righteousness, we may spare dependence, for the proverbs
are not as jewels linked in a Bracelet together, but as so many several
Diamonds lying one by another, and some of them several Diamonds lying (as it
were) in a box together; Now this proverb has in it two Diamonds set upon the
crown of Old men, one below it, and the other a top of it, that below it is the
Hoary Head, and a top of it is found in the way of righteousness. The hoarie
head is a crown to Old men, if it be found in the way of righteousness. Two
doctrinal points we have in the words, the First is.

Doct. 1. That Old Age is an honorable thing, it is a Crown of Glory. Doct. 2.
But then especially honorable, when it is found in the way of righteousness.
For it is not wholly limmited to the way of righteousness, the word [IF] is
not in the original, it is honorable howsoever, but then most honorable when
found in the way of rigoteousness.

I shall first prosecute the first Doctrine.

It is a high expression of the Holy Ghost here The Hoary head is Glory and it
is a Crown of Glory, Corona ornatissima says one Interpreter, a Glorious
Crown, Corona exaltationis, a Crown of exaltation says another Corona
pulchritudinis, a crown of beauty says another, The hoary head is a glorious
crown, a crown of exaltation, a crown of beauty.

1. God honors Old Age, as by speaking honorably of it in Proverbs, 20.29. Gray
hairs are the beauty of Old men.

2. God honors it by promising Old Age to the keeping of the commandments, in
Deuteronomy. 4.40. And you know that first commandment with promise, the fifth
Commandment, honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

3. God honors it by preferring it before al riches, and before al other kinds
of honors Proverbs 3.16. It is said, that in the right hand of wisdom is length
of days, in her left hand is riches and honors, riches and honor is but in the
left hand of wisdom, and length of days is in the right hand, thus God honors
Old Age.

4. God honors it by giveing a charge unto others to honor it, in Leviti.
19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the Old
man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord; It is one of the most solemnest charges
that we have in the scripture, mark with what gravity and solemnity the charge
goes; thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the Old
man, and fare thy God, I am the Lord; your fear of God is laid upon this, And
because I see many young ones here, I shall somewhat direct my speech to you, to
you that make any profession of Religion, you must manifest it in this; would
you make it appear that you fear the Lord? Thou shall rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the face of the Old man, and fear the Lord; this is one work
of fearing of God, to do this in obedience to God, and if you be bold and
impudent before the Aged, know this is an argument that the fear of God is not
upon you; The beauty and glory of religion is to be shown in the duties of our
relations, as between Father and Child, Servant and Master, inferior and
superior, young and old, except religion does manifest it self in our relations
it is al in vain, Thou shall honor the face of the Old man, and fear the Lord;
God lays the fear of his name upon this, and this is a great honor that God
putts upon Old Age.

Secondly, It is honored by all good men. Job. 32.5.6. And so Elihu there
honors the Aged in diverse verses, and when Paul writ to Phylemon, in verse 9.
of that Epistle, he makes it as an argument, and Paul the aged, knowing it was
a powerful argument indeed with Phylemon.

Thirdly, Old Age is honored by the heathen themselves. I remember I have read
of the Lacedaemonians, when their Ambassadors were at Athens, upon a time they
were in a Theater, where abundance of people were gathered together, there
comes a grave Old man in, and presently the Lacedemonian Ambassadors in
reverance to the Aged man, they rose up to make the Aged man room and place,
upon this all the Athenians gave a great shoute in applauding this their work,
that they being strangers would show such respect to age, and this was when
they came into a Theater. This is a good rule when they come not into Theaters,
but into places of Gods assemblies, when Aged men come not into Theaters to see
plays, but when they come to worship God, and hear his word, that young men
should rise up before them, and reverance their Age, and show reverance and
respect to them; and know I speak not this as a moral work, but as that wherein
you should show the fear of God.

Fourthly, It has been accounted in scripture a sign of great humanity, when
the Aged are so honored. In Deuteronomy, 28.50. There is a notable Place, God
threatens that he would send a nation of fierce countenance, which shall not
regard the person of the Ol^: It is an inhumane nation, of fierce countenance,
that shall not regard the person of the Old.

Fifthly, When God would threaten a judgment against a family, he threatens that
there should be no Old man in it. 1 Samuel 2.31.32.

Quest. But why should Old Age be so honored?

I have not time to search fully into the reasons of it, (there are others
things that I especially intend at this time that are behind) but yet somewhat
I must say. First.

Answ. 1 They had the possession of the world before you, and they have been
means to keep the world, instruments to keep it in that order, and in that good
condition in which it is.

2. They are to be supposed to have knowledge, Prudence, and understanding, and
Old Age is knit together diverse times in scripture, and I remember the Chaldee
paraphrase upon that place, thou shall rise up before the Old man, translate it
with this word, qui doctus est in Lege, before him that is taught in the Law,
supposing that al Old men should be men of understanding, and men of knowledge,
and indeed an ignorant Old man in these times of knowledge is a monster in the
world, having had such a time of light as we have had shinning so clearly,
dazeling our very eyes, and sparkling continually in our consciences. Again.

3. Old Age is that that al desire to come unto, and therefore honorable.

4. There is a kind of image of Gods eternity upon it, God himself has this
title of the ancient of days.

USE. 1.
If God then thus honors it, and puts this honor upon it, O! let us al honor
old age, let there be a reverent carriage of you toward them let them see the
work of Godline^^ the fruit of Godlyness, especially governors in in their
servants, parents in their Children, that they may see that since they were
more godly, they have more reverence to old age, Advise with them, be willing
to be guided by them, and yet not so far as to give so much unto age, as to
make it to be a rule of actions, as to be led into any error by it. When
antiquity is pleaded for that which is not truth, it is but the very mould (as
it were) of error, many men when they are (as it were) mired in their error,
and know not how to get out, especially in way of dispute, then they will seek
to help themselves by antiquity as we read of Jeremiah when he was put into
the mire, they put old rotten rags under his arme-holes to lift him up, so
many being plunged in disput, when they have nothing else to say, they think
to get together old rotten rags of antiquity, no true antiquity, for that is
antiquity that is according to the first original of al antiquities meus Jesus
Christus says Ignatius, and Crisostom says, Christ said not that I am custom,
but that I am the truth. There is a great deal of power I confess in old age,
for to prevail with the younger sometimes in tha that is evil, and in this sense
the holy ghost bids us call no man father, no man must be called Father, to have
the authority, to be a rule of our actions against the truth; we have a notable
story in the 1. Rings. 13.11. of the prophet that God charged not to return
back again the same way he came, and when he came to the Court, not to stay,
nor eat in that place, but when he came to the Court, then they labored to
persuade with him that he would return, that he would stay and eat, and he
could easily put off a company of young gallants at Court, but when he came unto
the old prophet, Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel, (says the text) and
this old prophet he comes and he prevails with him to go against the command of
God, it seems he had some reverent respect unto his age, and so he prevailed
with him when the other Courtiers could not. We must take heed that antiquity
never so prevail with us, no, not any old prophet, but though we must not be
led into error through our respect unto them, yet still keep our reverential
respect toward them, especially you that be Children, reverence you your old
parents, in Prove. 23.22. there is a charge, hearken to thy father that begat
thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old; Hear thy Father that begat
thee, and despise not thy mother, because they being weaker are more ready to
be despised, therefore God gives a charge that none must despise their mothers
when they are old.

2. Give respect to them by being dutifully obedient, hearkening to their
counsels. Even Esau himself that was so wicked, yet he would seem to give
some respect unto his old father Isaac, as in Genesis. 18.8. And Esau seeing
that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his Father, then went Esau to
Ishmael, and took unto the wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael
Abraham's Son etc. When Esau saw the daugh^ers of Canaan did not please his
father, Esau would go and take the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's Son, he would
not displease his own old father, no not an Easu, no, not a profane Esau he
would not displease his own old father, not in his match, in his choice, but
would choose those that he thought were most agreeable unto the mind of his
old Father.

3. Give respect unto your parents in bearing good will to them. The very reason
why many would fain have their old parents to be from them, or they from their
old parents, is indeed an argument (if it were considered) why they should
rather desire to have their parents with them, namly, because they have many
weaknesses, therefore thou should rather desire to have thy parents with
thee, that thou might cover their weaknesses, and bear with their
weaknesses, who is fitter to do it than thee to thy parents? the stork will
teach thee to provide for thy old parents, they will help them to fly, and feed
their old ones when they are not able to do it themselves.

1. It is a great evil in a commonwealth, and a sign of great confusion, when
young ones shall behave themselves proudly against the old, in Isaiah. 3.5.
when the young come and behave themselves proudly against the old, it is noted
as a great argument of Gods Judgments upon a Kingdom, and indeed it is a sad
and grevious disorder, we love the houses and the Towns in which we were borne,
much more then the loins and the womb in which we were borne, to which we
should give a greater respect. And.

2. God threatens those that are disobedient and stout to their parents, that
the very ravens shall pick out their eyes, and under the law they were to be
punished with death, if any parent would come and charge his son with
disobedience, he was to be stoned to death.

USE. 2.
You that are old and ancient, seeing God has put honor upon you, take heed
you dishonor not your hoary hairs. God says you are a Crown of Glory,
dishonor not you this your Cown of Glory, for your white hairs will make your
sins so much the blacker; and we read in Numb. 6.7. that the high priest might
not defile himself because the consecration of God was upon his head. There is
a Crown of Glory upon thy head, therefore defile not thy self. I have read of
a Lacedemonian that wore his beard very long, and it was white, and one asked
him why he wore it so long, he gave this answer; I wear it long that I seeing
my white hairs may do nothing dishonorable to them, may do nothing unbeseeming
those white hairs of mine. If thou should do any thing unbeseeming thy
Hoary head and Crown of Glory, thou take the beauty away from thee, there is
a Puerilis Senectus, an Old man may be a Child, as well as a young man may be
Old. A young man may be Old in respect of his spirit, and demeanor, and
carriage. And much vanity may appear in those that are Old, to make them be as
Children. Titus. 2.2, 3. you have there the exhortation of the Holy Ghost to
Old men, how they should carry themselves with all gravity, and with modesty. It
is a notable place that we are to observe that Rehoboam though he were above
forty years Old, yet the scripture (you shall find in 2. Chron. 13.7.) calls
Rehoboam a Child, he was but a Child, one that had a very childish Effeminate
heart, when Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, and could not withstand
them, young, a child, tender hearted, of a softly heart, a foolish Effeminat
childish spirit, that is the meaning of it, and yet this Rehoboam was above
forty years Old, whereas Joseph was a young man, and the scripture in Genesis 45.
calls him a Father unto Pharaoh. But Thirdly.

USE. 3.
If it be an honor to live many years in this world, O! What an honor is
eternity then to live for ever? It has been counted a great honor to have but
any monuments of men after they are dead, to last for a great while, Julius
Ceasar he has appointed his ashes to be kept in an urine in a Room to this
day, (as they say) so very honorable is a monument. But then to live to al
eternity with God, what honor is in that? If the hoary head be a crown of
glory, what crown of glory is it for a man to have eternal life? to have that
eternal crown of glory put upon him, what are a few years here in this world,
in comparison to eternity? but a little plash of water in comparison of the
infinite ocean. If thou have cause to bless God for a few days that he has
lengthened out to thee here, what cause have thou bless him for the hope of
eternal life? Again.

USE. 4,
If the hoary head be such a Crown of Glory, if it puts honor upon men, What
then does eternity it self put upon God? If men be to be honored because of a
few years here in this world, how is God to be honored then that is eternal?
God does glory himself in his eternity, I am he that inhabiteth eternity. And
the Elders in Revel. 4.8. they fell down and worshipped him that was, and is,
and shall be for evermore. I remember Pareus tells us of a custom of the Turks,
that they use every morning to have one proclaim aloud, The lord that was, and
that shall be for ever, the Lord is eternal, he has no beginning at al. Thou
art but of yesterday, though thou have lived now many years, the Lord he shall
have no end at al, but though thou live long, yet it will be said within a
little time, such an one lived so many years and is dead; as it is in Genesis 5.
There Methuselah and others lived thus and thus many years, and Adam and
others, and they died. And I have read of one that hearing that Chapter read,
that such an one lived so many hundred years and he died, and such an one lived
so many hundred years and he died, it made such an impression upon his spirit,
as took him off from all the things of the world, and caused him to mind the
provision of his eternal estate, and was the cause of his conversion, by
reading the years of so many men's ages, and yet they dyed. Remember it must be
said one day, such a man was seventy or eighty years Old and he dyed, but God
abides for ever, we are but as grass. And therefore if God will have honor put
upon you because of your Age, put you honor upon God because of his eternity:
God he can have no time added to his time, there is no succession of time with
him, God cannot be said to have continued, or to have lived a longer time now,
than he did live before the world began, there is no time added to him, he is
beyond all measure of time, and it is good for us when we enjoy any continuance
of time in any comfort, to worship the eternal God, to have our hearts to
delight in that eternal God that is beyond al time. It is a very observable
place that we have in Genesis concerning Abraham, it is in Genesis 21 That when
Abraham had been going up and down a while, and afterward had a resting place,
the text says Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba: that notes that he was to
abide where he planted a grove: and what then? and he called there upon the
name of the Lord, the everlasting God. This is the first time that God is
called in Scripture the everlasting God, and then did Abraham call upon the
name of the Lord, the everlasting God, when God did grant unto him ^ome abiding
in that place where he was, that he could stay and plant a grove. Has God
caused an abiding in you, that you have lived a long time in this Ci^y in a
prosperous condition? do you learn to call upon the name of God the everlasting
God, give honor to the eternal God? But we must pass from this first point
though it be a point of great use; yet the second is the principal, The hoary
head is a crown Glory; but when? When it is found in a way o^ righteousness.
That is the Second.

Doct. 2. That it is the way of righteousness that puts the Crown of Glory
indeed upon the hoary head.
That is the Diamond that is a top of the Crown, if the hoary head be an honor,
this is the honor of that honor, if it be a Crown, righteousness it is the
Crown, of that Crown Mensura vitae non est longitudo sed honestum, The measure
of life is not the length of it, but Godliness is the great honor we are to
measure our life by. I suppose you have heard the speech of him that said, I
have been long, but I have not lived long. Old men except they be righteous,
they are long, but they can scarce be said to live long. If it be found in the
way of righteousness, that is, supposing that you have been Godly from your
youth, and so grow up to be Godly while you are, then that honors indeed: for
though it be good for men to begin to come into the ways of Godliness at any
time, and it is never to late to come in, yet to be Elementarius Senex, that is
rather a dishonor to be a beginner when you are Old, in the great work, you
should be treading in all your days, rather a dishonor (I mean) that you do but
then begin, therefore surely the text means this: If it be found, that is if
you have gone on in the course of your life in righteousness, and so your Old
Age does not begin righteousness in you, but finds you in the way of
righteousness, you are in the way of righteousness, then it honors. It is
spoken to the honor of that disciple Manason, in Acts, 21.16. There went with
us also certain of the Disciples of Cesaria, and brought with them one Manason
of Cyprus an Old Disciple, with whom we should lodge; An Old Disciple, it is a
mark of honor unto him that he was an Old Desciple; and so Obadiah. 1 Kings,
18.12. I have feared God from my youth, (says Obadiah) and he speaks of it,
and the Holy Ghost records it as a great honor unto him, I have feared God from
my youth. If any of you (for at that time Obadiah was grown ancient, if any of
you) can say so, with Obadiah, The Lord has now given me length of days, and
I bless his name that (though in weakness yet) I have feared God from my youth;
Oh! this is honorable. As it is reported of Policarpus, Policarpus when he was
about to die by Martyrdom, they would have him to renounce the truth, Oh!
(says he) these eighty six years I have served Christ, and found him a good
master, shall I leave him now? What an honorable speech was this for him to be
able to say, these eighty six years have I served Christ and found him a good
Master. Will you appeal whether you can say, these sixty, these seventy years,
or forty years I have served Christ, and found him a good Master, if you can,
this is honorable if you be found in the way of righteousness.

1. This is a great evidence of the deep rooting of your Grace, and so puts a
greater honor upon you, it is an argument Grace had a very deep root, in that
it has held out all this while, and flourished all this while. You know the seed
that was sown in the stony ground, it came up a little for the present, but
vanished away, but that that was sown in the good ground, it came up and
flourished though in the heat of the Sun. Many have a good beginning as Nero,
though he were an abominable wretch afterward, yet his first five years were
very eminent for forwardness in Godliness, but afterward fell off. But now if
you shall go on and hold out til you be aged, Oh! it is a blessed evidence of
the deepness of the root of Grace in your hearts. That is the first.

2. Those that are Old in the ways of righteousness, they cannot but be
supposed to be very eminent in Grace and Godliness, they have gotten much in
the ways of Godliness, they have grown to some excellency in holy ways; John
he began young, and continued Old in Godliness, for so he was, he was near a
hundred years Old, he could not be less, for his banishment was in Domitians
time, which was eighty years after Christ, that he was banished into the Isle
of Pathmos, and then he could not be less than above a hundred years Old, and
then he had divine revealations revealed unto him. Those that have continued
long in Godliness, grow to a great eminency in Godliness. Obadiah (as some
think) was that prophet Obadiah afterward, that had continued long in the
ways of Godliness; It is not with Grace as with nature, nature comes to a
period, and then decays, but Grace grows and flourishes, though the body
grow downward, yet Grace will grow upward; It is the promise of God in Psalm.
92.14. That those that are planted in the house of God, they shall flourish in
the courts of God; Those that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the courts of God, they shall still bring forth fruit in Old Age,
they shall be fat and flourishing; that is the promise of God, and therefore it
cannot but be imagined, that there is a great deal of eminency in such, and
therefore to be honored, having a crown of Glory upon them. And thirdly.

3. Those that have continued long in the ways of righteousness, they have had
many experiences of God, wonderful experiences of the ways of God, the
faithfulness of God, the mercies of God, the truth of God, in the course of his
providence unto his Churches, and this is an honorable thing, David in Psalm.
25.6. he speaks of Gods mercies of Old; and in Psalm. 74.12. there you have
been speaking of God, he was a King of Old, and in Psalm. 44. And the begning,
there our Fathers have told us things of Old what thou have done Psalm. 119.152,
I have known thy testimonies of Old. To have the experiences of Gods will, and
of Gods ways in the passages of his providence of Old, is a glorious thing,
and so they that are Old in the ways of righteousness, they come to know
exceeding much of Gods mind in that regard; and this is a crown of Glory. And
Fourthly.

4. They that are Old in the ways of righteousness, that they give a good
testimony to the ways of righteousness that they are good; An Old Servant that
will not leave his master, gives a good testimony of the goodness of his Master.
The Be that sticks long at the flower and will not go away, gives a testimony
that there is a great deal of honor to be sucked out there. As Apostates that
fall from Gods service disgrace it, and (as much as in them lies) tell to the
world, that there is not that good in the service of God as others bear them
in hand there is, but those that are Old, and can say as Policarpus, I have
found him a good master all this while, they honor Gods ways.

5. It is honorable because there are so few that continue til they be Old in
the ways of Godliness; If we set many plants, and most of them vanish and come
to nothing, but there is one or two that flourish, and come to be trees, and so
prosper, we love them the better, and delight in them the more: so because God
sees there are so few that continue in his ways, therefore those that do are
the more prized by God, and the more honored by God; So Paul he tells us that
of the most he was forsaken; 2 Timothy 1 15.16. He prays for the house of
Onesiphorus, because he had kept by him when most in Asia had forsaken him;
that is honorable. Again,

Those that continue in the ways of Godliness they are honorable before the
Lord, because they have passed through many difficulties in the ways of God. A
soldier that has passed through man^ dangers and dfficulties in the Kings
service, is so much the more honored. We read of Solomon, 1 Kings, 2.26. That
he honored Abiathar because he had suffered so much affliction with his Father
of Old: so God will honor those that have suffered many difficulties, those that
have gone through many changes of time, and yet continued upright God will
exceedingly honor; in Luke, 18. Because you have endured with me in the time of
temptation, therefore I have appointed unto you a Kingdom, (says Christ.)
Again.

It is an honorable thing to be Old in the ways of righteousness, because
these have much acquaintance with God, they come to be of Gods long
acquaintance. Now we delight much if we can meet with one that is of our old
acquaintance, we say Oh! Such an one is my Old acquaintance, he was my fathers
acquaintance, therefore we prize him now. Now an Old man that has been a Godly
man a long time, he is our Old acquaintance, an Old acquaintance of God our
Father, and therefore we honor him; in Exodus, 15.23. Where Moses praises God
(says he) he is our God, and our Fathers ^od. Is it an honor to God that he
was our Fathers God? Then it is an honor to you that you are Gods that are our
Fathers, that you are our Fathers Saints; if God be honored for being our
Fathers God, then you are honored for being one of our Fathers Saints, Gods
Saint who is our Father. We read of Moses that having been but forty days
conversing with God upon the Mount, and his Face did shine, if conversing with
God forty days makes his face shine, what will it be to converse with God forty
years? Oh! how must their faces needs shine being so long acquainted with him.

8. Those that continue gracious Old, they have done a great deal of service,
and therefore honorable; especially if they have been in public places. A
public Minister that has, co^^inued to be Old in service for God, he is an
object o^ ^uch honor, to be exceedingly reverenced. I remember it is reported
of Basil, that when the officers came to apprehend him, the story says he was
about holy duties, and the gravity and sparkling holiness of countenance, made
the officers to fall down backwards, they were not able to bear it. A man that
has lived long in the service of God, is very honorable before the Lord, and
before men we honor our Old Servants, if any one has been your Old servant,
you will not see such an one want; he has been my Fathers servant, before me,
and an ancitent servant to the family, and therefore not to be disrespected;
shall we respect ancient servants to the family and company, then how much more
is an ancient servant to the Lord to be respected? How will not many Glory in
this, that they have been in the Kings service thus long? Oh! this is worthy of
Glory, that thou have been in the service of the Lord so long.

9. Oh! It is a crown of Glory to be Old in the ways of righteousness, because
thou art near to that eternal crown. Rom, 13.11. Our salvation is nearer than
when at first we believed. Thou art even almost at the heaven, and when thou
art looked upon thus, thou art to be honored in that regard, An Old soldier
that by being long in service, comes to have the next place of preferment to
be due to him, he is looked upon with respect and regard. It may be the next
place in heaven is like to be thy portion, thou art near unto thy Glory. Young
men are to go on in their warfare here, but thy warfar is even accomplished, in
Isa. 40. Comfort you, comfort you my people, for their warfar is accomplished.
Now those are to be honored, it is a glory for a man to be near the Kingdom of
heaven, to be near this crown of eternal Glory.

10. If thou continuest Old in the ways of righteousness, then thy crown of
Glory shall be exceeding great, exceeding glorious. The longer thou stayest for
it, the more glorious it shall be; the longer thy crown is a framing, the more
full of Diamonds and Pearls it will be when it comes. I have read of an Emperors
Son, that one speaking to him about the glory he was like to have hereafter, I,
(says he) the Cooks are a long time preparing the dinner, but we shall have the
better cheer when it comes. So though God has let those that are ancient and
Godly, live here in their Pilgrimage a long time, yet when it comes they shall
have the greater Glory. Put al these together, and certainly it must needs be,
that the hoary head must needs have a crown of glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness.

USE. 1.
We have cause to lament, that we have so few objects to honor as we have.
Indeed It is a most glorious sight to see an Old gracious holy man, that has
been from his youth holy and Godly, it is indeed a most glorious sight, and may
well draw the eyes of al to behold it. I remember Josephus says, that Moses
when he was but little, he had that beauty upon him, that all that passed by
were even enamoured with his beauty, and they could not pass by but they must
stand and look upon him. Truly if there be a beautiful honorable object in the
world, it is to see a hoary head in the ways of Righteousness; but O! woe to us
that we have so few of them among us, blessed be God that there are any, but
how happy we if we had more such objects to honor. That there are but few I
give you these evidences. First.

1. How few old ones have we that delight when they come together, when they
meet in their companies, to relate the experiences of the ways of God, of the
passages of Gods providence, of the faithfulness of God, and of the goodness of
God to them, and to his people, so as to give glory to his name: when they come
together they tell a great many of old tales, or old fables, they delight
themselves in telling the tricks of their youth, what they have done in such an
Inn, in such a Tavern, or in such a company; they can revive their youthful
sins again: but to discourse of the providence and ways of God to them of old,
to give glory to him, where find you this? Again secondly.

2. How few old ones have you that are fit to instruct young ones, and to come
and encourage them in the ways of Righteousness, and to tell them what they
have found in Gods ways, and so to provoke them on to the wais of
righteousness?

3. How few old ones have you that can delight to see God, yet appearing more
gloriously in his ways, in his truth, and ordinances than he has done? nay,
are not many vexed, and think to cast off al with an apprehension of novelty?
new things that we have, and so upon that vex and fret, and wish that things
were as they were formerly of Old?

4. How many have we that are ancient, that are spiritual and heavenly, that
can say with Paul, Now I have finished my course, and have fought the sight of
faith, and henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Glory, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Certainly if old age be found in the way of sin, it is as dishonorable
as it is glorious when it is found in the ways of righteousness 95 Isaiah 20.
a sinner a hundred years old shall be accursed (says God) a siner a hundred
years old; we read in Exe. 8.12. When God would show the superstitious idolatry
of his people there, he brought Ezekiel and showed him what the ancients of
Israel did. O! it is a sore and heavy thing when as the ancients of Israel shall
any ways countenance the ways of superstition and Idolatry; and therefore in
9 Ezekiel. 6. when God would come against his people in the ways of his
Judgments, then God had the destroying Angel begin at those that were old,
first, and strike them first; I, it is a blessed thing when the Hoary head is
found in the ways of righteousness, but when we have white hairs and black
consciences, that is a grievous thing; Instead of being old in the ways of
righteousness, to be old in adulteries, in Ezekiel. 23.43. it is said there, she
was old in adultry, that is an aggravation of her sin, that she was old in
adultery: yea, to have the wantonness of their youth, that be now come to their
old age, to have their old age be a sink to the diseases of their youth. Those
that are old in sin, they shall have old wrath heaped up for them, Ezekiel. 25.15.
it is an agravation of wrath, that it is said to be old wrath, there is old
wrath as well as old sins; An old enemy of God is a most dreadful thing, for him
and his forefathers to have bin old enemies to God, an old earthy muckworme; to
be old and yet ignorant and superstitious, to be an example to draw others to
that that is evil, through the venerableness of their age, this is a sore and a
very grievous, and an evil thing; the Lord speak to the hearts of those that
are so, because they have so little time to make provision for their souls, to
make up their peace with God, and it is hard for them to do it; they that have
bin in captivity seventy years, as we read of the children of Isarael, that
they had bin in captivity seventy years together: and so there are many men and
women, that have bin in captivity under satan for these seventy years, perhaps
for eighty years together, O! how hard is it to work upon them? as if a candle
lay a long time in the wet, it is hard to light that candel: it is as hard to
work the work of Grace upon any, that have layne soaking a long time in their
corruptions, I will not say it is impossible, but give me an example of one man,
that has bin converted when he was old, only one seems to have fom
probability of it, and that was Manasseh, but (except that) I know no example
of any, not that it is impossible, only this I speak to cause those that yet
have not made up their peace with God, and yet they have one foot in the grave,
to look about them while there is time, it is possible, but we must make
account of it as a mighty great thing. God must magnify his free grace toward
you, for how shall God have his end in working upon you? what service shall God
have from you, when you have given away your former time in the ways of sin?
the Lord speak to your consciences, and humble them before him at this day, for
their condition is sad, and it is a most dreadful object. As it is a most
glorious object to behold one righteous in his old age, so it is a dreadful
object to se an old drunkard, an old swearer, an old profane man is a most
dreadful and fearful object to behold, but we hope that the Lord has some
objects among us, that call for much reverence and respect, and to them I desire
rather to speak.

USE, 2
By way of encouragement, and by way of exhortation, much peace and comfort is
due unto such, the Lord and saints look upon them as honorable. Thou art a
Father in Israel, and God remembers all that thou have done for him these for^y,
these sixty years. I remember Luther says, That one gracious action is more
excellent than heaven and earth, Millies quam caelum et terra (says he) one
gracious action; and there is a truth in it, there is no gracious action but
has more excellency in it, than the frame of heaven and earth. Then those that
have continued long in the ways of God, and have grown Old in them, Oh! how
excellent are they that have performed so many gracious actions, and al are
treasured up with the Lord; know the Lord has Old mercies for thee, who have
been an Old disciple, and he will not forsake thee when thou art Old. Psalm.
71.9. Cast me not off in the time of Old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. And in verse. 18. now also when I am Old and gray headed, Oh God!
forsake me not. If thy conscience tells thee, tha^ ^hou have indeavored to
serve God from thy youth, to do good in the place God has set thee in, thou
may now go with comfort unto God; Oh Lord! now forsake me not when am Old,
leave me not when I am Old. Now thou ^ast the blessings of the people of God
upon thee, and whenever thou go out of the world, Oh! the sweet savor that
thou will leave behind thee, thou art a glory and honor to all thy children,
and shall be after thou art dead and gone in Proverbs, 17.6. Childrens children
are the crown of Old men, and the Glory of children are their fathers. [The
glory of children are their Fahers] I, when their Fathers are gracious and
Godly, then ^^ey are the glory of their children. As now? what an honor is it,
that a child came of such an one? Oh! this young man he had a very gracious
Father, an ancient grave Citizen, he did worthily in his time, he did God a
great deal of service, he was a man of excellent gifts in the place where God
had set him, surely there is a blessing for this child that had such a Father;
why? The very mention of thee that art Old, is an honor to thy child after
thee; wherefore, seeing God has put a crown upon thee, labor still to brighten
this crown more and more, to make it more glorious before thou die, and that
is the business I have to do, (and then I shall wind up all) to show to you what
Old men should do to make their crown more glorious, how they should exercise
the work of righteousness so, as indeed to be glorious when they live, and when
they die, and so, eternally afterward. The first is this.

1. Bewail the sins of thy youth; that is one work that is a very suitable
work for Old men, wherein their righteousness should run; bewail the sins of
thy youth, and bless God that thou have time to bewail them. Thus David in
Psalm. 25. Oh! remember not against me the sins of my youth, Oh! the many evils
of my youth that have passed from me! Oh! happy had it been for me that I had
beg^n sooner in the ways of God. It was Austins grievous complaint, Domine
nimis Sera etc. Oh Lord! I love thee too late, said Austin when he was an Old
man. So al you that are Old and ancient, look but to your former times, whether
you did be^^^ to grow gracious when you were young, if you have cause to say,
Oh Lord! I began to love thee too late, it had been happy for you had you begun
sooner.

2. Labor to redeem the time, to do much for God while he continues thy time.
It is a little time thou have to live, Oh! let much be done in that time; The
best of you have neglected the forepart of your times, double now your
diligence in the latter part of your times, labor to redeem it, by putting on
others in the ways of Godliness that they may be more forward than your
selves, to leave a succession of Godliness after you are dead and gone. Think
with your selves, what shall I go out of this world and do God so little service
as I have done? how little and poor service God has had from me all my days.
Again.

3. Encourage those that are young, that are to come after you; as David, come
children and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, tell them what you have
found in the ways of God, how sweet and how good they have been to you, labor
with your servants and children, that when you die you may die so much the more
comfortably, take heed of checking of young ones in their forwardness in the
ways of God, take not advantages against them, that if they do offend thee in
the least degree: I, this is your religion, this is your forwardness, this is
your profession. Oh! if you were gracious your selves, you would be wary of
checking of them in the ways of religion. It is true, if any of your servants
or children, make profession of religion more than others, and yet shall be
negligent in their duties, they are to be rebuked so much the more sharply, I
but you must do it with Gravity, and tenderness of affection, and with sense of
the name of God how that suffers, and this would beseem you to speak to them as
in the name of God, to charge things solemnly upon their consciences and to
sanctify them by prayer: but in every passion to be checking them for their
forwardness in religion, surly this is an evil; If they should make their moan
to God, and appeal to God, that thy endeavor to please you what they can, but
you take the rather advantage against them, because of their forwardness in
religion, O! this will be heard in heaven against you.

4. You that are Oldl, abor to beautify the crown of your glory; bless God
that you live to see any manifestation of the name of God, further than
formerly you have done, that you live to this day to see Christ appearing for
his people, and for his children, and his ordinances more than formerly,
whatsoever many of you may think of it, yet certainly if many of your
forefathers were left to live again, and to see these times in which we live,
they would bless God with their Faces upon the ground for that you live to see.
And I dare say, There is no gracious Old man living this day in England, but
sees indeed cause of giveing God abundance of praise, that ever they lived to
see so much appearing of God as they do. Do not because of some troubles and
interuptions vex and fret. Zachary, 3. And the latter end, that at the laying
of the Foundation of the Temple, the old men that were there they fell a weeping
and crying, the young men they shouted indeed, and they praised God, but the
old men they cried, because they knew what was before; so? many young men now
they shout, and bless God for what they see, but many old men they weep,
because it is not as formerly, they can remember a great deal more peace in
Queen Elizabeth's days; now there is such a deal of distraction and dissension,
therefore they are ready to weep, when the foundation of the Temple, when the
work of reformation is laid; Oh! they are ready to weep because of so much
distraction, but put all together, and certainly never any man since England
was a nation, no, nor since the beginning of the world, has seen more of God
and of his gracious ways to a people, than you have seen, therefore be not
froward for that which is amiss, but give God the praise and glory for that
that is well begun.

5. Show your righteousness in this, that you are willing to open your hearts,
to embrace what truths God shall come further reveal to you. Say not, what shall
we have now? Shall we be wiser than our forefathers? Take heed of such arguments
from your forefathers, you know that place in 1 Peter. 1.18. Christ was said
to come to lay down his life, to redeem us from our vain conversation,
received by tradition from our fathers; therefore stick not so much to old
customs, to what was in your forefathers times, but if God come to manifest
any further truth, be ready to embrace it, and bless his name for it, for there
are truths that do rise in several generations. If your forefathers in time of
reformation, should have said (as many of them said) should we be wiser than
our forefathers? We should have continued in Popery still, and yet we did think
well that they before us did decline from their forefathers, therefore we must
look to the truths that are come up, that are manifested in several
Generations; not that any truth is new, but the manifestation of some truths
are more evident in some generations than in others, and therefore in 1 Peter,
1.12. The Apostle speaks of being established in the present truth. As in
Luthers time there was a present truth, the point of justification that was the
present truth of that age, and so in these times there are present truths made
known, both concerning our outward and spiritual liberties. There was a great
deal of false divinity before preached amongst you, even concerning your
estates, that you had nothing of your own, but al was at the absolute will of
those above you, you had no propriety at al; and for spiritual liberty, we know
in what bondage we were there. Therefore labor now to understand these truths,
and give God the glory of them, before you do embrace these present truths. It
is strange that men should be so much set upon former things, as to neglect the
grace of God for the present, and al because of those that were before. As now
among the Fathers (as we call them Fathers) though they be to be reverenced for
their graces, yet they living among heathens, and coming newly out of
heathenisme, they were feign to yield as much as ever they could, to the
heathens among whom they lived, and did so, and therefore there were many
corruptions among them, and so the first reformers coming newly out of popery,
they were fain to yield, and did yield so far as they could for the gaining of
them, therefore we must not make that that was heretofore, the rule of things,
but bless God for what is revealed at the present.

6. Another work of Old men for beautifying their crown in righteousness is
this, you that are ancient often think of eternity, you are now just a
launching into the ocean of eternity, and in a few years there will be a mighty
difference between your conditions, between that that is now, and that when you
shall be entered upon an eternal estate. Think much of eternity al you that are
ancient. Al young ones should have their thoughts much weighed with eternity,
nothing will take of the thoughts of Old and young more, than to have them
ballased with the thoughts of eternity, especially those that are ancient.

7. Take heed of those things that are the usually distempers that accompany
Old age; as namely, timerousness, Oh! you would feign die in peace, you have
lived all this time in peace, and are loath to suffer any thing for the truth;
Policarpus did not so, when he was eighty six years of age, he was courageous.
So labor you for young men's courage for God, even in the time of your old age.
Take heed of such a surliness and pettishness of spirit, that because you have
not heretofore received such things, therefore now you will not. Remember it is
reported of the Senate of Rome, that when Tiberius would have had Christ to be
honored as a God, Oh! it must not be done, (forsooth) why? Because the Senate
did not first motion such a thing, because it was not first motioned by the
Senate. Many times in your meetings, though many be convinced of a good thing,
they will give notes against it, why? because they that were most ancient did
not first move it, because it was put on by the young ones first, therefore
though it be never so good, they will stick to their Old ways, O! take heed of
such a surliness and pettishness of spirit, Remember the Gretians, it was said
of them, that when they wished a curse upon their enemies, it was that they
should please themselves in bad customs; and it is a greivious curse indeed,
when old men are set upon such things, that they will not bauk what they have
done heretofore; And then again, another thing for the honor of your crown in
the ways of Righteousness, is,

8. When God shall take you out of this world, (as ere long must needs be)
labor before to prepare your selves so, as you may die in faith, in the hope of
the glorious things, that God is working for the Church in this latter age, for
certainly God is doing great things for his Church in this latter age of the
world, greater things than ever yet have bin done, and those that are a live
may live to see glorious workings of God in the world, more than before; and
though you are not like to live to see the great things that God intends to
do, yet thus far you may glorify God before you die, die in faith; as old
Jacob did. It is a notable expression of old Jacob, when he lay a dying he
called his sons to him, and says in Gene. 48.21. And Isarael said to Joseph,
behold I die, but God shall be with you, and bring you again to the land of your
fathers; So you that are old when you ly upon your death beds, when other young
ones com about you, say thus to them, behold I die, but assure your selves God
will be faithful in his promises to the Church, there are glorious things adoing
for his people; in Heb. 11.22. the faith of Joseph is there commended, in that
when he dyed he gave order concerning his bones; why? what work of faith was
it, for him to give order for his bones to be carried out of Egypt? yes, it was
a work of faith, that he believed God would fulfill his promises; do you die so
believing that God will fulfill those blessed promises he has made to the
Churches. And,

9. Take heed now in this your old age of a worldly spirit, this is that that
is charged upon old men, and yet it is the most strange and unreasonablest
thing that can be, and it is very observable, that God has promised length of
days to the quite contrary, and yet we see this distemper of heart prevails
with old men exceedingly, in Prove. 28.16. but he that hates covetuosness shall
prolong his days; and yet it is observable that old men are most subject to
it, and yet the scripture promises length of days by hating covetuousness;
none of you but would fain live a year longer, now hate covetuousness
especially in these times. There is nothing will more dishonor your crown, than
the sin of coveteousness in these days, because if ever there were times that
God called for spiritual and heavenly hearts, now it is; in Keve. 4, we read of
the description of the several ages of the Church, one was like a Lion the
second a Calf, the third a Man, the forth an Eagle, the last state of
reformation of the Church should be like an Eagle that is the hearts of those
that lived in that state should be Eagle like, soaring a loft in heavenly and
spiritual things, and so it becomes those that are old. Be not now basey
sparing and pichning because God has now great works to do for his people. I
have read of a people in India, that worshipped the tooth of a beast, and when
it was taken from them, they offered an incredible mass of treasure to recover
the tooth of the beast again, because they put religion in it; If these
heathens should be willing to disburse an in creedible mass of treasure, to
regaine that religions relic of a tooth of a beast; how willing should you be
freely to lay out your estates for the reformation of religion for the getting
of the truth^ and ordinances of God to be in freedom amongst us; We know that
both the state and necessity of our brethren calls for free liberal hearts, and
you that have the crown of glory in regard of age etc. are to go before others,
be you free to lay out for them; Remember it is reported of the Romans for the
honor of them, that at the very time that Hanibal was in the field, they would
be purchasing of those fields when their enemy was there, and would give a
round sum for them. Be not so distrustful, but be willing to disburse in this
way, that may be so much for the relief of our brethren in Ierland, and for
the setting up of the gospel there, though for the present there be some
hazards; Ordinarily those that are Old are full of fears and distrust, but of al
they should be the freest from them; And in the last place.

10. Let your prayers be, and your embracing of the gospel so for the present,
as you may have hope when you die, that you shall leave the gospel as an
inheritance to your children afterward; with what comfort may an aged man or
woman die, unless they may have hope the gospel shall be left to their
children; Not many years since when old people died, that had any sight in the
ways of God, they died with trembling hearts, for they thought, Now I am
going, and what miseries my Child may be brought to see I know not, it may be
he may be brought up in popery and Idolitry, but now when you die, you may have
a hope to leave the Gospel as an inheritance to your Children; especialy if
your prayers be strong, and your imbracements of it as it ought to be; It is
said of Justin the younger, that he ran mad with this conceit, that the Roman
Empire should decay, in his time, he was so extremely perplexed with such a
thought. So it should be with every generation, what! that the gospel should
decay, and the entail and evidence of it be cut off in my time, it should go
near every one of us, and therefore encourage your selves, and let there be a
youthful vigor in your spirits, to see to propagate the Gospel, that you may
have hopes to leave it to your posterities when you are gone and it is not
long you shall have it, for consider, you have had a blessed talant of grace in
the time God has afforded to you, I dare say that there was never eighty years
since the world began, so happy for the revelation of the mistry of Godlyness,
as has bin for these last eighty years, they that have lived them have had
such an eighty years, that cul out any eighty years since the beginning of the
world, never had a nation such an eighty years as this nation has had,
therefore know that you have much to answer for, and remember this, If you have
any Godliness at al, you have made many covenants and vows to God in your
times, fulfill them before you die, die not in Gods debt, you have put up many
prayers, and every prayer is an engagement to you in the ways of Godliness,
and if you thus beautify your Crown, when you come to die, O! how sweet will
death be to you, your pilow will be soft when you come to die if you can say so
(according to your measure) as Christ did, in Joh. 17. Father, glorify me with
thy self, I have finished the work thou have given me to do; Think but with
your selves you that are ancient, if you were to die, whether you are able to
say thus as Christ did, for so you may say in your measure, though not so
perfectly as Christ did Father glorify me with thy self, I have finished the
work thou have given me to do; Thou know it has bin my care in the days of
my poor pilgrimage, to finish this great work thou gave me to finish in this
world, O! How sweet will death be to such an one that shall die so.

ESE 3
One word to you that are young, (and so I have done al) Is it such a crown of
Glory to be found Old in the ways of righteousness? Do you then begin to be
Godly betimes, that if you live in this world you may have this crown set upon
your heads when you are ancient, for is it not better for you to be plants of
Gods house, then weeds upon the dunghill, Those that are wicked are but as weeds
upon a dunghill, but you that are Godly are as plants in Gods own orchard in the
last of the Romans, 3. We find that Andromicus and Junia are commended, because
they were in Christ before saint Paul, They were in Christ before me. It is an
honorable thing to be in Christ before others, this is honorable when you are
young, and then going on in the ways of Godliness al your young time, and so in
your middle age, and til you come to be Old. Here in my text you have this crown
prepared for you, for so says the Holy Ghost here, The hoary head is a crown
of Glory, if it be found in the ways of righteousness.

FINIS.

