A Visitation and Warning PROCLAIMED AND An Alarm Sounded in the Popes Borders,
in the Name and Authority of the Lord Almighty, and the Lamb. BEING The Account
of a Journey to Dunkirk, and the Proceedings there among the Jesuits, and
Friars and Papists; with some particular Quaeries, and also some propositions
sent unto them. Which may be satisfaction to many who may behold the difference
in part between the Papists and the people of God; and between the Idolaters
and the true Worshippers.

By one that travells in the labor of the Gospel of Christ for the Elect Seeds
sake,

Edw. Borough. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1659.

The particulars, and the Heads laid down.
1 The Account of the Journey. 2 A Letter to the Deputy Governor, and the
Officers of the English Army. 3 Quaeries to the Friars, first in Latin,
secondly in English. 4 Propositions, as a Charge against the Romish Church,
first in Latin, secondly in English; With a Letter to the chief Jesuit Rector
in Dunkirk. 5 A Warning to the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army. 6
Some Propositions to the English Priests in Dunkirk, with some other things,
ACcording to the will of the Lord, and being moved of him in spirit, and as it
lay upon me many days, I passed to Dunkirk; And that which I found upon me
chiefly, was to visit and warn the Papists, the Jesuits and Friars, and that
company of Idolaters, and to sound the mighty day of the Lord among them, and
to proclaim it in the Popes borders, and to warn them all of the day that is at
hand upon them by the word of the Lord, and to sound forth among them the
everlasting Gospel of Truth, and against all their Idolatrous ways, worships
and Practices which I have often felt the weight and burden of before ever I
saw outwardly what their ways or practices are; which when I saw their
Idolatrous practices and worships, and heard their doctrines, and what they
profess, I found it to be according to what I had seen and felt in the light
that tries all things. And about the sixth day of the third month 1659. I
(with Samuel Fisher, who was moved to go with we) shipped from Dover, and came
into Dunkirk the next day; and being strangers upon earth, as the generation of
the righteous seed ever was, we waited in the will of the Lord, to be guided by
his wisdom what to do, and how to be guided to act and speak to his glory. So
the next morning the Town Mayor came to us in the street, and required an
account of our coming, and our names, and from whence we came; to which we gave
him sober answers and a reasonable account. And that day it much spread over
the Town of our being come thither, which wrought no small cogitations in the
hearts of many as what our business was, and wherefore we were come; so that
the Deputy Governor Colonel Alsop with the Counsel of Officers sent for us
that night, (the chief Governor not being in Town) So we went to them, who did
kindly entreat us, and examine us concerning our coming thither, and what our
business was there, and such like; to which we gave them answers, and staid
with them in discourse some hours. And the Deputy Governor much pleaded to us
the danger of our staying in the Town, and feared the devision that might grow
among them through us; and withal much desired us to depart the Town,
supposing as he said, the great danger that might incur unto the Garrison
through our stay. But our answer was in much plainness, if he desired us, we
could not receive any such desire; and if he commanded us, we could not obey
his command in that case, neither could we depart the Town, but in the will of
God, according to which will we came thither; and having many words, and much
reasoning with them that night, we parted from them. And the next morning I was
moved to write this letter following, and to give them all a sober account of
our coming, and what our work is in this World wheresoever we come; which
letter was delivered to them, and read by many of them; But to it we received
no Answer, according as the latter part did require, as may be seen.

Dunkirk the eleventh of the third month 1659. English account.
To the Deputy Governor, and the Officers of the English Army in Dunkirk these.
FRiends, We the Servants of the Lord, are lovers of all your souls, and
wishes well unto you in the Lord, that truth and peace, and righteousness may
be among you, and in your hearts; and we are travelers in the labor of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus for the elect Seeds sake, having received the glad
tidings of life, and eternal salvation into our hearts, through the revelation
of Christ in us, who is our hope of glory, and the Lord has manifested greatly
his power amongst us, and revealed the riches of his grace in our souls, to our
own everlasting satisfaction and peace with God; and also he has made us
Ministers of his grace, and of his word to many others, to the turning of many
from darkness to light, and from Satan's power to God, and of him we are called
and ordained by his spirit into this his work to preach the everlasting Gospel
to the Nations, and to war against Antichrist, the Whore and false Prophets,
come up since the days of the Apostles, and have reigned over the World for
many generations; and this is our work in the World, to fight the Lambs battle
with his spiritual weapons and armor, and to follow him whithersoever he
goes, and to give up our selves in his service, to do or suffer for him
whatsoever he calls us unto; and in this hitherto has the pure and mighty
presence of the Lord God been with us, and is with us unto this day; and great
is his Name amongst us his people, and to be praised for ever more; and of this
has God given us the sure witness in our selves, even the testimony of his
good spirit, which bears us witness in our own consciences, that these things
are true, whether men believe or re^ect our testimony; for we are not Ministers
of man, nor by man's will, neither do we stand to man's judgment, to be approved
or disproved thereby; But to the witness and testimony of Gods spirit in every
conscience we do commend our selves, where ever any of us do come, in the
simplicity of truth, in the demonstration of the spirit, and not by words of
man's wisdom, and in the day of the Lord shall we be justified herein by him,
and by his witness in all men's consciences; and in the mean time we do suffer
all things patiently, and in the meek and quiet Spirit of the Lord; and as for
us two in particular who are now come into the Town of Dunkirk, as we have in
some part declared unto you already; and so I here again say unto you, not
being ashamed nor unwilling to give you an account of our coming; for we came
to be made manifest openly in the sight of all men in our doctrines, principles
and practices which are of and from the Lord, and fully agreeing in all things
with the Scriptures of truth, which were given forth by the spirit of truth as
the holy men of God were moved, and as we have said to you, we still testify,
we were moved of God, and by his spirit to come unto this place in love to the
souls of people, and it is the Lord God that has sent us, and not man; and
whether you believe us herein, or does reject us, the testimony of God is sure,
and remains with us; and for the truth hereof, we are not afraid to do and
suffer, but can do, and suffer in the strength of Christ whatsoever is put upon
us; Though chiefly our coming was (so far as the Lord showed us) in relation to
these Popish Idolaters, to discourse with their Jesuits, Friars and Priests,
and to discover to them the errors of their ways, and the falsnesse of their
worships, and to testify unto them in the fear and power of the Lord
concerning their Church, that it is not a true Church of Christ, but a false
Church come up in the Apostasy; and these things we have to argue with them, if
the heads of them will admit dispute; otherwise to charge these things upon
them from the Lord, and by his authority; and if they do any of them receive
our testimony, and turn from their idols, and be converted unto the truth, they
may be happy; but if they shall reject our testimony, and not believe the
truth, then shall they the more be fitted for destruction, and the day of their
destruction the sooner approach, and the Lord shall be clear of their blood,
and our reward shall be with us from God; for our testimony shall not return
to us in vain, but shall accomplish its end wherefore it is sent, and the Word
of the Lord by us shall either convert to God, and to the truth that they may
be saved, or shall through rejecting of it, harden the heart against God and
against the truth, that they may the more justly be condemned, and the Lord and
his servants be the more clear; and no other thing saving this do we promise to
our selves as the success of our endeavors: And not so much in relation to the
men of our English Nation are we come, though the Gospel of Salvation is freely
come to them also, that they may be freed from the Captivity of sin and death,
and we may not work, nor cause any disturbance or grief to any of them, further
then what they may take at us for the truth sake, or for declaring it in the
fear of God, and without any just cause given by us to any of you, or them,
though we dare not promise to you, nor our selves, what we will do, nor what we
will not do; only this we say, if the transgression of any just Law can be
charged upon us, we refuse not to suffer what shall be imposed; and this we do
believe that the Lord will so keep us, and order us by his spirit of truth, and
carry us in meekness, and righteousness toward you, while we stay amongst you,
be it weeks, or months, that you will have no just occasion against us, by any
offenses justly Ministered by us; and if you do take occasion against us without
any just cause given, be it upon your selves, to your own shame, and
condemnation in the sight of God and men, for we are clear; Only this we do
give unto the Lord, and cannot unto men, the exercise of our consciences, and
to be obedient unto the teachings of his spirit in all things, as he shall
guide and lead us, and if he commands to do, or not to do any thing, and you
the contrary, we must obey him, though we disobey you; for its better to obey
God then man, and when he bids speak, in what place or season soever we may not
be silent; for to keep our consciences clear in the sight of God in all things
by obedience to him is our care, and study, and that which we are given up to
do; and if you set your selves to gainsay this, it will turn to your own
destruction; for no other promise then this can we make for our selves, but to
do, and speak amongst you, as the Lord our God shall move us, and lead us, and
this Testemony we do bear for the Lord, he does not move us, nor lead us to any
thing, saving to what is just, and good, and holy, which may tend to the
happiness, and peace, and welfare of your souls and bodies also: and in the
Fathers will we stand, and as we came in his will, so we cannot submit to stay
or go at any man's will save the Lords alone: And as concerning our coming and
staying, and work here, this is a sober account to you, which may satisfy you
and any sober and reasonable men; And as conscerning our being with you
yesternight, many things passed from some of you and your Minister chiefly, to
which I had a great desire to have answered, and to have cleared the things
objected against us, but time and his patience afforded not the opportunity;
therefore now this I do propo^nd about the call to the Ministry, which was the
thing in dispute, to which I then could freely have spoken; whether he will
give me and us a fair meeting in some public place that is convenient for
your selves to hear, and be Judge between us, to discourse this matter ( viz.)
what the true call to the Ministry is, which is truly according to the
Scripture, and that to be laid down first, and then to compare his call to his
Ministry, and also his call to Dunkirk, with what the true call is which is
allowed of, and aproved in the Scriptures, and also to compare our call to the
Ministry, and even our call to Dunkirk, with what the true call of Christ's
Ministry was, as declared in the Scriptures, that it may be seen whether his
call, or our call is the more different from, or agreeable to the Scriptures,
and even the light in your own consciences shall be Judge between us in this
cause* and upon such an Issue, upon a just determination would we gladly join
trial; and such a meeting upon such grounds and proceedings may tend to
satisfy your selves, and many more, and such a meeting I do fully desire with
your consent, and concurrance who may preserve the people in peace and
soberness, that all may be edified in the things of so great moment as this is;
For if he can prove his call to the Ministry to be such as was the Apostles and
Ministers in the true Christian Churches before the apostasy, then shall we own
him, and not deny him; but if he cannot do this, and if we can do it on our own
behalf, in the power and spirit of the Lord, then may you and all men judge
who are the true Ministers of Christ, and who are the deceivers; And this
manner of proceedings would decide all doubts in you, about us; and we shall be
clear in manifesting the truth concerning the true Ministry and the false, and
the difference between them in their call, in their practice, and in their
maintenance; and this is sent to you to read and consider of, in the fear of
God, as the testimony of our love to you, and the truth, that you may take heed
to your ways; and we would receive first your answer, whether you do consent,
and will allow such a meeting, and secondly his answer whether he will
undertake such a dispute, and we further are ready to clear all doubts that may
remain in you about us, who are your friends, and desire your prosperity and
faithfulness in what the Lord calls you unto.

by Edward Borough* Samuel Fisher.


And the same day we went to the Capuchin Friars, and had some discourse with
the chiefest of them in their garden, concerning the light of Christ that every
man is lighted withal: and we did declare to them of the mighty day of the
Lord, that was at hand upon them; and the Lord was come to search them and try
them, and would hew down their Idolatrous ways, and worships and works, etc.
And in order to a fair proceeding with them, the next day I was moved to write
this following paper to them, by way of queries, as to lay some ground of
opposition; hoping to have received their answer, that I might have joined
trial with them: For it was in my heart to search and oppose their ways and
practices, and their whole Religion. And these queries were delivered to them
in Latin, as follows, though from them I have received no answer to this
day: but the queries stands upon them, and my charge they lie under, charged
upon them in the Name of the Lord.

Vobis omnibus qui profitemini vos-met-ipsos esse ad servitium Dei devotos and
ad sepaerationem e mundo and mortisic^tinem in conversationibus vestris qui
voca^i est^^ per nomina fratrum, and Sororum, tam in quam, prope Dunkirkam.
POtens dies Domini Dei venit and venturus est in vos and in universum mundum;
expergiscamini, and expergiscamini vo^ q^i d^rmitis in terra, Deus enim
teribilis, ^x ritu^us est ad expostu^andum vobiscum and ad redendum universo
mundo ^poculum excandesce^tiae suae propter idololatrias vestras, and
hypocrises, and abomin^^iones quae totum terrarum orbem corrup^runt, and
ascenderunt in consp^ctu Domini, and provocarunt eum; and voci^eratio justi qui
suit p^rcussus and occisus jacuit, intravit in aures al^i si^i; and gladius
^jus qui est verbum oris sui expergefactus ^st ad vulneran^um and ad occedendum
inimic^s ejus ac dies visitationis v^strae nunc advenit, in quo accurate
visitaturus and exploratus est vos ut retribuat vobis, and vobis hoc ipsum est
verbum Domini.

Q^apropter a Domino motus sum ad proponendum vobis pa^cas hasce q^estiones ob
explorationem vestcorum spirituum and viarum, ad quas responsum vestrum
expecto, ut omnia ad^era^^ur ad lucem, and ad verum examen and ut just
judicemini, and per spiritum Domini, vel obsolvamini vel condemnemini, Secundum
opera vestra.

1 Utrum fuere tales ordines virorum and mulierum in vera Christi Ecclesia, in
diebus Apostolicis? and ubi Christus instituit unquam hujusmodi cultus
exer^i^ia and vivendi modum desidiosum, otiosum, aque ac Deo and hominibus in
utilem plane, qualem vos exhibitis: and utrum tenetur aliquis fidem adhibere
vobis et insequi Religionem, and excercitia vestr^, nisi Religionem and
conversationes observationes, and cultus vestros probare possitis per
Scripturas* verba Christi aut exemplum sanctorum ^jus and Apostolorum? deinde
utrum, necne accipiatis totius vestri Religiosi cultus explorationem, and
probationem per and secundum scripturas and Apostolorum scripta?

2. Utrum mundus in cordibus vestris and natura mundi etiam radix ips^
concupiscentiae, Radex superbiae, avaritiae, amoris hujus seculi, and vanitatem
ejus, et Radex Idolatriae subjicitur in vobis? ^ppello lucem in conscientiis
vestris, and quid est radex horum omnium; et quid est quod hanc ipsam subigit?
estne abstinentia aliq^a externa facta per vim serarum, and ostiorum, et istius
modi, obstaculorum aut sui-met seperationem, in loca secreta, quae in maribus
et faeminis valet ad subigendum mundi Naturam? number per hujusmodi media Christus
dat victoriam in peccatum idemque vincit in populo suo? nonne hoc factum est
solum per potentiam Dei in cord? Et nonne est eti^m damnabilis hypocrifis in
vobis videri sancti, and liberi ab hisce rebus, dum adhuc ipsa natura, and
radex horum omnium vivida est in vobis, and ^erinde se exhibens in motionibus
suis? number ali^uid ex nugamentis vestris externis est crux Christi, aut Christus
crucifixus, qui mundo crucifigit, quae Apostoli praedicarunt, and in q^o
laetati sunt?

3. Haccine est in vobis* vera mundi abnegatio abnegare eum in uno mo^o and
loco, and incurrere in eum, eundemque amplecti in alio? neq ^q^am mi^i adhuc
apparet vos mundum abnegasse q^emadmodu^ Apostoli: Respondete etenim mihi, ubi
unquam habuerunt, illi tales, quales vos occupatis, seeds in pulcherrimis and
fertillissimis locis urbium and oppidorum, tam magnificas domus and hortos, and
annuales tantas videndi modus quantos and vos manentes per totum vitae suae,
curriculum in gran^i alico conclavi in otio and desidia corpescentes
q^emodmodum vos? illi per orbem peregrinati sunt evangelium praedicantes nec
certum aliquem habuerunt habetandi locum, sed in Spiritu Agnum Dei sequuti
sunt, nec stabiliarunt seipsos, si^u^i vos omn^bus diebus sistentes in
pinguibus terrae portionibus; judicamus itaque vos esse extra vitam nec eodem
Spiritu in qu^ fuerunt Apostoli; sed in aliquali justitiae and sanctitatis
forma absque vi ipsiu^: a vobis itaque responsum peto ad vindicandum vos
metipsos si potueritis, and ad probandum vos ^ss^ de vera ecclesia and vias,
and observationes vestras ess^, in, and per spiritum D^i, nec non secundum
Scripturas.

4. Q^alis est mors ill^ q^ae pervacit in omnes and Regnavit ab Adamo u^que ad
Mosen? and nonne regnat adhuc eadem in vos? and quaenam est ministratio Mo^is?
and number per illam vere veni^tis unquam? and est pars ista in vobis subacta
necne ab qu^m addite fuit lex Dei, and venistis ad Christum, ad ipsum
cognoscitis sicut fuit ante Abrahamum and ante Mariam? Et quammodo fuit Davidis
Dominus? Et quammodo ejusdem filius, and utrum natus est Christus in vobis, and
vobis Revelatus per quam, mundus fuit factus, and expectatis necne perfect
liberari a paccato, adeo ut in hac vita terrestri non amplius illud committetis?

5. Quid est anima? and quinam fuit status and conditio ejus ante
transgressionem? and quaenam in transgressione? and potestne aliquis per Adamum
secundum restitui manens adhuc in terra, in statum eundem quem amisit in primo
etiam vel non?

Amici in nomine and potentia Domini Dei a vobis requiro, ut per atramentu^ and
calamum de hisce mihi respondeat aliquis vestrum, and subscribantur nomina
vestra, ut reddam itidem vobis responsum and ulterius queramus de vobis, a
Domino enim missi sumus, ad visitandu^ and explorandum vos; and si in perfecta
veritate sitis and alios, ad religionem vestram covertere desideretis, tum
candide nobiscum agite, and in zelo vestro optimis utamini armis vestris
spiritualibus ad defendendum causam vestram contra nos, and pro Deo ve^tro
appareatis; sine vero de vestris ipsorum viis and observationibus dubitatis,
nec ad Religionem vestram, defendendam sufficientes sitis, tum obtaretur os
vestrum and divertite ab idololatria, nunc enim orbus est Dominus ad judicandum
vos just, etiam ac universum orbem.

Sum animarium vestrarium amator, sed testis contra quascunque falsas vias
Antichristi, ac meretricis, qui diu valde in mundo regnavere; quin etiam sum
Servus Domini Edvardus Borough per derisores mundi vocatus Aglice. A Quaker.

The English of these Queries follows.

The English is this.

To all ye that Profess your selves devoted to the service of God, and
separation from the world, and mortification in your lives, who are called by
the name of Friars, and Nunns, in, and about Dunkirk.
THe mighty day of the Lord God is come, and coming upon you, and all the
world; Awake, awake ye that sleep in in the earth, for the dreadful God is
arising to plead with you, and to give unto all the world the cup of his fierce
indignation because of your idolatries, and hypocrisies, and abominations which
has corrupted the earth, and is come up before him, and has provoked him and
the cry of the just who has been smitten, and laid slain, is entered into the
ears of the most high, and his sword, which is the words of his mouth is
awakened to wound, and slay all his enemies; and the day of your visitation is
now come, wherein the Lord is searching you, and trying you, that he may
recompense you, and this is the word of the Lord to you.

Wherefore I am moved of the Lord to propound some few Q^eries to you, for the
trial of your spirits and ways; to which I demand your answer, that all things
may be brought to light, and true judgment, and that you may be Judged justly,
and by the spirit of the Lord cleared, or condemned, according to your deeds.

1. Whether there was such orders of men* and women in the true Church of
Christ in the Apostles days? and where did Christ give Institution for such
worships, practices, and manner of life, and slothful idleness, and
unprofitableness to God and men as ye hold forth? And whether any are bound to
believe you, and follow your Religion and practices, except you can prove by
the Scriptures the words of Christ, or example of his Saints, and Apostles,
your Religion, and lives, and practices, and worships? and whether you do admit
of trial in all your whole Religion by, and according to the Scriptures and
writings of the Apostles, yea or nay.

2. Whether the world in your hearts, and the worlds nature, even the root of
lust, the root of pride, covetousness, and the love of this world, and its
vanities, and the root of Idolatry is subdued in you; to the light in your
consciences I do speak? and what is the root of all these things, and what is
it that subdues it? is it an outward abstinence by the force of locks and
doors, and bolts, or self-separation, and secret places that subdues the worlds
nature in men, and women, and is i^ by such means that Christ gives victory
over sin, and overcomes it in his people? or is it not by the power of God in
the heart only? And whether is it not damnable hypocrisy in you to appear
outwardly holy and free from these things, while yet the nature and root of all
these things are alive in you, and boiling up in the motions of them? and is
any outward thing the Cross of Christ, and Christ crucified, which mortifies
to the world, which the Apostles Preached and rejoiced in?

3. Whether is it a true denial of the world in you, to deny it in one manner
and place, and to run into it, and embrace it in another way and place? it does
not appear to me that you have denied the world, as the Apostles did; for
answer me, where had they any such ^eats in the finest and fattest places of
the Cities and Towns as ye have? such great fine houses and Gardens, and such
revenues by the year as ye have, staying all their days in a great house, and
spending their time in sloth and idleness as ye do; they went up and down the
world Preaching the Gospel, and had no certain dwelling place, but follows the
Lamb of God in the spirit, and did not settle themselves in fat places of the
earth, continuing all their days as ye do; therefore we judge that you are out
of the life, and not in the spirit as the Apostles were in, but are in the form
of righteousness, and holiness without the power; So I demand an answer to
clear your selves if you can, and to prove that you are of the true Church, and
that your w^yes and practices are in, and by the spirit of God, and according
to the Scriptures.

4. What is that death that has passed over all, and reigned from Adam to
Moses? and whether it does not reign yet in and over you? and what is Moses
Ministration, and whi^her ever through it you yet truly came? and whether that
part be subdu^d in you which the Law of God was added upon, and whether are you
come to Christ, and knows him as he was before Abraham, and before Mary? and
how was he David's Lord? and how his Son? and is Christ within you born, and
reve^led to you, by whom the world was made? and do you expect to be perfectly
freed from sin that ye shall not commit sin in this life upon earth, yea, or
nay?

5. What is the soul, and what was its state, and condition before
transgression? and what is its state, and condition in trnasgression, and
whether may man come to be restored by the second Adam into the same estate,
while upon earth, as he lost in the first Adam yea, or nay?

Friends, I demand of you in the name, and power of the Lord God to answer me
these things in writing some of you, and to subscribe your names, that I may
return you an answer, and query further of you; for we are sent of God to visit
you, and to try you; And if ye be in the perfect truth, and would convert
others to your Religion, be plain with us, and use your best spiritual weapons
in your zeal toward us, and defend your cause, and appear for your God; and If
you doubt of your own ways and practices, and be not able to defend your
Religion, then let your mouths be stopped, then turn from idolatry, for now is
the Lord God arisen that will judge ye and all the earth righteously.

I am a lover of souls but a witness against all false Idolatrous ways of
Antichrist and the Whore that has reigned in the world, and I am the Lords
Servant. Edward Borough. By the scorners of the world, called a Quaker.

ANd we were with them again at other times in discourse with the chief of all
the Friars of the company called Recolects also, and did in the power of the
Lord declare truth unto them, and against their Idolatry, until such time as
some of them were so offended with us, not having much wherewith to answer in
truth to defend themselves, they of the company called Capuchins grew light,
and scornful, and very wicked, and did in a manner deny us the liberty any more
to come unto them: and we were with each company of Friars two several times;
And as for the Jesuits, we had much upon us to visit them in their Colleges,
but we perceived that the chief Rector of the College of Jesuits had heard of
our being in the town, he did refuse to discourse with us, and we went once
into the College, and could not be admitted to speak with him. And about a
week after we came into the town, the chief Governor Lockhart coming home, he
sent, as he said, to the Jesuits College, that they should admit us to come
to speak with then; and as we found it from the Lord upon us, at a convenient
season, we went again to the College, and were for some hours in discourse
with the chief Rector of the College, who appeared at the first very high, and
subtle, and crafty, and did in his heart reject us, and the simplicity of the
Gospel, but truth and the word of the Lord had dominion over him, and before
the truth he and they all are as weak as water; many things were disputed upon,
which the particulars cannot now be related, but in about three hours time he
grew weary, pretendding other business, and would stay no longer with us, and
so we parted, demanding of him whether he would admit some more discourse at
some other time, which he did refuse* so we were not admited to come to him any
more; whereupon these following propositions I was moved to give forth, and
send among them as a charge upon them, in the Name and power of the Lord; and
they were given and delivered in Latin up and down among the Jesuits and
Friars in the Town; unto which to this day I never could receive an answer,
therefore my charge lies upon them to this day as a testimony from the mouth of
the Lord against them, of which they can never clear themselves. And we were
moved to visit the Nunns, and went to their place, and before many words were
spoken to them through a grate, (for we might not see them and to speak to them
both at once) they a^ked if we were of the order of those called Quakers; and
they perceiving that we were such, said, they might not hear us, because we
were such, and presently passed away, and refused to suffer us to speak to
them; and therefore we had very small time with them, only gave our witness
against them, and passed away.

Vobis omnibus Jesuitis, Sacerdotibus, Fratribus vobis etiam omnibus,
cujuscunque generis de Ecclesia Romanensi, in and prope Dunkirkum.
AMici in Charissimo amore erga vestras omnium Immortales animas haec vobis
motus sum exhibere, ut legatis, and consideretis ea in timore domini Dei.
Siquidem per aliquot dies in hoc oppido jam moratus sum, secundum Dei ipsius
beneplacitum, been observans Religionem vestram in principiis, and in statu
presenti, and in exercitiis ejus vere etiam animadvertens partem aliqualem, and
fidei vestrae, and doctrinae modum, etiam cultuum vestrorum; nec non
Traditiones, and ordines, and disciplinam. and rigimen Totius Ecclesiae
vestrae; and in spiritu Domini ponens, and aeque mensurans omnia ad lineam
recti Iudicii, a Domino and per spiritum ejus, haec ideo vobis propono, and
affirmo. viz.

1 Quod Ecclesia vestra non est vera Christi Ecclesia, uxor Agni, and Electa
Sponsa, sed in ejus fide, and doctrinis, and Cultibus, and ordinationibus, in
ordinibus disciplina, and Regimine degenerata est ab illo statu, in quo stetit
Ecclesia Christi in diebus Apostolorum, ante Apostasiam.

2 Quod Constitutio Ecclesiae vestrae, etiam and Cultus, and ordinationes
vestrae plerunque, and via; and modus diciplinae, and Regiminis vestri sunt ab
homine, and eriguntur, and sistunt ad arbitrium hominis, nec sunt secundum Deum
nec a Deo, s^cundum vero traditiones humanas qui docti and versati sunt in
ipsis, quod idolatria est nec sunt secundum mandata ipsius Christi, nec
exemplum Apostolorum ejus, nec Scripturas, sed penitus absque spiritu Dei
erecti omnes post dies Apostolicos, and ingressum Apostasiae, quae totum mundum
adumbravit.

3 Quod per varias generationes, and multa secula ab Apostolorum and vestrarum
ecclesia temporibus in mundum supervenit, universalis defectio and Apostasia a
vera fide, and doctrina, and Cultu, and ordinationibus, and disciplina, and
Regimine quae fuere inter Apostolos, and in diebus eorum apud veras Ecclesias
exercebantur, etiam and vestra Ecclesia nunc temporis est in defectione ista,
and Apostasia.

4 Quod Antichristus, Bestia, meretrix, and pseudoprophetae, per aetates multas
in mundum Regnavere, Antichristus ille sese opposuit Christo, and elatus fuit
in Templo Dei, and ut numen adoratus. Bestia trucidavit sanctos, eisque
oppugnavit, and potestatem adepta est in tribus and linquas and post eam
admiratus est universus orbis. M^retrix quam portavit Bestia, insedet populis,
and turbis, and Gentibus, and bibit sanguinem sanctorum and Martyrum, and
corrupit Terram, and secit u^ omnes biterunt ex poculo Scortationum suarum.
Pseudoprophetae supervenerunt in nationes, and deceperunt ea^. Deinde Ecclesia
vestra est de populis, turbis, and tribubus, in quos Bestia potestatem recepit,
and quibus insedit meretrix, quosque pseudoprophetae deceperunt.

5 Quod vera Christi Ecclesia, uxor Agni, electa sponsa, and urbs illa dilecta,
que peperit eum, qui Gentes erat Recturus, fugit in solitudinem, and alita fuit
in loco luctus, and desolationis mill ducentis sexaginta diebus; and
calcaverunt Gentes urbem sanctam, uxorem Agni, and dominium habuerunt in ipsam
mensibus quadraginta duobus; and etiamsi haud fuerit ipsa separata seu victa
adeo ut omni existentia penitus privari, in deserta solitudine tamen exstitit
in luctu ac desolatione, and in illa gloria and excellentia, quam olim habuit
nequaquam apparuit, sed amisit plane vestimenta and ornatus suos, haeredem
suum, and maritum ab ea separatum and raptum ad Deum, and thronum ejus, and in
hoc tempore divastationes and conculcationes Civitatis illius Sanctae, uxoris
Agni, and Regni Bestiae, and meretricis Ecclesia vestra, quae est ex muliere
falsa, and non ex Electa sponsa, quae Agno nupra est, exhibita fuit in potentia
sua and gloria.

6 Quod coactio and compulsio personarum per externam, aliquam, legem, and
potestatem conformes esse hujusmodi vel istius modi Religioso Cultui, est
Bestiae, and meretricis, and non Dei Cultus: Quinimo trucidare, and persequi
Conscientiae ergo, and propter abnegationem hujus, aut illius Religiosi Cultus,
est a Diabolo, and Dracone, nequaquam a Deo, nec secundum e^m; quinetiam
Ecclesia vestra, quae per istius modii media cogit ad suum cultum in hoc non
succedit Apostolis, and Ecclesiae verae, sed est de Bestia and meretrice, quas
in deil us suis Johannes vidit venturus esse, and nos in nostris venisse
videmus, and Regnasse per praeteritas generationes; affirmo etiam cuicunque
Religoso cultui Conformes se praebentes, non sponte, sed coacte per vim and
violentiam legum, esse duplo magis, quam antea Diatoli filios, nec per hoc
conversos esse ad Deum, sed sieri Idololatras quos Deus judicaturus est.

7 Quod nulli pro totum terrarum orbem sunt vera membra de vera Christi
Ecclesia, veb jus habentes ad haereditatem Eternae vitae, nisi qui e mundo
Collecti sunt per praedicationem Evangelii, and sunt transfigurati itidem and
Renovati per potentiam Domini Dei in Cord, and per spiritum ejus in ipsis
docti in omnem veritatem, and ad Christum Caput agglutinati, and aggregati in
eternam unitatem infiniti Corporis per eundem spiritum, and unctionem in ipsis
habitantem, and ex hujusmodi consistit vera Christi Ecclesia nunc temporis
quemadmodum in temporibus Apostolorum; de talibus vero membris non est Ecclesia
vestra in presenti hac aetate, nec est in ordine, and regimini spiritus
veritatis, sed in forma (absque vi) in illa fuit origo, and est status ejus in
hunc usque diem.

8 Quod oportunitas, and dies Domini, and plenitudo temporis praestituti
appropinquat, in quo Babylon illa magna dejicietur, and cadet, and dominus in
illam vindictam inferet, and judicia reddit and comprehendentur Bestia, and
meretrix; and pseudoprophetae, quibus subjiecerunt se Regna terrarum orbis, and
vivi conjicientur in stagnum; and Diabolus, and Satanas, non amplius seducent
nationes; sed Regna mundi hujus mutabuntur and facta erunt Regna Domini, and
Christi ejus, Cujus Regnum revelabitur in Cordibus Electorum Suorum in
potientia and multa gloria; Et Ecclesiam Romanensem, etiam and omnes falsas
Sectas, and Ecclesias per Vniversam terram subvertet Dominus Deus, and vera
ipsius Ecclesia recolligetur^e deserto; and pulchritudo Ierusolymae novae,
Ecclesiae Sanctae, vxoris Agni aeque glori^fa faerit, ac ante fugitum ejus
illuc, and conculcationem suam per Gentes and Dominus Deus Omnipotens
dignoscetur, and erit cum hominibus Tabernaculum ejus.

Haec Testor vobis in nomine Domini, and veritatem eorum quae certa est
probaturus sum; and de hisce (caeteris paribus) cum quocunque vestrum Sobriae
mentis disceptaturus, eademque per spiritum Domini nec non secundum scripturas
infallibilia esse demonstraturus: Qua propter consideretis ea in mansuetudine,
and patientia, and credit in lucem Christi in vestris ipsorum conscientiis,
qua cum unumquemque qui venit in Mund^m Christus illuminavit, ut ad agnitionen^
veritatis, and ab omnibus viis obliquis perveniatis; and si vestrum aliquis in
gratiam totius Corporis hisce Responsum Reddet, and si possitis per atramentum
and calamum, vindicare vos met ips^s de hisce, quae vobis imputantur, hoc erit
per me Candide receptum, etiam and in levitate cum Responsione revertetur, in
ordine adulteriorum manifestation^m veritatis, ut and veritas, and Iustitia
Clarissime appareat, and ^mplectatur, and delusio, and omnis Anti-Christi
impostura confundatur and abnegatur; and qui sunt in veritate in eadem
stabiliantur and qui in errore Commone fiant in hoc die visitationis Mundi,
Dominus venturus est ad judicium, qui omnium Cordium Secreta Iudicabit, and
Vniversum mundum in Iustitia.

Dun. 20.3d. mon. 1659. Per Amicum Justiciae, and omnium animarum Amatorem.
EDVARDUM BOROUGH.

The English of these propositions is as follows.

To all ye Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, and to all you in general of the
Romish Church, in and about Dunkirk.
FRiends, in dear love to all your immortal souls, I am moved to lay these
things before you, that you may read and consider them in the fear of the Lord
God, for as much as for some days I have been in this Town according to the
will of God, and having rightly observed your Religion, in its original, and
in its present standing, and in its practices; and having truly examined* some
part of your faith and Doctrines, and the manner of your worships, and your
ordinances, and the orders, and discipline and government of your whole Church,
and in the spirit of the Lord, having laid all things to the line of true
^udgment, and equally measured them; hereupon I do from the Lord and by his
spirit propound and assert these things unto you.

First, That your Church is not the true Church of Christ, the Lambs wife and
elected spouse, but is degenerated in her faith, and in her Doctrines, and in
her worships and ordinances, in her orders, discipline and government, from
what the true Church of Christ was, in the Apostles days, before the Apostasy.

2. That the constitution of your Church, and the chief part of your worship
and ordinances, and the way and manner of your discipline and Government are of
man, and set up and stands by the will of man, and are not after God, nor
according to him, but are after the traditions of man, learned and practiced
therein, which is Idolatry, and are not in the commandments of Christ, nor in
the example of his Apostles nor according to the Scriptures, but without the
spirit of God, being set up since the days of the Apostles, and since the
Apostasy came in which has over-shadowed the whole world.

3 That there has been over the world, for generations and many ages, since
the days of the Apostles and true Churches, a general declination and falling
away from the true faith and doctrines, and from the worship and ordinances,
and from the discipline and Government that was amongst the Apostles, and
practiced in the true Churches of Christ in their days, and your Church is in
that declination, and falling away.

4. That Ant^christ, the Beast and the whore and false prophets have reigned
over the world for generations; the Antichrist that has opposed Christ and
been exalted in the Temple of God, and been worshipped as God; The Beast that
has killed the Saints, and warred against them, and had power over Kindreds
and tongues, and the world has wondered after him; The Whore whom the Beast
has carried, she has sat upon peoples, multitudes and Nations, and drunk the
blood of the Saints and of the Martyrs, and she has corrupted the earth, and
caused all to drink her cup of fornications; And the false Prophets have
overspred the Nations and deceived them and you and your Church are of the
peoples, the multitudes, and the kindred that the Beast has received power
over, and the Whore has sat upon, and the false Prophets deceived.

5 That the true Church of Christ the Lambs wife, the ele^^ed spouse, and the
beloved City, who brought forth him that was to rule the ^ations, has been
fled into the Wilderness and been fled into the place of mourning and
dissolation for a thousand two hundred and 60 days, and the Gentiles feet have
trodden down the holy City, the Lambs wife, and had power over her for forty and
two months, and though she has not been prevailed against nor overcome, so as
to be extinguished from having a being, yet her being has been the Wilderness
in mourning and disolation, and she has not appeared in the glory and
excellency which once she had, but has lost her garments and her attire, and
her heir, and husband separated from her, and caught up to God and to his
Throne, and in this time of the disolation, and treading down of the holy City,
the Lambs wife, and the reigning of the Beast and the Whore, has your Church
been extant in her glory and power, which has been of the false woman, and not
of the ele^t spouse, that is married to the Lamb.

6. That forcing and compelling of persons by any outward Law and Authority to
be of such or such a Religion, and to conform to such a way of worship, is the
worship of the Beast and of the Whore, and not the worship of God, and to kill
and persecute persons, for the exercise of conscience, and because they will
not be of such a Religion, and cannot conform to such worship is of the Divill
and the Dragon, and not of God, nor according to him; and that your Church
herein is not successor of the Apostles and the true Church of Christ, but is
of the Beast and the Whore, which John saw was to come in his time, and which
we see are come in our days, and have ruled for generations, and I affirm
that persons so made conformable, by force and violent Laws, to such a Religion
and worship, are but two fold more the Children of the Divill, and are not at
all converted to God thereby, but becomes Idolaters, whom God will Judge.

7. That none upon earth are true members of the true Church of Christ, having
a portion in the inheritance of eternal life, but such who are gathered out of
the world by the preaching of the Gospel, and are changed and renewed by the
power of the Lord God in the heart, and are led by his spirit within them into
all truth, and are joined unto Christ the head, and gathered into the eternal
unity of the infinite body by the same spirit and anointing dwelling in them,
and of such only does the true Church of Christ consist now in this present
time, as it did in the Apostles days, but of such members does not your Church
consist in this present age, neither is it in the order and Government of the
spirit of truth, but in the form without the Power, therein was its beginning,
and is its standing at this day.

8. That the time is at hand, and the day of the Lord draws near, and the
fullness of time is approaching, wherein great Babylon shall be thrown down, and
fall to the ground, and the Lord will be avenged on her, and will render
Judgments unto her; and the Beast, and whore and false prophets, un^o whom the
Kingdoms of the world has been subject, shall be taken, and cast alive into
the lake, and the devil and Satan shall deceive the Nations no more, but the
Kingdoms of this World shall be changed, and become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ, whose Kingdom shall be revealed in power and great glory, in
the hearts of his chosen* and the Church of Rome, and all the false sects and
Churches upon the earth, will the Lord God overthrow, and his true Church shall
be gathered out of the Wilderness, and the beauty of new Jerusalem of the holy
Church, the Lambs wife, shall be as glorious as before she fled thither, and
before she was trodden down of the Gentiles, and the Lord God Almighty shall be
known, and his ^abernacle shall be with men

These things I assert to you in the Name of the Lord, and the truth thereof is
certain, and should be ready to argue and dispute these things with any sober
person amongst you upon equal terms, and to prove the infalibility hereof by
the spirit of the Lord, and according to the Scriptures, wherefore consider of
them in patience and meekness, and believe in the light of Christ which is in
your consciences, which Christ has lightened every man that comes into the
world withal, that you may come to the knowledge of the truth, and out of all
false ways, and if any of you will return an answer hereunto, in behalf of
your whole body, and can be able to clear your selves in writing from what is
charged upon you, it shall be gladly received by me, and a reply in meekness
returned to you for the further manifestation of truth, that truth and
righteousness may clearly appear, and be embraced, and all deceit and false
ways of Antichrist may be confounded, and denied, and who are in the truth
shall be confirmed, and who are in the error may have warning now in the day of
the worlds visitation; The Lord is coming, to Judgment, who will Judge the
Secrets of all hearts, and the whole world in equity.

Dunkirk 20. of 3. month 1659. English account. By a friend unto
righteousness, and a lover of all souls. Edward Borough.

This was sent to the chief Rector of the Jesuits College in Dunkirk, in
Latin.
FRiend, thy wisdom and thy knowledge is earthly and sensual, and thereby
can thou not know the things of the Kingdom of God, thou can neither learn
them thy self nor teach them to others, for thou art but a blind leader of the
blind, and thus says the Lord God unto thee, the fruitles tree is standing in
thee that brings forth no fruit unto God, and the head of the Serpent is not
broken in thee that deceives the soul, nor the body of sin put off that burdens
the just, and the Sword shall cut thee to pieces, even the sword of the Lord it
shall slay thee; and friend, the time is at hand, that the Lord will make thee
know, that thou art and have been in thy life time a dishonor to him, and that
thou have not served him, but thy self and the Divil, and thy heart is not
right in his sight, but is corrupt and deceitful, for thou art tried, and
measured, and thou art found wanting in all things, and God will Judge thee,
and the witness in thy conscience shall answer his Judgments, and all thy
Idolatrous practices and profession of Religion, and Church, and Ministry, thy
many Prayers, and thy works of Righteousness, all this shall not hide thee from
thee wrath of the Lamb, though now thou art hardened, and utterly insensible,
yet the stone shall fall upon thee that will grind thee to Powder, and thou
shall not escape, but the burden of thine own iniquities shall weigh thee down
into perdition, except thou speedily Repent. Therefore fear and tremble before
the Lord God, and remember thou art warned by one that seeks the peace of
souls, but makes War by the sword of the spirit against the kingdom of the
Divil and Antichrist in whom soever it stands.

And friend, answer me this one Querie; What is that Whore that has sat upon
multitudes, and peoples? and what is that Golden Cup in her hand? and what are
the Abominations and Fornications of which her Cup is full, which she has
caused the Kings and people to drink, and with which she has deceived the
world? Answer me this, and subscribe thy name.

E. B.


And now this I have to say concerning the Church of Rome, to them, and to all
the world, as having been in a measure an eye and ear witness of their
idolatrous and false ways, practices and doctrines, never having in all my
days, till this time and at this opportunity of going to Dunkirk; not having
any knowledge outwardly what their ways and practices were; not having any
knowledge I say by my sigh^, and particular hearing concerning them, without
me, otherwise then what the spirit of the Lord within me did make manifest:
Though from a child the spirit of the Lord in me has abhorred popery, and all
that which savours of i^: But now having been an eye and ear witness in a
little measure of their practices and doctrines, this I have to say to them,
and all men; blindness and ignorance covers them as with a mantle, and they
are wrapped up in the body of darkness, and gross darkness they do dwell in;
and all their ways and worships are but the works of darkness, which they are
led on in by the false feigned spirit of imitation, from one generation to
another, being exercised therein: And the sense of the spirit of life they have
not, but have wholly lost it; and they know nothing at all of the leading of it,
nor of its teaching: This they hiss at as a thing of naught when it is spoken
of to them. They have even sold themselves into the land of ignorance and
blindness, and they hate to be reformed: they are settled upon a false
foundation, even the traditions of men, which the Lord will break down, and
their whole building will fall. And when I consider how thousands and ten
thousands lies in the captivity of blindness and darkness under them, my
heart is rent for them, upon the consideration how they are led in darkness
and blindness, and how they rest in a false confidence which will destroy
their Souls, and the blood of many rests upon the heads of them that leads
them; for they that lead them cause them to err, and the blood of souls will
be required at their hands. And as for the poor and the common sort of them,
there is a pity in me for them; because they are led by the blind, and are out
of the way: but as for the Priests and Jesuits, and Clergy men they are to be
cut off with the edge of the sword of the Lord God, and the woe is unto them,
and no pity, because they cause the people to err, and keeps the people in
ignorance and blindness, under their false and unrighteous ways and worships.
And this I know, the word of the Lord is gone forth against the whole body of
the Romish-Church, from the head to the tail of them will* God plead with them;
the time is at hand, and his eye shall no^ pity, neither shall his hand spare
to punish them: The decree of the Lord is Sealed and he will take vengeance
upon their unrighteous laws, which binds the consciences of people, and limits
the spirit of the holy one; their unrighteous Ecclesiastical Laws I mean,
under which is defended all manner of Idolatry, and they compel people to be
Idolaters by a Law, and whereby they drink the blood of the Saints, and of the
Martyrs; but the Lord will take vengeance upon them; and disannul their
covenants and decrees; and his spirit shall not be limited, but shall rend them
to pieces, even their Laws and cruelties, and Inquisions by which they are
defended, and their Religion upheld in the world, and whereby they kill the
j^st, and murders the innocent that are better then they: for the fullness of
time is come, and all these shall be tumbled down, for their unjust Laws and
Inquisi^ions are the main strength and pillars of their Church, whereby their
Church and worishp does stand; and if they had not these cruel Laws and
Inquisitions to defend themselves by in their Religion, they would be soon
prevailed against, for they have nothing of the spirit and authority of God to
stand in, nor to fight with, against such as do oppose them; but their weapons
are carn^l and devilish, and by murders, oppressions, and tyrannies they do
defend themselves, and when these things are broken down, then their Church
cannot stand long. And as sure as the Lord lives, so shall it come to pass, a
generation shall accomplish it, and in the generation of the righteous seed it
shall be finished, their Laws shall be broken down, and murders avenged; and
their weakness shall then appear, and their whoredoms and Idolatries, and all
their abomin^tions shall be made naked, and uncovered, and judged by the Lamb,
and them that follow him, whom he will gather to fight his battle. And if the
people were but sensible hereof, as in measure I am, through the zeal of the
Lord, it would raise up the spirit of zeal in them all, to seek vengeance and
the overthrow of all their unrighteous Laws, and Inquisitions, and murders,
which keeps people in darkness and ignorance, and kills the just, that the
creatures may be saved and tyranny condemned; And when once the Lord does but
reach forth his arm, then shall people be awakened to mind what I now say. Who
would spare their own lives for the accomplishing of such a work, that the
spirit of the Lord may have liberty, and that which limits it may be dashed to
pieces? and that the earth may be set at liberty, and all Europ made free from
the cruel^ies and tyranies of Antichrist and of the whore? And to all you
Papists I say, and to all the body of the Church of Rome, prepare, prepare, for
the Lord God is coming up against you in his dreadful power; his word of
eternal judgment is gone forth, and his vials are full of wrath to be poured
forth, and he will be avenged upon your tyrannies and murders, and unequal
Laws, and subdue them before him. And his d^ead shall ^all upon your
consciences, ye that are Idolaters, hypocrites, ignorant wretches, wilful
persons and bondslaves of Satan, The plagues of God, and the wrath of the Lamb
shall reach un^o your high Throne. Repent, repent, for the Lords wrath is
kindled against you, and if there be any among you that fears the Lord, let
him deliver his own soul, by turning from your abominations, least the Lord
come upon you and destroy you altogether. Give up your Inquisitions, give up
your unjust Laws, and cease to murder the innocent, and torment the
righteous. I demand this of you on the Lords behalf, vex not the Lord any
longer, for his patience is turned into anger against you, and his
long-suffering will become fury to devour you.

And no little service we had in Dunkirke among our English Army. Diverse
meetings we had in the Town, and declared the message of salvation. And I must
commend the spirit of our English men for moderation, more then the men of any
other nation; And I did many times clear my conscience among them, both as they
were men, Sons of Adam, and in relation to an eternal state did direct them to
the way of happiness, out of sin and wickedness, that they might come to God;
preaching the everlasting Gospel, That as they were Sons of Adam in
trangression, they might come to be healed, and come into Christ the power and
wisdom of God, and might be saved. Again, as they were soldiers, and as they
were an army, I was moved to speak mcuh unto them, that they might know what
their service was there in that state, some time saying unto them, it was
possible the Lord might have some good work to do by them, if they were
faithful and no^ seek themselves, but the glory of the Lord.

And at one time being sent for by Governor Lockhart, where there were many
officers with him, and we had much discourse with them; and this lay upon me to
declare in the Name of the Lord unto them, that if they did enterprise any
business as they were an army, in a spirit in opposition unto us, and in that
spirit that did reject us, and deny us, and gain say us, then should they never
prosper in any enterprise whatsoever; but if they went on in any degree in the
fear of the Lord, and in that spirit that was among us, then should they
overcome their enemies, and none should have power over them, nor overcome
them. And after I was parted from them, this following paper was upon me to
write unto the whole Army in general, both to officers and soldiers.

To the English Army, to Officers and Soldiers.
Friends,
I Am moved to clear my conscience unto you, in the sight of the Lord to warn
you, that you may all learn wisdom and the fear of the Lord God, and may stand
in his Counsel always, for that will be a defense unto you at all times, and
therein will you prosper in the Lords work, and chiefly unto you, the small
remnant of our English Army in and about Dunkirk; I say unto you officers and
Soldiers, fear the Lord God, and walk in his wisdom, and every particular
person amongst you, Inquire of the Lord, what he requires of you, inquire of
the Lord I say, and know his will, and be obedient unto it in all things, and
so shall you prosper in standing in Gods Counsel, and in performing his will,
and so shall you be exalted, and have victory over your enemies, even as you
seek the honor of the Lord and his glory; for if you honor him, and do that
which is acceptable to him, he will honor you, and set you a top of all your
enemies, and he will make way through the mountains even by you for the further
appearance of his glory, and he will honor you as his workmen, if you be
faithful to him, and walk in his Counsel and wisdom, till he has prepared his
own way by you; for assuredly it is not in vain, but the Lord had some end in
it, to himself, in bringing you to that place, and what do you know but he may
have some good work for you to do, it is possible there is more in his heart,
and in his purpose, concerning you then yet may be discovered to you; wherefore
it is good for you, that you wait upon the Lord, to know his will fully
concerning you, that you may do it, and fulfill it, and therein shall be your
Crown, but on the contrary depends your misery and destruction.

And this I do know, that the Lord has owned and honored our English Army,
and done good things for them and by them in these Nations in our age, and the
Lord once armed them with the spirit of courage and zeal against many
abominations and tyrannies, and he was with them in many things which he called
them to, and gave them victory and Dominion over much injustice and oppression,
and over Tyrants and cruel Laws and he was with them till that a spirit of vain
glory and Ambition and self-seeking, and the honor of this world entered into
some and defiled the whole body, and made it deformed and void of its former
beauty, and of its valor and nobleness also, at which the anger of the Lord
was kindled, and against you also was his hand turned, with the loss of his
presence, because the sincerity and the faithful principle was almost choked
and the good eaten out from amongst you, by the false spirit of self-seeking
and vain glory, which was entered into the hearts of many but this is to the
army in general, and to say no more of it to you, only that you might search
your own hearts, and may be purged, and may again return to the old spirit of
righteousness, which will reach after the liberty of the people and the freedom
of the Nations, and that all oppression and tyranny and unjust powers may be
broken down to the dust before you, and be subdued by you as your prey, and
that there be no more a looking back by you for rest and ease in the flesh, in
great houses of residence, till you have visited Rome and inquired after, and
sought out the innocent blood that is buried therein, and avenge the blood of
the guiltless through all the Dominions of the Pope, the blood of the just it
cries through Italy and Spain, and the time is come that the Lord will search
it and seek it out and repay it, and it would be your honor to be made use of
by the Lord in any degree in order to this matter, whether the Lord will
revenge the grievous blood-guiltiness that lies upon them, by himself without
an instrument, or whether by you or others as an instrument, whether this way
or another; that God will do it, this I determine not, but this I do know, the
time is not long, that he will one way or another avenge and revenge the blood
of the just upon the murderous head; and this I also believe that the Lord will
do it, or make way hereunto even by you, the men of our English Nation, if you
be faithful to him, and do what he requires of you, for what are these few poor
Islands that you have run through, and laid many mountains low, and wounded the
remainder of the Romish Idolatry that was standing in the beginning of your
Wars, and the remaining part thereof, which stood between the days of Queen
Mary, and the last years of Charles has received a mortal blow, both by you,
and partly as preparers of the way, but what are these little Islands of
England, and Scotland* Ireland, they are but little in comparison of the great
part of Christendom in which Idolatry, tyranie and grievous oppressions do
abound, which the hand of the Lord is against, and which he will take vengeance
upon* Oh did you but see and perfectly know, the cruelties, the oppressions,
the idolatries, the murders, and all whatsoever that is evil, both in civil and
Ecclesiastical State, that is brought forth and rules in full power in all the
Popes Dominions; I do say, were you but fully acquainted with all these things,
and also of the purpose of the Lord, which is speedily to visit them with his
rod, it would awaken you, and stir you up, and it would set your spirits on
fire of a great zeal with desires of no greater honor, then to be instruments
in any degree toward the executing of so good a work, even toward the
relieving of the oppressed, and breaking the bands of cruelty, that the
Nations may come to rest, and may no more be captivated with the chains of
Antichrist; I do say it would be your greatest honor to be instruments in such
a work, and do you know what the Lords purpose is concerning you? only this I
do know, the Lord has a love to the men of our Nation, and there is a spirit
in them most fitting for such a work, even the zeal of the Lord has appeared,
and is beginning to appear against Babylon, and against Rome the seat of the
Whore; and the kingdom of Antichrist shall be thrown down, and the righteous
people shall go free, and Nations shall worship the Lord; but there is many
mountains in the way, wherefore hew down the tops, strike at the branches, make
way, that the Axe may be laid to the root of the tree; that your sword, and the
sword of the Lord, may neither leave root nor branch of Idolatry, oppressions
and tyranie, which the Nations are held in slaverie under, and oppressed
withal, to the grieving of the righteous soul, and vexing of the spirit of the
Lord. Oh how great is their Idolatries! you see a little part thereof amongst
you, oh what false, fained, deceitful and hypocritical services do they
practice? their imag^s, their pictures, and their praying before them, which is
Idolatry their Candles burning, and their Organs and instruments of music and
fained singings, all this is Idolatry and superstition; and a vexation to the
Lord, and that law which imposes them upon people contrary to a good
conscience, and that Law which condemns others as Hereti^ks that will not
worship thus, and that power that kills and destroys those that acts against
those worships, Laws and powers ought ye to make war against, and to claim a
disannulling of all such Laws and Authorities, by which this Idolatry is
imposed upon peoples consciences, and established in the Nations, and by which
many are destroyed and condemned who cannot bow to their Idolatries; such Laws
are not to stand before you, for these be the briars and thorns which covers
the great mountains, whom the Whore sits upon, which the Lord will judge;
did you but know all their unrighteous Laws, murders and all cruelties which
is abounding among them, and they have a dispensation to commit
unrighteousness, those Laws ought to be judged and destroyed, and your sword
is to be lifted up against them; It is the Lords work, I know, to make men
truly Religious, but yet the Lord may work by you, to break down the briars,
and thorns, and rocks and hills, which has set themselves against the Lord,
and which keeps people under the chains of Idolatry, so that they commit
Idolatry, and are compelled to it, and defended in it, even by a Law; but the
Lord will confound all this, either by means or without means, for such is
their oppression in their Ecclesi^stical state, and their unjust Laws whereby
their Church is established and defended, that it causes the very earth to
mourn, and the spirit of the righteous to faint, and their hearts to fail
because of oppression, to murder, and steal and rob, and to commit adultery,
these are accounted little sins amongst them, they are even tolerated and
pardoned by the Pope for a little money; and if they slay a man, and wilfully
murder him, ^hey can run to their Altar, there they can have a dispensation of
a wicked pardon, and here is a law that tolerates murder, and the greatest
sins; whereby it is hard for any that fears God for to be amongst them, and
blood, blood lies upon their whole dominions, and the guilty goes free and
uncondemned and the innocent suffers unjustly, for if any diminish from about
their Mass-houses to the value of a penny, that is death by their law, while
murder is tolerated; and here is naught but tyranie and oppression abounding,
even great mountains, which must be thrown down, and for which the sword of the
Lord must come upon them; and God will make their riches, and their falsely
consecrated vessels and treasures; even a spoil and a prey unto you, if you be
faithful unto the Lord; wherefore all you officers, fear the Lord God, and be
not ambitious nor vainglorious, nor seek not your selves to gain unto your
selves Kingdoms, to exalt your own horn, for if you go in this way, and if this
be your end, then your end shall be frustrated, and you shall not prosper; for
the Lord will lay you aside with shame unto you; but let it be your work and
your aim to require and demand the disanulling of their Inquisions and cruel
Laws, both in their Church and civil State, and that Christ alone may exercise
the peoples consciences neither be ye as Lords nor Tyrants over your poor
Soldiers, but be ye loving and meek toward them, I say unto you Officers and
to all you that bear Rule in the Army, be loving and kind and gentle unto all
under your authority, and be not as tyrants nor oppressors over your poor
Soldiers, but be examples of all goodness unto them, and give them no evil
examples in your lives and conversations, but lead them in the fear of the
Lord, and know a measure of his wisdom in you, whereby you may walk before
them, and they may possess their freedoms in their conditions, and may not be
as slaves ^o you, but as servants to the Lord in their places, and herein shall
you be blessed as you fulfill that which the Lord requires. And likewise unto
all the Soldiers I say, that ye may be sober and moderate, and faithful to the
Lord, and not go in the excess and superfluity of this creation, but may be all
kept low in your hearts, and tender toward God, and obey them that have power
over you in all things which are just, and be not deboist nor given to vanity,
But all of you both officers and soldiers live in that which keeps your
consciences void of offense, and that you may be clear and free in your own
spirits from the abominations of the Nations, and then you will be a terror to
the evil in all people wheresoever you come, and being clear and free in the
sight of the Lord, having no sin lying upon your consciences, then shall you
face your enemies with courage, and not fear death, but shall be ready to lay
down your lives for a testimony of Jesus in a good cause, and upon good
engagements; and if the Lord be your fear, then no man can make you afraid, but
you will be in that which overcomes the unrighteous power within you and
without you also, and here is the true honor, and in this it does consist, in
victory over all that which is contrary to God; and here is the true way to
happiness and prosperity in this life, and in the life to come, by seeking his
glory, and not your own; and all of you come to the light of Christ, that
Christ has lighted you with all, and that will teach you all things what you
ought to do, and what you ought not to do; for that light of Christ within you
ought to be the guide of all the children of men, in every state, place, and
condition, and upon this you are to wait for counsel to receive it from the
Lord, by that of him made manifest within you; and as for all your outward
teachers that has used their tongues amongst you, and said, the Lord says it,
when God has not spoken to them, nor sent them, and that preach for hire and
sums of money, and these are them that cannot profit the people, nor ever bring
you to the knowledge of God, nor give you counsel from the Lord, and if you
seek to uphold them and defend them, against the power of the Lord, and his
word which is gone forth against them, then shall you not prosper but fall with
them, and if you do enterprise any work in that spirit that does oppose the
spirit of Christ Jesus in his people, you can never have good success, but the
Lord will confound you before your enemies; And so now that you may all come
into the new covenant to be taught of the Lord, and to be far from all
oppression, this is the thing that you are all to wait for, and to know the
power of the Lord, and to go on in that, against unrighteous men and
unrighteous laws, which are set up in the Nations, that they may be destroyed
and brought under, and yet though such a victory would be honorable unto you,
yet there is a victory more honorable, to wit, the victory over sin and death,
and the Devil in your selves, and that you are to mind, and there is a kingdom
which is not of this world, which cannot be obtained by an outward sword, and
this kingdom are you to wait for, that you may know it and feel it in your own
particulars; and this is the doctrine of the Gospel of peace unto you, and the
glad tidings held forth unto all of you; come into the power of the Lord, and
mind it, that you may be lead of it, and then may you be fit instruments for
the Lord to work by; and take heed how you oppose those whom the Lord has
sent, and is sending abroad in the nations, to proclaim the mighty day of the
Lord, they are no enemies to you nor to any man's person, and therefore be
tender over them, for they go about the Lords work; of this I warn you all in
the presence of the Lord; And so you dwelling in the power of the Lord, there
is nothing shall destroy you, nor confound you, but you shall have victory over
all your enemies within you, and without you, and the Lord will make you a
dread and a fear to the Nations, and so this is a warning unto you all, both
officers and soldiers, that you may mind what the work of the Lord God is in
the nations, your work has been, and may be honorable in its day and season;
but he has a work more ho^ourable to work after you* that is to destroy the
kingdom of the Devil, and the ground of wars; and your victory has been of
the Lord, but there is a more honorable victory to be waited for, even the
victory over sin; and so we are the friends of the creation, that does preach
this victory and this kingdom and peace, which is endless and everlasting, and
which many are come into, yet we reject not the state, and work and victory and
honor of a soldier, but has a respect thereunto in their season; and as for
the many and diverse sorts of worship which is come up since the days of the
Apostles, and are of the whore and not of the true Church, they are all to be
thrown down, and the worship that is in Spirit and truth to be set up by the
Lord, and he is gathering people into that worship, but if you be out of the
fear of God in the rudeness and wickedness of the world; and seeks your
selves and not the freedom of the nations only, then the Lord will lay you
aside as a broken potsherd, and raise up unto himself a people that shall
fulfill his work and do it* for he has much work to do in the nations, to
accomplish in a few years time, for he is gathering his elect seed, and
changing the kingdoms of the world, and making them become the kingdoms of
Christ, and so be low in your own eyes, and do not seek your selves, but seek
one another good, and seek the glory of the Lord, and the freedom of the
oppressed, and in that you will be blessed and prosper till you have set up
your standard at the gates of Rome.

I am a lover of all your souls, and a sufferer in patience under the cruelties
of men.

E. B.


ANd some small discourse we had with our English Priests, that supplies the
place of Chaplains to the Army; and in particular, one of them which had spoken
something behind our backs against us, and we did proffer to have some
discourse with him, but he refused it (only to evade the matter at that
present) he bid us state some of our principles in writing, and he would answer
them in dispute in some public place; and being he was not willing to engage
to dispute otherwise, we were free to write this following Paper, but we had no
answer in agreement to dispute with us, but shifted the thing from himself, by
telling us the Governor was not willing; but t^ is was not the same Priest
before mentioned that we had discourse with at our first coming into the Town.

Friend,
For the manifestation of truth, and that the perfect difference between thee
and us may be known, and who are in the truth, and who in the error, and that
truth from error may be clearly discerned, therefore according to thy own
proposals and expressed desires thereof before many, we do here assert some
particulars of that truth which we have received from God, and do hold forth
and maintain in the world, in opposition to thee or any other that shall
gainsay them, viz.

1. That Christ has lightened all men with a light sufficient in it self to
bring them to salvation, if they follow it. 2. That God has given Christ to be
the Savior of all men. 3. That none are justified by Christ and his
righteousness without them; but as they have received Christ and his
righteousness, and witness them revealed in themselves. 4. That the Saints of
God may be perfectly freed from sin in this life, so as no more to commit it.
5. That the national Ministers and Churches, not only of Papists, but of the
Protestants also (as they now stand) are not the true ministers and Churches of
Christ. 6. That the scriptures are a true declaration given forth from the
spirit of God by holy men of God, moved by it to write them, and are
profitable, but are not the foundation, nor the most perfect Rule of faith and
life to the Saints.
These things we are freely willing and desirous to discourse upon, with thy
self and any others that shall join with thee, in the presence of sober and
wise men, who may judge between us, in any public place that may be procured
by thee according to thy engagements in this particular, provided it may be in
the spirit of meekness, and moderation, and that all fair and sober dealing
may be among us, and the fear of God; and to this we expect thy speedy answer,
concerning time and place.

E. Borough. S. Fisher.


The propositions were writ as short as could be, for to stop all advantages
against us, that might be taken by our adversary, in case he had met us, and
agreed to dispute, but upon enlargement in discourse, we might have laid open
the truth of every one of these particulars at large, to the satisfaction of
sober minds; that might have been doubtful hereof, and showed by the
Scriptures, the truth of all of them.

THE END.

