A Faithful Testimony Concerning the true WORSHIP OF GOD: What it is in it
self, and who are the true Worshippers.

In opposition to all the false worship in this Nation, which is Idolatry,
which is discovered in its foundation, and in its manifestation, not to be ever
commanded of God, or practiced by his Apostles and Saints; but it is declared
to consist chiefly of such things and practices as had their first beginning
and ordination in the Church of Rome, whereby the hypocrisy of this generation
does appear, in denying and crying against the Papists Idolatries, and yet are
found in the practice of the same thing in their Church, Ministry, and Worship,
which were first instituted by the Pope's Authority.

And this is written for a general good to all such as are worshipping in
Temples made with hands; By E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

A faithful Testimony concerning the true Worship of God, what it is in it
self, and who are the true Worshippers, etc.
FOrasmuch as there is in the world a great controversy among people
concerning the Worship of God, one crying, This is the right Worshp: Another,
That is the right Worship; and People in these Nations are divided about the
Worship of God, and diverse one from another in their performances and practices
of Worship, one sort worshipping after this manner, another after that, and
there is great strife through the whole Nation about this matter, and a great
dis-satisfaction among people, which is the right Worship, and who are the
right Worshippers, and thousands are desiring after the right Worship of God,
and to become Worshippers of him as he requires: Therefore now it is upon me to
show unto all the World what the true Worship of God is in it self, and who are
his true Worshippers.

First, The Worship of God in it self is this; It is a walking with God, and a
living with him in converse and fellowship, in spirit and truth; for he is
only worshipped therein; and to do the truth, and speak the truth; This is the
true Worship of God, where the mind is guided with the spirit of Truth, and the
presence of the Lord felt at all times, and his fear in the hearts of people,
and his Council stood in, and his Covenant felt, which unites to the Lord in
spirit: This is the true Worship of God, and it is without respect of times or
things, And now none upon earth can thus worship God, but who are changed and
renewed in heart and mind, and born of the spirit, and led thereby, where the
body of sin and death is put off, such as are redeemed out of the world, and
out of all its ways and nature, such only can worship God in the spirit and
in the truth, and such is the Father seeking to worship him now in this present
age; and there is never a one upon Earth that can worship God as he requires,
who remains unchanged, and are in the transgression, unrenewed and unconverted,
such cannot worship the true and living God, but that which they perform and
practice as the pretense of his Worship, is idolatry and abomination, and the
Lord has not required it at their hands; for none can walk with God, nor have
unity with him, but who are renewed and changed; nor none can do the truth, and
speak the truth in all things, but such who are led by the Spirit of Truth, and
such are in the Covenant of God, and true Worshippers of him, and all that is
contrary, is not the Worship of God, but Idolatry, as I have said.

And now as concerning this Worship practiced in England in these
Steeplehouses, Churches, (so called) it is not the worship of the living God,
but Superstition and Idolatry, for people has not learned it by the teachings
of the Spirit, neither does the Spirit lead them therein, but it stands in form
without power, and in the inventions and traditions of the Fathers, and there
is not in it the manifest presence of God, neither do you Worshippers meet with
the Lord, nor enjoy his pure life and presence in your practices; and the
substance of your Worship (as it is now practiced) is made up of Inventions
some part of your own, and some part brought along from the Church of Rome; And
is it not great hypocrisy in you to profess a denial of the Church of Rome,
and yet be found practicing some of the same things as your Worship, which the
Church of Rome first instituted and practiced as her Worship? Shall we instance
unto you some particular things? Was it not by the Authority of the Church of
Rome, that these houses in which you worship, which you call Churches, were
first set up and made worshipping places for them? and is it not a little while
since that the Mass, and the old Popish stuff was therein exercised with as
great zeal toward God, (if not with as good sincerity) as you practice yours
at this day? And are there not the very signs and symptoms of the Romish
Idolatry yet upon these Houses, being full of Images on the Walls, and on the
Pillars, and on the Glass-Windows and Crosses about them, and many other things
which were Popish inventions, as also the names given unto them, and
consecrated Bells in them, and such like stuff? And was it not a little while
since that there was the Altars, and the Rails, and the Font, and other such
like things which lately were broken down? But however though something there
may be altered, and changed, and converted to another use, and something taken
away, and other inventions brought in, instead thereof, yet still they are the
same Houses which you worship your God in, which Houses were set up by the
Authority of the Pope, and there remains yet the Popes sign and symptom of the
Romish Church upon them; and these Houses you call your Churches, and thousand
of thousands of blind ignorant people esteeming and respecting in their minds
of these places more then of any other, supposing them to be more holy and that
other places are not so good to worship in; alas poor, blind, ignorant people,
that deceives your own souls in the traditions and inventions of man, which you
live in the practice of, supposing it to be the very Worship of God, which is
no other in it self but Idolatry, and you Idolaters; for does not all
unconverted people, and unrighteous people, such who are not taught of the
Lord, nor led by his Spirit, but daily rushes into iniquity, and into evil,
are not such found Worshippers here in Steeplehouses, conforming themselves to
these things, and these practices? And can such worship God? Or is God
worshipped by such? I tell you nay, the Lord God is pure, and they that worship
him, must be sanctified, and led by his Spirit which leads into all truth:

But now as concerning your present practices which your Worship consists of,
they are not such as ever the Lord instituted, but such as men has set up in
their own wills and wisdom, and not in the Lords. As for your sprinkling of
Infants, which is a chief practice of your Worship, was not this first ordained
at Rome? Read the Records. And was it not a Popish invention which you are thus
zealously reforming, as if it were indeed required of the Lord? Can the
unconverted and unregenerated be truly baptized into the faith of Christ? No;
but the unconverted and unregenerated are partakers of your baptism into the
faith which you profess: There was no such practice in the Christians Church
before the Apostasy; but when the Apostasy came in, then came up these
inventions and imitations which you practice as the Worship of God, whenas he
never required it, neither did his Saints and his Apostles ever give your
example for it. And by it, nor in it, God is not worshipped; neither is it in
it self, nor as practiced by you, any part of the Worship of God, but stands in
the inventions of man, and is after their traditions, and not after the
Commandments of the Lord.

And as for your singing of David's Experiences in the form and manner as you
do, practicing it as another main part of your Worship; this is the same with
the former, neither ever commanded of the Lord, nor (in the course and manner
as you do it) was it ever practiced by the Saints of old; and is it any better
then a Popish Invention? For was the Nation in any better state then Popery,
when that practice was first instituted and begun to be performed; you your
selves will confess that it was in the time of darkness, and through the
ordination of the Bishops and Prelates, whom you your selves say were little
better then Papists in their worship and practice; and yet this you practice at
this day as a part of your Worship, which has no better beginning then as I
have said, and from them you have received it, to wit, from the Bishops and
Prelates; yea, the chief part of your Worship consists of the performances of
such things as you have received traditionally from them, and from ^ome, for
all these things they instituted.

And as concerning your Ministry, is it any other with that, then with these
particulars as I have mentioned? Is it not the same Ministry in substance,
though in some particulars altered, as was in the days of Popery and Prelacy?
Have not your Ministers the same Call to their Ministry, and the same practice
in their Ministry, and the same Maintenance at this day, as was in generations
past, when this Nation was under the Cloud of darkness and ignorance, as your
selves will confess? Are not they made Ministers now by natural learning,
receiving ordination from man, through the seize of such Arts, and
Sciences, and Degrees, through natural learning and humane policy, not having
their Ministry by the gift of the Holy Ghost, no more then the Papists and
Prelates had before them, who were made Ministers by the same power, and after
the same manner as these are: And it was the Church of Rome, and by the Popish
Authority, that Colleges and Schools, to make Ministers by them, were first
ordained and set up; and as that Ministry was sent forth in the time of Popery,
by the same way and means (generally as to substance) are your Ministers now
sent forth, though in some particulars differing in matter of form, yet the
same for substance: But Christ's Ministers in the time of the true Church, were
not thus sent forth, but had received power from on High, and the gift of the
Holy Ghost, whereby they were made able Ministers, and not by any other thing,
nor by any such means or way as your Ministers now are set up and established;
and this Ministry is differing from the true Ministry which Christ sent forth,
and is not according, but contrary in all things; and it is not the Ministry of
God which brings people to God; but by this Ministry people are not converted,
but such it is that the true Prophet cried against; They have run, says the
Lord, and I have not sent them, therefore they shall not profit the people at
all.

And as for this maintenance of the Ministry of the Church of England, is it
not the same as was in the days of Popery and Prelacy? Was it not by the Popes
Authority that Tithes were first established and set up to be the maintenance
of his Ministry? and did not the Romish Church first ordain that the people
should give the tenth to the use of Religion, and to maintain their Ministry?
If you search the Records, you will find it so. And was it not the very
practice of the Papists and Prelates Ministers, to have hire, and great sums of
money by the year, and stipends, and large benefits for preaching; and the same
things are practiced by these Ministers, which they have borrowed from the
Papists and Prelates which went before them; for are not these Ministers
maintained by Tithes as the Popes Ministers were? And have they not hire and
great sums of money by the year, or quarterly, even as the Papists and Prelates
had? Wherefore it is plain, that the maintenance of your Ministers is the very
same for substance as theirs were that went before you, which you your selves
say were Idolaters; and if they were Idolaters, how can you Ministers be free
which does practice the very same things, unto the very same end? And does not
the Priests of this generation far exceed the Papists and Prelates? Was there
ever in generations past such casting people into prison, and spoiling peoples
goods, as is at this day through the means of these Priests, and all about
their maintenance, and for their Tithes and Hire, and yearly stipends, and
quarterly gain* Did ever the Papists or Prelates worse in this particular, with
any people that denied them wages, then these do that denied them Oh! great
blindness and ignorance is over your hearts, and great hypocrisy among your
Ministers, who profess a denial and dissenting from the Church of Rome, and
cries against them as Heretics, and that they are in ignorance, and yet
practices the very same things; their Call is the very same to their Ministry,
and their Maintenance the same, and practice in many things the very same as
theirs were, which they seem to deny; and this is great hypocrisy, to cast out
and kill their persons, and yet to uphold in many things their practice,
relating to their Worship and their Ministry: Oh abominable Idolatry! the hand
of the Lord is against it. But this is not the way that Christ's Ministers were
maintained, they had no such hire nor great sums of money, nor yearly Tithes,
as these Ministers have through the Popes Institution; but into whatsoever
house they entered, that was worthy, they might eat such things as were set
before them, and the Apostles might freely reap carnal things, where they had
sown spiritual things; but this was after another manner, and after another
nature; for if they had not that, yet did they not cast men into prison, and
spoil their goods that would not give it them, as this generation of Teachers
do; and the Lord God is risen to confound this Worship and this Ministry, which
is Idolatry, and this Church, which is but a false feigned imitation, and he
will establish his true Worship that is in spirit and in truth; and his true
Ministry that is by the gift of the Holy Ghost, and his true Church; and this
shall be brought to pass in his day.

But again, there is another practice which you have, which the Church of Rome,
and the Prelates had, (your predecessors) if any come in the Name of the Lord
to declare against you, and against your abominations, to cry against your sin,
and cry repentance among you, that you may be converted to God, this you
account a great Transgression, and persecutes them that does it, by
imprisoning, and whipping, and stocking, and by imposing great fines upon them,
and causing them to suffer cruel things, and this did the Papists and Prelates
in like manner as you do, if any was moved to cry against them, they indeed
rewarded them even as you do at this day, the same thing you do against such as
are moved of the Lord to come among you; and herein you succeed them, and
brings forth the same persecution in your Churches, as they did in their
Churches; and this is the defense of your Church, and of your Ministry, Carnal
Weapons, Imprisonment, and Whipping, and Stocking, and causing the bodies of
people to suffer through cruelty and injustice, and by this means is your
Church and Ministry defended and preserved, or otherwise it would presently
fall, as not being able to continue nor resist, nor gainsay the spirit and
power of God, which now is risen to oppose them, if they had not carnal Laws,
and Earthly Powers, and Gaols, and Houses of Correction to defend themselves
by: And is this the Church of Christ? And is this Christ's Ministry that have
need of such weapons as these? The Apostles nor true Churches never did thus,
neither sent people to prison that opposed them, nor had such cruelty to
execute upon the bodies of people, though many did oppose them out of
wickedness, but the Spirit and Authority of the Lord did defend them from all
their Enemies. But your Church and Ministry is manifest to be another then that
was, and to be defended by another means, even by the same means that the
Papists and Prelates of old were of a long time defended by; but when the
measure of these things are fulfilled, they will come to an end: as the measure
of that generations iniquity was fulfilled which went before you, so in the
Lords season will your measure be fulfilled, and the Lords people shall be
free, and all bonds of iniquity broken.

And thus it is manifest that this Church and Ministry succeeds the Church of
Rome and her Ministers, far more then the Church of Christ and its true
Ministers, and to that it is not equal in any thing, but to the Church of Rome
it is comparable in many things; so that it is manifest, that this Church and
Ministry are not quite another then the Church and Ministry of Rome, but such
as has dissented from them, and are truly sprung out of that root, and is the
same still in substance, though differing in some practices, having cast out
some old inventions, and brought in some new, but as I have said, remains still
the same in nature and substance, though dissented in some particulars, yet
succeeds in many particulars, as I may show more fully hereafter. And though
you bare the Name, and style your selves, The reformed Churches, you mean,
reformed from the Church of Rome; but how are you reformed? but by some visible
appearances, and not in the ground, having put off but some of her garments,
and remains the same body for substance, in nature and matter, though differing
only in appearances? For the Church which is the true Church of Christ, is not
thus reformed, only changed in part, and altered in degrees, but the true
Church denies the Church of Rome in her very being and ground, and in all her
practices whatsoever; for though many Sects have risen one from another, yet
all the same for substance, only differing in particulars: But as for you to
whom this particular is written, that worship God in Steeplehouses, you are not
so much differing from the Church of Rome, as many others are, which are not
true Churches neither; but the Lord God is now gathering his people; wherefore
come out of your Idol-worship, and Idol-Temples, for God dwells not in them,
nor is not worshipped there, but he dwells and walks in his Saints, and is
worshipped in spirit and in truth, and his day is dawned, and his glory is
risen, and he will confound this Church and Ministry which bears the marks of
the Romish Whore, and has her symptoms and characters remaining upon them unto
this day, as it is manifest.

And though some may object and say, That God commanded a Temple to be builded
for the worship of his Name, and Ordinances to be practiced in the time of the
old Covenant. To which I do say, Yea it was so, a Temple was builded by Solomon
for the seed of the Jews to worship in, and to come to sacrifice to the Lord
in, and there was an outward worship and ordinances; But it is many hundred
years since this Temple was destroyed, and worship and ordinances thrown down,
which God once commanded, and his people once practiced; and Christ the life,
the power, and wisdom of God, was the substance thereof, and unto whom he was
made manifest, and in whom he was revealed in the spirit, they utterly
renounced and denied the Temple, and the Worship therein, though God once had
commanded it; and the Saints after the manifesting of Christ to them in spirit,
and after that the Holy Ghost was given, we do not find through all the
Churches of the Saints, that they worshipped in the Temple of the Jews, but
witnessed against it, and said that God dwelt not in Temples made with hands,
neither was he worshipped in Temples made with hands, but in the spirit, and in
the truth their worship consisted, and therefore were persecuted; but they bare
witness against the Temple, and the worship, and those Ordinances which God
once had commanded, and which once his people practiced, though it was to the
peril of their lives; but as for these Temples, and these Ordinances, and this
worship which are now on foot, they were never brought forth by any Ordination
or Commandment of God, but the foundation of them was the inventions of men,
and men's traditions taught them, and not the spirit of the Lord, and therefore
against those things, those Temples, and those Ordinances, and Worships, much
reason have we to cry against them all, as being neither sign nor substance of
good, but wholly inventions of men. The Jews Temple and Ordinance was signs of
good things to come, and when the substance was come, the Saints denied the
shadows and the figures; but as for these, they are denied wholly, as being
Idolatry and Abomination from the beginning to the end of them; for as I have
shown, these things (which are the matter of which your Worship and Ordinance
does consist) had their rise and beginning in the days of darkness and
ignorance, since the Apostasy came in, and so in the Name and Authority of the
Lord, we do declare against them, even against your Temples and whole Worship,
to the intent to bring you to the true Worship, that is in spirit and in truth,
and that you might know your bodies the Temples of God, and that he might dwell
in you, and walk in you, according as he has promised in the New Covenant.
Wherefore all people, awake and come out of your Idolatry, and Idolatrous
Worships, separate your selves, touch no more of it, that the Lord may receive
you, and that you may come into his Covenant, which is life and peace for your
souls, for in those Worships, and Temples, and all your practices therein, you
have not true peace with the Lord, nor the refreshments from his pure presence,
but sin and death reigns amongst you, and great ignorance is over your hearts,
and Idolatry corrupts your minds, and the Lord has been forgotten by you,
days without number; God is not well-pleased, neither has any delight in your
Worship; for your worship of him, and fear toward him, is but taught by the
precepts of men, and by the traditions of the Fathers in the days of Popery,
and if ever he opens your eyes, you will see it, for it is with the humble and
contrite in heart that the Lord dwells, him that crembleth at the word of the
Lord, whose heart is right in his sight, and has learned his judgments and
fear, and such as are changed and renewed, and born of the seed of God, and
begotten by his powerful Word, such are the true worshippers whom the Lord is
seeking, and such will he find to worship him.

And whereas there is a great cry amongst you, and among many people at this
day, about deceivers, and being deceived, and there are many deceivers, you
say, and your cry is one to another, Take heed you be not deceived by false
Teachers and false Doctrine. This is the cry of Parents to Children, and of
Children to Parents, and of Masters to Servants, and of Servants to Masters,
and chiefly, it is the cry of your Priests to the people, Take heed you be not
deceived, etc.

Now to all this I do say, That there are many deceivers, and many are
deceived, this is certainly true, and plainly manifest; but now to show what a
deceiver is, and what it is to be deceived, and who it is that are deceived.
First, That is a deceiver, that person, that spirit, or that thing, that
leads, or inticeth the minds of people into something, to do, or practice, or
speak something which the Lord by his spirit does not lead to. I say, That
which leads the creature to take up a joy, or a delight, or a happiness in
something of this world which is under the Sun, to place confidence or felicity
in such a thing; that which thus leads or draws the mind, whether it be
person, or spirit, it is a deceiver, and deceives the soul; and he, or they
that does follow this, and give up themselves into the obedience of it, to do,
or speak something that is contrary to God, or which his spirit does not lead
unto, nor guide in, this person is deceived of the presence of the Lord, and of
the comfort, and joy, and happiness that is in him, and has pleasure, and joy
in something of the Creation that is not of him, but besides him, and this
person is deceived, and in deceit, who has placed a joy, and happiness, and
confidence in some creature or thing that is not perfectly the Lord; and
another spirit besides the Spirit of the Lord, has seated its self in the
heart, and taken possession of the mind, and the mind and heart is thereby
captivated by that way, in the works and pleasures of this world; and this is a
deceived estate; and thus much of a deceiver, and a deceiving in the ground, in
that declared.

But now you that are crying one to another, Be not deceived, Be not deceived;
And you not such as are deceived already, and that lies wallowing in the
deceit, and vanity, and evil of this world? For while sin has power over you,
and that spirit that is not of God does lead you, you are deceived; and thus it
is with you, being unchanged and unrenewed in mind and heart; are not you
deceived? For you want the feeling of the presence, and of the comfort of the
Lord God, and you are deceived of that, for that you have not, and another
thing possesses your mind, the joy and pleasure of this world, and in your
exercise spiritual and temporal, the spirit that is of this world does lead
you, and guide you, the spirit of unrighteousness that leads contrary to
him; and can you be otherwise deceived, or more deceived? For you are without
God a ready, and wants his peace, and the inheritance of life eternal that is
in him, you want the possession thereof, and you are following dead Idols and
vanities which steals away your mind, whereby it is manifest that you are
deceived; For all people upon the Earth that are not led by the spirit into all
truth, that has not received the promise of the Father, they are all deceived,
and cannot be more deceived then they are; and so is the cry in general among
people, if any one forsake and deny their way of Worship and Religion, and
Profession, be it of what manner and nature, soever, presently there is a cry,
(chiefly by the Priests) Take heed you be not deceived, and you are in heresy
and error, and such like: Thus have the Papists cried against them that have
dissented from them, and the Prelates cried the same, and now you cry the same
to them that dissent from you; but your zeal is not so much against Heresy and
Error, simply so, as it is to have your own Sect and Worship upheld, and
against them that does dissent from you; and it has been Antichrists way since
the apostasy, since the days of the Apostles, to cry Heresy, and Error, and
you are deceived, to all that did decline and dissent from him; for you may
read in the Scriptures, Power was given to the Beast to compel all to worship
him, and all that would not, he made war against, and had power to kill them.
And thus have the Papists done, warred against them that denied their Church;
and thus did the Prelates, and thus do you, your cry is, Heresy, and Error,
and they are deceived who do sorsake your Church, and your Ministry; and this
cry have you learned of your forefathers, the Romish Church. But cease all
sorts of people to cry that others are deceived, and that others are in Error,
and see how your selves are led with the spirit of unrighteousness, and
blindness, and ignorance, and a cloud of Error is over you, and between you and
the Son of God, who is appearing now in Majesty and Renown, to exalt his Name
over all the Earth; and Antichrists way you have been in, who would have all to
bow under his Power, unto his Worship; but now the eyes of people are opened,
and Life, and Righteousness, and Truth it self is sprung forth over all the
Clouds of Darkness and Error.

Your worship is to the unknown God, and him you ignorantly worship after the
traditions of men, and not after the Commandments of God, for the tradition of
the Fathers is seated in you above the Witness, and blinds the eye, and
quenches the spirit; your old customs, traditions and forms, and your exercise
therein, feeds that part which is carnal, and answers that in others, and your
worship which is out of the spirit of God, answers not the spirit of God in
others, to convert any truly to the living God; and the Lord will destroy your
worship, and confound it, and no more is the Lord worshipped in Steeplehouses,
they are lest desolate of Gods presence, and no more in days, and times, and
things, but they that worship must be in the spirit changed by it, and led by
it into the truth; so when the Lord does open your eyes, you will see the
worship of God to be another thing then you suppose it; you cannot be educated
naturally in the worship of God, nor learn it by traditions, for it stands
only in the spirit, and is taught by the spirit unto all them that are born of
the spirit; and who comes to be born of that, are the true worshippers of God,
in which the Father is well pleased. And as for your worship in Steeplehouses,
God has no delight in, he savoureth it not, but it is an abomination to him,
it is not pleasing to him, because you be out of his spirit, and worships after
your own traditions, and not after his spirit; and this worship has stood all
this long time of Antichrist, while the Whore and the Beast has ruled over
Nations, and so one tradition after another has been brought in, and one false
Worship has risen out of another, and what people has had, it has been by
tradition, and not from the immediate spirit of God and so the true God has
not been worshipped in his spirit; and now all the world has been pleading for
their traditions, and they be in respect above the Commandments of God, among
ye that worship in Steeplehouses; you are even mad against them that cries
against the Steeplehouses, and pleads the Antiquity of your Worship, and of
your Traditions and Ordinances, now they are ancient, even as ancient as since
the false Prophets and Antichrist came in, and put on the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are wolves; these killed the life, and slew the Prophets, and they set
up inventions of their own; and your traditions and worships are as ancient as
since power was given to the Beast over kindreds and peoples; and the Lord God
is bringing down your worship, the original of which, came up when Antichrist
went into the world, as you may read in John's Epistle, and so you may plead
Antiquity, yet not as ancient as the true Church is, for when the true Churches
were apostatized, then came up your worship, and your many traditions; and this
has been while the woman has been fled into the wilderness, and the Manchild
caught up to God, which when the woman returns again, your Worship and
Ordinance will be overthrown, and the true worship again established, and
liberty; but first you must know the spirit to teach you, before you can
worship in it, and the spirit must purify your hearts, and make them clean,
before you can offer to God an acceptable sacrifice; for your sacrifices are
not acceptable, but they are stained and polluted in the sight of the Lord, who
now has beheld what you are a doing, and you are in that which his soul has
no pleasure in, and in the day of your visitation the witness in your
consciences shall answer it; so you are to know God by his spirit, before you
can worship him; the word of the Lord must be felt in your hearts as a fire,
and as a hammer, and you must be created anew, and have another spirit, before
ye can worship God. So all you false worshippers, you are called that you may
return, and may come into the true worship, which is in the commandment of God,
and not the traditions of men, and in that Law written in the heart, is God
known, who works man's salvation, and which leads in the true and perfect
worship, of the true and living God, where the Lord is all in all. Therefore
return, why will you dye and perish in your iniquities? A lamentation is taken
up for you, O! why will you perish through neglecting your own salvation? Come
into the spirit, and into the truth, that you may worship God, and be accepted
of him, who is now appeared in power and great glory, to gather his people to
himself.

This is to go abroad among all people who are worshipping in Temples made with
hands, and who are under this Ministry, and are of this Church aforementioned,
that they may come to consider, and see the error of their way, of their
worship, and of their ministry, and this is a visitation from the Lord unto
them all, by a friend unto all your souls.

The End.

