A TRUE DESCRIPTION OF MY Manner of Life, Of what I have been in My PROFESSION
OF RELIGION unto this very Day: AND What I am at PRESENT, by the Grace of God.

This was given forth some time before that Faithful Servant of God laid down
his Body, who was known amongst many, by the Name of EDWARD BVRROVGH.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson in the Year, 1663.

A true Description of my manner of Life, of What I have been in my Profession
of Religion unto this very Day; and what I am at present, by the Grace of God.
I Was brought up, and Educated by my Natural Parents in profession of
Religion, according to the Customs and Traditions of this Nation, in saying
Prayers, professing the Scriptures, and hearing men Speak upon them: And I was
exercised in the Formal Worship then upheld, to Read, and Hear, and Sing, and
Pray, according to Tradition: And this was about the time when Prelacy was
going down; but I was Wanton and Leight, and lived in Pleasures, and without
the Fear of God, and knew nothing of him but by Hearsay, and Tradition. Neither
was I then Zealous for what I Professed; But when I grew up toward Twelve
years of Age, something of God stirred in my Mind and Understanding, and showed
me, That there was a Higher thing, and that this was Darkness, and not at all
the Worship of the Living God, but Ignorance, and without his Knowledge. And
then I sought after, and followed the chiefest Presbyterian Priests in the
Country, and would have gone several Miles to have heard one of the best of
them, which seemed liker Truth than the other; Such was then my Thirstings and
desire after God, out of the sincerity of my Heart, which were begotten in me:
So I followed the Highest of the Priests and Professors of that Form, and grew
in Favor with them, and was Owned among them as Religious, (then I left off
some small part of my Leightness and Vanity) and Soberminded, as having
something of the Fear of God before me: Then (through my industry in Reading and
Hearing, and writing Notes) I gathered much Knowledge from the Scriptures of
that sound and report of things Without me, as of Christ Jesus, his Life, his
Dying and Rising, etc. which I applied in may self, to have peace thereby (as I
thought;) but it was in the enmity against God in my Nature all this while, and
unregenerate, though grown very Zealous in Prayer, and Duties, and
Performances; highly respecting the Sabbath day, and my Duties, and the like:
So that thus I became a Scorn to many of my Acquaintance, and was Reproached by
the Name of a Roundhead, and such like. But as I grew up in Wisdom and
Knowledge, so into Pride, and Highmindedness, and forgot the Simplicity, and
left the former Innocence; and so was kept and continued in Ignorance of the
Living Truth, and but groping as a Blind man, not knowing whether I went.

Then when I was about Sixteen Years of Age, it pleased the Lord to show
Himself a little more to me; and I was stricken with great Terrors many times,
and Judgment was set up in me; and my Wisdom and former Knowledge was much
confounded; and my observing of my former duties of Righteousness was become
dead, and dry, and empty to me: for when I had been Praying, I heard the Voice
often, Thou art Ignorant of God, thou know not where he is, nor what he is; To
what purpose is thy Prayer? And very often much Fear and Dread came upon me,
and broke me off from Prayer many times; and trouble came thick into my mind,
and Fearfulness fell many times upon me; Weeping and Crying took hold of me;
and I was stricken off my former Delights that I had loved; and what I had
gathered into my Wisdom (as of Experiences, and the Knowledge of God) died in
me: And for a time I left off Reading the Scriptures; for it was showed me,
that I was Ignorant of the true God; neither knew, nor understood what I Read:
the Beauty of all things Vanished, and I had no Pleasure in anything: Even the
Preaching of those whom I had formerly delighted to Hear, was Withered to me,
and became Empty and Barren, and he burden of Sin lay Heavy upon me. And many
a time I sat down alone Weeping and Sorrowing, and separated my self from the
Vain ways of the World, and from Vain worldly People, and was made to Reprove
many often for Wickedness, though therefore I was had in Derision; for Wrath
was in me against Sin, though my self was Ignorant of God. And I went to some
of the Ministers, and asked What this God was, but no man could give me
Satifaction herein. And thus I was hurried up and down, and many times
grievously Tempted; but knew not where to have my Mind stayed, nor how to gain
Power over my Enemies, which were very many.

But for a time, having been exercised through great trouble of Spirit, it
pleased the Lord to manifest his Love in my Soul, and I had sweet Refreshings
coming in from his Presence, and I had Joy and Peace in abundance, and great
openings of the Mysteries of God was Revealed in me, which the World knew not;
and through Judgment was a pure innocent Simplicity brought forth in me, and
great Thirstings and Desires more then at the first were begotten in me toward
God; and I saw many Glorious things afar off by way of Prophecy, and was in
much Rejoicing many times, and could sing Praises unto God; for then I was
brought out of the Land of Egypt and Darkness, and could say I had peace in
Measure with God in the Light; and many Scriptures were opened to me, and the
Ministry of Christ was looked into, which before I had been blind concerning,
and my former Sorrow was not departed from me, and forgotten; for Joy and
Gladness filled my heart, and I grew up to know Great things in my
apprehension, and began to run forth in my Wisdom, thinking to comprehend in my
own Knowledge, the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, having the True Light
shining in my Understanding; And through my Aspiring mind, grew up into the
notion of Truth, but without the Life, only to speak of Great things in my own
Wisdom: But not knowing the Cross of Christ, to keep Low in it, to have my Mind
stayed upon the Principle of God, to be preserved in my Peace and Joy with God,
I lost again my self, through my forward Will and Wisdom, and running out into
Knowledge without the Fear of God; Though I was above many of the Priests and
Professors in my Knowledge, and followed only the highest Notionists; but the
Fleshly Man was set at Liberty, and the Cross was despised, though I was looked
upon to know Much, and could speak True Experiences; but the Judgment I had
lost, and the former Terror was gone, and the Rod that once Smote me was
Broken, and out of the Serpent's Root sprang forth a Cockatrice, and his Fruit
was a fiery stinging Serpent, upon which I fed for many days: And then Pride
grew more than ever, and Self-conceitedness, and Presumption, and Fleshly
liberty to the Carnal mind: And my delight was much in Discoursing, and Talking
of the Mysteries of God, where I spent that which God had given me, like the
Prodigal, and gave Holy Things to Dogs, for I wanted the true Wisdom of the
Heir of the Kingdom. And here I lived Pleasantly, for I had the Knowledge of
the Mystery of Christ in my Comprehension; and the Mystery of the Kingdom (as I
thought) was Revealed; for I comprehended much in my Wisdom, being unsettled in
the Light, which should have guided me into the Cross; But the World was set in
my Heart, and Pride, and Covetousness, and the Earthly Spirit ruled, and my
Delight grew up again, from the Simplicity I once had, growing in the Knowledge
out of the Innocence.

Here I ran from my Husband, after other Lovers, and had left the Lord, my
Maker; and I spent the Portion of the Gift of God as among Harlots, and
Iniquity and Sin increased again, and Death by Sin came upon me, and the
Serpent beguiled me, as he did Eve, even when I was Innocent, and I had Eaten
of the Knowledge, and not of the Life, and that fed a part within me, which
should have been Famished, and my Left hand knew what my Right hand did, and
the Woman usurped power over the Man-child in me. And in this condition, for
many days, I traveled, and became darkened in my Mind more and more; and had
lost that which once I had Felt and Known, and had but in my earthly Memory the
sense which before I had in the true Light, and in a Measure enjoyed: I could
tell of Experiences, but they were Dead to me, and could speak of many Divine
things in my Imaginations, but I held the Truth in an unrighteous mind.

Then the Witness of God began again to work in me, and brought me to Question
some things how it was with me; and I saw my self to be Ignorant more then
formerly, and I felt Peace and Joy departed from me; and something desired to be
restored again to my former condition, but I grew to be much given to the love
and delights of Riches, and Honor in the World; I fed my self with that
Knowledge which formerly I had received in the Light, and with a Deceitful mind
could say, I once had the Love of God; and whom he Loved once, he loves for
ever. But then that was head and ruled in me which he Loves never.

And I was Wanton, and in Ishmaels Birth, which I thought to be a goodly Child,
and would fancy he might have lived before the Lord; and in my Vanities amongst
Heathens I crucified the Lord of Life; but the Blood of that which I had slain
cried continually, and the Witness which lay slain gave me no rest, which the
Earthly man made Merry over, for a time, till the Lord was awakned as one out
of sleep, to lay again his Judgments upon me; and then I grew weary of all
Knowledge, and Profession, though never so High; Something which shined deep in
me, showed me Ignorance in the Highest of Words; and I was tossed up and down
in my Thoughts, having lost the savor of Life which once I had tasted of, and
that Tenderness which was once upon my Spirit; And I was as a Dry Bone strewed
abroad, and I became a Reproach to my self, who once had felt the Working of
the Power of God; but was now past Sense, and might sit down in Darkness, and
look no more after Religion. And this was partly my Resolution, seeing my self
Deceived in all Things.

But in due time the Lord Awakned me, and brought me Home, and sent the true
and faithful Messenger (the First-brought-forth of many Children) not known to
the World, for whom the Nations shall Bless the Lord; and the Message of
Eternal Light he declared, and spoke the Language I knew not, notwithstanding
all my High talkings; for it was Higher, and yet Lower then I understood; and
it comprehended me, and overthrew me in the height of my Knowledge: And the
Lord spoke to me, by Him, and caused me to hear his Voice, through Him; and my
dim Eye was restored to Sight, and my Understanding was Opened, and the Vail
was Rent; and I saw my self as in a Glass, to be in the Prodigal state, and
above the Cross, and without Judgment, and without the Fear of the Lord; for
my professed Freedom was proved Bondage, in the balance of Equity; and my own
Will had Power over me, and my own Heart led me Captive; And the Witness being
Raised, I saw my self Where I was, and What I had been doing; I saw I had been
making an Image to the first Beast, which had a Wound by the Sword, and did
Live, whose Deadly Wound was again Healed, and was Worshipping the Image which
I had set Up, even he Likeness of the first Beast: And I was full of Airy
Notions and Imaginations, and the Son of the Bondwoman lived; and I saw that
Harlots gone from God had been my Companions: And I confessed I was not worthy
to be called a Son, who had departed from the Fathers House, and was found
Feeding upon Husks, and could not fill my Belly; then Trouble and Distress come
upon me, and the Lord appeared a swift Witness against me, and true Judgment
was set up in my Heart, and days of Sorrow compassed me about, such as was not
since the beginning of the World; and I was at my Wits end, and a day of thick
Darkness and Trouble, a day of Weeping and Mourning, and Misery; a day of
Recompense and Vengeance came upon me, such as I had never known, even for many
days I was compassed with Pain, as a Traveling Woman; one Vial of Wrath after
another was poured out, and the Great Whore was to be Judged, and to Drink of
the Wine of the Wrath of God, which had once made me to Drink of the Wine of
her Fornication and Abominations; my Pleasant day was turned into Mourning, and
my Merry Hours into Weeping; the Earth was with its Glory consumed away, and
the Children of my Vanity fainted for Thirst; and I became a Reproach to the
Wicked round about me, and was some time as a Distracted man, when the Terror
of the Lord was upon me; And it was hard to find Patience in that Day, and to
endure this Wounded Spirit: My Sins were set in Order before my Face, and they
Reviewed by the Law of God set up in me; and then I submitted my Neck to the
Yoke, and separated my Heart from all the Glory of the World, and from all my
Acquaintance, and sought out the Fear of the Lord, and his Judgments my Soul
loved; And I gave my Heart to seek the Lord, and I Prized his Treasure above
All things, and my Heart found Favor in the sight of God, as I became Subject
to Him. And I betook my self to a poor Despised, Contemptible People called
Quakers, and the Lord Raised us up about this time; and now the Lord has Made
up the Breach, and Healed up the Wound, and Restored ever lasting Praise and
Rest in my Soul; and she has found her Beloved, whom from the days of my
Childhood I sought, with a desire to know his Ways; and now I am one in the
Generation of the Righteous Seed, which was ever Hated by the Seed of Evil
Doers; But I had rather have chosen Affliction with Them, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin with the Multitude: And now do I bear Witness unto the Lord in
this his Day, unto the one Eternal Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, of whom I
am made a Partaker (through the Faith of the Gospel) by the Word of God, and do
set to my Seal, That the Lord is True, and his Ways and Judgments are Equal,
whereby he Redeems Sion, and her Children: And a Witness for the Lord I bear by
his Spirit, against all the Deceitful Professions of the World, which stands in
the Wisdom of Man, and not in the Power of God; and from the Head of the great
Image, unto the Feet, his whole Body (in the Light) is seen and comprehended,
and all deceivableness of Unrighteousness is seen in its Working; And unto the
pure Teachings of God in the Spirit, do I give Testimony, and against all the
False Teachers and Hirelings in the World, by whom the People are not Profited:
And in a Measure I have received the end of the Ministry of Christ, and do not
thereby Destroy it, but Seal to it; and am come into the Covenant of Peace,
where every one, from the Least to the Greatest know the Lord, and are
established in Righteousness: And what we have Heard, Seen, and Tasted of the
Word of Life, that do we Declare, and stand Witness for God; as we have
Received the Truth, in which we are made Free by the Son, and do Suffer, and
are giving up to Bear the Sufferings for the Seeds sake, which is not of this
World. Unto which Seed in us, God has fulfilled his Promises, and his Word,
and has removed the Enmity, and taken away his Punishing Hand; and the
Fearfulness of his Countenance is changed into Love, Life, and Peace; and
Sorrow, and Mourning is fled away, and the Man-child is brought forth, and the
Remembrance of our former Trouble is now past: And unto Him who is not known in
the World, though a Sufferer by it, do I bear Witness in the sight of God,
Angels and Men; and Woe unto his Persecutors, they shall Fall, and never more
Rise again; and Sorrow and Confusion shall fill their Loins, and the end of
his Enemies shall be accursed in deep Misery, and the Snares of the Enemy laid
for him shall hold fast their own Feet. Now I am Despised of the World, and
cast aside of my Relations, and am not Greater than my Lord, who was called a
Blasphemer, and Deceiver, as now I am, Praised be the Lord for Evermore, who
has Separated me from the World, and Worldly Glory, and has made me a
Partaker of his Love, in which my Soul has full Satisfaction, Joy* and
Content; and now my Habitation is in the Lord. And thus I have Traveled
through the World, even to the End, and now am come to the Beginning of that
which never shall have an End, which the Dark mind of Man knows not. And this
has been my Travel many a day in Weariness, and in a Burdened Spirit; and
though tossed too and fro, yet now I have found a sure Resting Place, even the
beautiful Gates of Sion; and my Mind is stayed, and my Soul Rests in the
Enjoyment of Love, and a sure Defense is upon my Glory, my Neighbors may
Rejoice with me for ever.

Edward Borough.

THE END.

