TO THE BELOVED AND CHOSEN of GOD IN THE Seed Elected, Particularly in LONDON
And elsewhere, Who have seen the day of Christ, and received the Message of
Peace and Reconciliation in these last days of his Glorious appearance.
THe dear Salutation of my life salutes you all, in the most pure and dearest
love with which I am beloved of the Father, and with which also at this present
my heart is filled and issues forth toward you, and the whole body of elected
ones, and the remembrance of you in the Lord is very precious unto me, as I see
and behold you, and has fellowship with you in the Immortal life, which the
Father has begotten in you and in me, and in which my knowledge is of you, and
my unity with you, and therein only is the remembrance of my dearest love unto
you, and in which I hope I am also known and remembered of you, even in the
spiritual relation and heirship of Immortality, being fellow Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and children of her conception and bringing forth.

Now my dearest friends, seeing you have believed in the light and life of men,
even in him that was, and is, and is to come, and have also tasted of that all
fullness that is in him, you have a witness in your selves, even of the Spirit
of the Father which is greater then all, and you need no other testimony but
that of the Spirit, That the Lord is good and full of Grace, Truth, Mercy,
Peace, and Joy, even the full Fountain and Treasure of all virtue and
blessedness in this present time and hereafter; I say, if you have tasted and
felt of Immortal life, and if the fountain has been opened in you, and you
have seen his glory, and received of his treasure, then the evidence dwells in
you of eternal blessedness, and no man needs to teach you of these things, nor
to say unto you know the Lord, if you dwell in him and go no more forth, yet
bear with me a little, that I may speak and be refreshed, not to deminish from
what testimony you have in you, but the rather to add toward it; for my
witness is not another, but the same which ye enjoy, which is faithful and
true; And this I say, Oh how great, how mighty and powerful is the Lord our God
everlasting and infinite; He is that eternal spirit that fills all, the
Creator and being of all things that are, the life and virtue in all, and the
invisible substance greater then all, he is in himself the immesurable and
infinite fullness, the Fountain of Life, of Mercy, and Righteousness and
Peace, and of all virtue, and of every good thing, who can declare his
beginning, or end? he is without time, place or thing, yet gives being to all,
and is present in all, yet not known, saving of himself, and by his own spirit,
yet he effects all things, and works whatsoever he will; Who can utter his
wondrous Works? Who can number his Mercies? Who can account his infiniteness?
Who can behold his Invisibility? Who can reach his endless being? He fills
Heaven and Earth, and of his fullness every Creature in Heaven and Earth
receives, and by him does subsist, though it is only given unto mankind to
behold and perceive of him, it is only his gift unto his Saints that fear him,
to understand of his ways, and in us he has opened of his fullness and
treasure, even in our hearts, and the divine mystery of this infinite God is
revealed and discovered in the hearts of the sons of men whom he has chosen;
and he has given us to enjoy and possess in us a measure of that fullness that
is in himself, even a measure of the same love and life, of the same mercy and
power, and of the same divine nature, and a measure of the same heavenly
quality and property which is in him in all fullness, dwells in us his Saints
by measure, even in all that are born of him, in whom the immortal birth is
brought forth, which is of his own nature, and is Immortal, Spiritual, Holy,
Meek, Merciful, even as the Father; for the quality of him that has begotten,
is in us that are begotten of him, we bear his image and are of the Father,
partakers of his substance, Immortal and Infinite, and are one with him in
nature and fellowship, and perfect through him that dwells in us, and has
changed us into his likeness; these things ye know if ye be born from above,
and if the immortal birth live in you, and ye be constant in the faith, then
are ye heirs through it, of the everlasting inheritance of eternal life, and
already have received the earnest, and assurance thereof, and all are yours,
because you are Christ's, and he is Gods, and you have the Father and the Son.

And this life and immortality is brought forth in us, and infiniteness it
self dwells with us, and eternity possesses us, and fullness it self is shed
abroad in our hearts, and we have the treasure of Life, of Wisdom, of
Knowledge, and of Divine fullness in our Tabernacles of clay, which also are
sanctified by his Word and Power to be fit habitations for the Eternal God to
dwell in; And oh what love is this with which we are beloved by him! Oh what
mercy is this of which we partake from him! Who are become the Sons of God and
Children of the most high, in whose earthen vessels dwells Immortality and
Life, and infinite Substance, being gathered into his shepherds fold of
defense, where we have immortal food, and are established on the Holy Mountain
where nothing can destroy, and are at rest and peace under the shadow of the
Rock of Ages, that hell nor death, nor wrath of man can terrify; Oh what eye
has seen this, what ear has heard it, and what heart has perceived it, and
not admired the loving kindness of the Lord? who among you are witnesses of
this, that says not, great and Infinite is the Lord, and Immeasurable in
Mercy, and Truth, and Righteousness; Oh Friends, if ye know these things, and
if ye receive daily of this fullness, and if the measure of that immortal life
be risen in you, and has raised up you with its self into its own fullness,
which once was descended out of its own fullness of Eternal Rest, and strength,
and was manifest in its measure, in poverty and weakness in your hearts, in
the feeling of afflictions and wrath because of sin, but it descended to suffer
all, and to bear transgression, that you might be raised with it into its life,
and glory, and fullness; and if this be finished and effected in you, Oh then
how shall you not live to his glory and praise in your Generation, and in love,
and peace, and unity with himself, and one with another, and magnify him in
Soul and Spirit that has called you and chosen you, and now works all your
works in you and for you, and you live by him, because he lives in you.

But though it is thus that some are entered into the rest, and have received of
his fullness, and has the Testimony of Life and assurance in the Father, and
are risen with Christ, yet are you and we and all the children of the Father,
so set and placed in this Creation, as that there is an enemy to be ruled over,
and also a service to be fulfilled by us for the Lord that has chosen us; and
therefore watchfulness and faithfulness is required from us; And unto this I
cannot but exhort you all, even to walk in the fear of the Lord, in
watchfulness and faithfulness, in humility and meekness, in truth and
justice, and in every good thing, and that you fulfill the Will of the Lord in
all things whatsoever the motions of his own life draws you unto, that every
member of this infinite Body which is highly exalted at his right hand, may be
preserved in dominion over sin and death, and also may show forth the Honor,
and Glory, and Praise of him who is the head (even Christ) whose virtue has
anointed every member, and is shed abroad through the whole body; I say
Friends, of every member is required the duty and service thereunto pertaining,
according as it is placed of him, that the Treasure of Life may show forth its
virtue in one manner or another through you all in all well doing, to the glory
of him who is God above all, and that in the sight of your enemies (whom you
know watches for evil, and would rejoice in any occasion against you, that they
might speak evil of the Lord because of you) you may walk without offense in
the answer of a Good conscience, and if you walk as such as are the Lords, you
will cut off all occasions from them that seek it, and they will be confounded,
and you preserved in the blessedness and peace everlasting, and you will grow
in immortality, and into the knowledge and fullness thereof more and more till
you know the Father, even as you are known of him.

And be not unmindeful of the word of Lord which begat you, which first entered into
your hearts, and wrought mightily in you to the wounding and destroying of
death and emnity, and remember the travel of the days past, and the
indignation which once you felt because of sin, through the Word of God, and
the Word endures for ever, of which you are begotten; and if any appearance of
iniquity, or motion thereunto arise in you into desire to be fulfilled, the
word will quench it, and give you dominion over sin and death, and save you
from the effects thereof; for the word changes not, but is the same always,
but if man change and pervert his way into iniquity, it reproves and corrects,
and so delivers him, for this word keeps clean the heart, and it sanctifies,
and also keeps in subjection the mortal man with all his thoughts, desires and
actions, and destroys the man of sin, the sinful man by whom the whole Creation
has been corrupted and perverted into evil in its practice of degenerate man,
and if you forget the word, then iniquity prevails again and the love of this
world and its vanities, and the riches and pleasures of the mortal man steals
away the heart, and they possess the habitation of God unrighteously, and all
things are become sinful, and the body of death comes over the pure Life, and
peace with God in the Conscience is lost, and that because the word of God is
forgotten which once begat unto God, and where the unclean spirit enters again,
the latter end of such is worse then the beginning, more sinful against God,
and more hated of him; and therefore let none follow the way of such, for it
leads to death and darkness, and misery will be the end of it. But Friends,
mind him and feel his power, who is the preserver of men in Peace and
Righteousness, and let not up that part in you into liberty, into which Satan
enters and sowes his Seed of degeneration, but live in the Cross of Christ, and
in the meek and lowly Spirit, that you may not do your own wills, but the Will
of the Father, and may fear him and his goodness, and that subjecteth the
ground of temptations that sin cannot prevail; so shall your peace be
everlasting, and your life as a River of pleasure, and joy and gladness shall
be your daily portion, and the Lord shall never forsake you, but be unto you a
Tower of strength, and habitation of peace, and a Crown of victory and Reward
in this present time and for ever.

And if ye abide in Christ the Vine into which you are planted by Regeneration,
then will your fruit be of the Vine, and acceptable unto the Father who is the
good Husbandman, and through his virtue you will grow into perfection as
partaining to the conscience, where all guilt of sin is taken away, and the
burden of iniquity and body of death clean removed away from you; for that is
perfection as pertaining to the conscience where sin and transgression is done
away, and power received over it, both in motion and action and the guilt of
it, and the conscience sprinkled with the imortal blood of the Lamb, and no
stain nor guilt remaining, but peace altogether by the holy spirit in the
conscience; and this is perfection which was not attained to by outward things
in the first covenant, but is witnessed in the second which the Lord has made
with us, and confirmed unto us, where sin and iniquity is blotted out, and
innocence and immortality lives and raigns; and such stands before the throne
of God without fault before him, and no guile in their mouths, and these sings
the song of the Lamb and of the Redeemed where all sorrow is fled away, if so
be that the burden and guilt of all tansgression be removed, then there is no
cause of sorrow; and blessed are they that dwells here, and that are entered
into the everlasting rest, even into God, for he is the rest of the immotal
soul and the life of it; and if ye know these things, ye have satisfaction and
comfort, which none knows but they that have it, its the portion of the
redeemed, whose Father, Master, Ruler, Judge and King is the Lord God and the
Lamb, and we are sujects of that Kingdom, and free born of that City the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and we are made free through the price of immortal blood,
and then how can any of you that are such serve this world and the vanities of
it, by any immoderate care or desire or exercise in earthly things, for this is
the bondage of Egypt, but the children are free from it, and are not entangled
concerning the things of this world, but they are subjected under, and the
inheritance of a better portion is their crown and substance; and Esaus portion
is the earth, he that has no assurance in God; wherefore live above this world
in the seed of God, and be without immoderate care in every thing, as to
earthly matters, not taking thought what shall come, or be to morrow, neither
cumbring your selves about uncertain riches, but leave the issue of all things
to the Lord, in whose hands are blessing and the curse, to give or take away
according to his pleasure; and be not servants unto but Rulers over all
affections in earthly things, for spiritual blessings are the Crown, and the
earth is the footstool of the Lords Redeemed.

And as for the days and seasons in which we now are, let none be troubled as
though it were not well, or could be better, for all things are well that are
come to pass, because the will of the Lord has effected them, either as the
cause or as the means, and it is good for us that these things are so; for the
prosperity of our Kingdom is going on through all, the hammer is beating upon
the Rocks that will beat them to pieces, and the ax is hewing down the Ceders,
and the little stone prevails against the many headed beast; and the Image of
idolatry is weakening and the holy Seed grows in strength and virtue, and the
puropse of the Lord can none prevent; But the light of the Sun must be as the
light of seven days amongst us, and the day spring from on high has already
visited us, and we have seen of his glory; wherefore let all the upright have
patience and long suffering til the measure of iniquity in our adversaries be
fullfilled, which is hastening to be accomplished, and transgression grows
full, and sinners grows ripe for vengance, and we must pass over their
mountain of darkness, and in the mean time the Lord hides us under his shadow,
even till transgression be finished, and covers us from the storm, and blinds
the enemy, and turns his rage backward, and we are not destoyed, but our life
is renewed, and righteousness, mercy and love are a defense about us, and how
great is the kindness of the Lord herein mine eye have seen it, and my heart
meditateth thereon, the power and wisdom and love of the Lord herein are very
great, and who can find out the depth thereof, or declare his immeasurable
power and wisdom.

And thus the salutation of my life unto all the faithful is expressed, and I
am well in him who is my fullness, and desires no more concerning you then your
faithfulness in the cause of God, for without controversy the cause of God is
with us, and on our part, and as you are faithful therein, that is my reward
concerning you, and the addition to my joy; and in the Heavenly spirit of the
Lord God Almighty are you committed unto him who is able to keep you, even to
the end and in the end, to glorify you in eternal life in rest and peace for
ever; and this is the portion of the faithful, and my desires on your behalf,
and my salutation of you, hoping that you have not so learned Christ as to deny
his because of the Love or terror of this world, but that over all you will be
preserved in faith and victory.

I am now according to the will of the Father in Ireland, it is some weeks
since I arrived at Cork City in much peace and safty, with my dear companions,
it having been long upon my spirit to visit the seed of God in this Nation,
even of love have I felt it in me and not of constraint; but of a willing mind
and free spirit, and not of force; and after the time of patience and waiting
for many days to see my way clear for it, the Lord has ordered it and brought
it to pass acceptable unto me and many here; and this is the time in which this
visitation must be effected, for till now my way was not clear; and but that
this journey, has laid upon me, I should have rejoiced to have been present
among you either in testimony by suffering or otherwise, but this is the will
of God. And it is in my heart to pass through this Nation, and to visit the
seed of God by the love and word of the Father, as he gives of his life and
strength and opens the way before me. I perceive in this Land friends are
generally well and truth grows in victory and dominion, and the Lord is adding
to the numberless number of them that must stand on mount Zion; and through the
rage of men, and above it all, the little flock is preserved in its beauty, and
the seed sown in weakness and afflictions is received and quickened in much
power, which is my joy. About Bristol I continued about two months in much
precious service for the Lord, and truth had good authority over all, and great
acceptance in the hearts of many, and some convinced and others edified and
confirmed, as many can witness in the spirit; and until after the time of the
Fair I was not clear of that City, but imediately after I was free, and my way
made very convenient and clear to this place; and the hand of providence
ordered all things very well on that behalf, as I do hope, in the continuance
of the power and presence of the Lord with me through this work; and in his
power I am committed, even to do or suffer all things for his Name sake, and
that by virtue of his own life that dwells in me; And the Lord preserve all the
Brethren like minded that the work of the Lord may be fulfilled and finished by
us. Amen.

County of Cork, the 2^th of the 6th Month, 1660. E. B.

The End.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate. 1660.


