THE Everlasting Gospel OF REPENTANCE AND Remission of Sins; Held forth and
Declared to the Inhabitants of the Earth, That they may Turn and be Converted
to the Living GOD, lest they perish in the Day of Vengeance, which is near at
hand. And this is A MESSAGE of RECONCILIATION to All PEOPLE every where in
General, but more particularly to the Inhabitants of IRELAND, and to all sorts
of People therein, even to the Rich, and to the Poor; to the Professors, and to
the Profane; that every one may be stirred up to seek the Lord by Repentance.
With Certain PROPOSITIONS of FAITH laid down, which every one must believe, or
else they cannot be saved. And Certain OBJECTIONS Answered, relating to the
Present Days; With the Way of a Hapyy and Blessed GOVERNMENT discovered in the
Kingdoms of this World, etc.

By one that seeks the Good of all men. Edward Borough.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand.

The Everlasting Gospel of Repentance and Remission of Sins, held forth, and
declared, etc.
OH IRELAND! the day of Gods visitation of Love and tender Mercy has been upon
thee, to try thee* and to prove thee; and the Lord would have gathered thy
People into Covenant and Fellowship with himself, to live in Love, Unity and
Peace, and the Lord would have made thy Inhabitants blessed, but they would
not; but many have refused the Day of his Love, and they have neglected his
Loving Kindness, and have chosen their own ways of Iniquity and
Unrighteousness, rather than the way of Truth and Peace; though the Lord has
often smitten, and caused his Judgments to be known in the Land, and suffered
great destruction in days past, even Plague, Sword and Famine were sore upon
thee, Have thy Inhabitants forgotten the dealings of the Lord toward thee? Are
his Judgments and Mercies clean gone out of remembrance, which the Lord showed
in thee not many years since? And because of thy Iniquities and Transgressions,
which were grown very great against God, he was angry with thee, and provoked
against thee, and did give up thy Inhabitants to hardness of heart, and cruelty
of mind one against another, so that they were given up to destroy and cut off
one another, and thousands of them fell through the malice and wickedness of
each others hearts and hands, and cruel Murders, Robberies, Treacheries, and a
very great destruction was committed amongst thy People; and this was because
Iniquity at that day was full, Pride and Oppression, Drunkenness and Whoredom,
Double-dealing* and Preachery, and all manner of Unrighteousness was grown to
the height, and therefore did the Lord suffer a very great Rebuke in the Land,
and by Sword, Plague and Famine did he plead with thy Inhabitanas for some
years together, even that he might humble thee and correct thee, and that thy
People might turn unto him, and forsake their Iniquities: Oh! why have thou
forgotten the dealings of the Lord, running into the same abominations! for
since the Lord stayed his Judgments, Iniquity is incre^^^^ even as before;
though the Lord has given thee Rest and Peace for diverse years, and healed
thee of thy Sorrows and Miseries, and replenished thee with People, and this
have had Peace and Fullness for a good season, but yet thou have not made a
right use of these mercies as thou ought to have done; though the Lord has
showed Love and Favor toward thee, in delivering of thee from thy former
Troubles and Miseries, yet thou have turned, to thy own hurt, his Blessings
into a Curse, through thy abuse of them; and now through Rest, and Peace and
Fullness, thy Inhabitants are corrupted and become abominably sinful, and they
have laden themselves with transgressions, and heaped up wrath against the day
of wrath, even wrathful matter for the wrath of God; and former Judgments and
Mercies, seems to be both forgotten, many having abused them to their hurt,
though the Lord intended them for their good, and thy Inhabitants are as
before, many of them hardened in Iniquity, rather than turned from it; and they
are turned into their old paths, and drinks of the same Cup of Abominations,
and Pride, and Oppression, and all Unrighteousness in every part of it, is
grown as high as ever it was in thee: Oh how does Wickedness abound!
Drunkenness, Wantonness, vain Pleasures, Envy, Wrath, Contention,
Heart-burning, Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness, Double-dealing,
False-heartedness, Idolatry and Hypocrisy, and all fruits of the Flesh, how do
they abound in thee! even as high as ever before, as though thou had never
felt Judgment, because of thy sins, and as though thou had never tasted of
Mercy that thou should live a better life; but both Judgment and Mercy
bypast are neglected, and the remembrance of them worn out, and thou have said
in thy heart, We love this World, its Pleasures and Vanities, and after our
ways will we go.

Oh Nation and Kingdom, this is thy condition, and thy present state; thou
drinkest up Iniquity as an Ox drinks water, and thou addest sin to sin, as if
all thou could do were too little, and like as if thou were appointed for no
other end, but to commit sin; and thou hate Reproof, and despisest
Correction, and him that reproves thee, thou countest thy Enemy; for the whole
pleasure of many of thy People is in sinning against God: and thus thou
think to serve him with thy sins, and requitest the Lord evil for his good
toward thee, and his Judgments and Mercies have no place in thy heart; Though
yet thou have been warned, for these diverse years, that thy people should turn
from their Inquities and serve the living God; Repentance and forsaking of sin
has been preached through thee, and warning has been given of the Judgments of
God that are to come: but hereof have thou taken no notice as thou ought to
have done, but thy Inhabitants have despised the Lords Servants, and persecuted
them, and thou have held in derision and under great afflictions the People of
the Lord, and persecuted them for good Conscience Sake.

And this is the fulfilling of Wickedness in thee, and the hight of thy
Inhabitants Transgressions, in that they have persecuted such who have warned
them, and despised the Lords Reproof, and would not hearken to the Advice of
his People, but do always reject the Message of Gods Light, which reproves
People in their own Consciences because of Sin, that they should turn from it
and be saved; this Message has been proclaimed through the Land, even for some
years together, wherein the Lord has visited thee with his Love, that he might
gather thy People, and condemn their Iniquities, and save their Souls; but thy
People have rejected this Message, and would not be turned from their
Idolatrous ways and worships, nor from the Hypocrisy of their ways, that they
might be healed; but thy People have forsaken the living God, and rebelled
against the Light, and the way of Peace they have refused, and turned their
backs toward the Lord and not their face, and after Covetousness and the love
of this World they have gone; though there has been a great profession of
Worship and Religion in thee, much Preaching and Praying, Sabbath-keeping and
professed Church Fellowship, Ministry and Ordinances, and a Sect here of one
sort, and there another, that have cried, Lord, Lord, and have made a show of
Worships and Duties toward him, yet notwithstanding, Hypocrisy,
Falseheartedness, Covetousness, Double-mindedness, and the spirit of Pride and
Ambition, and vain Glory, have possessed the hearts of both Teachers and
People, in all the false Sects and diverse kinds of Religion; though they have
had a show, as if they were the Lords People, and a pretense of Worship, and
conformity of Church Fellowship, etc. yet their hearts have not been right
before the Lord; but of these it may be said, even they have professed God with
their mouths, and with their lips honored him, and in the very time their
hearts have gone after Covetousness, and been far departed from the Lord; and
though they have cried, The Temple of the Lord, and we are the Church of Christ
and Members of him, and have Gospel, and Ministry, and Ordinances; yet these
people have walked in Pride and Arrogance, and Covetousness, and their hearts
have been Corrupted in the sight of the Most High, and all their Religion has
been but as the fig leaves, by which they have sought to cover themselves, but
it cannot be; For behold ye Professors and People of Ireland! God has beheld
your Hypocrisies, and the Deceitfulness of your hearts, and your nakedness does
appear; for though you have professed much of the Spirit, and Spiritual Things,
yet you have walked in the Flesh, and brought forth the fruits thereof, and
your garments of feigned Prayers and Practices, and your profession of Church
and Ordinances, will not cover nor hide you from the Wrath of the Lamb.

Oh People of Ireland, many of you have been corrupted in your hearts, and
polluted in your minds, and from the highest of you to the lowest, you are
sound Transgressors against God, even from the Professor to the Porphane the
Lord has found no good fruit amongst you, well-pleasing to him, but four
grapes and bitter fruit have you brought forth, even fruit of a bad taste and
loathsome smell unto the Lord; and now the Lord has found you out in your
wickedness, and the cry of your Iniquities call for Vengeance; for of you it
may be said, Ah Nation laden with Iniquity! ah sinful People! a seed of
Evildoers, corrupted from the crown of the heal to the soal of the foot: these
things are so, and they cannot be hid: But now the Lords purpose is to deal
with thee, because of thy sins, seeing he is provoked against this People by
their Iniquities, who have been disobedient to the living God; Therefore will
he renew his Judgments of old, and withdraw his Mercies, and he will plead with
the People in his Justice: his Judgments are at the door, and he will punish
the stout-hearted, and proud and arrogant, till they learn meekness and
humility; he will correct the Transgressors with his Rod of heavy Wrath, till
they turn to him by Repentance; and all that will not bow and kiss the Son, and
cease from evil, and learn to do well, they shall be broken and cut off and
perish in his anger, and he will never heal them; even the Feller will come
upon thy People, O Nation, who will hew down thy Cedars, and cut up thy strong
Oaks; the Fanner is coming upon thee to sift thee, to preserve the good Grain,
and to separate the Chaff into the fire; thy Strength will be made weak, and
thy Crown will be toden down, and thy Beauty shall be marred, and all thy Glory
and Might shall fade like a flower in that day, when the Lord of Hosts pleads
with thee, and when he rewards thee for thy Wickedness, Then Woe unto thee, and
unto all the Wicked and workers of Iniquity, and he will cause them to remember
what they have done; thy Sins, O Nation, shall be set in order before thee, and
thy Persecution of the Lords Servants shall be charged to thy account, and the
Rod of Affliction shall reach close unto thee because thereof; and as thy
Rulers have done to others, so shall it be done to them, into Captivity shall
they go, and the Spoyler shall come upon the Land: for Just is the Lord, and
his Judgments altogether equal; and though he be long-suffering and of great
forbearance, yet he forgets not to plead with his Enemies, and to plague the
Ungodly, nor to show mercy to them that trust in him; And doubtless there is a
Cup of Wrath prepared for the Wicked to drink, and it seems to be near, even
a day of great Wrath and Tribulation upon Sinners and Transgressors, who have
rejected the Lord, and despised his Reproofs, and would not receive the Message
of the Light of the World, that they might be healed.

Wherefore, Repeat, Repent all sorts of People, all Sinners and Transgressors,
tremble before the Lord ye stout-hearted and rebellious Children; Woe unto ye
unjust Rulers and Judges, that have exercised unjust Judgment in the Land, that
have judged for Gifts and Rewards, and that have turned aside just Judgment,
Mercy and Truth, and that have persecuted the Innocent without just cause; Woe
unto you that have been Oppressors of the Poor and Needy, ye that have not
judged for the Lord as ye ought to have done, but have been ambitious and
vainglorious, and puffed up in the flesh by high Titles and Places of Honor,
ye that have exalted your selves above your Brethren, and sought Honor of Men,
and loved the Honor of this World more than the Honor of God, Woe unto you;
for the day of the Lords Judgment is at hand, and an account of your
Stewardship must you give: Ye that should have judged in Mercy, and Truth, and
Equity, but have perverted just Judgment, and made the Innocent Offenders, and
have not been a praise to them that do well, nor a terror to evildoers as ye
ought to have been; Woe unto you, and to the Oppressing and Falshearted Lawyers,
and that Train, who have been greedy of Gain, and served your own Ends, and
sought Riches to your selves, and the Cause of the Poor has not been freely
pleaded by you; Woe unto all ye that have made a Trade of doing Judgment and
Justice, and have been exercised in the Laws for your own Ends, and not singly
for the Lord; Tremble ye sons of Wickedness, ye that have exercised the Power
of Antichrist and the Beast, for the Judgments of the Lord are at hand to be
executed upon you.

Woe unto you Great and Rich men, ye covetous and earthly Worldlings, ye that
have made your selves rich by Oppression and grinding the faces of the Poor;
that have got Gain by hard dealing, and added Land to Land and Field to Field,
and that have overreached the Ignorant, and oppressed the Widows and
Fatherless, and that have exercised Cruelty and hard dealing to your Tenants
and Servants, and have laid heavy Yoaks upon such with whom you have dealt, and
that have made your selves great and rich in the Earth by such means; Woe unto
you, Misery is coming upon you, weep and howl, ye earthly greedy covetous
Wretches of this World, who have sought Riches more than the Lord, and gotten
Gain by Oppression and Overreaching your Neighbors; your Riches so gotten
shall never prosper nor be blessed to you, but shall be a Curse to you, and
your Children and your Covetousness will God plague; Ye that have gotten Goods
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of your days: Woe unto you
Carnal minds, all the treasures of them are corruptible, your Lands, Gold and
Silver are fading treasures; the day of the Lords Judgments are at hand upon
you, and the Rod of his Wrath will smite you, and ye shall have Poverty and
Want instead of Fullness and Excess, and ye shall have Leanness and Barrenness,
and God will plead with you in the way of have sinned against him; The time of
your Visitation draws near.

Woe unto you Merchants, Traders, Buyers and Sellers, that have been
double-dealers and double-tongu'd, and dealt deceitfully in your Commodities
with your Neighbors; VVo unto ye that have got Gain by double-dealing, and by
feigned and flattering speeches have beguiled one another, and sought to
out-reach in your barganing every man his Brother! These things have ye done, O
ye Covetous men, ye have even robbed the Poor by your craft and guileful
dealing, by your smooth and flattering tongues; and if any amongst you could
not use fraud, and dissemble, such have been your prey and scorn; and it is your
use to discommend a Commodity when you buy it, and to praise it when you sell
it; and ye make a fair outside to please the eye, and ye use multitude of words
and fair speeches, and deceive the Simple, and get Gain by Oppression, Craft
and Deceit: Woe unto you, Repent of this your sin; Cleanse your hearts, ye
Sinners; and purify your hearts, ye Double-minded: I charge you by the Lord,
give over your double-dealing, and deceitful merchandise; cease to lie and
defraud, cease your flattery and feigned words, and speak the truth every one
to his Neighbor, and come out of your Iniquities; use not a bad conscience any
longer, for it is a fearful Abomination against the Lord; but mind the Light
of Christ in you, which will convince you in your Consciences of your naughty
and sinful ways, and that Light will exercise your Consciences to do the
Truth, and speak the Truth to your Neighbor in all things, and this is
blessed, and the Gain that is thereby gotten, is not a Curse; for ye ought in
all your ways to reverence the Lord and respect him, that he should lead you
and guide you in your exercise of all earthly things: For the Earth is the
Lords; and the Fullness thereof, and it ought to be exercised to his Glory; and
there is sufficient in this Creation for all People, And therefore covet not
earthly things one from another, neither oppress nor overreach one another
about them; neither treasure up earthly things, while the Poor want, for if ye
do, ye hide your selves from your own slesh, laying field to field till there
is no place for the Poor; and woe unto such, the Day of the Lord will be upon
you: but learn the Wisdom of God, how to be ordered, and how to order all
things of this Creation, and be in unity and good agreement amongst your
selves, and do not fall out nor strive, not contend nor envy one another about
earthly things, but if ye have much, or if ye have little, be contented with
what you have, and do not grind the hearts and consciences one of another to
get earthly things, for they will fade and perish away; and seek not after that
which perishes, but after that which is unto eternal life; for the Day of the
Lord is at hand, and his Judgments upon all Oppressors, Double-dealers and
false hearted Flatterers, that are covetous of earthly things.

Woe unto all ye Drunkards and Swearers, Whoremongers and Profane Persons, the
Judgments of the Lord are upon you unawares; ye that destroy the Creation upon
your Lusts, that are run into the Excess of Wine and Beer, and that cover it
excessively, and that drink till ye inflame your selves, and spend your time in
it; ye are like the Beasts of the field, and like the Swine that wallows in
filthiness; ye pervert the right use and end of the good Creatures of God, and
spend them upon your lusts, and have not regard unto the living God; and one
sin even begets another, Drunkenness begets Swearing, and Profane words, and
Whoredom, and beastly Affections, and thus you add sin to sin, and heap up
one sin upon another, contrary to the Light in your own Consciences; and thus
ye serve the Devil and Satan, committing Iniquity, with both hands, as it were,
by Drunkenness and Swearing, and taking the Name of the Lord in vain, and
Cursed Speeches, and falling out one with another; and your minds are erred
from the Lord, and ye abuse your selves, and your own bodies, which were made
for the Service of God, and not for Whoredom; and ye slay your own Souls by
your own Iniquities, and many times provoke the Lord to destroy both soul and
body: VVo unto you, the Plagues of God are your portion, and Misery your end
here and hereafter; Repent of your Iniquities, and turn from them, lest the
Lord find you in your Iniquities when he comes to Judgment; for if you
continue in them you can never be pardoned, but you sin unto death, and the
Lord will come upon you suddenly; for ye that follow Drunkenness and Profaneness
you live contrary to the Light in your own Consciences, and you sin against
your knowledge, against that knowledge that God has given you; and this is
your greatest sin, even because ye do the things which ye know ye should not
do, and the Light in your Consciences does show you, that these things are evil
before you do them; but ye doing the things contrary to the Light in your own
Consciences, this makes your crime heinous, and your sin unpardonable, if ye
continue in Sin and Profaneness, contrary to the reproof of Gods Spirit in your
own Consciences: Wherefore ye profane persons, cease to do evil, lest the
Lords Judgments come upon you suddenly to your destruction, and the Lord smite
you, and you never be healed.

VVo unto all ye hypocritical and deceitful Professors of Religion, that hold
the Truth in Unrighteousness, that have a talk and a show of Religion, and that
have the name of Church Members and of Worshippers of God, but are dead in sins
and trespasses; ye that are Christians by name, but want the nature, who are
wolves in sheeps clothing, that have Christ's words, the the Prophets and
Apostles words, but want their Spirit and Life; VVo unto you, the Day of the
Lord is at hand upon you, ye Hypocrites, ye that serve God with your lips, and
with your mouths profess much love, when as your hearts are full of Envy,
Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness; ye are the Apostate Christians, that have
taken the Form of Godliness upon you, but want the Power; ye preach, and pray,
and hear Sermons, and keep Sabbath-dayes, and perform Duties, but ye are not
changed in your hearts, but the old nature is alive, and the old birth lives in
you; and ye are unlike unto God in nature, and ye walk in the Flesh and not in
the Spirit, and ye take Christ's words and the Apostles words, and use your
tongues, when God never spoke to you; O ye Hypocrites! ye have a name to live,
but are dead, and ye think ye are Rich, when as ye are poor, miserable, blind
and naked, and your souls are lean and want the Bread of Life, and ye have not
put off the body of Sin, nor have you overcome your Souls enemies, but the
burden of Sin lies upon your Consciences, and Temptations overcome you daily;
and though you say, ye have Faith in Christ, yet your hearts are not purified,
but the Old Man, with his deeds, is yet alive, and the New Creature is not
brought forth in you, nor is Christ living in you, and speaking in you; the day
of the Lord will come upon you, you false-hearted men, ye Apostate Christians,
that hold the Profession of Truth, and Church, and Gospel, and Ministry in your
unrighteous minds; your Sacrifices are not acceptable to God, nor your
Offerings well-pleasing to him; for your hearts are not aright before him, and
your Hypocrisy will God judge, and his Wrath will go out like fire to consume
your glory, and God will cloth himself with Zeal, as with a Cloak, and with a
Garment of Vengeance, and he will slay you with his Sword, and wound your
Consciences with the Words of his Mouth, and your Religion will not save you,
nor your Garment cover you from the Wrath of the Almighty: Woe unto you, the
Mighty Day of the Lord is at hand upon you, ye Earthly Professors, who would be
heirs of two Kingdoms, who would enjoy God and this World too, and love its
Vanities and Profits and Pleasures, and Honors, and live in strife and
contention one with another about earthly things, and about your Religion too,
and are not of one heart, and mind, and soul, but are strangers to the New
Covenant of God, though you hear Sermons, and say a Form of Prayer, and keep
Sabbaths and Lecture-dayes, and perform Ordinances and Duties, and yet your
hearts are hard, and the body of Sin and Death lies upon your Consciences, and
you are not changed into the Divine Nature; this Religion will not save you,
away with it all, it is of Antichrish, and his spirit leads you, while you walk
in the Form of Godliness without the Power, the Lord will come upon you
suddenly; therefore Repent ye of your Hypocrisies, and turn to the Spirit of
God within you, hear its Reproofs, and obey it, and walk in the Spirit, and be
ye Changed, or else you can never be Saved.

VVo, Woe unto all ye false Teachers and blind Leaders of the People, ye
Diviners and false Prophets, and Day of the Lord is at hand upon-you; ye have
deceived souls for dishonest gain, ye have run and were never sent of God, and
ye have not profited the people at all, and ye have taken the name upon you of
Ministers of Christ, when he never sent you forth; and you have kept a prating
and preaching up and down, and run for Gifts, and Rewards, and Hire; ye have
deceived the World, and the Blood of Souls rests upon you: O ye Generation of
Serpents! poison has lodged under your tongues, your hearts have been rotten,
and your tongues feigned and full of flattery, and you have been as
Canker-worms in the Earth, and have corrupted the whole World; Whom have not ye
deceived by your Lies and false Divinations? Whom have not you cried Peace
unto, if they would but give you Gifts, Money and Hire? What Form of Religion
would not you take up for advantage to your selves? how often have you turned
from one way to another? Oh ye false-hearted men, the God of Heaven will show
you no mercy; ye are the men that have made the Earth drunk with false faith,
and false doctrines, and with contention and distention, sometime preaching up
one Government, sometimes another; and sometime being for one way of Worship,
and sometimes for another; Treachery has lodged in your hearts above all
others; ye have eaten up the sin of the People, and cried Peace unto the
Ungodly: Woe unto ye that have gone in Cain's way, that have bread Contention,
Persecution, Strife and Emulation amongst People, and that have gone in Balaams
way for Gifts and Rewards, and would do any great man a pleasure, and even
curse the people for Money; ye have been such as all the holy Prophets cried
against, your fruits and works declares it; ye have sought for your Gain from
your Quarter, and could never have enough, such as Isaiah cried against, Chap.
56. and such as Micha cried against, Micah 3. That preached for Hire, and
divined for Money, and leaned upon the Lord, and cried Peace to them that would
give Money, and prepared War against them that would not: and these things have
you done, some of ye Teachers and Priests, and ye have been blind Watchmen, and
ye have been idle and lazy Shepherds, such as Ezekiel cried against, Chap. 34.
that ruled over people with Force and Cruelty, and killed them that were fed,
and did not heal the diseased, nor strengthen the weak, but pusht with the horn
at such as went astray from you; and idle and lazy Shepherds have you been, who
have not sed the Flock with living food, but you have caused them to drink of
the foul waters, and their souls are lean and barren under your Preaching; Oh
look into your Flocks, and see what fruit is brought forth by them, and what
may be gathered from them; Oh the abundance of Pride and Wickedness, of
Ambition and Vainglory, and Covetousness, and the love of this World, lying and
double-dealing, and all the fruits of the flesh, How do they abound amongst the
flocks of your fold? who are in their fruits, and by their works not the Sheep
of Christ's Pasture, but are like Goats and Wolves under your Teaching; Can ye
behold this and consider of it, and not be ashamed of the fruit of your ways?
What have ye brought forth these many years? or what profit have the People
received from you, who are yet in their sins, unturned from them, and not
converted to God? whereby it appears you have run, and never were sent, because
the People are not profited at all; and it grieves the heart of the Righteous
to look into your Vineyards, and to see such bad fruit growing; you have been
sloathfull Tillers, and have not sown the good Seed in the hearts of the
People, but the Seed of Corruption brings forth fruit in them, and your
Vineyards are like barren and untilled ground, that is unplowed and undigged,
and unplanted with Trees of Righteousness: Oh ye have been unprofitable
Vineyard-dressers, and ye have labored for your selves, and not for the Lord,
as is manifest; and ye have been idle and lazy, and the God of Heaven is weary
of you, and the time is at hand he will pluck you up by the roots, and visit
you with great destruction, and your name shall be a Reproach amongst men; for
ye have not sought the Lords honor, but your own; and ye have been changable
in your ways for your own advantages; ye have preached for filthy Lucre, and
through Covetousness made merchandise of People; and ye have traded with the
Scriptures, and made a Trade of Preaching the Gospel; and ye have made Traffic
of the Souls of men: and these things have you done, and the Lord has kept
silence, and he has forborne to smite you, and therefore have you been hardened
the more in your Transgressions, as though the Lord took no notice; and you
have filled your hands with dishonest gain in your unrighteous ways, and your
sins are increased every day against the God of Heaven; you repent not when you
are warned, but reject reproof, and go on without fear; ye are a company of
proud men, heady and high-minded men, ambitious and self-seeking persons, even
such as the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles marked forth for Deceivers, and
your fruits and works do prove it; ye have been covered with the Sheeps
clothing in your unrighteous natures, and your Iniquities are almost full, and
the Lord will bring unresistable destruction upon you; in a day when you cry,
Peace, peace, then sudden destruction will come: Woe unto you, because of your
Iniquities, the Earth is weary of you, which ye have corrupted through your
false ways, and the Kingdoms groan under your Oppressions, and the Earth will
spue you out, and the People, whom you have deceived, shall rise up in Judgment
against you; the dreadful Day of the Lord is at hand upon you, ye Apostates
from the Life and Faith of Christ Jesus, for of that race you are, even of them
Apostates that went out in the Apostles days, that went in Balaam's way, and
Cain's way, for ye are of the spirit that kills and persecutes people about
Worship and Sacrifices, and Religion, as Cain did; and ye go for Gifts and
Rewards, even as Balaam did: These things are so, the Witness of God in your
Consciences shall answer, and all People shall acknowledge the truth hereof in
the day when God pleads with all the wicked.

All People, Return and Repent of your Iniquities, the dreadful Day of the Lord
is at hand, ye Sinners and Transgressors, ye hypocritical Professors and
profane Persons, the Day of Vengeance is at hand: Whither will you fly, and
where will you leave your glory? where will you seek a defense, or where can
you be hid? the Mountains will not cover you, nor the Rocks will not fall upon
you, the wrath of the Lamb you cannot escape, even the long-suffering of God
will be turned into a flame of anger, and patience will be turned into sharp
rebuke, the wrath of the Lamb will utterly smite you, and the Cup of Gods
Indignation you must drink, all the Earth must taste of it, and the Wicked shall
drink the dreggs; Wherefore all ye Inhabitants of the Earth forsake your
Transgressions, that the Lord may not cut you off for ever, but let God arise
to destroy your Iniquities, and to save your Souls, let him take vengeance upon
your Inventions, that he may forgive you: Oh! why will you dye, why will you
perish? the Lord would have you to return, that he might save you.

And this is the day of your Visitation, the door of Mercy is yet open for a
little season, and the Lord yet calls unto you for a moment; but the time is at
hand, that he who is filthy, shall be filthy still, and that determination
shall be passed, Come, ye Blessed, and, Go ye Cursed; the doleful sentence
shall be pronounced to all workers of Iniquity, Into everlasting Burning must
they depart, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and shall not see the
Countenance of the Lord to refresh their souls, but in the presence of the
Lord, and of the Lamb, shall the Wicked be tormented: Wherefore hear and
tremble, all ye Transgressors that live and act contrary to your knowledge, and
against the Witness of God in your own Consciences; and this is your great sin,
for which the wrath of God comes, not because you have acted in Ignorance and
without knowledge, but because you have acted against the Light in your
Consciences, and sinned against your knowledge, and done the things, which you
knew were evil before you did them; and because hereof you are not to be
excused, but the burden of your own sins and the guilt of them will fall heavy
upon you in the Day of the Lord; For this is the Condemnation of the World,
that Light is come into it, but you have loved Darkness rather than Light, and
followed evil deeds and loved them, and this contrary to the Light that is come
into the world, and which has enlightened your own Consciences.

Certain Propositions of Faith laid down, which every one must believe, or else
they cannot be saved.
I. NOw none can be saved from the Wrath of the Lord but they who are saved
from their Sins; for Sin brings the Wrath of God upon the Consciences of men,
and Anguish upon Soul and Body; and who are not saved from Sin, cannot be saved
from Wrath; for Wrath pursues the Guilty, and he that does evil, sin lies at
his door, and continual anguish upon his spirit because of sin, and the load
and burden of the body of death oppresses his soul, and anger from God
kindles in his breast, because he has sinned; and he knows he is gu^^^y of
Transgression, and the Lord wounds him in his Conscience, and no man in that
state can speak peace unto him, nor can any save him from the Wrath of God,
because he is not saved from his Sin, nor from the guilt of it; but his grief
and burden is, because he has sinned against the Light in his own Conscience:
And therefore whosoever will be saved from Wrath, must be saved from Sin and
Christ, must purify his heart, and the Blood of the Lamb must sanctify him,
and his Conscience must be cleansed from the guilt of Transgression, and Christ
must live in him, and he must live the life of Faith, which gives victory over
all Sin, or else he cannot be saved with the Salvation of God eternally.

II. Again, Whosoever will be saved with the Salvation of God, must own the
Light of Christ Jesus in his own Conscience, and he must believe in this Light
and walk in it, even the Light in his Conscience, that convinces him, and
checks him for his evil deeds, and that lets him see what sin he is guilty of;
you must believe in this Light, and follow it, and depart from that, and
forsake that Iniquity which it convinces you of, and do that Good which it
moves your hearts unto, or else you can never be saved; for if your continue in
evil-doing, contrary to the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, you are in
a condemned condition, and you cannot be justified of the Lord, while you are
accused by the Light within you, of such and such sins, and that you are guilty
of them, and forsakes them not; for the God of Heaven condemns and justifies
men according to the Witness of the Light in their own Consciences; for it is
Gods Evidence, to bear witness for God, and to accuse or excuse every man in
his sight, and according to its evidence, God justifies or condemns all the
children of men.

III. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must be born again of the Seed of God,
and must be changed and renewed in mind and heart, and spirit; and old things
must pass away, and all things must be made new; and a new nature must live in
you, and the Image of God must be brought forth, which is in Righteousness and
true Holiness, which is like unto God; and this is the new Creation, which
every one must witness to be wrought in them that ever enters into Gods
Kingdom; For says Christ, Except a man be born again he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; for it is not a profession of Religion made with the lips, nor
the practices of Duties and Ordinances, taken on the performed in the old
nature, and a holding of truth in unrighteousness; this is not the way of
Salvation, but it is the regenerating and making like unto God, being his Image
of Justice, Truth and Righteousness; it is this in which men may be saved
everlastingly.

IV. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must receive the Spirit of God, and it
must dwell in them, even the Spirit of the Father; and they must be taught by
it, and led into all Truth, to do the Truth, and speak the Truth in all things;
even the Spirit of Truth must be received, to teach and to lead in all the
ways of God; it alone must teach; and all the Hireling-Teachers of the world
must be turned away from, by whom peoples souls have been deceived; all such as
have run, and God never sent them; that have cried up Teaching and Ministry,
and through whom people have not received the Spirit of the Father; all such
Teachers must he denied, their Church and Ministry; and the Spirit of the
Father must only teach and lead; and you must walk in the Spirit, and not after
the Flesh; for if you walk after the Flesh, in the ways and works of it, you
are in the state of Condemnation, and not of Salvation; and the Spirit of God
does not teach you, but you are out of the New Covenant of God; in which
Covenant all are taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness are they established:
the Spirit of God is put within them, and the Law of God is written in their
hearts; and they need no man to teach them, but as the Spirit teaches: and
this is the New Covenant of Peace with God, into which all must come to witness
this, or else they cannot be saved.

V. Again, All that will be saved, must be sanctified, cleansed and purified
from all unrighteousness, by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby every heart
must be made clean, and every conscience sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb;
and the body of Sin and Death must be put off, and the bondage of Corruption
must be broken, and Iniquity must be forsaken, and turned from, and Sin must be
judged in the flesh, and Purity, Holiness and Righteousness must live and reign
in all that will be saved; and Sin and Transgression, and the guilt of it must
be removed; and you must show forth the Image of God in Holiness and
Righteousness; and must be pure, as he is pure, in kind and quality; and you
must walk in Holiness and Righteousness, being freed from Corruption, and from
the ways of Sin and Death, being sanctified in Body, Mind and Spirit, by the
Word of the Lord; and Sin must be blotted out, and Transgression must be
covered, and Iniquity must be remembered no more, and in all things you must
cease to do evil, and learn to do well, if ever you will be saved.

VI. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must witness Christ revealed in you, and
He must live in you, and you must be followers of him whithersoever he goes,
and your Bodies must be the Temples of the living God, and God must walk in you
and dwell in you, according to his promise; and he must be your King, your
Judge and Lawgiver, and Teacher, Father and Master, and he must be all in all
unto you, even God the Father who is blessed for ever; you must know him near
you, and feel his presence in you, to be your joy, life and peace; and you must
have fellowship with him in Spirit, and must worship him in Spirit, and by the
Spirit, without respect of Days, Times or Places: Every one that will be saved
must come into this, and witness it, for this is the way of the Salvation of
God.

VII. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must live in the power of Godliness, and
must deny all Forms of Religion without the Power; all Profession of
Scriptures, Ordinances, Church-member-ship, Praying and Preaching, which is not
in the Power of God, and by his Spirit, must be denied, and that part that
holds it, (that holds the Form of Godliness without the Power) must be
crucified; and every one must come into the Power of the Spirit of God, and
must witness that to work in them, to will and to do; and no more professing of
the things of God, but as they are witnessed by the work of his Spirit in their
hearts: you must not hold Truth any longer in unrighteousness, nor make a
profession of it in your unrighteous minds; no more talking of Justification
and Redemption, nor of any of the matters of Gods Kingdom, but according as
they are witnessed by the working of the Spirit of God in the heart; and every
one must feel in himself the evidence and testimony of the Spirit of God to
witness the Truth in his heart (or conscience) of what he professes with his
mouth.

VIII. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must witness the Scriptures of Truth
fulfilled in themselves: the things that they have read of without them, must
be wrought within them, wrought in their hearts by the same Spirit as gave
forth the Scriptures; they must pass through the same conditions as the holy
men of God did; and the same truth that the Scriptures declare of, must be
revealed in the heart, by the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; and
none must profess more than they do enjoy from God; and all flesh must be
silent from speaking of the things of Gods Kingdom, which they have not seen,
handled, tasted and felt, by the working of the Spirit of God in their
Consciences: and this is to witness the Scriptures fulfilled, when you have
experience of the same conditions, and of the same operations and
manifestations which the Servants of the Lord passed through and had experience
of; and so that you may speak what you have heard, and seen, and handled, and
tasted of the Word of Life: All that will be saved must come to this, and
witness it.

IX. Again, Whosoever will be saved, must believe in Jesus Christ, and receive
him; and they must take up his daily cross and follow him; and must know him to
mortify and crucify them to the world: and he must work the same things in
you by his Spirit spiritually, as he wrought without you in his Person, or else
you have no part in him, nor salvation by him: For it is not enough unto
eternal life, only to believe that there was such a one as a Christ, and that
he did and spoke such and such things at a distance without you; for many may
make a belief and a profession of this, and yet perish; but Him that was, of
whom you read, without you, must you receive, and witness within you; and you
must know Him as he was before Abraham was, and before the world was; and He
himself by his Spirit in you must give you the knowledge of Himself, what He
was before the beginning, what he is now, and what he shall for ever be.

X. Again, Every one that will be saved, must come up out of the Apostasy into
which all Christendom has been fallen, and must come into the same Spirit,
Life and Power as the Apostles were in, from which Life, spirit and Power, all
Christendom have been Apostates, and they have held the words and practices of
the Apostles without the same Life and Power, and made Sects, Churches and
Ministers, but out of the same Life and Spirit as the holy men of God were in;
and all that will be saved, must be restored and recovered into the same Spirit
and Life in their Churches, Ministry and Ordinances, as the Apostles of Christ
Jesus were in: and this is Restoration, when People come again into the same
Life and Spirit of God, which the Apostate Christians have all wanted, and been
in the Form of Ministry, Churches, Religion and Godliness, without the Power;
And unto this is the Lord God restoring People, his Day is dawned, and his
everlasting Light is risen, and his Name will be known in the Earth: And none
can be saved with the salvation of God, but who believe, receive and understand
these things.

A general Objection answered.
Object. 1. And whereas there is a great cry by some people of late, That there
must be no more Private Meetings, but all People must come to Church (as they
say) and that there must be no more Conventicles, etc.

Answ. As for Conventicles, I understand you mean Meetings out of Public
Steeple Houses, and that there must be no private Meetings for Preaching and
Prayer, but all People must be forced to come to Public Places of Worship. Now
I say, if the Authority that is now set up, and has the Power, does exercise
it self in this way; then the God of Heaven will be provoked against it, to
overthrow it and confound it, if it proceed contrary to the End of just Rule
and Authority ordained of God, which is for the punishment of them that do evil
in things between man and man; but not to impose upon men's Consciences, in
things relating to the Worship and Service of God: But the Lord God is wholly
Judge in such matters, and not any man; and if any men should err in their
minds concerning Faith and Doctrine, and the Worship of God, that belongs to
the Lord to punish, and not to any Earthly Authority.

And what! must not the People of God come together to worship the Lord in
Spirit and Truth? Must not People conveen together in this Age, as the People
of God did in Ages past? Did not Christ many times preach in the Desert, and
sometimes in a ship by the Seaside, and sometimes on a Mountain, as you may
read in the Scriptures? And did not he often preach unto the Pharisees, and
sometimes to his Disciples, out of the public Synagogues? And might not the
Jews have called those Meetings, Conventicles, because they were not in their
Public Synagogues? And also, did not the Apostles and Saints, after the
Resurrection of Christ, when they returned from Jerusalem, meet together
privately? for they went into an Upper Room, and waited upon the Lord, and
continued with one accord in Prayer and Supplication: And again, at another
time, they were about an hundred and twenty in number, that were in one place
to wait upon the Lord, and Peter preached unto them; and were these Meetings
Conventicles, because they were not in a public Synagogue, but in an Upper
Chamber, and in a private place? And thus the Saints of old met together, as ye
may read, Act. 1. and worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth, and preached and
prayed; and must not the People of God now meet together to pray and wait upon
the Lord, but they must be reproached with the name of Conventiclers, and
threatened and punished for so doing? Oh how blind is this Generation, and how
contrary to the true Christian Spirit in their practices! And did not Philip
preach Jesus unto the Eunuch in a Chariot, as they went on the way? and this
was not in a public Synagogue, as in Act. 8. And did not Peter preach to
Cornelius, with many others, in Cornelius his house? and this was a Meeting,
and not in a Synagogue, Acts. 10. And did not the Apostles and Saints meet
together in an Upper Chamber, where Paul preached until midnight amongst the
Saints? Act. 20. and was this a Conventicle, and an unlawful Meeting? Might
not the Jews have said, this was an Unlawful Assembly, being in a Chamber, and
not in a Public Synagogue? And again, Did not Paul preach in his own Hired
House for two whole years together, and received all that came in unto him?
Act. 28. And here were Private Meetings out of Public Synagogues. But did the
Jews threaten them, and inflict sufferings upon them, because they met in
private houses, and would not come to their Synagogues and Public Worship? or
did they reproach them with the name of Sectaries and Conventiclers, when they
met together to wait upon the Lord, sometime in praying, and sometime in
preaching? And thus you may see by many Examples, that the Saints and true
Christian Churches in the days of old met together, sometime on Mountains, and
sometime in Deserts, and sometime in Upper Chambers, and sometime in their own
hired houses, and not in the public Synagogues; but they were gathered from
the Temple and first Priesthood, and from the Worship which God had once
commanded, which stood in outward things and Ordinances; and when they had
received the substance, they denied the shadows, types and figures, and did not
uphold them any longer: And they were gathered by the preaching of the Gospel
into the second and new Covenant, and they met together in private Houses, and
upper Chambers, and by the Seaside to preach and pray, and to worship the
Lord* and we do not read that the Jews persecuted them for so doing: And will
you that have the name of Christians persecute the People of God, though they
meet together in private houses, and their own hired houses, and cannot come to
your Temples and Steeple Houses? And will not you suffer such to meet together
out of your Public Places, but you will persecute them, and call them
Heretics, and such like? Is not this worse than ever the Jews did to the
Apostles? And so you are out of the Example of the true Christians, who met
together, and preached and prayed often, and not in a Synagogue or Public
Place; but you cry against them that do so, and threaten to persecute for it:
and thus you show your selves out of the true Christan Example, and in this you
are worse than the Jews and more cruel, if you should persecute People for
meeting together to wait upon the Lord in their own houses, or in what place or
time, as the Lord should move their hearts; but if you proceed in this way, and
will not permit the People of God to meet together in their own houses, and not
in your Idol-Temples; then the Power of the Lord will confound you, and God
will break you to pieces, and you will feel his heavy Wrath upon your
Consciences, and God will smite you with his Judgments inwardly and outwardly.

Now for your restraining of people from one way of Worship, and forcing them
to another, and compelling them about Religion by cruel Laws and Commandments
of men; this is of Antichrist, for you to do, and of the Devil: for all forcing
of People to this kind of Worship, and from another, and imposing upon their
Consciences in matters of Gods Kingdom; this is also of Antichrist, and
contrary to Christ and his Way; for he won People by sound Doctrine, and by
Love, and by a good Conversation; and so did his Disciples, for they never
forced any by outward violence to their Worship, nor to their Church Government
and Ordinances: but it was the practice of the Beast, and the Dragon, that
first forced People, and compelled them to worship, since the days of the
Apostles, Rev. 13. It was Antichrist that first imposed upon People in the
Ignorance of their Consciences, and contrary to their Consciences, by the
Commandments of men, false Faith, false Worship, false Ministry, false
Doctrine, and false Religions; so that now, if you should force any contrary to
their Consciences, to your Steeple Houses, to hear and say your Form of
Prayers, we shall say then you are Antichrist, and of the Devil, if so be you
should endeavor to compel any, either against their Consciences, or in the
Ignorance of their Consciences, to your way of Worship or Religion.

Therefore take heed how you meddle in these things, lest God confound you: and
as for us, we are the People of God, we fear his Name, and worship him, and
cannot bow to the Devil; and we need not be forced to worship the Lord, for his
Spirit leads us into all Truth, and we need none of your outward Prescriptions,
or Form of Prayers, for the Spirit of God teaches us in all these things,
when, and where, and how we should worship the Lord God, who is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, which is free, and not by outward
force; and all the Worship that is otherwise, and not in the free Spirit of
Christ, is of Great Babylon, whom the Lord will confound and destroy.

Another general Objection answered.
Object. 2. Again, Whereas it is said by some, Now there must be no more
private Preachers, Unlearned men, and men not Ordained must not now preach any
more; Lay-persons must not be Preachers that are not so qualified, nor so and
so ordained: and this is the present talk among some people.

Answ. To this I also answer, and say, VVo to them that would stop, or quench,
or limit the Spirit of God in Sons or Daughters; for such are denyers of the
Scriptures and the Power of God; and such bring guilt upon their own
Consciences, and work fearful Abomination against God. And what, must not the
Spirit of the Lord speak now, where it is, in this Age, as it did in the days
of old, as you may read in the Scriptures? for, was not Elisha a Plowman, and
was not he called from the Plough, 1 King. 19. and became a Prophet of the Lord
unto the House of Israel, and had the Spirit of Elijah poured upon him? and
would not you have said he was a Layman, a Plowman, unordained, not fitting
to preach, if you had lived in his days? And was not Amos called from
following the Flock? who had been no Prophet, nor no Prophets son, but an
Herds-man, Amos 7, 14, 15. and it was lawful for him to preach the Word of the
Lord, though he was but an Herds-man, and had been no Prophet, nor Prophets
son; which if he had lived in your days, you would have called him a Layman,
an unfit person, unlearned, and one not ordained for the Ministry: and you,
like Amaziah the wicked Priest of Bethel, would now quench the Spirit, as he
would have done in Amos, who was a Tradesman, and such an one as you now call
Laymen, who are not (as you say) fitting to preach. And did not Christ Jesus
himself choose Fishermen, and sent them forth to preach the Gospel? and such as
were men of Trades, and unlearned in Books, as it is written, Act. 4. 13. When
the Rulers saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived they were
Unlearned, they marvelled; and these were Ministers of Christ, and preached the
Everlasting Gospel, whom you would have called Laymen, and men unfit to
preach, had you lived in their days. And Paul himself by occupation was a
Tent-maker, it is said, and he labored with his hands, and yet was a Preacher
of the Gospel; and there are multitudes of Witnesses in the Scriptures of these
things, how that men of Trades, and unlearned in Letters and Books, and never
were brought up at Schools and Colleges, but followed the Plough, and were
keepers of Cattle, and some followed fishing; such as these in old time had the
Spirit of God given them, and they preached the Gospel: And what if the Lord at
this day give his Spirit to such as these, and send them forth to preach the
Gospel, even to such as were brought up and educated (it may be) at Handycraft
Trades, and are labouring-men, and are not learned at Schools and Colleges;
will you limit the Lord, and quench his Spirit, and reproach his Ways and
Servants, and now call them Lay-persons, and say they are not fitting to
preach? for they are not Learned nor Ordained, say you; and calling them
Mechannicks and private Preachers, and say, they must not now be admitted to
preach the Gospel; and in this you deny the Scriptures, and the Example of the
Saints in former Ages, and so neither know the Scriptures, nor the Spirit that
gave them forth: though you say, you own the Scriptures, yet if the same things
come to pass which they declare of, you deny them in this Age, and cry against
such as Heretics who witness the fulfilling of them; which shows you are of
Antichrist, and that you quench the Spirit in Sons and Daughters, which God
has promised in the New Covenant, that he would give and pour forth upon Sons
and Daughters, and they shall prophecy: And are not we to look for these
things now? What, must not God's Promises be fulfilled? must not an Herds-man
now preach if the Word ofs the Lord come unto him? and must not Plow-men now
speak of the things of God, if they have experience of them? and must not
Fishermen and Tent-makers bear witness to the Name of Christ, if they have
received of his Spirit? And will you deny the Scriptures, which says, As every
one has received the Spirit and the Gift, so let him administer the same one
to another? 1 Pet. 4. or, do you say, None must have the Gift of the Spirit,
but such as are brought up at Schools and Colleges? or, will you limit the
Holy One to such and such men and ways? Oh you are blind and ignorant, who
would quench the Spirit of God, that it should not speak in these days, and
thus you are denyers of the Scriptures: but God has given of his Spirit, and
spoken in our hearts, and we must prophecy, and speak as the Spirit of God
gives utterance, as the Saints of old did, Act. 2. 4.

Now for your way of making Ministers at Schools and Colleges, and so
quallifying them with Knowledge in the seven Sciences, as it is said, and
ordaining them in that manner and way, as among Papists and Protestants has
been practiced for Ages, this way of making Ministers, and sending of them
forth; was never known among the Apostles; for they were not thus made and
ordained, and sent to preach, nor was this way of making and sending forth
Ministers, till the Spirit and Power of God was lost and forsaken by the
Apostate Christians; and the Scriptures make no mention of such ways, nor give
no Example for such things; and we cannot own any Religion, nor any practice
thereof, but what we have Example for from the Saints of old before us: and we
believe that it is generally of Antichrist, to invent and introduce such and
such Practices for Religion toward God, and for the worship of him, for which
there is no Example in all the Christian Churches in the Apostles days; and we
believe that way of making Ministers, and sending of them forth, which is not
approvable by the Scriptures, nor according to them, is of Antichrist, and not
of God; neither can we own such Ministers nor their Ministry, who are not
ordained of God, and according to the Scriptures: nor can we deny private
Preachers nor their Ministry, as you call them, if they have received the
Spirit of Christ, though they be not so learned outwardly, nor ordained
according to what some may call the right way; but who are Ministers, made and
sent of God, and have the Authority of his Spirit, such we own, and cannot
deny; and such the Lord will bless with his Presence, to the confounding of all
their Enemies.

Concerning Settlement in a happy Government.
Object. There has been great Divisions and Distractions in these Nations for
diverse years; and in the midst of them the great cry has been by many for
Settlement and Peace, and for a quiet and happy Government.

Answ. These things has the Lord suffered to come to pass in the world; even
great Contentions, Divisions and Distractions, and much Changes of Government
in these Kingdoms; And the appearing cause of these things, has been from the
lust that has warred in the Members, for from thence does Wars and Strife
arise; and many have been Ambitions, Vainglorious, Self-seeking and Covetous
of the Honors and Pleasures of this World; the lust and desire of these
things has possessed the minds of men, and induced them to envy and wrath one
against another, and has filled them with heart-burnings, and cruelty of mind,
to the killing and destroying of one another, by Wars and Bloodsheds, and by
Plots and Contrivances have sought how to extinguish one another from the
Earth, that themselves might be exalted: and thus from the desires that have
warred in men's minds, have Wars arisen against the persons of men, and among
them: and this is the appearing cause of the Wars and Distractions that have
been in these Nations; though the hidden cause (which has not so appeared)
has been in God, and because of the wickedness of men, both high and low, and
because of their Oppressions and Abominations, which have been many and great
in the World; Therefore has the God of Heaven been provoked in just Judgment
toward Rulers and People, to suffer men to destroy one another, and to execute
Bloudsheds and Destructions one upon another; and he has brought it to pass,
in giving up men to the fulfilling of their cruel intents, which has been
hatched in their evil minds, every man against his Neighbor, and even because
they have been departed out of his Counsel, and followed their own wicked
ways; and Justice, and Mercy, and Truth have been wanting amongst men in these
Nations; so that this is the principal cause wherefore the Lord God has
brought about and suffered these Wars, Distractions, Confusions and Discords in
these latter days; and out of the justness of Gods Judgments, because of the
wickedness of men, have these things been.

And now these Distractions and Confusions, and Discords amongst men can never
wholly and truly cease to be, till Iniquity and Transgression be repented of,
and turned from, which is the very cause wherefore God has done and suffered
these things, as I have said; and so men must cease from Oppression, from
Cruelty, and from all Unrighteousness, and must turn to the Lord, and become
cleansed from their sins, ere ever the Judgments of the Lord be removed, and
these Distractions, Wars and Confusions cease to be in these Lands; and till
men become meek and humble, and till they cease to seek Revenge one of another;
and till they cease all Oppression and Covetousness, Injustice and
Unmercifulness; and till they forsake their worldly Honor and high Titles,
which puffs them up in Arrogance and Ambition; and even till every man forsake
his particular Iniquity; till all these things be, Distractions will not cease,
nor shall Settlement, and Peace, and happy Government ever be: This is
certainly so; for except the Cause be removed, the Effect can never cease: and
there appears to be at this day as great (if not far more) Dissatisfactions in
the minds of some People, than has been heretofore; and it appears to be as
far from Settlement and true Peace in an happy Union in Government, as for many
years; though it has been expected by many, that we should have Peace and
Settlement in Government, yet, behold, it cannot be; for there are Discontents
and Murmurings in the minds of men, and Unsettlement in their spirits, and the
Foundation of a happy Government is not yet discovered unto many; nor do the
people walk in the way of Peace, but Iniquity is abounding, Oppression and
Cruelty yet lives; Hard-heartedness and Envy, Pride and Ambition, are not yet
cut down, neither in all the Governors, nor in the Governed: and this is not
the way of Peace and true Settlement; but it is the way of Troubles and
Distractions, and the very Foundation of greater Distractions and Wars, rather
than of Settlement and happy Government: These things are so; and therefore
true Peace and Settlement in good Agreement, who can expect? because the ground
of Distractions and Unsettlement is continued and increased, rather than abated
and removed amongst many; and the true Foundation of Peace and Settlement in
happy Government, is not yet raised up amongst men; but because Injustice and
Oppression are continued, therefore will God be provoked to bring Distractions,
Wars and Tribulations upon the Kingdoms of all the World; and God will confound
and dash in pieces, Powers, Authorities, Rulers, Nations and Peoples; and He
will break one Potsherd against another, and overthrow one Mountain against
another; and the hands of cruel men will God suffer to devour one another; and
ambitious and malicious hearts shall be suffered to finish one another end,
because of their own wickedness: and therefore be not deceived; Blessedness in
the Kingdoms of this World can never be, except Iniquity and Transgression be
departed from; except Oppression and Hard-heartedness dye; and except the
Foundation of War and Strife be removed, and the Foundation of Peace and happy
Government be raised up amongst men.

Again, True Peace and Settlement in good Government can never be, except the
Lord alone be owned as Judge and Lawgiver, and his righteous Laws to be
executed in the Earth; that Justice and true Judgment may flow down, and all
the contrary may be stopped and limited by the just Laws of God; and all
unjust and unequal Laws (made and established in the Ignorance of men) which
have not been justly according to the Law of God, nor depended thereupon; such
Laws must also be made void, judged and cast out, and the Law of God must
enter: This must be accomplished, if ever true Settlement in a happy Peace be
amongst us: the Laws must be changed, the unjust and unequal cast out, and just
and equal Laws brought in* for because hereof, while unjust and unequal Laws
have been executed in Judgment, therefore have we wanted Settlement and Peace
in a happy Government, and the contrary has been, and will continue till all
unjust, unequal and oppressive Love be discontinued.

Again, If ever true Peace and Settlement in a happy Government be amongst men*
Governors, Rulers and Executors of the Law must be Just persons and Righteous
men, Men that fear God, and hate Covetousness, and that depart from every evil
way; and all ambitious, self-seeking, and unjust men must be cast out, even all
they that have sought themselves, and not the Lord, in their places of Trust;
such as have perverted Justice and true Judgment for their own corrupted ends;
and such as have been cruel and hard-hearted Oppressors; all such as these must
be cast out, and the Law must not be committed to such to execute, neither must
such sit in Judgment over the People; for because hereof, and while such men
have ruled and governed, and executed the Laws, no true Settlement in a Just
Government, but the contrary has been, even Distractions and Tribulations; and
while such men do continue to rule and judge, and execute the Laws in any part
of the world, we shall never have a happy Government nor Settlement in it in
this world; nor till Just men, that have the Spirit of God, and sound Judgment,
that are humble and meek, patient and merciful, and such as fear the Lord, and
walk in his ways, be called to rule and judge, and execute the Laws; and the
Laws must be just and holy, and the Executors of them equal and upright men.
Till these things be accomplished, a happy Settlement in this Worlds Kingdoms
can never be, but God will dash one Mountain against another, and throw one
Hill upon another; and he will give no Peace among the Kings of the Earth, but
stain the Glory of all the Worlds Governments, till Truth and Righteousness
come to reign, and till Just Laws be executed by Just men, and till Mercy and
Justice, Truth and Equity flow forth abundantly.

Therefore all Nations, you have been deceived while you have turned up and
down, from one way and manner and kind of Government to another, and from one
sort of Governors to others: sometimes you have been for a Parliament;
sometime for a Protector; and sometime for neither: from each of these to
others you have changed, thinking to have Peace and Settlement in a happy
Government; but it could not be: for there are continual Distractions until
this day in the minds of men, and they are yet unsettled in their spirits; and
there are Heart-burnings, and Envyings, and seeking of Revenge; and while these
things are, nothing but Distractions and Tribulations; not Peace, but Troubles,
even till these things be removed; And till we have just and equal Laws,
according to the Law of God, established over us, and Just, and Holy, and
Righteous men to execute them in Judgment upon us; and till we have Truth and
Righteousness sit on the Throne; until this be, no true Settlement in a happy
Government; but Distractions and Contentions, and woeful Tribulations in the
Kingdoms of the World, and amongst men; and this is certain, and according unto
the Will of the Lord: and in the justness of his Judgments these things come
to pass; for it is Injustice and Oppressions, and want of Mercy and Truth,
which is the Foundation of Contentions and Distractions; and it is Justice and
Equity, Truth and Righteousness, that is the only Foundation of Peace and
Settlement, and a happy Government for a perpetual continuance.

To all False Christia^^
THere are many false ways in the world, and many false kinds of Religions,
and people are in much disagreement about their Church, Worship and Ministry;
Papists are opposing the Protestents, and the Protestants the Papists; and
there is a great contention in the World. But the Papists are in a wrong way,
and so are the Protestants too; and their Religions are both false in many
things; for whilst they profess Christ and Christianity, and make a show of
Righteousness in outward appearance, yet many of them live in sinful ways, and
bring forth the fruits of Iniquity against the living God, and Pride, Cheating,
and Double-dealing, Covetousness and Envy, Drunkenness and Whoredom, and all
Wickedness is abounding and brought forth, both by the Apostate Christians,
though they cry up the Name of Christ, and the Profession of Godliness, yet are
they wicked in the sight of God, and they are not changed in heart and mind,
nor do they know the New Birth; and all such are out of the right way, in the
way of Error, if they have the Form of Godliness, but want the Power; though
they may have Mass, or say Common Prayer once a week, or oftener, yet all this
is but Abomination and Deceit, whilst they practice Iniquity, Hatred, Back
biting, Lying, Drunkenness, and the like; they that act these things, the
Plagues of God will be their portion, and Misery their end, and their
Profession in Religion will not save them.

The Day of the Lord is at hand, ye Hypocrites, ye false Christians, ye that
profess God with your lips, and your hearts are far away: Therefore repent ye
and tremble before the Lord, lest he smite you with Vengeance: and forsake your
false Religions, both your Mass, and your Forms of Prayer; and be not
Idolaters, in professing love in your mouths, and honor with your lips,
whilst your hearts are departed from the living God; and now come to learn the
true Religion: Depart from all Iniquity, and do not lie, nor swear, nor be
drunk, nor steal, nor murder, nor envy; but love the Lord with all your hearts,
and your Neighbor as your selves: And this is the true Religion, in which man
may be saved, and live in Soberness, Meekness and Honesty, and speak every man
Truth to his Neighbor, and live in love one with another, and be kind and
gentle, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit of God; Cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, and depart from all Iniquity, and follow after Righteousness:
This is true Religion, and in it you may be saved: this is the right way, all
that walk in it shall have Peace and Blessing from God; and all that walk
contrary, Damnation is their portion: Therefore you Papists and Protestants (so
called) turn from your Hypocrisy, and learn this way, and cease from your
false worships, that are after the Forms and Traditions of men, and not after
the Spirit of God; and learn to worship God in the Spirit, that you may be
saved: You have a Light from Christ in your consciences, which lets you see
what sins ye are guilty of, and it reproves you for your sin: If you belie^e in
the Light, and walk in it that is the right way, then you will deny what is
evil, and follow what is good in your Coversations, but if you follow what is
evil, and act contrary to the Light in your Consciences, and repent nor.
Vengeance in flames of fire will be your portion.

This is the day of your Visitation, the Army of the Lamb is gone forth, and
the Sword of the Spirit is drawn amongst them, that will wound your
Consciences, and God will smite you with the words of his mouth, ye Rocks, and
Hills, and Briars and Thorns, and fruitless Trees, the God of Heaven will hew
you to pieces, and pluck you up, and oast you into the fire to be consumed.
Repons, for the Day of the Lord is at hand.

THE END.

