A Tender Salutation OF Perfect Love UNTO THE ELECT OF GOD, The Royal Seed, the
Saints of the Most High, who have believed the Testimony of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and walks in the Light that has enlightened every man that comes into
the World.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1661.

FRIENDS,
THis following Epistle being committed to me, I have found it convenient to
disperse it on this wise to the Churches of Christ, for whose service chiefly
it has been written as I perceive; and this being a time, wherein each Friend
in God ought to serve another, and to be a strength and encouragement one
toward another in the Ways of God, and therefore according to my duty,
wherein I stand bound to the lord and his Servants, I have diligently
endeavored your benefit and edification in sending this unto you, who accounts
it my greatest honor to serve the Lord and his Servants.

Ellis Hooks.

To the Beloved Church of God that have believed and received the Testimony of
our Lord Jesus Christ; The true Light that Lights every man that comes into
the World.
IN the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever, that tender
Salutations of my immortal Life is daily abounding toward, you, who are the
true Flock of the Fathers Love and Care, who has begotten you to himself by
his Word that lives for ever in us and with us, that ye should be a People
Chosen and Elected of him unto eternal blessings, and to be a Praise and an
Honor to him throughout the World, by and through the virtue of his Life and
Power, and in the fruits of his Spirit brought forth by you all, who are the
only Children of that birth which is only the Lords.

Well dearly Beloved, my heart at this time is filled in the Fathers Love, with
the dear Remembrance of you whom the Lord has gathered with his Arm of power,
and in his Spirit do I desire the increase of all mercies, and peace, and
blessings unto you, that you may be rich and strong, and wise and mighty
through the Lord Jesus Christ, and receiving daily of his grace, may ever be
preserved, constant and faithful in the heavenly calling unto the end; And
forasmuch as the Lord has began his glorious work in the midst of you, and
gathered you out of the darkness, and ignorance, and unbelief of this World,
where sometime your converse has been, while ye knew not the Lord, and raised
you up into the Light, and Power and Wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, having
largely tasted of the same in the experience of his leadings through diverse
Operations and Manifestations of his Spirit, so that many of you have attained
to a good measure to peace and rest with the Lord in your inward man; Dearly
Beloved, seeing it is thus, these things the Spirit of the Father in me
traveleth to bring forth unto you, for the end to comfort you, and to confirm
you, and to edify you in the saving Truths of the Gospel of peace.

1. Consider what your former estate has been, an estate scattered like sheep
without a Shepherd, some of you dispersed into one false kind of Profession of
Religion, and some into another, walking in such ways as the Lord led you not
in, but ye were driven from God into the paths of Death and Darkness, and were
led by blind Watchmen in the Hypocrisy and false pretenses toward God,
honoring him with the lips while the heart was far away; this was the
condition of some of you, and others of you were wallowing in the open
profaneness of the sinful World, and such was your estate wherein you were
all strangers to God, and were without him in the World, and served the Spirit
which leads Captive to Destruction, and in that way you were strayed even in
the separation from Gods, being in the state of enmity against him, till the
Lord Jesus Christ the good Shepherd of Israel found you out in the estate of
darkness, and brought you home from your strayed condition, even unto the
sense and feeling of his power and spirit in you, which called you out of the
ways of sin and death, and also changed you and regenerated you into the
Inheritance of a better Kingdom and glory then that which is of this World,
and ye now know Christ Jesus to be your Shepherd, his Spirit to teach you, his
Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification to dwell in you, being partakers
of the same through the eternal light which once shined in darkness, and the
darkness could not comprehend it, but now it is risen in much glory and power,
and death and darkness is swallowed up of life and light, and the fruits
thereof subdued; these things are true and faithful unto many, let all such
rejoice and be glad in the Lord who have thus seen his day, and tasted of his
power, and are witnesses that the Kingdom is come which never fades away.

2. Consider what the tender dealings of God toward you, and his gentle
leadings have been since he has called you out of your former strayed estate;
has not his light shined upon your Tabernacle with much clearness, persuading
your hearts fully of his way and truth? has not your hearts often been
refreshed, and your souls truly comforted by the refreshing presence of the
Lord? Has not the way of life been made so clear unto you, and the way of your
peace so perfectly discovered, that no occasion has been left of unbelief or
stumbling unto the upright in heart? Surely the Lord has not been wanting to
you in any of these things, but he has so reached home by his Word and Spirit
to your Hearts and Consciences with such full convictions and persuasions in
the ways of Salvation, that no sincere heart can doubt or waver concerning the
things pertaining to his Souls peace and comfort; for so large and evident has
Gods Testimony been unto you, ever since he first called you by his Grace, that
no man having sense and experience thereof, but must bear witness that the Lord
has been good, long-suffering, full of Mercy and Righteousness toward all
that fear him; I am persuaded ye know these things, and that the taste and
virtue of the Lords Mercies and Power remains steadfast in your remembrance and
enjoyment, even his Mercies and loving Kindness that have been made manifest to
you since ye have known the Lord, who has led you by the hand as a Father does
his Children, and carried you in his Arms of Preservation, and born you on his
shoulders in all your afflictions, insomuch that through his Power and Wisdom
only, we are yet alive, and the Adversary has not prevailed against us,
though his attempts has often been great to destroy us.

3. Consider what is now your present state and standing? How is it with your
inward man? In what life and strength and dominion is he? Is he strong over all
the corruptible, or is he weak under corruption? Is he in the growth of a
perfect man, of the stature of Christ Jesus? Is he so begotten and born in you,
that life has swallowed up death? Has he victory over the grave, and does he
reign in you, even the new man, the spiritual man, the immortal man, Christ in
you, is he come in power and dominion to dwell with you? Dearly Beloved, mind
each Particular in what state you are, and what is your present standing to
God-wards? Have ye had faith in God, and love to God, and boldness for God, and
are ye firmly continued therein, or is any such weakened and decreased in these
things? Is your love grown cold, and your zeal lost, and your confidence
decayed? if it be thus with any, their present state is not aright before the
Lord, but they must repent and return to their first love, and return again to
the witness of the Spirit of Christ within them that their strength may be
renewed, for they only that dwell with the Lord in faithfulness and abides in
Covenant with him must see his Glory, and be fed daily with the Bread that
comes down from Heaven, and refreshed with the Fountain of endless Mercies; if
so be ye be perfect with the lord after your inward man, strong and lively and
zealous, faithful and constant, having a clean heart and a pure conscience,
guiltless and underfiled before God, this is to be perfect with the Lord, and
if ye are thus, blessed are you; if ye be increased daily in the Love and Life
of the Father, if your inward man grow in the Wisdom and Power and Knowledge of
the Creator, if ye receive the assurance of Eternal Life in your selves; If
this be your present state, Oh happy people, who is like unto you, because ye
are saved of the Lord.

4. What is the present work of God in your own hearts? Ye must always feel
the Word of God abiding in you, even the Word in the heart; hear that Word and
do it always, and your souls shall live by the Word of God; that Word beats
down whatsoever tempts and draws from God which would defile you, and load you
Consciences, and vex the Spirit, for if any obey the Temptations, they become
darkened, unbelief enters, and the fruits of it grows, and then there is a
falling from the Lord, and a departing from his way of Salvation; therefore
mind the Power and Spirit of Christ in you, and be constant and faithful
therein, that you may be preserved unto the finishing of the Work of the Lord
in you, that at last ye may sit down in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in
places of Peace, and Comfort, and Assurance for ever, where the Lord is enjoyed
all in all, which you must wait for to be accomplished in you according to the
Promise, and you must witness the Work of Christ in you, he must work in you by
his Spirit Regeneration, Reconciliation; Sanctification, Justification, and all
good things, for it is not sufficient to profess that Christ in his Person has
wrought the works of God, but every one in particular must witness at this day
the work of the Spirit of Christ in his own heart, even the Work of
Reconciliation and Salvation, that ye may in each man's particular receive the
Knowledge and Experience of the Lords Work, of his Love, and Life, and
Salvation, and Redemption in particular; for though never so large Testimonies
in general should be given to you, or received by you concerning Christ Jesus
and his Salvation, yet the particular feeling of the Love and Power of God in
your own hearts must you stand by in the Day of Trial, for that alone can
uphold in the day of Troubles, even the Testimony of the Spirit of Christ unto
Salvation, felt in each particular heart.

And seeing the Lord has brought you to the knowledge of his truth, so in
conversion and rageneration, that many can say(...) the Way of the Lord is so
made manifest, that we look not for another, nor are doubtful of the Way of
Eternal Life; therefore be established steadfast and constant in that way, not
easily moved nor tossed too and fro with men, nor new Doctrines, nor changeable
things, but approve your hearts in uprightness before the Lord, by being
faithful to the end, faithful I say to be and do, according to the measure of
Light and Grace and Knowledge that God has already committed to you, that ye
may not offend against the Grace of God, but may glorify the Lord in your
Souls and Spirits, being joined in your hearts, and married to the Living God,
and the Lord becomes Your Husband according to the Promise; but if any be of a
changeable Spirit, such will receive Temptations, and go out of the Covenant of
God, and abuse the gift of God, if their heart be not meek, and lowly, and
humble, and perfect in the sight of God, though there may be a taste of the Love
of God, yet there can be no assureance of it if the heart be not aright before
the Lord, and faithful and constant in his Truth; and therefore all must wait
to receive the assurance of Eternal Life in themselves, even such an assurance
of Life, and Peace, and Joy, and Comfort, that there can be no departing away,
being established in the Heir-ship never to loose the Crown, Heirs of the power
of God, of his Wisdom, of his Righteousness, Inheriters and Possessors of the
Eternal Life, that ye may dwell in the house for ever, not only as Servants,
but as Sons; not only as such that have tasted of the Love of God, but as such
as are born Heirs thereof, and must inherit the same for ever.

now dear Friends, if this were my last unto You, more then this the Lord has
not to say by me; and last of all in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, I charge all
the Saints to he faithful to the Principles and Doctrines which Ye have heard
and received, and been taught of Christ through his Gospel. Oh be not
inconstant of unfaithful in those Principles and Doctrines which the Spirit of
God has persuaded your Consciences of the truth of; for if any are unfaithful,
they deny the Lord of Life before men, and must be denied of him before the
Father; therefore let us put on strength and courage to be faithful and
constant in life or death, to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, and if we
must suffer for our profession and practice of those truths which God has
persuaded our Consciences of the verity of, we shall never be ashamed nor
confounded before the Adversary, though we gain Tribulations, Persecutions, yea
death it self for the Name of the Lord and his Truth, yet we shall obtain the
Crown of Glory which never fades away: and verily all the Sufferings and
Afflictions of this present time, are not worthy to be compared to that weight
of Peace and Comfort, which is and shall be revealed amongst us.

And as concerning our Obedience to Government, ever since we were a people, Ye
know what our Principle and Practice in that case has been, even to obey all
men in all things, either by doing or suffering, it at any time ye are required
to do any thing by any in Authority which is not agreeing, but contrary to the
Scriptures example of the Saints, and the Spirit of Christ in your own
consciences, then ye are to suffer whatsoever, if it be death it self rather
then to obey and submit to the doing of that which is contrary to a good
conscience, this has ever been our Principle and Practice since we were a
People, agreeing with the practice of the holy Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs
in all ages, who rather did suffer grievous oppressions and persecutions, then
to obey any command of men in power, by doing any thing contrary to the
testimony of the Spirit of God in their own particulars; let us all be
like-minded this day, not to do, nor bend, nor be in any wise contrary to the
Spirit of Christ that dwells in us, but rather suffer whatsoever may be imposed
then to sin against that Light and Knowledge of the Spirit of Christ which he
has given us, but let us keep a clean heart and a pure conscience to
God-wards, and therein we shall triumph over all in our inward Man, though our
outward man be afflicted, and in this we shall have peace and comfort in God
over all our Adversaries.

And as concerning your meetings, the Lord has given you the testimony of his
Spirit in you for the verity and righteousness thereof, though ye should suffer
persecution for the same, yet ye have the Spirit of Christ testifying in your
hearts that this Way and Practice of meeting together (as our practice has
been) is of God, and he Justifies us in the same, and we have suciffient of
assurance by the holy Spirit to stand faithful in that practice of assembling
together to worship God.

First, we have the testimony of Scriptures and exple of Saints in the Apostles
days, to prove this practice of Meeting together; The first Christians they
met together in this manner and way as we do now, they met in private houses,
and from house to house separate and apart from the Public Synagogues and all
other Sects; and it is clear that we have the example of Saints and Scriptures
proof for this our practice of meeting together.

2. We have our own experience for this diverse years, how that the Spirit of
the Lord has moved our hearts to assemble together, and the presence and power
of the Lord Jesus Christ has been amongst us, and we have tasted of the
goodness and love of the Lord, being so met together, how often has the Lord
met with us and his countenance shined upon us, and our souls have been
refreshed, strengthened and comforted in this practice of meeting together;
these things are true, and may confirm us in this practice of meeting together,
and to be faithful to the end.

3. We have the full persuasions of the Spirit of God lively and fervent in our
hearts at this moment, that we ought not to neglect the Assembling of our
selves together, but that God requires it of us, and it is his will that his
people meet together to worship him in Spirit and Truth, separate from all the
world even in one Spirit, and in the Name and Power of Jesus I hope ye are all
like-minded herein, and that the spirit of Christ persuades your Consciences in
the Truth of that practice, therefore be faithful unto God herein, and sin not
against the testimony of Scriptures and example of the first Christians, nor
against your own experience, nor against the admonitions of the Servants of the
Lord, who are the first fruits unto God since the Apostasy, and have again and
again in the Name and Spirit of Christ exhorted you to meet together; wherefore
be faithful to perform your duty of God in that particular whatsoever
sufferings should be infflicted upon you by the men of this world.

And as concerning refusing to take any Oath, ye know it has been our
Principle and Practice so to do since the Lord has given us knowledge of his
ways, and the spirit of the Lord that dwells in us, persuades our hearts to
deny all swearing, both as it was practiced under the Law, according to the
command of God, and in the types and figures, and as it is practiced among the
Christians since the Apostles days, which is as now practiced, Idolatry and
Superstition; And I say the Spirit of Christ does confirm our hearts in this
truth, even to deny all swearing, and also we have the express command of
Christ and of the Apostle James forbiding all swearing by Heaven and Earth and
all other Oaths, which bears witness to the truth of our refusing to swear at
this day; likewise we have the Testimony of many holy Martyrs and Prophets
since the Apostles days, who denied to swear on any wise, who suffered for
such their Testimony. All which evidences may justly confirm the hearts of Gods
people at this day faithfully to hold out their Testimony of refusing to swear
at all, seeing we have a cloud of witnesses that testify with us, the express
command and Christ and the Apostle; the Testimony of diverse holy men in
diverse ages, who suffered for the same, and the present persuasions of the
Spirit of Christ in our own hearts; All which are sufficient to give courage
and boldness under all sufferings and afflictions that we may meet withal, for
refusing to swear.

Well Friends, be faithful to God in these and all other things which God has
given you light and knowledge in, and I do warn all to keep a clear conscience,
and not to sin against the light and knowledge, that God has given you, either
by denying to profess and practice that truth which the Lord has persuaded
your hearts of, or by conforming to any thing which ye know is not of the
truth, and this is the way of eternal peace with God; but if any shall through
the temptations of the adversary, and for the love and fear of this world deny
the Lord, and renounce good conscience and be unfaithful, such must bear the
burden of the Lords anger because of their backslidings and revoltings from
the ways of God. True it is, this is a day of great trial, yet the Lord is
strong and gives strength unto all his people that wait upon him.

And let us be mindful what our controversy is, and with whom, this day our
controversy is for the Lord and his truth, to do faithfully and suffer
patiently whatsoever the will of the Lord is unto us, and not to renounce and
deny the exercise of our pure consciences in those things that God has
persuaded our hearts of the truth of; For if any this day should be unfaithful,
either by doing what they should not, or leaving undone what they know they
should do; If any deny the Lord and his truth, and conform to the false ways
and worships of men, such loses the controversy, and gives the cause of God
into the hand of your enemies, which is a fearful abomination, and the
controversy is with that spirit which opposes us in these things which we
know are of the Lord. It is with the spirit that we must contend, contend I say
by the spirit of the Father, in long-suffering and patience and good will
toward all men, and not with the weapons of this World in envy to any, even
with that spirit which does oppose our meeting together to worship God, and
would impose Oaths and things upon us contrary to our Consciences; And these
things are the main matters of controversy this day, which the spirit of
Christ in us must oppose, being imposed on us by the spirit of the world. So
all Friends are to mind to be faithful to the spirit of Christ and its
persuasions, and against that spirit which is not of him; for the opposition is
between the two spirits, and none must say the things required to be forborne or
to be done are but small matters in themselves, and may be done or not done
without offense, this king of reasoning may be dangerous, and may easily divert
from the obedience of Christ; for we are not to look so much at the things in
themselves which are required to be done or to be forborne, as at the spirit
which does impose upon us in such cases against pure conscience, if the spirit
be not of God we must not obey it in the least things; for this is indeed the
matter of conscience, not so much particular things or actions, as the spirit
that is not of God, where it requires things against good conscience, for
whatsoever that spirit requires, be it little or much in respect of the
action, it must not be obeyed and that for conscience sake, for this is a good
conscience that cannot do nor conform to any thing which the spirit that is not
of God enjoyneth, though therefore suffering be inflicted on the outward man.
And last of all, I do advise and exhort that ye have love and unity in the
spirit of the Lord and one with another, that oneness of heart and soul and
spirit may be amongst us, being bound up in the holy Covenant of the Father,
even willing to do or suffer one for another, and in this spirit of unity the
Lord will bless us, and make us strong and able to go through joyfully all our
afflictions; but if any strife or division be in the body, it weakens the
whole, if one member vex another through discord, this is not of the Father but
contrary to him, this is not for the safety of the body* but bruises it and
wounds it, and may more afflict the soul of the righteous then all outward
enemies, and strife and contention arising out of our own bowels, may sooner
work an overthrow then all the oppositions that can come from men. Oh therefore
as a Brother to some, and as a Father to many, and as a Servant to all, let me
entreat and beseech that ye follow those things which makes for peace, that ye
love one another as Christ has loved you, and that ye be like minded in all
things, even one as the Father and the Son are one, and so shall the blessings
of the Lord never depart from you; For dear Friends, the Lord has never been
wanting unto us, but always near at hand to fill us with his riches and
treasure; and are not we Vessels of honor, is not his Name in our foreheads,
are not we the flock of his fold? Therefore let us honor him by the works of
truth, of love, of mercy, and all the works of righteousness, let us bring
forth fruits unto the Father, thereby proving that we are true branches in
Christ the Vine, and let us give up to suffer all things patiently for the
testimony of his Truth written in our hearts; if we live let it be to him only,
and if we die let it be for him, having the seal of his good Spirit in us, that
whether we live or die, we are the Lords.

E. B.


