JERVSALEMS GLORY Breaking forth into the WORLD BEING A SCRIPTURE-DISCOVERY OF
THE New-Testament-Church In the Latter Days, immediately before the SECOND
COMING OF CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. and are to be (...) most Booksellers. 168^.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THIS Precious Treatise of the New Testament Church in the latter Days,
Preached many Years a-go by that Evangelical Prophet, Mr. Jeremiah Burroughes;
was committed to us by a Citizen of Zion, to whose ready Pen the World is much
engaged, for Preserving the Mantles of diverse of our late Elijah's, which they
let fall from their Pulpits, before they went to Heaven.

If thou have seen and tasted that Gracious and Warm Spirit, which runs through
His many other Works, Published by Himself and His Brethren; it will
certainly increase in thee a Spiritful Thirst and Longing after what else he
has received from his LORD and MASTER, and has freely Communicated, as His
Ambassador to His People, which are yet to be printed.

The Principal Scope of this Small, though weighty Book, is, to give us
Scriptural notice that Jesus Christ will usher in His second Coming, by making
Jerusalem, (His Church) a Praise in the Earth, (a Glory throughout the World.)
This is plainly demonstrated according to the WORD by this Apollos, mighty in
the Scriptures, and an Interpreter one of a Thousand. Therefore seriously
peruse every Text without a prejudicate Opinion, Judge not rashly, lest thou be
judged: For this Master Builder has set before thee, nothing but that which is
grounded upon the Pillar of Truth, and which is according to the Golden Reed of
the Sanctuary. Here is a singular Collection of several Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, looking one the other in the face, (as the Cherubims of Gold
did, which Moses made at each end of the Mercy Seat) and shaking Hands together
for the more evident and firm Demonstration of this Great Gospel Truth,
following the Apostles Rule, Comparing spiritual things, with spiritual things;
so that you will find this Soul-ravishing Point, (that Christ's Church shall be
the Praise and Glory of all the World) as the Light of the Sun, breaking forth
more and more, to a perfect midday of Glory.

Oh! how welcome will that day of Christ's Espousals and Coronation, be to His
Lovesick Spouse; as the Dove with the Olive Leaf was to Noah, or the
re-appearing of the Star to the Wise Men!

Let us resolve in the strength of Christ (who is the only Supreme Head of His
Church) constantly to make it our solemn business to plead at the Throne of
Grace, those glorious Prophesies and Promises in his Name, in whom they are Yea
and Amen, even till He Establish, and till He make Jerusalem a Praise; till He
have not only laid the foundations with Saphirs, but finished this City of
Pearl; not only brought forth the Corner stone, but the Top Stone of Jerusalem:
and all the Earth with shouting, cry, Grace, Grace to it.

26 th. of this 3 d. Month, 1675. Less than the Least of Jerusalems
Remembrancers, William Adderley.

THE EPISTLE.
THE Publisher of these Sermons, is desirous they might pass with Testimonial
into the World, that they might pass with the greater Freedom. But indeed the
Name of the Author, so well known, may be sufficient Argument for their
Reception in every place.

These Sermons are but some Fragments, of the Worthy Authors Judicious and
Pious Labors; But Christ gave order to his Disciples that the Fragments should
not be lost. Faith may here find some food; as it takes a prospect of the
Glory, that is hereafter to be revealed.

For here you have the Author's Sentiments about the last times, and of the
Catastrophe of all things at last; After the Dragon and the Beast have acted
their parts in their opposition to the Lamb, and his followers, wherein he has
presented to our View the many ancient Prophesies recorded in Scripture, that
bear witness to these things. So far as you see Prophetic Light shine before
you, take heed to it, which is all that is desired of the Reader, and by the
Publisher. Who having this Commodity, I mean this Copy lying by him; was
willing to bring it forth, as men bring Corn and other necessaries to Market
for public Use and benefit; only remember, that it was not in the Author's
Intention for to have it so. Had his own hand been upon the Frame, you should
have seen the Lines drawn with more Accuracy, and the Truth more fully searched
into. And if any has thoughts different from the Author's in these ensuing
Sermons; let him show, however, that Respect to so Reverend a Man, as to reject
nothing Rashly that is Asserted by him; and if he does not Receive, let him
Consider; And let us all be waiting and preparing for the Bride-groom's coming.
Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.

ISA. 62. v. 7. And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.


SERMON I.
IN the former Chapter, there are many Promises of an excellent and Glorious
state, that God would bring his Church into, in his time: with those Promises,
the heart of this Prophet Isaiah was much taken, and therefore in the beginning
of this Chapter, (says he) For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for
Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns: And as he himself
would not rest, nor hold his peace, so he would that all the Watchmen, that
were set upon the Walls of Jerusalem, and so after, all the Ministers of the
Church, that they should not rest; yea he would that they should give God no
rest, until he establish and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.

Give God no rest; he speaks here after the manner of Men, to note what
importunity there should be among the people of God, in seeking of God, to make
good all those glorious Promises that he has made to his Church, for the
raising of it up to a glorious state: as a man that is importunate of any
business, he is not satisfied; if he does Petition, and nothing comes of it, he
falls to it again and again, and seeks to get by importunity, and resolves that
he will be at no rest. And so God speaks after this manner, not that his rest,
or not rest, does depend upon us; But that we should be as importunate with him
for so great a mercy as this is, as with any man in the world, that we were
resolved, that till he had given us an answer, we would give him no rest: and
give him no rest until he has established, and made Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth.

Till he establish. Till he makes good his word, till the Church be brought to
a settled way of mercy, and into a safe and sure condition: For sometimes (as
if the Prophet should say) we find the Promises beginning to work, and God is
doing good for us, but at other times things seem to go back again, therefore
give him no rest till he Establish, till we see things settled. As you
Mariners, when you are to go a great Voyage, you love to see the Wind settled
in some place or other before you go forth: so faith the Prophet, Sometimes we
find the mercy and goodness of God much toward us; but things have gone back
again, therefore give him no rest till he has established.

And till he has made Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.

By Jerusalem we are to understand the Church of God, not so much the City
Jerusalem that then was, but the Church of God that was to be in the times of
the Gospel especially, for Jerusalem was a Type of it.

As the praise of the Earth; The Septuagint translates it, and the word
signifies the Glory, the Exaltation of the Earth: till he makes Jerusalem the
praise of the Earth.

Now we know that Prayer ought to be in Faith, then those that pray to God, and
especially that are importunate with God, they must believe that there is such
a thing to be done, that the Church of God is to be made the praise and Glory
of the Earth: And if they believe it is to be done, they must have some word
for it.

Now this is the main thing, that I intend at this time to make out unto you,
that there is a time that God has, to make his Church, to be the praise and
glory of all the world. In this World; To be the glory of the Earth, not only
to be glorious its self in Heaven; that I suppose you all believe, that there
is a time that the Church Militant here, shall be Triumphant in Heaven, and
glorious there; but that there is a time that God in this Earth, shall make his
Church to be the glory of the earth: And therefore all the Saints of God, to
whom the glory of God is dear, who do desire that the Honor of God may be
raised and set out, they are to pray for this, and to be importunate for this,
as a certain thing that is to be done and fulfilled by God: Now because you
cannot pray for it, and be importunate, to give God no rest till you see it
plainly that it will be so, therefore this thing is now to be opened unto you.

The truth is, Jerusalem, the Church of God, has been in a low Estate always,
in comparison of what God intends it to be at this time, when the Prophet here
says, give God no rest till he make Jerusalem the praise of the whole Earth.

Jerusalem was in no glorious condition, it was but a little before God
intended a Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem: For this Prophet, (you shall find
in the beginning of his Prophecy) did Prophecy in the days of Hezekiah; now
in the sixth year of Hezekiah's Reign did the Babilonians come and sack
Samaria, 2 Kings 18.10. and took the People into Captivity: And it might be
(for ought we know) not above a year or two before their captivity, that here
the Prophet calls upon this people to pray to God, and give him no rest till he
set Jerusalem up, as the praise of the whole earth; and yet he knew it was it
to go into Captivity presently; certainly then the Prophet did not intend here
any time that should be in his days, or in any little time after. The Prophet
therefore must needs have a Reference to some notable time of the Church, that
must be in after days, the people of the Jews were never the praise of the
whole Earth.

If you look before this time, they were unto the other people, but a
contemptible people, and lived in a little Country, one way a little more than
fourscore miles; a very little Country it was that all the people of the Jews
lived in, and very contemptible in respect of the other Nations of the World:
Therefore it was not the praise of the whole earth before.

Not presently after this is spoken, for they were to go into Captivity, and to
be there so long a time.

You will say, it may be it is meant about the time when they were to return
from Captivity.

No not so neither, for they were but very poor and contemptible in the eyes of
the world after their Captivity; for when they did return, it was but by leave,
and they were but as Servants unto the Medes still, they were but as servants
unto Cyrus, and the rest of them. When they went to build the Walls of
Jerusalem again, they scoff at them; And what do these feeble Jews? and if a
Fox goes but upon their walls, it will break them down. Certainly in their
return from Captivity, they were not the praise of the whole Earth, no nor in
after times; they had many interruptions before they could bring any thing to
any effect. Many Learned men compute that they were longer a building the wall
than they were in Captivity; and we know that it was not long after their
Captivity, that they all did lie at the mercy of a wicked Haman, who had gotten
a Decree to cut off all the people of the Jews; therefore they were not in any
glorious condition, no not after their return from Captivity: from that time
till the time that the Romans came and destroyed them, they were but in a low
condition, and then afterward they were low enough: so that it could not be
meant literally of Jerusalem, of that place, nor of the Church of the Jews;
therefore it must be meant of the state of the Church in the times of the
Gospel: Now when was that as the praise of the whole earth? certainly though it
were the praise of God, and God had his praise from his Church at all times;
yet now this must be meant of some eminent time that was to come, and it must
be some outward glory that they must have, so as the whole earth must take
notice of it.

And it was not in the time of Christ himself, Christ himself was the glory of
God, but yet in the earth he was despised, a man that had no form nor
comeliness in him; in regard of outward, they were then under Herod, and
rejected Christ when he came, and within a while afterward by Titus Vespatian
they were destroyed, and an unspeakable havoc was upon Jerusalem, and the
people of the Jews, and so they have abode to this day, to be as a runnagate
Nation. For the Apostles, nothing was more contemptible than they; you know
what St. Paul says, not only of himself but of other of the Apostles, they
were made the very off-scowring of the Earth, the basest things of the Earth;
even the Apostles themselves, they were in no outward glory before the face of
the world, that they could see it.

And afterward in the Primitive times, you know they were under most dreadful
persecutions, how they were Massacred and hackt and hewed, and what woeful
misery they were put to: all this while Jerusalem was not the praise of the
Earth.

Well, but after those bloody persecutions ended, then came Constantine, and
then they had peace, and were in a more flourishing condition.

But not then neither, for presently Antichrist began to rise; then, This day
is poison poured into the Church: Then they fell out one with another, by their
contentions; then Arrianisme began to spread all over the World; and within a
little time they were brought into a great Bondage, under an Antichristian
power; and so great darkness did come upon all the Churches. I find Mr.
Brightman and some others, they begin the 42 Weeks, even from the time that the
Church did begin to flourish in some outward pomp and glory. Then began the
Prelatical power presently upon that, and so they reckon the time of reigning
from thence; so that Jerusalem has not been yet the praise of the whole Earth
to this day: Therefore this that the Prophet here speaks of, must be meant of
some other time that yet is not come to pass; so that we live in these times
wherein we are to look for the accomplishing of this Prophecy, that God should
make Jerusalem the praise of the whole Earth, yet in another manner than ever
he has done; and that is the thing that I especially shall endeavor to show
you, that yet there is a time for Jerusalem, for the Church to be in a more
glorious condition than formerly it has been, so that we may have our spirits
awakened and stirred up, not only to Pray, but be Instumental all that we can,
for the setting up of the glory of the Church of God; God is about the working
of a great work this way, and therefore it is pity that any that have love to
God, and to his cause, but that they should put on all they can by Prayer, and
all the ways they can, to further such a glorious work as this is: it was
that, that was the comfort of the Saints of God in the Primitive times, and a
little after, when they suffered hard things, yet had comfort that there was a
time a coming, that Jerusalem should be the praise of the Earth, and that Jesus
Christ should come and Reign in his Church in another manner, than ever yet he
did. Just in Martyr, that lived about thirty years after John, Prophesies (in
speaking of this point) of a glorious time of the Church that should be. Both
my self ( says he) and all that are Orthodox do generally hold this, that
there is such a time of the Glorious condition of the Church. And Lactantius,
that lived 1300 years ago (or more) he spends a great many Chapters in showing
the glorious condition of the Church of God that should be, and they longed for
it; now we are fallen into the times that are nearer; our salvation is nearer
than when they believed, yea, or when we our selves did at first believe. And
therefore as in natural things, the nearer a thing comes to the Center, the
faster it moves, so the nearer the people of God come to the glorious condition
that God intends for his people in the latter days, the more should their
hearts outrun them, in giving God no rest till he come to establish it:
Wherefore then for the opening of this, Christ has great things to do for his
Church in this world, in making of it the praise of the Earth.

I Will first show it you by comparing diverse Scriptures together.

And then I Will show you what the state of the Church is like to be, when it
comes to be made the praise of the whole Earth; or what God will do for his
Church, when he intends it to be the praise of the whole earth.

For the first, To compare some Scriptures; the Scriptures are very remarkable,
especially in the Prophet Isaiah, compared with diverse Scriptures in the Book
of the Revelations; you may see (as it were) how they do Echo one to another,
whereby we may see apparently, that Isaiah was an Evangelical Prophet (as he is
called by many Divines.)

The first is in the 24. Isa. v. 23. compared with the 4. Rev. 4. v. In the 24.
of Isa. Then (speaking of God's deliverance of his Church from evil, then he
makes this promise) the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the
Lord of Hosts shall Reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his
Ancients gloriously. The Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed: The
meaning of it is this: There shall be so much glory, as shall darken the glory
of the Sun and Moon, and because their glory shall be darkened, they shall be as
it were ashamed: As a man when he sees others come that have more glory than
himself, it puts him to some shame; so they shall be ashamed; why? because the
Lord of Hosts shall Reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, before his Ancients
gloriously. Certainly this has not been yet fulfilled, the Lord has not so
reigned in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem before his Ancients gloriously, so as to
darken the glory of the Sun and Moon.

Now in the 4th of Rev. v. 4. it seems to have regard to this Scripture, and
shows you what the Throne of Christ is, when he shall come to Reign in Zion
gloriously. And round about the Throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the
Seats* I saw four and twenty Elders, sitting clothed in white raiment, and
they had on their heads Crowns of Gold; and here the Lord reigns before the
Ancients. There Is the Throne of God set up; and upon the Seats I saw four and
twenty Elders, or Ancients, sitting clothed in white raiment, and they had on
their heads Crowns of Gold. So that John seems to have regard to this Text, and
that Prophecy of John is apparently of the state of the Church that was to be
in after times.

And so there are other places of Scripture, as that 54. of Isa. and 21. of the
Revelat. In the 54. Isa. v. 12. there is a promise to the Church that was
Afflicted; O thou Afflicted, tossed with Tempest, and not comforted, behold I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy Foundation with Saphires;
And I will make thy Windows of Agats, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones. Here God promises that he would build his Church
with precious stones, the Church that was so Afflicted and tossed: Now mark the
21. of the Revelat. and see there how St. John takes this Prophecy, and does
plainly interpret it, that it is of the glorious state of the Church that
should be after: says the Text there, describing there the glorious Estate of
the Church; And the Foundations of the wall of the City, were garnished with
all manner of precious stones. Here Is a Prophecy it should be so, and John
takes this Prophecy, and tells, that this is to be understood of a time of the
Christian Church, that it shall indeed be so.

And again, in the 60. of Isa. v. 19. compare it with the 21. Rev. v. 23. In
Isa. there the Text speaking of the glorious state of the Church that should
be, says, The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give Light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory. Thy Sun shall no more go down,
neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Certainly this
has not yet been fulfilled. And in the 21. Rev. toward the latter end, you
have almost the same words: And the City (says the Text) had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the Light thereof. I shall afterward come further to open
somewhat of the meaning of that, what it is, no to have no need of Sun and
Moon, when we come to open wherein the glory of the Church does consist, that
God intends to make the praise of the whole Earth.

I might name diverse other Scriptures, but I hasten rather to the other thing,
(which is the main) to open wherein the Church shall be the praise of the whole
earth, or what shall make it to be the Praise of the whole earth.

First, more generally; Certainly when the condition Jerusalem shall be in when
Gods time shall come, there will be a time of Resurrection from the dead: there
will be a kind of Resurrection from the dead, before the general Resurrection
at the great day of Judgment: we have diverse Scriptures that do seem to point
at this, and indeed clearly to manifest it: The first Scripture is in the 12
Chapter of the book of Daniel, that speaks of a Resurrection, another
Resurrection than that that shall be at the great day of Judgment: says the
Text, And at that time thy people shall be delivered, (...) every one that
shall be found written in the Book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of
the Earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt; and they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever
and ever. Now that this must be an Estate of the Church before the great and
general Resurrection, is clear.

First, It Is said here, Some shall rise; he speaks not of all shall rise: Now
at that day, good and bad, all shall rise.

But then Secondly, The uttermost glory of the most eminent godly men that
shall rise, it shall be but to shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and
the height of all is, that they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars,
they shall but shine as the Stars.

Surely those who are not only righteous themselves, but are means to turn
others to Righteousness, they are like to have the greatest degree of Glory in
Heaven; which is a mighty encouraging place, not only to Ministers, but to all,
to seek to convert all they can: For this Scripture seems to hold forth this
Truth, that the Lord will look upon them as Instruments of his Glory, and give
them a higher degree of Glory than others: But now, at the great day of
Judgment we know that the Saints of God shall shine brighter than the Stars;
they shall be as the Sun: These Bodies of Clay, that we carry now about with
us, in the great day, when Christ shall come to judge all the World, they shall
shine as the Sun in the Firmament: The poorest Man, or Woman, or Child, that is
godly, though their Bodies are clothed with Rags now, yet at the day of Christ
their Bodies shall be made to shine as the Glory of the Firmament; nay, more
than so, as the Glory of the Sun: Yea, they shall be like to the Body of Jesus
Christ himself, etc. and the Body of Christ shall be beyond the Glory of the
Sun; therefore this is not meant of that time; for the height of all the Glory
here is but as the Stars.

But then a third Reason why it is not meant at that time, is, because the Lord
bids Daniel to close up this Prophecy, and tells him it shall be a thing kept
hid. Now, that there shall be a Resurrection, that God shall come to judge the
World, this was never any such secret, the light of Nature will tell us this;
that there is a time that it must be well with the righteous, and ill with the
wicked: The Heathens could tell us of a time that God should judge the World:
But now the Prophet here speaks of this as a Mystery, that it was not to be
revealed till the latter days.

Yea, and then Fourthly, The Lord promises to Daniel, as a peculiar and
special favor unto him, that he should arise, and stand in the Lot at the end
of the days. Now for Daniel to arise at the day of Judgment, that is a thing
that is common to all, good and bad; but here it is promised to him as a
special Mercy, that he shall stand up in the latter days in his Lot: And
therefore, according to the Reverend Brightman, and others, this place is
interpreted of the time of the calling in of the Jews, when they and the
Gentiles shall join together; and Jerusalem shall then be set up as the Praise
of the whole Earth.

And the rather it makes me think so, because the Apostle in the 11 of the Romans
verse. 15. speaking of the time of the calling of the Jews, he does make use of
such a kind of Phrase, that it shall be even a time of Resurrection, it shall
be no other but even a raising from the dead. In the 15 verse, For if the
casting away of them be the reconciling of the World, what shall the receiving
of them be, but life from the dead? Therefore it seems that he had some
Reference to this very Scripture here at this time.

And in the 37 of Ezekiel. the beginning, the receiving of the Jews there, is set
out by the dry Bones that were breathed upon by the breath of God, and so they
stood up as an Army, and had life.

Yea, and this shall be as a new Creation: There will be as great works done,
as God did when he made the World at first, and he will put forth as great a
power. So you have it set forth unto you in the 65. of Isa. There the Prophet
prophesying of a Glorious Condition of the Church, what it should be, mark how
he does express it. For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be ye glad, and rejoice
for ever in that which I Create; for behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her People a Joy. I create (says he) new Heavens, and a new Earth. When
will God do this? Why, says he, Be glad in it; for behold, I create Jerusalem
a rejoicing, and her People a Joy. When this Jerusalem shall be made the praise
of the whole Earth, then there shall be new Heavens, and a new Earth created:
That is, there shall be as great a change of things, as if there were new
Heavens, and new Earth created: There shall be a mighty glorious power of God
manifested toward his Churches, as if God were Creating new Heavens and new
Earth again. Oh! we do not know, but that either you or some of your Children,
may yet live to see such times as these are.

And it is another World indeed. It Is not the World that we live in now; there
shall be a kind of new World: And therefore some Scriptures, that many times we
think are meant concerning the Life in Heaven, after the day of Judgment,
because they are spoken of another World; they are rather to be understood of
the state of the Church here in this World. And to the end that I may show
this, for otherwise all that is said is but in vain:

It may be you will say, that the Prophet meant that State of the Church
Triumphant in Heaven: And so the Apostle St. John, in his reference to what the
Prophet says; he seems to mean it, of the glorious state of the Church in
Heaven. And I verily believe the most of you that have read with Observation
the latter end of the Book of the Revelations, you have thought it has been
meant of the State of the Church in Heaven; but that it cannot be be meant:
I Will give you a Reason or two why the 21 of the Revelations cannot be meant of
the Church in Heaven.

First, Because the Text says, That Jerusalem shall come down from Heaven;
after he had described it in the 10 Verse. He carried me away in the Spirit to a
great and high Mountain, and showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of Heaven, from God. That is, the Glory of Jerusalem shall not
come from the Earth, nor from any Earthly means: Though men ought to do what
they can, yet it shall be too great a Glory for any earthly means to be able to
bring; but it shall come down from Heaven; there shall be some admirable
glorious work of God from Heaven, to bring Jerusalem into such Glory as it
shall be brought into. And that is one thing; That it is not the State of
Heaven, for it comes down from Heaven.

And then besides, that that is an undeniable Reason, is that which you have in
the 24 and 26 Verses; And the Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the
light of it; and the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor into
it. They do not bring their Honor to the State of the Church Triumphant in
Heaven: The Saints in Heaven shall have no need of any of the Glory of the
Kings of the Earth; the meanest, poorest Servant, or Boy that is Godly, shall
be more glorious than all the Kings of the Earth ever were in this World; but
this is such a State, that the Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory to
it. And in the 26 verse; They shall bring the Glory and Honor of the Nations
into it: The meaning is, that when this time comes, the Lord will make all the
Kings of the Earth, and all the Nations of the Earth to be some way serviceable
to the Glory of his Churches; that is the plain meaning of it: that whereas now
the Kings of the Earth, and the Nations do persecute the Church generally, and
(as in the second Psalm you have it) the Kings of the Earth they combine
themselves together against Jesus Christ, and will none of his Government; but
yet for all this, the Lord says, that he will set his King upon his holy Hill:
And then here is the Prophecy, that there shall be such a work of God upon the
Kings and Nations of the Earth, as they shall all come in, and bring their
Glory to Jerusalem, to the Church, to do the uttermost they can to make the
Church to be Glorious. This is in General the state of Jerusalem, when it shall
be made the Praise of the Earth.

But now that I might come to move Particulars about this:

The first thing is this; When that time shall come, all Tears shall be wiped
from the Eyes of Saints; the People of God shall be delivered from all Enemies;
they shall never be any further pestered with wicked and ungodly men to be
enemies to them, but be fully freed from them all: We groan under the burden of
the Enmity of wicked Men, and their Opposition; I, but let us be content to
bear it, and to endure Oppositions from wicked and ungodly Men; for there is a
time a coming, that thou shall be delivered even in this World.

You will say, when we come to Heaven, we shall be above the Malice of all the
wicked Men in the World.

Nay, there is a time when the Saints shall be above the Malice of wicked men
upon this Earth: In the 28 of Ezekiel. A Chapter that speaks so much of the
Glorious Condition of the People of God, verse 24. There shall be no more a
pricking Briar, nor any grieving Thorn of all that are round about them that
despised them. They shall be so far from having any power to do any mischief to
the People of God, as they shall not be so much as able to prick them, no
grieving Thorn, nor no bryer pricking of the Saints of God, as heretofore they
have done. It will be a blessed time when the Saints shall be delivered from
the Curse of the Earth, the Briars and Thorns it brings forth. Where are wicked
men, certainly those are the worst Briars and Thorns in the World, and do the
most mischief here in the World: Now the Lord has promised that they shall be
delivered wholly from them. Rev. 21.4. There is a Scripture leading to that
way; And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no
more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying; neither shall there be any more Pain:
For the former things are passed away. This is prophesied of for such times as
these are; for those that then lived; the Saints are like to live when Christ
shall come in that Glorious state of Judgment, and have no pain nor sickness,
and therefore be delivered from all Enemies, and from all evils both from
without and within, in regard of any pain or misesery; and in the 19 of the
Revelations, we have it there prophesied of Christ, that he shall come and have
his Vesture dipped in blood, in the overcoming all the wicked and ungodly; Verse
13. And he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is called
the Word of God. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him upon white
Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and clean; and out of his Mouth goes a
sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the Nations; and he shall rule them
with a Rod of Iron; and he treads the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath
of Almighty God. But this is observable, why it is said, that the Garments of
Christ were dipped in blood, and the Robes of the Saints were white: the meaning
is this; That it is to note, that when this time comes, to set up Jerusalem as
the praise of the whole World, that Jesus Christ he shall come to be avenged of
his Enemies, of all the wicked and ungodly upon the Earth; and so he shall come
in an Hostile way against them: But those that follow him, they shall have
their Robes white, the Saints shall triumph; they shall do nothing but take the
Triumph: Christ shall go before, and endure all the difficulty and hardship,
and they shall come after in a triumphing way. Thus the Scripture speaks of
deliverance from wicked men. And in the 12 Zech. verse 3. there you have a
place likewise observable for this: And in that day will I make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone for all People; all that burden themselves with it, shall be
cut in pieces, though all the people of the Earth be gathered together against
it: I Will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone; will they fight against it? it shall
be a burdensome stone to them; and whosoever set themselves against Jerusalem in
that day, shall not prevail, but shall be cut in pieces. Why that day has not
been yet: But there shall be a day, when whosoever throughout the World shall
set himself against the Church, shall not prevail, but shall be cut in pieces.
And so we find in the 11 of Exodus the 7 verse, That when the People of Israel
went out of Egypt, the Text says there was not a Dog that did move his Tongue
against them. We know the Deliverance from Egypt was typical: It notes the
deliverance of the People of this new Jerusalem from the Tyranny of
Antichrist. And therefore in the 15 of the Revel. you find that Moses Song it
is sung again. In the 15 of Exodus after their Deliverance from Pharaoh, Moses
sings a Song of Thanksgiving; and in the 15 Rev. they sing it over again, verse
2, 3. after their deliverance from their Captivity. The Dogs of the World they
do move their Tongues against the Saints of God now, but there is a time coming
that no Dog shall move his Tongue: They shall be so convinced of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that God is with them, that they shall not be able to
move their Tongues against them. And I remember, Lactantius (that I spoke of
before, that did speak so much in his time, so many hundred Years ago, that
there was such a time a coming;) he has this expression among others: At that
time it shall be with wicked men as it was with the People of Egypt: When God
(says he) did deliver Israel from the Egyptian Bondage, he brought most
dreadful Judgments upon the Egyptians at that time; so (says he) whenever the
time shall come, that God shall set up Jerusalem as the Praise of the whole
World, then shall be most fearful Judgments upon the ungodly. Now indeed
Judgment begins at the House of God, and the Saints in many places suffer most;
but then Judgment shall fall upon the Egyptians, and God will destroy wicked
men, or at least subdue them so far, as they shall not be able to do any hurt
to the Saints: And that is the first thing that shall be, when Jerusalem shall
be made the Praise of the whole Earth; the People of God shall be delivered
from wicked men, and all Oppression; and much less shall they be oppressed by
one another: It is that that darkens Jerusalem now, that it is under oppression
from evil Men, and that the Saints do oppress one another so much. But for the
Union of the Saints, that we shall speak of afterward.

But for the second thing, and that is this: Then shall all the Expressions of
the Churches Glory, that we have in the Old Testament in a Typical way, be
fully made good, and that visibly; it shall be visibly and apparently to the
World made good.

You will say, What are those?

There are very many, the Lord speaks very much of the Glory of his Church,
when he had his Church but among the Jews; but certainly the ways of God
toward his Church then were typical, and God intended by his high Expressions
of the Glory of his Church then, some other thing that should be afterward
made good in a more apparent and visible way: As thus now, you have these
things said of the Church of God in the Old Testament.

First, That it is the Portion of God, Yea, it is his Pleasant Portion, Jer.
12.10 verse. By that that has outwardly appeared, who would think that a few
People that were contemptible to the World, were God's pleasant Portion? All
that we read of the State of the Church in the Old Testament will appear one
day before all the World, that indeed God did not say in vain of his Church,
that it was his pleasant Portion.

Secondly, We find that God says, that his Church is his Inheritance. Isa.
19.25. It is his own Inheritance; Yet how do the wicked break into the
Inheritance of God for the present! But there is a time a coming, that the Lord
will make it appear to all the World, that his People are his Inheritance.

Thirdly, The Church is called the Dearly Beloved of Gods Soul, Jer. 12.7. It
is a very high Expression, the Dearly Beloved of his Soul: And yet at that time
the Lord says there, that he will give the dearly Beloved of his Soul into the
hand of their Enemies. Oh! but how does it appear then that the Church is the
dearly Beloved of Gods Soul? Well, though it does not so appear now to the
World, God has a time to make it appear before all the World, that his Church
is the dearly Beloved of his Soul.

A fourth Expression is, That it is the Peculiar Treasure of God, in the 19 of
Exodus v. 5. Ye shall be a peculiar Treasure unto me above all People. Men make
much of their Treasure, but especially Treasures that are Peculiar: Now the
Lord has another Treasure besides the Church; the Blessings of God in Nature
are God's Treasure; therefore in the 28 of Deuteronomy. 12. verse, the Scripture
says, that God did bring out of his good treasure, when he speaks of the
outward blessings of his People: when God gives us of the good things of
nature, he gives us out of his good treasure; I, but that is a Common Treasure,
the treasure of nature: But God has a Peculiar Treasure, and that is his
Church, there is the Riches of God: Just as if a Merchant should be trading for
diverse sorts of Commodities, perhaps he trades for Clothes, or Lumber stuff,
there is some treasure there; I, but he trades for Jewels and Pearls besides,
and he has them locked up under diverse Locks, and there he accounts all his
treasure to be: Now I may compare all the good things of this world, in respect
of the Excellency of the Church to a deal of Lumber, of Clothes, and such
things indeed as have some worth in them: But when you come to the Church there
be the Jewels of God, the Pearls of God, and the heart of God is upon them:
there God communicates the Riches of his goodness: Oh! it is a blessed thing to
be one of Gods people, then thou art one of his Jewels, of his treasure, of his
peculiar treasure. Now does it appear to the World that the Church is the
peculiar treasure of God? why it is trampled under foot by men; but God tells us
that there is a time that it shall not be so as now it is. In the third of
Malachi, There is a time that he will make up his Jewels: Now the Jewels of God
lie trampled under feet, they seem to lie in the dirt; but verse. 17. They shall
be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I
will spare them, as a man spares his own Servant that serves him. There is a
time a coming for God to make up his Jewels, there are many precious Jewels lie
in the dirt, and no body regards them. But a time shall come, when it shall be
known that there is a difference between him that fears God, and him that
fears him not; why do not we know it now? those that are Spiritual know it. But
this Scripture seems to hold forth this thing, that there shall be a time that
all the world shall know it. Now the time is that we cannot discern by any
outward things a difference between Love and Hatred; But there will be a time
that we shall discern between the Love and Hatred of God, apparently before the
world: There will be a time when it shall be said, Verily there is a reward for
the Righteous, verily there is a God that Judges in the Earth: That Is the
fourth Expression.

The fifth is, The Church is called the Glory of God: In the fourth of Isa.
Upon all the glory shall be a defense; and so in another place, I will place
Salvation in Zion, for Israel my Glory. The house of Gods glory; So it is called
in the 60. of Isa. v. 7. It Is called the Crown of glory, In the 62. of Isa. v.
3. And it is called the Throne of Gods glory. Jer. 14.21. -- The glory of God.
-- The House of his glory. -- The Crown of his glory. The Throne of his glory:
All these Expressions has the Church of God in the Old Testament: Certainly
God intended that these being Typical, should Typifie some glorious condition
that the Church should be in, in time to come.

We find that the Church is called by way of Type, Gods Ornament. Ezekiel. 7.20.
As for the beauty of his Ornament he set it in Majesty. It Is the Ornament of
God: The Beauty of his Ornament: The beauty of his Ornament set in Majesty. All
these three are in one Verse spoken concerning the Church of God. As for the
beauty of his Ornament, he set it in Majesty, but they made the Images of their
Abominations, and of their detestable things therein. The force of the Argument
is thus; Says God, Why, was not my Church, and Ordinances there, more glorious
than their false Worship? was not my Temple more glorious than their Images? As
for the beauty of his Ornament, That is, the Temple that was a Tipe of the
Church, he set it in Majesty; Yet, says he, they went and made Images. O
wretched People! that when they had such a glorious Temple, where my presence
was so much, and yet that they should turn to Worship stocks and stones! As if
God should say to any wretched Man or Woman, Have not thou come to the Word,
and heard the Excellency of my Son set forth unto thee? and have not thou had
the glory of God in the Gospel shining before thine Eyes? have not thou heard
of those blessed things that are revealed in the Doctrine of Grace? and yet
will thou turn after base things, to satisfy thy flesh, and mind nothing else
but that? O unworthy wretch that ever thou should be partaker of any of
those Excellent and glorious things, that are revealed in my Gospel! Just in
such a manner does the Lord speak to this People. What, go and forsake my
Temple and Ordinances, and go and turn to Images, when it was so glorious! O
unworthy that ever they should receive mercy from the Lord!

Now was the Temple of God at such a time as that Gods Ornament, so beautiful,
and set in Majesty, surely Gods Church that is Tipified by it, is one day or
other to be an Ornament to God, and a Beauty, and set in Majesty and glory.

And then it is called the Royal Diadem, in the Book of Isa. There is a time
therefore when this must appear to be so, which is, when the Lord shall set up
Jerusalem as the praise of the whole Earth. Now if the state of the Church in
the time of the Law that was Typical, was so, mark what the Apostle says
concerning the tipes and shadows of the Law, Heb. 10.1. The Law having a shadow
of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things, can never with
those Sacrifices which they offered Year by Year continually, make the comers^
thereunto perfect. The Law had but a shadow of the Image of things, as is
observeable. It had not so much as the Image, it was but a shadow, then surely
they could but barely resemble the good things to come: here this Scripture may
be understood by the way that Limners or Picture-Drawers use when they would
make a Curious Picture of a Man. First they draw a shadow with a piece of Chalk
or Cole, by which you may see a little proportion of the man, but what is this
to the Image of the man; now that is more excellent, and much beauty there is in
that; But in the man himself there does appear more glory still than in his
Image: why the time of the Church under the Law, that was like the drawing of a
man upon a piece of Board with a Cole; But now, the state of the Church under
the Gospel, that is like the Image it self; and the state of the Church in
Heaven, that is as the Man himself: So then, I make use of this Scripture thus:
If the Lord speak so of his Church in the time of the Law, when the state was
but Typical; That it was his Portion, -- his Peculiar Treasure, -- his
Inheritance, -- and his Diadem, -- and Ornament, and the like; what shall it be
in the time of the Gospel, when we come to have the Image of the thing, not the
shadow but the Image? and then what must it be in Heaven, when it comes to be
the thing it self in glory? And this is the second thing that shall be, when
the Church comes to be the praise of the whole Earth. Oh now give God no rest,
Lord let it appear thus: this point will help you to pray much, and you should
put this into your Petitions. Lord make thy Church appear to be thy Portion;
Thy Treasure, Thy Glory, Now come Lord Jesus, come quickly, O that that day
might come!

The third thing is this, That when God sets up Jerusalem as the praise of the
whole Earth, then God will make good the Promises, that he has made unto his
Church in the Old Testament: And the Prophecies of the glory of his Church,
which are very many, that the truth is, we do not know what to make of them, we
are fain to make Allegories of them, when it is very probable that they are to
be in a literal way to be understood, and all for the want of the knowledge of
this one thing, that there is a time for God to set up Jerusalem as the praise
of the whole Earth. Commonly we find that Divines have opened the promises of
the Old Testament either by way of an Allegory, or of the state of the Church
in glory, so that there has been a great mistake in this thing.

We find in the 54 of Isa. v. 17. when the Lord makes a promise to his Church
that no weapon that was formed against that should prosper, he concludes it and
says, This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord. All the promises in
the Old Testament, are the Inheritance of the Saints of God: It Is a very sweet
place, it is an Excellent place to poor People, that have no Riches, nor
Inheritance left them by their Parents, but they have the Promises for their
Inheritance. Thou may look over the Book of God, and watsoever promise thou
find made to the Church, thou may look upon it as thine Inheritance. Many
carnal men that have great Inheritances other ways, they have nothing to do
with the Promises of the Saints. But the poorest Saint has all the glory that
there is in the Promises of the Word of God, they are their Inheritance.

But in the mean time I have little.

Why thou art under age yet, and God he is thy Guardian, and God will be
accountable to thee for all; and the longer thou stayest before thou come to
thine Inheritance, the more shall thou have when thou come to it: and
therefore remember that all the Promises in the Word are to be made good to
thee one way or other, and all that concern his People will be made good in
this world, when God shall come and set up Jerusalem as the praise of the whole
Earth. We shall understand that hereafter, and therefore we find in the 5 th.
of the Revelations, that there the Lamb, he only is able to open the Seals of
the Book. There was brought a Book Sealed, and a Proclamation was made to know,
who was worthy to open the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof. Now the Text
says, that John saw none found worthy.

At length there appeared a Lamb as it had been slain, and he was found worthy,
and the Book was given to him, and he opened the Seals of the Book: this Book
is the Book of the Prophecies of the state of the Church in the new Testament,
and the promises of God for the glory of the Church of the new Testament. Now
these things have been kept Sealed for a long time, and especially before
Christ's time; But Jesus Christ the Lamb that has been slain, it is he only
that is able to open this Book and the Seals of it, and there is a time that he
will open it, he opens it by degrees to his Church. And therefore I find it is
very observable in the 22. of Revel. verse. 6. There comes an Angel to John, and
said unto him; These things are faithful and true. And the Lord God of the holy
Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants the things which must shortly
be done. Why now John was before, speaking of the glorious condition of
Jerusalem, the Jerusalem that came down from Heaven; Now says he, The Lord God
of the holy Prophets sent his Angel. Why is it said here, The Lord God of the
holy Prophets? The meaning is this, that the Lord now sends his Angel to make
his Servants to understand what was in the Prophets, and therefore the Lord
has this title, The Lord God of the holy Prophets. It Is not said here, The
great God, or the holy God only, or the Father of Christ, or any such title;
But the Lord God of the holy Prophets. That is, I here will manifest to my
Servants what I did Inspire the holy Prophets with in former times, and will
open their Prophecies unto them. O it will be a blessed time when we shall come
to understand the Prophecies of the Old Testament, and how they do aim at the
New Testament; you Read their Book, and how often do you shut the Book, and
say, O Lord I cannot understand, I do not know the meaning of these things, and
so likewise the book of the Revelations: and sometimes you are ready to think,
why does God write so in his word. But be satisfied in this thing, in your
Reading the Scriptures there are some things very dark; But now the main things
that concern thine everlasting Salvation, are clear enough; and bless God for
that. But now if you would know why other things are dark, they are dark
because the Lord intends in them to manifest some glorious thing, that he will
do toward the latter end of the world for his People, that the truth is, God
would not have generally known till then. You will say, why then have we the
Scriptures? Yes, we have them now, that God may appear so much the more
glorious when they are fulfilled, that they may be manifested to his Saints
that these are no other things than the Prophets did Prophecy of diverse
thousand Years ago. Now this will mightily add to the Joy of the Saints, when
they shall come to see, O this is partly fulfilling of such a Prophecy in Isa.
and in Ezekiel. and in the Revelations; now it adds to the Joy of the Church, to
know that these things that now they have, are no other than God did foretell by
his holy Prophets, as no question now when Christ was Prophesied of. For he was
Prophesied of for four thousand Years before he came into the world, and in a
Mighty dark way, as now this first Prophecy of Christ: The seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents Head; what could they understand of this? and yet
under this Prophecy was the whole Gospel Prophesied of: and he shall bruise thy
heel; there all the sufferings of Jesus Christ were Prophesied of under that
Prophecy. Now I am confident, that for the general part of the Jews, they
understood no more of that Prophecy to be meant of Christ and his sufferings,
than we when we Read in Ezekiel and in the Revelations, do understand what God
will do for his Church in time to come: But now when this Prophecy is
fulfilled, that we find the seed of the Woman is come, and how he has overcome
Principalities and Powers, and how the Devil has opposed him; now we see the
meaning of this Prophecy: And now, we can bless God so much the more for Christ.

Christ is no other than the Lord did in Paradise formerly Prophecy of. And so
diverse other Prophecies in the Old Testament; as, The Scepter shall not depart
from Judah unto Shilo come. Alas! none of the Jews almost did understand this:
And that not a bone of Christ should be broken; and so I might name you forty
such Prophecies: so just as now, The Prophecies that were Prophesied of
concerning Christ's coming in the Flesh, were very obscure in the Old Testament,
but were made clear by the fulfilling of them to us in the New: So the
Prophecies of the glorious state of the Church, when Jerusalem shall be made as
the praise of the whole Earth, they are obscure to us yet, but when it comes to
be made clear, the Saints of God will praise and bless God that now they come
to enjoy that, that so many years ago was Prophesied of: And therefore comfort
your selves in this, when you Read the Prophecies in the Word. -- But certainly
when it shall come, it will be a blessed time, and therefore pray for it, give
the Lord no rest till he set up Jerusalem as the praise of the whole Earth: For
then shall the Book of God be opened, and things shall be seen mighty plain
when that comes. I will give you one Scripture for that, of the clear opening
of things when Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the whole Earth. You find
in the fourth of the Revelations and verse. 1. There was a Door opened in
Heaven, nothing else but a Door. But afterward you find that Heaven it self
was opened: In the 19. Chap. verse. 11. And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a
white Horse, and he that sat upon him was called faithful and true, etc.

First, A Door was opened, and then the Heaven of God was opened; Noteing that
there should be a Progress in the state of the Church; at the first they should
have but a little knowledge, but afterward they should have abundance of
knowledge. And in the 11. Chap. the 19. verse. And the Temple of God was opened
in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, etc.

How comes that to pass, for in the time of the Law there was no such opening
of the Temple, as to see the Ark of Gods Testament, for that was kept hid: But
now, speaking of the glorious times of the Church in the state of the Gospel,
the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was the Ark of the Testament
of God seen, it was made clear. Then the Ark of Gods Testament it was kept hid
from the People, that they could not see it in the time of the Law.

But when Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the whole Earth, the Temple
shall be opened, and the Ark shall appear, the word of God shall be made open
in the Promises and Prophecies of it: Therefore let us pray and believe, let us
believe and pray that this time may be hastened.

The Second SERMON. On a Fast Day, at Stepny. October. 31. 1645.
IN the fourth place, the time when Jerusalem shall be made the Praise of the
whole Earth, what shall be done then? We shall be delivered from all
Oppressions, -- The Titles of the Church made good visibly, -- Prophecies and
Promises fulfilled. -- And in the fourth place there shall be a wonderful
Confluence of People that shall join with the Saints in the way of God's
Worship. It Is true, now there are but a very few that do join to worship God,
how little is God known in the World; and Jesus Christ, how little is he
acknowledged in all the world: if we should divide the World ( as some have*)
into thirty parts, we find not above five of those thirty that do so much as
acknowledge Jesus Christ, all the other are Heathens at this very day. And then
among those that do acknowledge Christ, in the Grecian Churches, though he is
acknowledged to be Christ the Savior, yet they are extreme ignorant generally.
And what a great part of the Christian World has Popery under it! And among
those that make profession of Christ, how few are there that do honor him, and
worship him according to his own way! But when this time comes, that Jerusalem
shall be made the Praise of the whole World, you shall have a mighty Confluence
of People; It shall not be said any more, Little Flock, fear not, little,
little Flock, but it shall be a great Flock; and therefore you find in the Book
of the Revelations, that Jerusalem, when it comes to be measured, it is said to
be a great City, a mighty Confluence shall be unto the Church: In the 2 of
Daniel, v. 35. it is said there, (speaking of the Church, as I remember) it is by
way of resemblance of a Stone; that it should grow great, as a Mountain, and it
should fill the whole Earth; there should be the generality of the World called
in, the fullness of the Gentiles, together with the Jews; I will not say every
one, but generally they shall be called in to the true Worship of Jesus Christ,
and to the embracing of the Gospel. -- That Scripture in the sixtieth of Isa.
ver. 3, 4. and so on, it is remarkable for this. And the Gentiles shall come to
thy light, and Kings to the Brightness of thy Rising: Lift up thine Eyes round
about and see; all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: Thy Sons
shall come from far, and thy Daughters shall be Nursed at thy side. Then thou
shall see, and flow together, and thine Heart shall fear, and be enlarged,
because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee; the forces of
the Gentiles shall come unto thee. Mariners and those that converse at Sea,
they shall be converted unto the Church. It Is a Prophecy showing that the Lord
has a special care of Mariners, that have gone on in ways of Ignorance, not
knowing Christ, and the way of the Gospel; says he, Abundance of the Sea shall
be converted unto thee. He does not mean the waters of the Sea, but the People
that do converse in the Seas, Mariners in the Sea; that they shall even come
over the Sea to join, when they hear the Gospel comes to be set forth in the
beauty and Power of it. And so he goes on still further in the 6 verse. The
multitudes of Camels shall cover thee, the Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all
they from Sheba shall come, they shall bring Gold and Incense, and they shall
show forth the Praises of the Lord. Read but this sixtieth of Isaiah, and you
shall find both this of the multitude of People: -- And of abundance of Glory
of Jerusalem that shall be; which in the very Reading of it you cannot think
that this has been yet fulfilled since the time of this Prophecy, and
therefore is yet to come. -- And so in the 66 of Isa. (For this Prophet Isaiah
is the most Evangelical Prophet, that speaks more of the Glory of the times of
the Gospel than any Prophet;) verse. 7, 8. Before she traveled, she brought
forth, before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-Child. Who has heard
such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the Earth be made to bring forth
in one day, or shall a Nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion traveled,
she brought forth her Children. -- Here Is the Number, and the Suddenness of it
together. It shall be done even in a sudden way.

That Promise shall be then fulfilled to Christ, wherein the Lord has said to
him, That he would give unto him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession: Now, though that Promise be
made to Jesus Christ, yet the Lord is a great while before he does make it good
to the uttermost, that he did intend. Well then may we be content to wait for
the fulfilling of Promises, when as the Promise that God has made to his own
Son, he is fain to wait for the fulfilling of it. And that is the fourth thing:
A great confluence of People shall come into Jerusalem; it shall be a great
City.

And then in the fifth place, Where there are multitudes coming in, will there
not be a great deal of dross and filthiness? It is usual, that a Church, while
it has but a few, it may continue in some purity; but, let a Church have many
to join with it, have but any considerable Number, it usually does quickly
corrupt. There grows a great deal of soil and filthiness, where there are a
Number joined together. But now, this shall be the Glory of this Jerusalem,
that though it shall be very great, there shall be a mighty Confluence of
People, yet it shall abide in its purity, there shall be a great deal of Purity
in the Ordinances that they shall have, and in the Professors that shall join
together: And for that, we have that Prophecy in the 44. of Ezekiel. verse 9.
which is a place by all Divines understood of the state of the Gospel: Thus
says the Lord God, No Stranger uncircumcised in Heart, nor uncircumcised in
flesh, shall enter into my Sanctuary: Not so much as uncircumcised in Heart.

Mark here; it seems, in the times of the Gospel, a mere outward Profession is
not enough; for one to profess himself to worship God, and the like; but if he
be uncircumcised in Heart, he must not enter.

You will say, How can we know the Heart?

It Is true, we cannot know the Heart, unless it be some way discovered; but if
there be any thing to discover wickedness in the Heart, such a one in the times
of the Gospel must not be received into the Church of God.

And there will be a time of greater discerning than now there is, and
therefore you find it in the 21. of Revel. where St. John does Prophecy of the
New Jerusalem, at the last verse. And there shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abominations, or makes a lie:
But they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life. In no wise, no, no,
there is two negatives there, though we in our English Tongue make two Negatives
to be an Affirmative, yet the Holy Ghost does not; there shall not, not, no, in
no wise shall there enter any unclean thing into it.

Now it is apparent by diverse things in this Chapter, that this must be meant,
not of the Glory that there shall be in the highest Heavens, but of some Glory
of the Church here: For it is said in the 24. verse, That the Nations of them
which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the Earth do
bring their Glory and honor into it. Now the Kings of the Earth do not bring
their Glory and Honor to the highest Heavens; there is no difference between a
King, and the poorest and meanest; they must there be stripped of all their
Robes, and the Kings of the Earth shall bring no more Glory to that, than
meaner men. Therefore it must be understood of an Estate here, where the Kings
of the Earth do bring their Glory to it.

It Is very hard to conceive, that it is impossible for any Hypocrite to get in;
yet the Scripture speaks so as it shall not be ordinary for an Hypocrite to get
in. Indeed, in the state of the Church as hitherto it has been, or as yet it
is, there are abundance of Hypocrites; and therefore that is no Argument against
laboring to cleanse the Church from profane ones: to say, Why the best of all
have those that are Hypocrites. Though it is true, yet when men do some way or
other discover themselves to be Hypocrites, they must not be received into the
Church.

But now here is the Question, Whether there should be any but those that should
give such Testimony of Godliness, as may appear to the judgments of men to be
so; And if once they appear to be otherwise, they should be cast out of the
Church.

This must be a certain Rule; those that ought to be cast out, if they were in,
they must not be received in, if now they were to be received. If no Profane
one but must be cast out, if they were got into the Church, when they appear to
be so; why then certainly they are not to be taken in, appearing to be profane.

We are now to labor what we can to come as near to that glorious Jerusalem as
we are able: We are now to labor to promote the condition that the Church
shall be in then; but we cannot expect for to have it yet, till the Lord does
put another Spirit upon men than hitherto. Therefore when God intends to make
Jerusalem as the Praise of the whole Earth, there will be certainly another
Spirit upon men, than yet there is for the present.

Therefore in the sixth place, the Gifts and Graces of the Saints shall be
exceedingly raised and enlarged. Those that are now poor, and low, and mean,
shall be then very much enlarged and raised. For that take these Scriptures;
Isa. 65.20. There shall be no more thence an Infant of days, nor an Old Man
that has not filled his days; For the Child shall die an hundred years old,
but the Sinner being an hundred Years old, shall be accursed. This apparently
speaks of an Estate in this World: But now the meaning is this; That there
shall thence be no more an Infant of Days; that is, those that are weak, shall
be raised to a very high pitch of Ability and Understanding; even Young ones
shall be raised very high, to have the understanding of men in them; and so
proportionably the gifts of the Saints shall be raised in that time. And in the
12. Zech. 8 verse, there it is more clear. In that day shall the Lord defend the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day, shall
be as David, and the House of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them. Mark, he that is feeble shall be as David, at that day, and the
House of David shall be even as an Angel of God. Those that are weak
Christians, yet at that day, when the Lord shall set up Jerusalem as the praise
of the whole Earth, weak Christians shall be as David, and he that is strong
shall be as an Angel of God. Now I would but know when was this? what time was
this? was this ever in the time of the Gospel? I verily believe the times of
the Gospel are as glorious at this day, as ever they were since the Apostles
days, in regard of the graces of Gods Spirit. There is as clear Revelations of
Christ, and as strange workings of the Graces of Gods Spirit in the generality,
(I must except those that are eminent, as the Apostles, and those that had
miraculous and extraordinary gifts; but to speak of the generality of
Christians,) they have as much knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the ways of
Christ, as ever any; yet can we say now that even strong Christians are like
David? If we should examine and see what David was, how short should we come?
where have we almost any that may parallel with David? but there is a Prophecy
that the feeble shall be like David, and the strong ones shall be like the
Angel of God. In the forty fifth Psalm, there the Church is described: The
Clothing of the Kings Daughter is of wrought Gold, and she shall be brought
unto the King in Raiment of Needle Work. Which is but to signify the excellent
Gifts and Graces of the Saints; that they shall be clothed, as it were, with
their Gifts, as Princes Daughters that have such Clothing. And Revel. 22.3, 4.
there is a Prophecy that they shall continually stand before the Lord, and serve
him night and day; they shall be unwearied in the service of the Lord, they
shall serve him night and day. Now you are quickly tired, a little time in the
worship of God does tire you; but there is a time coming, when the Saints shall
be so strengthened with the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit of God, as they
shall be able to serve him night and day.

The seventh thing that shall be done, when Jerusalem shall be raised, as the
praise of the whole Earth; it shall be the glorious presence of Christ that
shall be amongst them. I say, the Glorious presence of Christ; I do not say,
the Personal presence of Christ in his Body; for that would require arguing and
much dispute; therefore we meddle not with it: But that there shall be a more
glorious presence of Jesus Christ in his Churches, than yet has been: That the
Scripture seems to be clear enough in: As in the 21. Revel. verse 22. And I saw
no Temple therein, ( that was, in the New Jerusalem:) For the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it: And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof. That is, there should not be such need of
help as now there is, either from Creatures, or Ordinances, in comparison; for
the Lord God shall be the light of that place, and the Lamb shall be instead of
the Temple. In the 2 Pet. 1.19. compared with the Rev. 2.28. There is very much
to give light to this, and yet that we are not able to understand thoroughly the
meaning of it: We have also (says he) a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto
you do well that you take heed, as unto a lig^^ that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. This more sure word
of Prophecy, he means certainly the Scriptures that we have, and the way of
Gods revealing himself there: You do well to take heed, (says he unto them)
Until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. He seems to speak
here, of another manner of manifestation of light from God, that shall be
besides that sure Word of Prophecy; that is, the Day Star rising in their
Hearts. Now compare this with the 2. Revel. and the 28. There is promised to
such as do overcome in Antichristian times, that at length the Lord will give
unto them the morning Star. Now these two being compared together, may cause us
thus much to see, that there certainly shall be some further Presence of Christ
among the Saints, than in former times has been: For Christ, he is the morning
Star, and God will give them the morning star; that is, he will give them
Christ; the Presence of Christ shall arise in the Hearts of the Saints in
another way than formerly; for they were Godly to whom this morning Star is
promised; but if you continue to be Godly, and to overcome in the Antichristian
time, you shall have this blessing, you shall have the morning Star: They had
Christ to justify them, and to sanctify them. But they were promised to have
Christ yet further, in another more high and glorious presence of his, to be as
a morning Star arising in their Hearts.

And in the 33 of Isa. v. 17. there it is promised to them that are upright,
that they should see the King in his Glory. Thine eyes shall see the King in
his beauty. The Promise is made to those that are described in the 15. verse.
Jesus Christ, the King, that was so much desired in former times, shall appear
in his beauty and glory unto them. And in the 102. Psam there is a clear
Prophecy of this Estate of Jerusalem, when the Lord shall make it the praise of
the whole Earth. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion, for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come, verse. 16. But in the 15. verse. So the
Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the Earth thy
Glory. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his Glory. There
will be a glorious appearing, when God shall come to build up Zion, and make
Jerusalem as the Praise of the whole Earth. God has appeared gloriously in all
his works in former times; but this great work is the greatest next the sending
of his Son into the World, to be made flesh; It is the greatest that ever was
done; the building up of Zion, Then God shall appear in his Glory. When the
Marriage of the Saints shall be, the new Jerusalem, that is, the Spouse of
Christ. As Parents do use to put on their best Garments, in the time when they
marry their Children; so in the time when the Lord shall raise Jerusalem, thus
it shall be, as a great Marriage-day of the Church to Christ. Now there is a
Marriage of particular Souls to Christ; but then there shall be a glorious
Marriage of the Universal Church to Jesus Christ, as in a Body; and then the
Lord shall appear in his Glory: There shall be a more glorious presence of God
and Jesus Christ with the Saints, than yet we have had.

The eighth thing, That there shall be when Jerusalem shall be set up as the
praise of the whole Earth, Powerful Godliness, and the Saints shall be honored
in the World. As they have been trampled under feet, and disgraced, and
vilified in the World; So when this time shall come, they shall be honored in
the World, and their Enemies shall stoop to them. We have a great many
Scriptures that tend that way. In the 49. of Isa. v. 23. You may Read there how
the Enemies shall come and stoop to the Saints, that did despise them before.
And so in the 3 d. Revel. verse. 9. Those that hated them shall come and bow
unto them. I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say, they are Jews
and are not, but do lie; Behold I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee. They will not own them now, but God
has his time to make wicked and ungodly men, to come and acknowledge that
these are the beloved ones of the Lord, verily these are the Servants, yea they
are the Children of the most high God. And more specially those Scriptures that
you have in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 60.6. and so verse. 13. V. 6. The
Multitude of Camels shall cover thee, the Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah: all
they from Sheba shall come, they shall bring Gold and Incense, and they shall
show forth the praise of the Lord. All the Flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto thee, the Rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee. And verse.
13. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the Fir Tree, the Pine Tree, and
the Box together, to beautify the place of my Sanctuary, and I will make the
place of my feet glorious. Mark, The Church it is the place of Gods feet: It Is
under God, but the Lord has his time to make it glorious before all the world:
For if you speak of the Spiritual glory of it, so it is so glorious now. Gods
Church it was always glorious spiritually before God, and was the most glorious
Object that God had to view in the World: But here is a promise that he will
make it glorious before others. Verse. 14. The Sons also of them that afflicted
thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee, shall bow
themselves down at the Soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee, The City of
the Lord, the Zion of the Holy one of Israel. It may be they called them before
nick names; they called you Hypocrites, and you were they that made such a show
of Religion, but you were a company of proud People that would seem to be
holier than other men; But now they shall call thee the City of the Lord, and
the Zion of the Holy one of Israel. And verse. 15. Whereas thou have been
forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an
Eternal Excellency, a Joy of many Generations.

This is not spoken only unto Godly men, personally and particularly, but to
Godly men as in a Society, as in the Church; they shall be made an Eternal
Excellency, and a Joy of many Generations.

And again, for the 9. of Zech. v. 16. And the Lord their God shall save them,
in that day, as the Flock of his People: For they shall be as the stones of a
Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon his Land. They shall be as the stones of a
Crown lifted up: This shows the Excellent glory that shall be put upon the
Saints: Now they are as stones in the dirt; but then they shall be as the
stones in a Crown that is lifted up. And so in the 12. Chap. verse. 5. And the
Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, The Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God. It is not, shall be,
that is in another Character, and they in that Jerusalem, they shall be honored
by the Governors of Judah; And the Governors of Judah shall say, well, our
strength it is in the Inhabitants of this Jerusalem; In the Lord of hosts their
God; We accounted them before but as Schismatics and precise Fools, but we see
that God is with them. And the Governors of Judah shall say, Our strength is
in the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the Lord of Hosts their God. This will be a
blessed time, when Governors shall acknowledge the Saints to be those that the
Lord does own; and they shall acknowledge the very strength of a Nation to
consist in the Saints: They shall see that the Saints have a propriety in God
beyond others; there is such a time a coming, however they be despised now. In
the third of Mal. v. 3. The Lord makes a promise that he will gather up his
Jewels, and there shall be a time when there shall be a known difference
between him that fears God and him that fears him not; The Saints of God
are compared to Jewels that lie in the dirt, and Swine trampling upon the
Jewels, but there is a time that the Lord will gather up these Jewels, and at
that day there shall be known a difference between him that fears God, and
him that fears him not: this time is coming, and this is the time that my
Text speaks of, that we should give the Lord no rest until he make Jerusalem
thus: Certainly when this is, it will be the praise of the whole Earth.

The Ninth thing is, when Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the whole
Earth, it will be made a quiet Habitation; there shall be a blessed Union of
the Church, then shall divisions be taken away: Now that that hinders the
beauty of the Church, and of the Saints, and does exceedingly darken their
beauty, it is their Divisions: were it that the Saints of God could live in
union one with another, and so grow up in holiness, they would be a great deal
more beautiful in their conversations: My beloved is one, and the Daughters saw
her and blessed her. But the divisions and contentions that there are among the
Churches, do exceedingly take away the beauty and glory of them, and therefore
they are not now the praise of the places where they live; but many times they
make themselves the scorn of the places; but there is a time a coming that this
Spirit of division shall be taken away from among the Saints, you will say,
that will be a blessed time indeed: I Will give you two or three Scriptures that
are very observable for this; In the 11. of Isa. verse. 13. There Is the first
promise of Union that there shall be among the Churches. The envy also of
Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim
shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. Now ordinarily in
Scripture, Ephraim and Judah is made Typical of the Churches, there was a great
deal of contention between Ephraim and Judah, one envying another: Now this
Prophecy is not yet fulfilled; for we never Read of Ephraim, (that is) the ten
Tribes and Judah were joined in that near League and Union one with another, as
yet: For the ten Tribes were carried Captive, and never returned; Judah indeed
was carried Captive and they did return, but not the ten Tribes. Therefore it
is spoken of an Estate of the Church afterward: Though my Church shall be in
after times, the times of the Gospel, like Ephraim and Judah, one envying
another, I Will take away their envy, they shall not envy, but they shall love
one another, and join one with another. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah
shall not vex Ephraim. -- And then another Prophecy is, in the 14. Zech. verse.
9. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth; in that day, shall there be
one Lord, and his Name one: It Is true, all of us that are Christians, we
acknowledge but one Lord; but we call him by diverse Names, and one says, This
is his mind, and another faith, the other is his mind; but says he, In that
day as there shall be but one Lord, so his Name shall be but one. There shall
not be those different apprehensions of Christ as now there are, but Christians
shall generally join together in one. There shall not be such opinions to
divide Christians one from another as now there are, there shall be but one
Lord, and his Name shall be but one. -- And a further Prophecy which is very
remarkable, is in the third of Zeph. v. 9. For then will I turn to the People a
pure Language, that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him
with one consent. In the Original it is, with one Shoulder; now how do
Christians shoulder one another, and push one another by the shoulder as it
were, opposing one another what they can; but then they shall join their
shoulders together, and all shall be but as one shoulder; they shall serve the
Lord with one shoulder, with one consent; their hearts shall join in one, and
then their strength shall join together: Now this is that that shall be done,
when the Lord shall make Jerusalem as the praise of the whole Earth; you that
mind the Lord, and the things of his glory, give him no rest until he do
establish this that he has promised, and make Jerusalem the praise of the
whole Earth.

In the tenth place, there shall be a great change of things in the world at
that time, a great change in the whole frame of the creation of Heaven and
Earth: And I think verily that place in the eighth of the Romans, (and there is
ground for it, why we should think so) is meant of this time. Verse. 20, 21. For
the earnest expectation of the creature, waits for the manifestation of the
Sons of God; For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him who has subjected the same in hope, because the creature it self
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth,
and travelleth in pain together until now. And not only they, but our selves
also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit: Even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
Bodies.

Now that this should be then, in such an Estate of the Church in this World,
this is the Reason: Either you must grant it to be so, or otherwise you must
grant that after the day of Judgment, in the state of glory that the Saints
shall have, (which Divines generally say shall be in Heaven) you must grant
that then there shall be the continuance of all the Creatures as now they are,
and that the Saints must live here: Now that is hardly granted by any Divines.

But this speaks of the whole Creation to be delivered from their bondage, and
to come to partake of the benefit of the Adoption of the Sons of God: That is,
at that time when the Adoption of the Sons of God shall appear gloriously, that
there shall be such a change in all the Creatures, that they shall be restored
to the first perfection, that they had in the state of Innocence: They groan to
be delivered from the bondage, surely they do not groan to be Annihilated and
turned into nothing: Therefore there is a time for the Heavens, and Earth, and
Sea, and Plants, and Beasts to be in another condition than now they are.

And to say that this shall be at the day of Judgment, or after, few Divines
have thought: But this is spoken of a time when all the Creatures in this world
shall have a mighty change put upon them. And to that end, the Scripture
likewise in the 2 of Peter the 3 d. Chap. though one would think (in the
Reading of it) if you did not mark it thoroughly, that it should be meant at the
day of Judgment; but if you observe it thoroughly, it seems to be spoken of a
great change, that there shall be when the creatures shall be delivered from
bondage. In the 10. verse. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the
night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up; and now observe the 13. verse. Nevertheless we
according to his promise, look for new Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells
Righteousness. There shall be a mighty change in the world by Fire, or some
other way, and so as all things shall seem as if they were brought into
nothing; but says the Apostle by the Holy Ghost, We according to his promise
look for new Heavens and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness: Now
suppose all the world were dissolved, how new Heavens and a new Earth then?
shall the Saints after the day of Judgment have a new Earth, and live upon the
Earth here? This I suppose you would think to be but a very strange Doctrine;
But now this is such a change of things as shall have New Earth, as well as New
Heavens, and this is according to the promise; now what promise have we in all
the Book of God that this has reference to?

I find all Divines referr it to the 65. of Isa. For you have no other
Scripture that you can refer this promise to in the 17. verse. For behold, I
create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered nor
come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create, for
behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her People a Joy. So that this
Scripture in Peter, though in some passages of it may seem to referr to the
great day of Judgment, yet compared with Isa. out of which it is taken, it
appears to be but a very comment upon my Text: and I find generally,
Interpreters do Interpret this of Isa. to be meant of the Church of God in this
World. And so by comparing one Scripture with another, we may find out much
truth. And besides, the Prophets did Prophecy very little about the Eternal
life after the day of Judgment, though something there was about it, but very
little in comparison, and therefore we have a great deal of Reason to think it
to be meant concerning this time of this new Jerusalem, when God shall make it
to be the praise of the whole Earth.

Lastly, This shall add to the beauty of this new Jerusalem, that Prosperity
shall do it no hurt; and therefore as I remember in the 4 th. of the Revelat.
the state of the Church in this time is compared to an Eagle: there were four
Beasts, the first like a Lion, the second like a Calf, the third was like a
Man, and the fourth was like a Flying-Eagle: Noting the four states of the
Church, and the last shall be as an Eagle, that is, they shall be lifted above
all these outward things: At first, when the Church was raised from persecution
in Constantines time, the History of those times tells us, that there was a
voice heard in the Air, To day is Poison poured into the Church; It was at that
time when Constantine did endow the Church with great Endowments; and we find
it now, that we have weak stomachs, and are not able to bear much prosperity,
and therefore God has thought it rather fit to keep his Church low; but when
that day comes, for Jerusalem to be made the praise of the whole Earth, there
shall be no fear of hurt from prosperity; For Christ shall be all in all to
them: There shall be a more immediate enjoyment of God, and that will keep them
from taking hurt by what they have in the creature.

Now let us put all these together, and see what a glorious condition the Saints
shall be in: surely, when all these things shall be fulfilled, then you must
needs say, that Jerusalem will be made a praise in the whole Earth. That is,

First, When there shall be a Resurrection, a new creation, a new world, when
all Tears shall be wiped away, when all wicked men shall be kept under. When
the Church shall appear to be the pleasant Portion of God, his Inheritance, his
dearly Beloved, his Glory, and when all Promises that have been made to them,
and all Prophecies of their glory shall be fulfilled; when there shall be a
wonderful confluence of the Nations, Jews and Gentiles to them, and yet there
shall be a great deal of purity in ordinances, there shall not be filth among
them as now there is. And the gifts and graces of the Saints shall be mightily
enlarged and raised, when there shall be a glorious presence of the Father and
of Jesus Christ with them, when Godliness, and the Saints shall be honored in
the World as much as it is contemned, when there shall be a blessed Union among
all the Churches, when there shall be a mighty change of the creatures, and
when there shall be no fear of any danger, of any hurt by any Prosperity that
they shall enjoy: surely then will Jerusalem be made a praise of the whole
Earth. Therefore let the Saints give the Lord no rest until Jerusalem be thus
made as the praise of the whole Earth.

You will say, are these things so, are they so indeed? This may seem to be
very strange, and a strange point to some of you: But in former times, it was
not so accounted: those that are learned will find that Lactantius, 17. Book,
18.23, 24. Chapters, spends them almost all upon this Argument, and he speaks
of very strange things, which I am loath to mention, (It may be he might go too
far) and he lived about 1300. Years ago. -- But Justin Martyr (that was long
before him, for he was but thirty Years after John the Disciple) speaking about
this point that I am speaking of. I, and all that are Christians of the
Orthodox Faith hold this, that there is such a time a coming, of a glorious
condition of the Church; -- I know that this has been abused by those that
they account Millenaries; there were some that did abuse this Doctrine, and
made the glory of the Church to consist in fleshly pleasures, (and the like)
and so they were condemned. But I make the glory especially to consist in
Spiritual good, yet so as it shall appear to all the World. And I find some
Expressions in the Revelations, where the Holy Ghost speaks of this, of Christ's
coming to appear in this glorious manner; he has another manner of phrase to
express it, than I find in all the Book of God, when other things are spoken
of. In the 19. of the Revel. v. 9. He had spoken before of the Kingdom of
Christ. And he says unto me, Write, blessed are they which are called unto the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb. And he says unto me, These are the true sayings
of God. Are there any false sayings of God? It were blasphemy to think so; one
would think that if he did but say, these are the sayings of God, it were
enough; or these are true sayings: But to make it sure that we may believe it,
These are the true sayings of God.

Not only the sayings, but the True sayings of God.

Now if you say, How can these things be?

To that I answer as in the eighth of Zech. v. 6. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
if it be mavelous in the Eyes of the Remnant of this People in these days,
should it also be mavelous in my Eyes ( says the Lord of Hosts;) It Is
mavelous in your Eyes, should it therefore be mavelous in my Eyes? I am the
Lord of Hosts! We may be ready to think these things cannot be; But the Lord
intends to put forth an Almighty power in bringing this to pass, and it is that
that is much in the heart of God to do.

These things, the nearer the time comes, the more they will be known, and
therefore I think it very useful at some time or other, that people should be
acquainted; only Ministers had need have a Spirit of sobriety and moderation,
because not yet being fulfilled they are not thoroughly understood, and
therefore we must not dare to be too bold in our guessing at things that are
not clear: But such things as appear clearly, so as we may see there is footing
for, we should exercise our selves in, and labor to make others acquainted
with.

But now, If you ask me when shall these things be? when shall Jerusalem be
made the praise of the whole Earth? I Answer thus:

The Third SERMON.
It Is very hard to determine the particular time; but surely at the end of
Antichrist's Reign it must be: And how long Antichrist shall reign, that we
know certainly; only the difficulty is to reckon the very time of the beginning
of his Reign: I say, how long his Reign shall last, we have certain knowledge
of that, that Antichrist shall reign for 1260 Years. And we have such Parallel
Scriptures for this, that there is nothing more evident than it is; and
generally Divines agree upon it.

Those two Scriptures in the Book of the Revelations are sufficient, especially
compared with some in Daniel. Rev. 11.2, 3. The Court which is without the
Temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles, and
the Holy City (which is the Church) shall they tread under feet forty two
Months. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in Sackcloath. Now these
forty two Months, and one thousand two hundred and threescore days, will come
to the same, that is, a day for a year, wherein the Church should be under the
power of Antichrist.

And he says, two Witnesses; not as if he meant only two men, but because by
two or three witnesses every thing is established. But the Spirit of God means
by the witnesses (whatever they are) those that shall witness to his Truth in
the true Church of God, in all places of the World, those that witness to his
truth: They shall prophecy in Sackcloth: that is, in a mourning condition,
they shall go on in their witness for 1260 days, 1260 years. -- And so in the
12 of the Revelations, there we read of the wom^n (by which the Church is set
out) that fled into the Wilderness, where she had her place prepared of God,
that they should feed her there, even 1260 days. The Holy Ghost falls upon
this number, which is 1260 years.

Now all the difficulty is about the beginning of this 1260 days; that is,
when Antichrist did prevail, and when the Church was driven into the Wilderness.

I find generally, those that make a computaiton of the Reign of Antichrist,
they pitch it upon two Periods; either upon such a time as will be ended within
a very few years, as Mr. Brightman and others; he thinks it will be ended so as
that the beginning of these days will be a matter of five or six years hence.
-- And others in the year 1666. But there is another computation of those that
think Antichrist did not begin to reign so soon, and they conceive it will be
a matter of two hundred, or more years before the beginning of these times. But
I think God has not left it fully clear to determine about the time, only
this, God by his strange kind of workings among us, does seem as if he were
hastening of the time, as if it were near at hand.

Wherefore then, we leave all uncertainties, and come to show you what use you
are to make of what has been said about this time, of Jerusalems being made
the praise of the whole Earth.

Use. The first is, the consideration of this, that God has his time to bring
his Church to be in such a glorious condition here in this World, this should
be a great incitement to us all to come in and embrace Jesus Christ, to be
Godly; -- Why, because the Lord intends to glorify himself so much in the
Church; -- and though I dare not tell you the time, yet there is nothing to the
contrary but that it is possible it may be in your days, that you may live to
see these times: or if you should not live, yet in the 12 of Daniel we read of
a Resurrection that should be at that time; However, when we do but think that
there is a time that Jesus Christ shall be honored in the World, and Godliness
shall be had in high esteem in the World, it is a mighty Argument to cause man
and woman to come in and embrace Religion. -- But if it should prove to be in
your days, as nothing appears to the contrary, but many probabilities there are
for it; it would go very hard with you, if so be these times should come upon
you unawares, and you not found to be Godly: For the Scripture speaks most
dreadfully against those that have lived in the places where Christian Religion
has been known, and yet have been naught and ungodly, and these times found
them so: -- After these times were described to John in the Book of the
Revelations, then says he in the 21 Chap. 8. verse. But the fearful, and
Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second Death.

Mark, The very Fearful and Unbelieving; and I take it, the Reason why the
Fearful and Unbelieving are here placed among these notorious Sinners, it is
because that in the time that Antichrist shall prevail, many out of fear of
trouble and danger shall deny the truth, and cleave to the Antichristian Party,
and because they see things go very hardly with the Godly Party, they will
forsake them through their Unbelief; and therefore they are reckoned in among
the notorious vile sinners, and the rather because that a little before this
time shall come;

There will be a great trial and hour of Temptation. Men will be put to it to
be tried what they are, whether they have faith in the Word, or not, or whether
they have courage for God, or not.

Now therefore, because God intends to put men to the trial a little before
these times come, (therefore he says,) The fearful and unbelieving; he reckons
up them among the notorious Sinners: as if the Lord should say; When I am about
to set up this new Jerusalem, there will come a time of trial, and abundance of
you that made fair Professions, while you met with some evils and troubles,
through your fear and unbelief you will forsake my cause, and will rather
cleave to them. But know, you shall have your Portion in the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second death. -- And so in the 22 Revelations; there
the Holy Ghost speaks of men that are unjust, when this time shall come, and
says he, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: If men will go on in their Injustice and Filthiness, let
them go, says God, I intend not now to work further upon them; but as these
times shall meet with them, so it shall be with them to all Eternity.

The nearer the approaching of these times, the less will wicked men be wrought
upon: Therefore now let us come in, and embrace the truth; for this truth that
is preached to you, and the works of God that you are put upon, they will be
honored one day; we love to be of the strongest side, the side that will
prevail, we love to join unto it: Certainly the side of Godliness, and the
truths of Christianity is of the side that will prevail one day, and therefore
come in and join with them: Though it is true, there are many things now that
seem to darken Religion, but certainly Religion is getting up in the World;
though the Devil does bestir him as much as ever he did since he was a Devil,
to darken Religion, and the Glory of it in the World, yet certainly Religion is
getting up, and it will prevail. Take heed you be not like the five foolish
Virgins, which I find diverse do apply to this very time when the Bridegroom
shall come, when Christ shall come in his glory to set up Jerusalem as the
praise of the whole Earth, that then the wise Virgins shall enter in with him,
and be partaker of the glory of the times; but the foolish Virgins shall knock
at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but he shall say, I know you not,
depart, ye workers of Iniquity. You that make but a mere outside of Religion;
and have but a formal profession of Religion, you have Lamps but you have no
Oil in your Lamps burning, when Christ shall come, you shall be shut out, and
not be Partakers of the glorious Jerusalem, that shall be made the Praise of
the whole Earth.

And likewise this is a great Argument to move you to bring up your Children in
Godliness, and to instruct them in the ways of Godliness; because if you
should not live to it, yet your Children may: Therefore labor to infuse what
you can, the knowledge of Christ into them now betimes, that so they may
partake of those glorious things that are spoken of in the Word.

But Secondly, Is there a time that Jerusalem shall be made as the Praise of
the whole Earth? let us be willing to mourn with Jerusalem while it is in a
mourning condition, and be willing to suffer for Jesus Christ a while, seeing
there is a time that all sorrows shall be turned into Joy, and all Sufferings
shall be done away, and wherein the Saints shall be all honored and
recompensed abundantly. In the eleventh of the Revelations you find, that the
Witnesses were to prophecy in Sackcloath, in a mourning condition, for a long
time. It cannot be meant of two men, because they were to prophecy 1260 Years;
but what made them go on in that mournful condition? they did believe this time.

Therefore in the 12. verse you shall find how they that had prophesied in
Sackcloath for so long a time, they were slain a little before this time came,
and for three years and an half together, there was a slaughter made of them;
and the Text says, After three days and an half, that is, three years and an
half, the Spirit of life from God entered into them; and they stood upon their
feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them; and they heard a great
voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to
Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld them. They were mightily honored
before their Enemies: Those that had been prophesying in Sackcloath, and were
willing to suffer for Christ for a long time, now they were called up, and
honored before their very Enemies. Let us be willing to suffer, and that will
be an evidence that we shall rejoice with this new Jerusalem, when it shall
come to be made the Praise of the whole Earth.

So in the 66 of Isa. v. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her,
all ye that love her, rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her. All
that mourned for Jerusalem when the glory of it was darkened, shall come and
rejoice with Jerusalem, when Jerusalem shall be made as the praise of the whole
Earth. -- And the very Book of the Revelations is written on purpose for to
encourage the Saints to be willing to suffer all the time of Anti-Christ's
Reign. And hence it has been, that in the time that Antichrist has Reigned,
there has been so little known of the Book of the Revelations, because it has
been applied only in a metaphorical way, and all the glory has been
interpreted of the glory of Heaven: Because, I say, there has been a darkness
on the face of the Earth in the time of Antichrist's prevailing. And it has
been the care of Antichrist to darken this, and to keep under the Saints, and
to make them suffer very hard and grievous things. But, as I remember, I have
read of Caius the Emperor; that when Agrippa had spoken for him before he was
Emperor, and suffered for his sake; after Caius came to be Emperor, he put a
Chain of Gold about his Neck, and gave it him, just as heavy as his Iron Chain
had been before. So, look what any one suffers for Jesus Christ now, before he
comes to take this Kingdom to himself, before the time comes when the voice
shall be heard from Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of the Earth are become the
Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever; I say, look what measure
of sufferings any have for Christ now, Christ will put a Chain of Gold upon
them as heavy as ever their Sufferings were.

And especially now we had need prepare for Sufferings, if it should prove that
this time be at hand; for we find that a little before this glorious time
there is like to be as great Sufferings to the People of God as at any time; as
in the 11 of the Revelations, where it is spoken of the Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloath, they prophesied for 1260 Years. But they were not slain until three
Years and a half before this glorious time was risen, and then they were slain.
So that immediately before the time that Christ shall come and appear in his
Glory, there will be greater Sufferings unto his Churches than there were in
former times; for you find, that just upon their slaying, that they were called
up to Heaven. And the seventh Trumpet sounded presently after, and there were
great voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

As if the Holy Ghost should say, Now all sufferings are done with all, and now
the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ;
and he shall reign for ever and ever.

And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon
their faces, and worshipped God, saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee
thy great power, and have reigned. Whereas before men had power, now God has
taken his great power to himself.

This follows presently upon it, which is a very great Argument why those
Witnesses are not yet slain, The Witnesses not yet slain.
because immediately upon their being slain there should follow such strange
things as these are. And then the Kingdoms of the Earth should be the Lords,
and his Christ's.

You will say, Are they not now?

No certainly, not so as then, in that we do not see such an eminency of
Christ's taking the Kingdoms of the Earth, now more than formerly; and I say,
this is an evident Argument that the Witnesses are not slain.

In the 12 of Daniel, there you have a Prophecy of the same times that we have
here. But mark how he begins this Prophecy; there, says he, in the 1 verse. And
at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for the
Children of thy People, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a Nation, even to that same time; and at that time thy people
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the Book. Though
the time of trouble without be great, such as never was the like, yet these
that are written in the Book shall be delivered. And so he goes on, describing
the glorious condition of the Church of God as it shall be: I spoke something
to that in the opening of the Glory of this new Jerusalem, and showed you, that
it could not be meant there of the Glory of Heaven; but of the glory of the
Church here that should be upon the Earth.

And then in the 3 d. of Revel. verse. 10. we Read of an hour of Temptation that
should be throughout the face of the Earth; there is a time of Temptation that
shall go quite through the whole world, and whether yet this is come upon us,
does not certainly appear, and therefore let the consideration of this prepare
us for suffering before hand. For God will cause sufferings to try men, who are
true and will cleave to him, and who are not, but will desert him: And so I
remember Lactantius (the former Author quoted) he speaks as clearly of this, as
if so be that he did live and had seen it: says he, A little before these
times, times will grow so evil in comparison of the times that we live in now,
in which wickedness one would think were grown to the greatest height that
possibly could be, yet in comparison of these, there shall come such evil times
just before this glorious time of the Church, as our times may be accounted
Golden and Happy times in respect of those sad times; for, says he, good men
they shall be a prey to wicked men, and they shall be in contempt and poverty;
all right among men shall be confounded, all Law shall perish, and no man shall
know what is his own; things shall be in such a cumbustion and confusion that no
Law shall prevail, and no man shall know what is his own; this shall be a little
before (says he) the glorious state of the Church wherein Christ shall appear:
Now if he could say so, so long before, certainly none then having Scripture so
suitable to it, have cause to fear that yet we may live to meet with very hard
things.

Although it will be but short, that is the comfort; if there should be great
sufferings just before the day break, and it should be darker than it was, yet
it will continue but a while, three Years and an half will be the most: But the
times of the great sufferings of the Church before Jerusalem is to be made the
praise of the whole Earth, these three Years and a half will put men so to it,
that if they have not true grace they will fall off.

The Administration of Gods Providence are very strange, we have had thoughts
that all had been blowing over, that we should have lived in safety and peace,
but clouds gather still: And though the former clouds seemed in some measure to
be gone, yet new clouds are gathering, and therefore it is wisdom for the People
of God, that fear God and look into his Word, to see what God has made known
in his Word; I say it is their wisdom to prepare for the hardest that possibly
can come: That they may be bright, and made white with all the troubles that
they meet with, and be not among them that shall not be found written in the
Book, and so to be cast out of all the good of this Jerusalem that shall be
made the praise of the Earth.

Thirdly, Though we should prepare for sufferings, yet let us strengthen our
faith, and rejoice in the hope of such times as these are, in the midst of
sufferings rejoice: it is an Excellent thing when a Christian is able in the
midst of sufferings to rejoice in the assurance of a promise, when things go
never so contrary, yet to keep in Gods ways upon the expectation of a promise
to be fulfilled. You have an Excellent Scripture in the 64. of Isa. verse. 5.
Thou meetest him that rejoices and works Righteousness, those that Remember
thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned. In those is
continuance, and we shall be saved. If you read this Chapter you shall find
that the Church was in a sad condition; but mark, Thou meetest him that
rejoices and works Righteousness: In the saddest times there were some that
did not only work Righteousness, but did Rejoice and work Righteousness; Though
God was wroth, and all things did seem to be very dismal, yet there were some
that went on in the ways of Righteousness, and rejoiced in the ways of
Righteousness: It Is a most Excellent Scripture, and of mavelous use to us if
God should bring us into sad times, for us not only to keep in the ways of
Righteousness, but to rejoice in the ways of Righteousness, to rejoice that
ever we were brought into it, and that is upon an expectation that the Lord will
save us. Whatsoever sufferings you meet withal, yet strengthen your faith, and
rejoice in the Expectation of this Glory of Jerusalem.

The believing of such times as these are, really makes Life desirable,
especially because God is so stirring in this Age; not for any great matters
that we shall have outwardly in the World for a while, but that we may come to
see the Issue of all these stirs; and at length, out of all the Confusion, to
see Jerusalem to be the praise of the whole world. And therefore in the 102.
Psalm. which I think verily has reference to these times, you shall find the
Title of it to be, A Prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and
pours out his complaint before the Lord.

But mark, in his pouring out his complaint before God, how he comforts
himself, in the 13. verse. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion, for the
time to favor her, yea the set time is come. For thy servants take pleasure in
her stones, and favor the dust thereof, so the Heathen shall fear the Name of
the Lord, and all the Kings of the Earth thy glory. When the Lord shall build
up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. The Lord shall appear in his glory in
building up Zion that is now cast down, I say it is a Prophetical Psalm, of the
disposition of Christians a little before this Kingdom shall be made the praise
of the Earth.

Now mark, what those do desire that shall live a little before these times. In
the 24. verse. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days. As if
he should have said, O Lord, I hope that e're long thou will build up Zion, and
appear in thy glory, and fulfill thy promises concerning Jerusalem; O Lord,
take me not away in the midst of my days: It is (I say) a Prophetical Prayer of
the Christians that shall live a little before Gods building up of Zion.

But you will say, Why shall any desire to live, for if one should die (if he
be Godly) he shall go to Heaven; and will it not be as good to be in Heaven, as
to live to see Jerusalem the praise of the Earth?

To that I answer, that though it is true, It will be as good for the Soul; but
for Soul and Body, to live here to see that glorious administration of God in
the World, to see God honored upon the Earth, where he has been so much
dishonored, certainly it cannot but be an abundant satisfaction and
contentment to those that are gracious, and that it is desirable;
notwithstanding the objection, I make it clearly thus, from the promise that
God gave to Children that did obey their Parents, in the fifth Commandment,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; why? That thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. God makes a promise that they should enjoy
the Land of Canaan. And why? Godly Children, should go to Heaven if they had
died: But it was accounted a mercy to live long in the Land of Canaan.

Now the Land of Canaan was but a Type of the glorious Church, so that this is
a more glorious promise: Therefore (I say) it is desirable to live to see what
God intends to do in these Concussions. It is observed by some, that John did
never fall down to worship the Angel but twice, and twice he fell down and
worshipped the Angel. But you shall observe it, if you examine the places; It
was when the Angel brought him the tidings of this glorious Jerusalem: and
John's heart was so taken with these tidings, as indeed he forgets himself so
far as to fall down and worship the Angel, which was sinful: but I note it for
this end, to show how mightily the heart of John was taken with the tidings of
this new Jerusalem: And God expects that though we have but a glimpse of it
now, yet that our hearts should be much taken with the tidings of this glorious
Jerusalem, when it shall be made the praise of the Earth. Christ has humbled
himself in this world, and has been dishonored here, and therefore the Father
will advance him, and honor him in this World as well as in Heaven.

And the Heathen, and uttermost parts of the Earth, are given to Christ for a
possession, but Christ has not had it yet, and therefore let us strengthen our
Faith, and joyfully expect such a time as this is. Those whose hearts are
carnal and sensual, they mind only carnal and sensual things, and cannot
believe these things; but such as have Faith to believe, they are able to
rejoice in the Expectation of this glory that is to be revealed.

Fourthly, These truths that have been delivered about this glory of the new
Jerusalem, they call for heavenly hearts, they call off all our hearts from the
Earth, why should we have our hearts: grovelling upon the Earth, when as God
has revealed such glorious things as these are? In the 60. of Isa. v. 1.
Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee.

I may make use of it, at least by way of Allusion, thus: O arise, and shine in
heavenliness, and shake off the dust of this Earth, for here you hear of the
glory of this Lord, and who knows but it may very suddenly, within a little
time arise upon us? yet the very hearing of it were enough to cause us to shake
off all Earthliness from our Spirits: when John was shown the new Jerusalem, he
was carried up upon the mountain; so if we would understand the glory of this
Jerusalem, we must get up our hearts on high. It is an Observation of Mr.
Brightman, upon the 4 th. of Revel. Where we have described the four living
Creatures, the Lion, the Ox, the Man, and the Eagle. Now (says he) these four
living Creatures do set forth the four Estates of the Church. The Lion sets
forth the state of the Church in the Primitive times, they had Lyon-like
Spirits, that were able to encounter the rage of persecuting Emperors, to
endure all kind of Torment without having their hearts daunted at all. -- The
second State of the Church was the Ox, that is, Antichrist prevailing, they
were as an Ox that is a heavy and dull Creature, fit to bear burdens. -- But
then the third is the Man, that is, a man comes to inquire after the reason of
things, and to understand things, and does desire liberty. Why now (says he)
in the beginning of the Reformation, the state of the Church was like a Man.
They would not be under such base Thraldom to take the yoke of Antichrist as
they did before; before they were lead like beasts, but now they were as Men,
they would understand what they did. -- And then the fourth was like an Eagle,
that is, soaring aloft, on high. When the Church shall be in this glorious
condition, Men shall be of Heavenly minds, they shall soar up like the Eagle,
to be above the Earth. And certainly such dispositions are fit for this new
Jerusalem, and though it be not yet come, yet we should labor to be of such
dispositions as are fit for it.

And that is the fifth Use, To prepare for these times, fit our selves.

First, By the Wedding Garment, for now comes the Bridegroom, and we should
prepare for him by the Wedding Garment.

You will say, What is the Wedding Garment by which the Saints are prepared to
meet with Christ?

The applying of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ by Faith, that is the
Wedding Garment; when Christians come to understand clearly the point of
Justification without mistake. There are some kind of hastenings about it in
these times more than before, and inquiring after the very grace of God in the
point of Justification, but certainly that point is darkened much by many
errors: But now the clear understanding the point of Justification, of Gods
Righteousness applied by Faith, this is the Garment by which we are to meet
with Jesus Christ, when he shall appear in his glory; and I verily believe,
that in the time of the new Jerusalem, the point of the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ will be the main point of Religion that then will be known, and that the
hearts of the Saints will be taken up withal, the main point of Religion; and
as we see, the nearer we grow unto these times, the more clearer is the point
of Justification revealed to us: O what strange conceits in times of Popery had
People of Justification, and I verily believe that many of your Consciences may
tell you, that a very few years since, you had very strange thoughts about that
point, and understood but little of it; but it begins to be clear more and
more, and we should study that point more; for surely it is that point of
Religion that will take up the heart of the People of God most in such times as
these are. It is called the fine Linen of the Saints, which is the
Righteousness of the Saints: That that is Translated in your Books
Righteousness, it is the Righteousnesses of the Saints, that is this.

Not only the knowledge of the Righteousness of Christ applied by Faith; But
Righteousness before Men too, is the fine Linen of the Saints, they shall
appear Righteous before men, and Righteous, being clothed with the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. And I would therefore commend that to those that
speak much of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ; know, they must have
Righteousnesses, in the Plural Number; that is, not only be careful to have
Righteousness before God through Christ, but Righteousness before Men: and
that is the second thing that is to be done for preparation of us for Christ's
coming, to have our Lamps burning, Holiness shining in our conversations before
Men, to live convincing conversations, to make the ways of Godliness amiable.
-- And then let us watch, O take heed of slumbering. -- And let us be constant
in our holy profession, take heed our Lamps do not go out. -- And let us humble
our selves for our former defilement; we have defiled our selves by
superstitious vanities in former times; O let us humble our souls for them,
thereby shall we be fitted for this glorious time. If new Jerusalem should
come, and you not humbled for your former defilements, you would be unfit for
this time.

Sixthly, Seeing there is such a time for this new Jerusalem, why then let us
labor to further what we can the cause of God in his Church, to make the
Church as near to Jerusalem as we can now.

For though it is true, it shall be brought to pass by the Almighty power of
Jesus Christ, yet he requires that his Saints should put their hands to it, and
indeed, this should be the care of all that make profession of Godliness, to do
what they can to make Jerusalem to be the praise of the world now. O it is a
blessed thing to live to see the glory of God as it shines in this new
Jerusalem. But if it be blessed to See it, it is more blessed to have a hand in
it: O let us be willing to consecrate all that we are, or have, for the
furtherance of the glory of this new Jerusalem; let us labor to draw all that
we can to Godliness, and be Godly our selves: That should be the work of all
those that profess Godliness, to labor now to walk so as to make every body in
Love with Godliness, and to labor to wipe off all the aspersions that are cast
upon the ways of Godliness; there are strange errors and miscarriages of men,
why now those that are faithful should labor to wipe off all those things.

But on the other side, let them know, that make profession of Religion now,
and walk scandalously, and are abominably erroneous in their Opinions, they do
what they can to hinder the glory of this Jerusalem: though it is true, God will
bring it about, but thou do what thou can to hinder it. O woe to thee that
thou were born to such a time as this is! It Is ill that thou should live in
such a time as this is, to cast any stain upon Religion, that Religion should
suffer any thing for thee.

Now every one that makes but any profession of Religion, O they should labor
to walk exactly, and humbly, and faithfully, and conscionably, that they may
win others, and so others being won by their conversation, why then the People
of the Land might join together, and say, Well, verily it is these are the
servants of the living God, and we will join with them, and set up their ways,
for we see them to be the ways of God; I, this were very hopeful, that
Jerusalem were lifting up indeed; if so be we would convince men by our holy
conversation: But now when there appears so much folly and baseness of Spirit
in those that are Professors, why it makes men hate Religion more than ever
they did; and indeed, but that we know God can bring the greatest good out of
the greatest Evil, one would think that there were as great a stop to the glory
of the Church in these times, as ever there was, but woe to those that are the
stoppers. And howsoever some cry out, such men stop it, and such men stop it,
but the Lord I hope will come e're long, and will make it appear who hinders
the glory of his Churches; whether it be those that in the sincerity of their
hearts labor to raise up Godliness to the strictest form of all, or those that
will content themselves with a form.

Certainly those that give up themselves to promote the most strict way of
Godliness, and the most pure Ordinances, they are not those that hinder the
Reformation; but Christ will own them to be those that further the Glory of
this Reformation.

The Scripture speaking of this Jerusalem, says, that no impure thing should
enter into it; that is, Men should be as careful as possibly they can, to keep
out all things that are impure, and so to raise up the ways of Godliness to the
strictest and highest rule that possibly they can; these are they that further
the glory of this Jerusalem.

The Last thing is that we have in the Text, Give God no rest till this be. We
might make it a several point of Doctrine, but I only bring it in here by way of
Use. The truth is, when Christ taught us to pray, Thy Kingdom come, he had an
Eye at this; for the Kingdom of Christ is not fully come till this time be
come; and as in that 36. of Ezekiel. 37. When the Lord had promised there such
glorious things to his People, says he, I will yet for this be enquired of by
the House of Israel, to do it for them. So though God does intend to raise up
Jerusalem thus, yet the Lord will be sought unto, for it must be furthered by
Prayer: All Gods People should cry out, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! how
long, how long, holy and true, will it be before thou do this, before these
things come to pass, my precious Lord! God loves importunity, especially in
such things as these are.

Diverse motives I had thought of to have put you on to this, to be mighty in
Prayer.

First, Till this time, till Jerusalem be thus raised, the truth is, the Earth
is under a Curse, a Curse all that time.

For, First, all Creatures are subject to vanity, and that vanity shall not be
taken off, nor the bondage, till this time.

Secondly, There will be trouble and Wars continually till this time, there
will be no certainty nor settledness of things till Jerusalem come to be made
as the praise of the Earth.

There will attend affliction to the people of God; yea and to others too.

Yea, and there is a Curse upon men's Spirits, which will not be taken off till
this time comes.

The truth is, when we look upon what is in the Earth, we can see little that
should make us desire to live, in respect of the earthly comforts that are
here; and for my own part, thinking in my thoughts about this point, this
Meditation came into my mind: I wonder why men that live here, and are not
useful, and serviceable, to do service for God; I wonder why they should desire
to live! for what pleasure is there in the Earth? The Earth is under a curse.
Now were it not for this one thing, that we might live to make our peace with
God, and to do God service; I say it is a wonder that any should desire to live;
for the truth is; Afflictions, and Fears, and Troubles, will countervail the
Comforts of any that do live: But indeed, that will countervail our affliction,
if we may live to do service for God, but let us give God no rest till this be;
because till then, the Earth is under a curse: It is this that brings a glory
to the Earth; O! it will be worth living in the World, when God shall be set up
in the World, (when Jesus Christ shall rule in the World,) it will be worth the
living, and not till then.

And then further, give God no rest, because that the time is near now;
howsoever, it is near in respect of what it was when this Prophet thus spoke,
for ^t was above two thousand Years ago that the Prophet spoke these words.

Now the end of the world it is even up on us, and Christ seems to be even at
the door. Now as it is in nature, a heavy thing, the nearer it comes to the
center the faster it moves; so the nearer we are come to this time, the more
should our hearts be stirred, for the time is even at hand, and therefore let us
pray now mightily: as we find in the 9 th. of Daniel; Daniel did understand by
Books that the time of their deliverance was near: Mark at the third Verse. the
Text tells us, that Daniel set his face to seek the Lord, O then he fasted and
prayed indeed. My Brethren, when you have such things as th^se presented to
you, and some h^^^^^l Arguments presented likewi(...) are near; learn to set
your (...) the Lord, and resolve never to (...)king, till he make this
Jerusalem to be the praise of the whole Earth. O my Brethren! now a praying
heart is worth something; it is a miserable thing for any Man or Woman not to
have a Spirit of Prayer in these times, a dangerous sign that such a one shall
never be partaker of the glory of this new Jerusalem, that has not a praying
Spirit in these times.

Yea, now we find there are mighty stirrings abroad in the world, the hearts of
men are more raised to expect it than ever they were before. I remember it is
observed of the woman of Samaria, you may see by her that there was a general
expectation raised of the Messiah, at the time that he came; says she, when
the Messiah comes, he will tell us all things: and truly there is the greatest
expectation of the Saints of God, and those that are the most strict and holy,
the greatest expectation of these times, as ever yet was, and we find the Lord
is so stirring in the world, as makes us think that he is bringing about some
glorious things; and therefore pray, pray, pray; and you that want matter to
pray, among other things, put this into your prayer, both in your Closets and
Families, pray the Lord, and cry to him so as to give him no rest every day: O
Lord, make Jerusalem the praise of the Earth! O Lord, we see abundance of
darkness in thy Churches, and Godliness is little Honored in the world, but O
Lord, make thy Churches glorious, set up the glory of Godliness in the world!
pray thus privately, and so publicly.

And a further motive to give God no rest, is this: That in this your heart
does join with the work of God that is most acceptable to God, and that his
Soul does take delight in; and that is a comfortable thing.

And besides, give him no rest, for God has appointed Prayer to be a special
Engine, and a great means to further this. In the 102. Psalm (says the Text)
The Lord will regard the Prayer of the destitute. Alas! may some say, I am a
poor weak Christian, a poor Body, I am able to do but little, I may Sigh to
God, but what are my prayers worth? Mark the Text, speaking of the glory of
these times, and of the way to further it; The Lord will regard the Prayer of
the destitute: Though thou be but as a poor shrub, the Lord will regard thy
Prayer; and mark what the Text says, This shall be written for the Generation
to come, verse. 18. This is written for thee, Prayer has done great things,
has made a mighty change of things; and if ever People were encouraged to
pray, now they may be encouraged, because they have seen so much that Prayer
has done already.

We have many Scriptures which I had thought to have spoken of, for the
encouragement of you in Prayer for these things, that you might go on and not
faint. Though you see things seem to go very Cross, yet be not troubled at it,
but still go on, give him no rest; it may be God will do nothing now, yet still
give him no rest, but be constant till the thing be done; for certainly it will
be done at length, and if it should not come to pass in your life, yet this I
will conclude withal, When you die, die in the Faith of it: Any of you that
have been earnest in prayer for this thing, and yet you see little come of it,
yet die in the Faith of it, when you die; as it is said of Joseph, in the 50.
of Genesis 24. Behold I die, and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of
this Land, unto the Land which he swear to Abraham, etc. So you may speak to
your Children, I die now, I must not see this new Jerusalem, but there is hope
that God will bring you into it, though I perhaps shall not see it: and close
your Eyes with this belief when you are to die, I die, yet in the Faith that
there is a time a coming, that the Lord will make Jerusalem as the praise of
the whole Earth.

FINIS.

