A VISITATION AND PRESENTATION OF LOVE UNTO THE KING And Those called
ROYALLISTS;

Consisting I. Of an ANSWER to several QUERIES proposed to the People (called
QUAKERS) from a (supposed) ROYALLIST. II. Of an OBjECTION Answered, concerning
the KINGS SUPREMACY. III. Of an EPISTLE directed to the KING, and those that go
under the name of ROYALLISTS. IV. Of certain QUERIES returned to them (called
ROYALLISTS) to Answer.

LONDON, Printed and are to be fold by Robert Wilson, 1660.

AN ANSWER To diverse QUERIES
Superscribed thus, To the Quakers some Queries is sent to be Answered, that
all People may know your Spirit, and the temper of it, and your Judgment
concerning the Times and Seasons; and Subscribed, let your Answer be directed,
Tradite banc Amico Regis.
AS concerning the Quakers, that are scornfully so called, We are at this day,
and have been ever since we were a People, a poor despised and contemptible
People, in the eye of this world, and deep Sufferers under the Injustice, and
Cruelties, and Oppressions both of Rulers Teachers and People, and we have been
a prey to the wicked, and trodden down under the feet of Ambitious men, that
have been in Power in this Nation, and have Ruled in force and cruelty over us,
and this has been ever since the Lord raised us up to be a People, though we
have not been offensive to any just Law, or Government, or to any sort of
People, otherwise then that we have given our Witness against Sin and
wickedness in all People; but we have not been Oppressors of others, neither
have we envied the persons of any, but in all good Conscience have we walked
toward all men, doing no otherwise to any, than we would be done unto; and
this is the very Law we walk by toward all men, desiring the good of all, and
that all may come to Repentance and be Saved; and what we are as unto the Lord,
if I should declare, it could not be believed by many: But we are his People,
and he has Chosen us, and he is our God, and we have Believed in him, and
walked with him in the uprightness of hear, and we have this Testimony in our
own hearts, if we die it is for him, and if we live it is to him; and though we
have been and may be clouded with the Reproaches and Persecutions of an
Uncircumcised Generation, yet in the Lords season it shall be manifest, even to
the world, and to our very enemies, that we are his People and Chosen of him,
and he in the midst of us, whom we Serve and Worship in Spirit, in Truth, and
in Righteousness, and this shall be manifest in the day of the Lord, and in the
mean time we are willing to bear, and to suffer all things that is put upon us,
for the Name of the Lords sake.

Query 1. Whether you, or any of you, that pretend to Inspiration and
Revelation, did foresee, or was it revealed to you, that ever Charles Stuart
should be Proclaimed King to Reign in England, ever any more? Or, whether or no
any of you did believe it, or could have believed it by your great Faith which
you profess, if it had been told you long ago?

Answ. As for the Proclaiming of Charles Stuart King, to Reign in England, it
was not improbable unto our Faith, neither is it contrary unto that which some
of us has seen; for we know that God respects neither persons nor names, but
does See G. Fox his Paper directed to the Parliament and Army so called.
give the Kingdoms of this World to whomsoever he will: And thus much was said
as may be seen in a Book, called, GOOD COUNSEL AND ADVICE, REJECTED, (and
diverse other Papers) etc. p. 17. In a Letter to Oliver Cromwell, it is said
concerning you that are commonly called Cavaliers; But what and if, for and
because of thy wickedness in the sight of God, he should raise them up, and
make them Instruments in his hand to accomplish his wrath upon thee, even like
as he made thee once his Instrument to overthrow them, etc. And here the thing
was believed to be possible, that the Lord might raise you up again for his
pleasure, to fulfill his will, because of the wickedness of the Army and Nation;
and it is now come to pass even as was seen and believed. And also it was
expressed in a Letter, written in the tenth Month, 1659. concerning them that
were your Enemies, and that were at first raised against you, The very same
spirit of Pride, and Oppression, and Idolatry, is entered into them, (meaning
your Enemies) and now lives in them in as high a measure as ever it lived
amongst you; and their Iniquities are well nigh finished, and the Lord will one
way or other correct and reprove them, and they shall be dealt with in like
manner as they have dealt with you; for they were no more than a Rod in the
hand of the Lord for a season, and they must also be broken and cast into the
fire, and whether the Lord may ever make use of you to reprove them, as he did
of them to reprove you, this I determine not; but leaves it to him who can do
whatsoever he will by what Instruments he pleases: It is true you have made
many Attempts to be revenged upon them, but you have not hitherto prospered;
but could you be humbled and come into the meek Spirit of the Lord, then might
you prosper, but hitherto the Lord has always defeated you, and bowed you
down under a People as unworthy at others, but their time will come to an end:
And submit unto the will of the Lord in what is come to pass, and seek not
vengeance to your selves, and then the Lord will avenge your cause for the
Iniquities of your Adversaries are ripe, etc. And Charles Stuart must either be
Converted to God, and ruled by him, or else he can never rightly Rule for God
in this Nation; though this I believe it is not impossible but that he may be a
Rod upon them that once smote him, and their Oppressions and Ambitions may
receive a check through him, etc.

These things were written in a Letter to all the people of your part, long
before there was any visible appearance, of that which is now come to pass:
whereby it does appear that these things in a great measure were foreseen and
Prophesied of, and it was believed as a thing very possible, that thus it might
be as is already come to pass: And as for visions, they are for an appointed
time, there is a time to see, and a time to speak what is seen; and revealed
things belongs to us, and when we declare them then you may take notice of it;
But it was verily believed as a thing possible, that such a thing would be, and
also by the proceedings and transactions as they have fallen out, for your very
enemies have so acted and proceeded as to destroy themselves, and to bring you
in over their Heads, though they little intended the thing, yet the effect of
their proceedings could hardly prove otherwise than to destroy themselves, and
make room for you, and these things I observed; And also thus far we did fore
see and it was revealed to us, and believed by many of us fully, and we did
often Prophecy it, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth would destroy and
bring down the Government, and Authority as they have stood in this Nation for
diverse years, and that he would bring Judgment upon the Rulers, and upon many
of the Teachers, and People of this Nation, because of their Oppressions and
Unfaithfulness, and Treachery, and Hypocrisy, and Wickedness, which abounded
amongst them, which we have felt and seen, and been sensible of; and we have
often given our witness against them, because of their guiltiness in their
sinful ways; Oh it has been loathsome unto the Lord, even the Oppressions and
Treacheries of the Rulers! Oh how has Cruelty and Injustice abounded in their
Government! and their hypocrisy has been evident in our sight in many
Particulars, and even in that they have cried against and overthrown King and
Kingly Government, charging them with oppression and cruelty, and pretended to
ease the People in a better way of Government, when as though Governors and
Names, and Titles of Government, were changed and altered, yet oppression
ceased not, neither was injustice forsaken, nor was the heavy yoakes of great
bondage removed: but the rather these things were increased upon many good
People in these Nations, and herein was the unfaithfulness, and treachery of
the Rulers very great in the sight of God, and their Government unjust and
unequal, wherefore the Lord has been provoked against them to confound them,
and overturn them, and we have often told it them, and also the Hypocrisy and
deceits, and sinfulness of Teachers, we have seen and testified against, and
our witness to them both is and will be found true, and Gods justice will be
fulfilled upon them both, and these things we have observed, even the heinous
guilt of sin against God in both Rulers and Teachers, and the abominations that
have been committed both in Civil, and Church Government (so called) also, and
many People have loved to have these things so, and we have been sensible how
the Lord has been provoked to overthrow the Governors of this Nation, because
hereof; and this we have foreseen and Prophesied of, even that Judgment and
Confusion would come upon the Government, the Rulers, and the Teachers; but
particularly when and after what manner, judgment and overthrow should come
upon them, was left to the Lord, who has brought to pass his own will
according to Justice, and it may prove to be a just Jugdment from the Lord,
upon the Unfaithful and Treacherous, and Unjust Rulers, and Teachers, and
People which I have mentioned, and the Lord may justly avenge himself upon them
who have abused his Mercies, and not improved his Deliverance to his glory, but
perverted the end wherefore they were at first raised up, I say the Lord may
justly be avenged of them by this means, of this man's comingin, and he may be
in the hand of the Lord a very smiting Rod to correct and rebuke, and may be a
heavy Judgment upon many in this Nation, even from that cause, and for that end
as before I have expressed.

Quer. 2. Whether you, or any of you, do adjudge it Reasonable and Equitable,
that he should come and inherit the Nations of which he is born the right Heir?
Or whether or no it is just or unjust to God and men, that he should Reign King
over these Nations? If you walk and judge by the Law of God which is Equal, then
judge of this whether he has been kept out this many Years, and now is brought
in again Reasonably and Justly, or Unjustly and contrary to Reason*

Answ. That he should come in, is Reasonable and Equitable, because through the
purpose of the Lord, his coming in is accomplished, who effects nothing but
what is Equal and Reasonable, and there is cause in God sufficient wherefore it
should thus be, and there is Sufficient cause and Reason appearing to us in
this matter; and upon the very account as laid down in my Answer to the first
Query, it is Equal as in the Lord, that he should be restored who has been
removed and cast out by such as have pretended to Govern and Rule better than
he, but have ruled in Oppression and Injustice, and not answered the cause
wherefore he was cast out; and that he should come in to be a Scourge upon
these, this is just, and in this particular does lie the Reason and Equity of
his coming in to inherit this Nation. And as for Reigning justly over this
Nation, that may better be answered when we have had experience of his Reign,
for if he Reign and Rule in Truth and Righteousness, in Mercy and in Justice,
and by and according to the Just Law of God, if thus he Reign, then he Reigns
justly, and it is just to God and men that he should Reign, and this the Law of
God which is Equal, judges, by which we walk in all things, and do judge of
all things: And as for his being kept out this many years, we do judge that the
hand of the Lord is in these matters, and they were done and suffered to be
done by him, in which he will be glorified, yet, thus far I say, they that have
kept him out, in pretense that they would Rule better than he, and yet have
ruled in Oppression and Injustice, as much more (may be) then he would have
done, they have dealed unjustly and contrary to reason, both to him, and much
more to the People of these Nations, while they have made and had new Names and
Titles of Government and Governors, but have continued the old oppressions, and
not releived the oppressed according to their own vows and promises, which they
have broken, and it is but just they should be punished for it; but if he
render not evil for evil, he does well.

Quer. 3. Whether or no ye can judge that his Reign and Government shall be
blessed to himself, and these Nations, or the contrary? Or whether shall Peace
or Trouble be in the Land in his days? And shall his days be many, or shall
his time be short; if this be revealed to you let us know?

Answ. We do judge that his Reign and Government may be blessed to himself and
these Nations, or not blessed; and peace may be in the Land, or trouble in his
days; and his time may be long, or it may be short; according as he walks in
the fear of the Lord, or as he walks wickedly, and according as his Reign and
Government is in Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth, or in Oppression and
Injustice, accordingly do I judge may he be blessed and may have Peace, and
long days, or the contrary, if he walk in the way which brings contrary
effects: and we take not upon us to judge any thing before the time, but as
through time he discovers himself, so we may judge of him, (for we desire well
for him and all men) that he may so Reign and Govern as to be a blessing to
himself and these Nations, that Peace may be in his days, and his Time may be
happy: And this we certainly know that there is an Eternal God, who is over
all, and that can do whatsoever he will, even set up and pull down whomsoever
he will, and though his strength now be great, and his number very many, yet
there is an Eternal God above all, who is mighty to save, and mighty to
destroy, and if he please no God in his ways, and in his Reign, but be an
Oppressor, and walk in evil ways, we certainly believe he cannot be blessed,
nor have Peace, nor long time, but the Lord may bring to pass the contrary; for
as the Scriptures say, it is by him that Kings Reign, and he makes Kings
blessed or miserable, the Scriptures gives much evidence concerning the good
and the bad Kings of Israel, they that were good men and Ruled well, they were
blessed and had long days, and people were happy under them; and to the Kings
that were Idolaters and Oppressors, and walked in wickedness, and vexed the
Lord, it was contrary, for the Lord cut them off and destroyed them, and
delivered the oppressed; and God is the same now as he was then, as powerful to
save the Righteous, and as mighty to destroy the wicked, and we rather desire
that he may follow the example of the good Kings of Israel, that the good
effects may follow, and that he may not follow the evil example of Tyrants and
Oppressors: But and if he do, the effect and reward will certainly be upon him,
and the Lord will rebuke him, and this we know by the Spirit of the Lord.

Quer. 4. Whither may he justly forgive, or avenge himself, of his and his
Fathers Enemies, and if he do avenge, whether or no can that be called
persecution? and if any or many suffer death, or otherwise on that account
because they destroyed his Father, and sought to destroy him also; do such
suffer for righteousness and good conscience or no? If some of you suffer, for
that cause shall you have Peace with God in it, or is it for the name of
Christ, as ye often say?

Answ. He may justly in the sight of God forgive his, and his Fathers Enemies,
and he will be the more blessed if he do it, for it is a happy thing to forgive
Enemies, and it is Christ's Doctrine also to forgive Enemies, and it would be a
good report unto him among his Friends, and it would win his Enemies, or be a
good means toward it, if he do forgive all Enemies, and it will be a good
beginning of his Government to remit offenses; though yet in his heart he may
be persuaded, that he and his Father have been much injured, yet I say, justly
he may forgive all in the sight of God, and also in the sight of men, as many
ways may appear; even in as much as his Father and he, did fly to the Sword
to determine their Controversy in this Nation, and the Sword went against
them, and did determine the Controversy even against them; and that whereby
they thought to stand, they did fall, and that which they chused for their
defense, did destroy them, and who then shall they blame for that which befell
them, seeing the Sword destroyed them, But this is not meant of the Kings's
Death.
which themselves did choose and thought thereby to stand, but it determined the
Controversy against them: and if you cannot own it, as that the Hand of the
Lord went against you in Battle, yet you must confess that the fortune of War
(as some call it) went against you; and must such now suffer because hereof?
nay they ought not, but may rather be spared by the King; and in as much as he
is restored again without blood or loss of lives, it may be very just for him
not to take away any men's lives, but it will be more just to pass by all old
things; and if he have a deliverance, let him turn it into the praise of the
Lord in holiness, and not into the shedding of blood in the way of a fierce
revenge; and let him leave it to the Lord to avenge himself upon such as have
been his Enemies, and upon such as have cast out King and Kingly Government,
and pretended to a better Government, and to Govern more Righteously, and yet
have been Oppressors, and not answered their own pretenses and engagements, but
broken them and acted contrary, by their Unfaithfulness and Hypocrisy; and in
that does lie the justness of punishment if it come upon them, and if they be
punished with death, or otherwise if they suffer on that account; I say,
because they destroyed Kingly Government in Name and Title, and pretended
better things, and to Govern better, and did not make Reformation, but were
Oppressors, as I have said, Suffering for that cause cannot be called
Persecution, nor is it for good Conscience, nor Righteousness sake that such do
Suffer: But none of us can Suffer for that cause, as not being guilty thereof,
as in the Answer to the next Querie, I shall have full occasion to show you;
but and if we Suffer in your Government, it is for the Name of Christ, and we
shall have Peace with God in it; because nothing can be charged against us in
this Capacity as we now stand, and in this State into which we are now gathered
and changed; not in any matter of Action or Rebellion against him nor his
Father, nor any thing but concerning the Law and Worship of our God, and the
matters of his Kingdom, and our pure Consciences; and if upon this account we
are made to suffer by him and for this cause, the reward will be Sad and Heavy
upon him, in the day of the Lord: And if any that are now amongst us, were any
way engaged in the Parliament Service in the Wars, it was not in Rebellion
against him or his Father, as that we sought their destruction as men, but upon
Sober and Reasonable Principles, and not for corrup, ted ends, nor to get
Honor and Riches to our selves, as some others might do, who went in the War
for self ends, and continued in action after the cause (which was once engaged
for) was utterly lost, as we have long seen it; and that Principle which some
time led some in action to oppose Oppression and seek after Reformation, we
never have nor shall deny, but that Principle is still justified; though we are
now better informed than once we were, for though we do now more than ever
oppose Oppression, and seek after Reformation, yet we do it not in that way of
outward Warring, and Fighting with Carnal Weapons, and Swords; and YOU, and the
KING ought to put a difference (both in their guilt and suffering) between such
as some time acted in the Wars against you, in and upon Sober and Reasonable
Principles, and that did not make themselves Rich and High in this World through
your Sufferings; and between such as have acted against you for self ends, and
have insulted over you, and have made themselves Great and Rich in this world,
through your Afflictions and Sufferings; for they who have walked in that way,
and are hereof guilty, they havenot acted Righteously, nor walked in good
Conscience; and if such Suffer by you for that cause, it cannot be called
Persecution, nor is it for the Name of Christ, nor can such have Peace with
God: But we being clear from the sin of such, we cannot suffer as such, but if
we suffer by you it is Persecution, and our sufferings will be upon you.

Quer. 5. Whether the great Afflictions and Sufferings sustained by him this
diverse years, from the Subjects if his own Nation, and the guilt thereof, do
lie upon all the Subjects in general? Or whether upon any, or some pa^icular
Sects and Sorts of people? (many which now are arisen) and if upon any
particular Sect and Sort, who are such more than others? distinguish them from
others, and clear your selves if you can from the guilt of his Sufferings.

Answ. As for the Afflictions and Sufferings sustained by him, so far as they
were Just and Righteous Judgment from God, because of iniquity, can no man be
charged with, but that is on Gods account, who was pleased to chastise with
Afflictions and Sufferings, and no man can be blamed with Injustice for that
Affliction which comes from the Hand of God, upon whom Injustice may not be
charged by any one whatsoever; and so far as his Sufferings were unjust, the
guilt thereof does not lie upon all the Subjects in general, nor upon every
particular sort of people alike, but upon some more than others, and such are
easy to be distinguished from others, if it be considered who they are that
first raised the War in this Nation against the King, And who was it that first
Preached and Prayed up the War, and prosecuted it against his Father? And who
is it that cast out the Bishops and Prelates from their places, and took their
Revenues and Benefices, and are become men as Corrupted, as Covetous, and
Self-seeking, as Proud and Ambitious, as Unjust Persecutors as ever the men
were which they cast out? And the guilt is partly upon such who cast out others
in pretense of Refarmation but did it not: And who is it that has gotten great
Estates in this Nation, and Worldly Honor, and raised themselves from nothing
by the Wars, and by your Suffering, and became ambitious and insulting over
others, though they first began the War in this Nation, and pretended great
Reformation in the Civil State, as well as the other had done in Church State?
And who get the Estates and Titles of their Enemies, and pretended to free this
Nation from all Oppressions, but have not done it, but have continued the old
Oppressions, and have been striving among themselves who should Rule, and who
should be great, but have not Ruled for God, nor in Justice and Equity, though
they first Warred against the King, and carried it on, and removed the King and
Lords, and that Government, and all this in pretense of Ruling better, and in a
better Government, and yet kept not Engagements, nor Promises made in that
case? Upon such is the guilt of the Suffering of the King, so far as his
Sufferings are unjust, even upon Hypocrites, who have ^alked in these steps,
who as I have said, first made war against the King, and got great Estates, and
quite forgotten the cause once pretended by them, and now in flattery, Cries up
King and Kingly Government again, though this many years they have seemed to be
opposite against it; upon such as these may the guilt aforesaid in measure be
charged: And though there are risen many Sects and Sorts of People since the
beginning of the Wars, yet in the beginning there was but one sort that were in
a capacity to raise and prosecute War against the King; and upon such there is
guilt to be charged in the sight of God, who have foregone their Principles,
and been deceitful both to God and men: And as for Us who are called Quakers,
we are clear from the guilt of all his Sufferings, and in the present Capacity
wherein we now stand, and under the actings of that Spirit which now we are of,
we have no part in the guilt of these Iniquities; we have not cast out others,
and taken their places of great Benefices, neither have we made war with carnal
weapons against any, never since we were a People, (mark) neither have we
broken Oaths and Engagements, nor promised freedom and deliverance, and for
self ends, and Earthly Riches betrayed, as others have done, what we pretended
to; and in many particulars it does appear, that we are clear from his
Sufferings, for we have been a Suffering People as well as they, by the same
Spirit which caused them to suffer, which has been much more Cruel, Wicked,
and Unjust toward us, than it has been toward them, though our Persecution
has been in another manner; but what they have done against us we can freely
forgive them, and we would have you to follow the same example; and if you
could accuse them in many things, so could we; but this is not a time to accuse
one another, but to forgive one another, and so to overcome your Enemies, or
else you will appear in the same Spirit, that so he that condemns them cannot
justify you, though we do condemn as well as you, them that have pretended
Reformation, and Warred against you upon that account: And when they had gotten
victory did not reform, but became Oppressors themselves, as well as others,
and became Cruel toward others, that would not say and do as they; and for
this Cause the Lord has brought them down, and may justly suffer others to
deal with them as they have dealt with others; yet notwithstanding I must still
say, and it is my judgment, that there was very great Oppressions and Vexations
under the Government of the late King, and Bishops under his power, which the
Lord was offended with, and many good People Oppressed by, for which cause the
Lord might and did justly raise up some to oppose, and strive against
Oppressions and Injustice, and to intend and press after Reformation in all
things, and that principle of Sincerity which God did raise in many in the
beginning of the Wars, which in some things acted them forth, and carried them
on in opposing Oppressions, and pressing after Reformation, this Principle I
can never deny, but acknowledge to it, though many soon lost it, and became
Self-seekers, forgetting and foregoing the Cause pretended to, having lost
Sincerity, and became corrupted in their way, and Injustice and Oppression
abounded by them, and because hereof are they condemned in the sight of the
Lord, and not by me Justified, because they have lost Sincerity, and turned the
War, and all the Proceedings into Self-seeking; and therefore is God provoked
against them, though had they continued in their Integrity, and had really
performed what some time they pretended, and had forsaken all Sin, it had not
been thus with them, neither had this guilt been upon them, which now they are
like to be accountable for: And this is my Judgment concerning these things.

Quer. 6. Whether or no he may justly (think ye) and with more safety to
himself, and happiness to the Kingdoms, Tolerate and Allow LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE, (so called) to all the many Sects and sorts of People, and
Worshippers that are now in being in these Nations? Or whether he may Tolerate
some and not all? Or whether he may Tolerate none, but reduce the Government
of the Church into the way of Bishops and Prelates, as it was in his Fathers
days? Which of these may he do justly, and with more safety to himself, and
happiness to his Government and Kingdoms?

Answ. We do believe he may and ought justly, and with most safety to himself,
and happiness to the Kingdoms, Tolerate and Allow free LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE
in all the Matters of Faith and Worship toward God; for LIBERTY in exercise of
CONSCIENCE, in the Matters of Gods Kingdom, is a very precious thing to the
Lord, and very dear in his sight, and he is tender of it; and I do steadfastly
believe, he will not bless the Rulers of this Nation, that shall deny (to the
People of this Nation) and oppose LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE in the exercise of
Faith and Worship toward God; for I do know it is not given of God to any
Earthly King or Ruler whatsoever, to exercise Lordship over the Consciences of
People in the Matters of Faith and Worship, and the things pertaining to Gods
Kingdom; for Kings and Rulers, are but to Rule over men in a Nation, in the
Matters between one man and another, in outward things and worldly affairs; and
therein only men ought to Rule in Equity over a Nation, or City, or Country;
and Magistracy in this state, and for such an end is Gods Ordinance appointed
of him, for the preserving of Peace and good order among men in outward things;
and it is a privilege of the Crown of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, to be Lord
and Ruler over and in men's Consciences, in Faith and Worship, and all the
Matters of his Kingdom, even as and according to his pleasure, and as his
Spirit leads and guids; for, and if any man shall assume to prescribe God a way
how he must be Worshipped, and shall limit his Spirit from this, or to the
other way of Religion, and think to be Lord in men's Consciences in religious
Matters, such are but Usurpers, and are not wellpleasing to the Lord (in such
their way and Government) if they oppress men's Consciences, by limiting from,
or compelling to any such way of Worship or kind of Religion; neither are they
Ordained to Rule among men for that end, not to be King and Judge, and Law
giver in Heavenly and Spiritual Matters; and this ought not CHARLES (the King)
to do: but and if he do it, and will not let Christ alone be the Head over his
Church, it cannot be with safety to himself, nor happiness to the Kingdoms, nor
justly in the sight of God, but it will work contrary effects: And he may and
ought to Tolerate and Allow LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE in the matters of Gods
Kingdom, to all sorts of People, and Worshippers, that are in this Nation; and
let him mind Gods Wisdom, how to keep the Nations in peace and good order, in
all outward and civil Affairs, between man and man, and between one sort of
People and another, that none destroy each others persons or estates, nor be
Oppressors one of another in outward and earthly Matters; and that is the place
and privilege of a just King and Ruler upon Earth; and to leave Faith and
Worship, and Duty toward God, as every one is persuaded in their own
Consciences is the right Way; whether they will read the Common Prayer, or
Preach and Pray after the order of the Directory, or otherwise; Or whether they
will meet in silence without words; and let all these enjoy their way of
Religion and Worship in outward peace, and not kill one another about their
Religion, Worship, Church and Ministry, nor imprison and persecute one another
about these things; but let them all be preserved as men, living in peace one
with another in all outward relations, and yielding Subjection to good Laws
which concerns their outward man, and their peace and well-being as Subjects of
a Nation; but there ought to be no Law of Bondage and Force, nor violent
Impositions by any man concerning Religion, for the Lord alone is sufficient to
give Prescriptions and Laws to his Peop^^ how he may be served and worshipped;
and this is the way of good Government in this Nation, that only the outward
man in outward things be Governed, and all Matters of Conscience in Spiritual
things be left unto God, that his Spirit may therein only rule and have the
pre-eminence; and if the King do Rule thus, he may be more blessed, and in that
this Nation has his word, for LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, it is expected; for
because this has been wanting, (to wit) the allowance of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE
in Spiritual Matters, because of this, have been much strife and contention,
and heart-burnings in the Nation, while some Sects of People have been
tolerated and upheld, and others persecuted for their Religion-sake by Law;
and this was one of the chief causes wherefore the Presbyterians (so called)
first raised War against the Bishops, even because they could not be
tolerated, but were persecuted, while the other were guarded and defended by
Law; and this was a great cause of enmity, which if the Presbyterians (so
called) could have had Liberty and Tolleration at that day, for their Worship
and Faith, it is possible the War against the Bishops had not so far proceeded;
though when they had gotten Victory, they were no less furious toward the
Bishops to destroy them, than the other had been once against them; and this
arose by reason of persecuting for Conscience sake, because all had not Liberty
in the exercise of Spiritual things, which if the King had declared at that day
Equal Liberty to both, in Matters of their Faith and Religion, and yet ruled
over both in outward affairs, and had Authority over the Persons and Estates in
Matters not related to Spiritual Worship, but left them therein free, and in
their Religion; by such means the War might have been stopped, and not
proceeded so far as it did, and into such destruction; and this being now well
considered, may be an Example to prevent the like hereafter: So that I say, it
cannot be for his safety, nor for the good of the Kingdoms, to Tolerate some
sorts of People, and Religions, and Persecute others, for that will be the very
Cause of strife among men, it will provoke one sort to destroy another, and it
will provoke the Lord God against the King and his Government, to destroy them
both; Therefore to reduce the Government of the Church into the State, as it
stood under the Bishops in his Fathers days, and to prohibit all others that
may differ in Judgment from that, this is not the way for Peace and happiness
in these Nations, nor the way that will be blessed to the Government; neither
can the Bishops and Prelates justly themselves desire it, that only they and
their Church Government, should be Imposed and Tolerated, and all besides
Prohibited; for this is not doing to others as they would be done unto; and I
may hope that their Suffering this diverse years, may have taught them the worth
of Liberty to themselves, and so, that they will allow to others (if it be in
their power) the same which they have desired themselves, in their time of
Suffering; and they having tasted of some Subjection in Adversity, they know
the better how to behave themselves in time of prosperity; and they may compare
others with their own states, and may judge that others will as much desire
Liberty, and from as good Principles, in their Worship and Faith, as themselves
would have enjoined it in times past; and they may have learned to be good to
others in that case, for which themselves have Suffered, and not cause others
to suffer for that thing about which themselves have suffered: And I do conclude,
that he may justly and with more safty and happiness to his Government,
Tolerate and Allow LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE in the Exercise of Faith and Worship
toward God, in all Spiritual Matters, even to al sorts of People in this
Nation, and let him defend their Persons and Estates, from the wrong one of
another, by wholesome Laws; and let each sort defend themselves in their Faith
and Worship, in their Church and Ministry, by their soundest Arguments, and the
best Spiritual weapons they have; and thus should it be blessed to the
Government: And whatsoever sort or Sect of People are not contented with this,
that is to say, to Allow the same Liberty to others in Faith and Worship, which
they do desire themselves, are not worthy themselves to be allowed Liberty
unto; and this every reasonable man may judge.

Quer. 7. Lastly, What is your Judgment; (if ye dare declare it) concerning
the Times and Seasons, and the present motions of them? And what are your
Observations of the present proceedings? Are the present Times and Seasons, and
the proceedings, and transfactions in Mercy, or in Judgment to the King, and
his Subjects? If in Mercy, to whom is it Mercy? And if in Judgment who are they
to whom these things are so? If ye be not fainthearted declare your minds, now
in your last days (as many think) for many say, that your ruin is nigh come,
and if it be not so, many are deceived?

Answ. Yes we dare declare our Judgment concerning the Times and Seasons, for
we have received the Judgment of Truth in our Spirits, and never have been, nor
are we afraid to declare the Truth, so far as Truth is necessary to be
declared; and we say the Times and Seasons are in the hand of the Lord, and the
motions of them are very swift, and the Lord gives to whom, and takes from
whom, (Times and Seasons) as he pleases, even as it were in an instant does
the Lord give, and change, and alter, Times, Authorities, and Things; and
mortal man ought not to glory in Times or Seasons as if they were certain and
unchangable to him; for behold the Motions of Times flies away, and Seasons
removes their course, and the most confident of men have no certainty thereof,
and that because they are in the hand of the Lord that turns them about, and
often contrary to men's will and pleasure; and therefore let every man be good
in his time, and fulfill the will of the Lord in his Season, before Time and
Season be no more, but removed from them.

And as for our Observations, they are very many of the present proceedings and
transactions; first, we do observe that there is not any thing of all these
transactions that are come to pass, but there is a secret hand of the Lord God,
through them, and in them; either doing of them, or suffering of them to be
done; and either as the cause by secret purpose, or as the means of their
accomplishment; it is not without him that these things comes to pass, but his
eye and his hand is over them, and that man is only blesed which has respect
unto him in all these things, that he may do or suffer for the Lord, and that
he may not rebel against him, in what is brought to pass by him.

Secondly, we observe how that the Lord has given unto many Men a Day and a
Time, and tried them what they would do for him, and whether they would rule in
Righteousness, and in Equity, but many have proved deceitful, and not answered
to the Lord what he expected from them; and therefore the Lord has confounded
them in their Counsels, and suffered them to Clash one against another, and
made them overthrow one another; and one self-seeking man has been the ruin of
another (as bad as himself) and even many by their own proceedings have
prepared a rod and judgment, even for themselves, and through their blindness
of heart, which they have been given up to, because of their wickedness, they
have destroyed themselves, and given their very enemies advantage over them to
afflict them, and this we have observed of present proceedings.

Thirdly, We observe that there is a rude profane spirit, highly abounding
throughout this Nation, that brings forth much bad fruit, as drunkenness and
wickedness in a great measure, which may justly provoke the Lord to wrath and
indignation against the Land, if it be not forsaken, though it be lifted up in
this wonderful rudeness in a pretense of glorying on the behalf of the King,
and his Government; yet it vexes the Lord and it works Sorrow in the hearts of
many Sober People, who are pondering what the End of this Government may be,
that is thus rude and profane in its beginning, saying in their hearts, how
shall the Lord bless these proceedings, and make the end of them happy, which
are thus void of the fear of God in the first part of them; and if a stop be
not put and a limitation upon the Spirit, it will provoke the Lord to work
sudden destruction, and overthrown the Nation.

Fourthly, We observe, that many Hypocrites and dubble minded men, are afraid,
and terror has Surprised them, who have taken the profession of such or such a
Religion, on them for a Cloak, and has been in the show of Righteousness for
earthly ends, such are afraid, and their ends are frustrated, and they are
turned into confussion, and a profane Spirit abounding over their Hypocrisy,
and such will deny their Principles and their Faith, and will fawn and slatter
to save themselves, and this is abominable; but men that have been and are
upright and sincere towars God in their way, they are not afraid, but are
confident in the Lord, and are given up in his will, whether to do or suffer
for his Names-sake, and they have no terror upon them because of any guilt,
because they have been upright, in that way which they were persuaded to be
right, and such lives in a patient and quiet life, and are contented whatsoever
comes to pass, because they have the witness, that they have not followed their
Religion for self ends, nor taken the name of Righteousness for a Cloak as many
others have, upon whom this overturning falls very heavy: And these things with
many more the like, we do observe from the present transfactions, which are
fallen out in Mercy to some, and in Judgment to others, even a Judgment upon
all that do not fear the Lord, but walk in wickedness, and that have been
Hypocrites, and hard-hearted, and cruel, and to all that does not repent of
their sins, these things, and the end of them, are, and shall be great
Judgments, and shall be turned into bitterness, even their joy, and rejoicing,
into howling, and great Lamentation, this shall be the end unto all the
ungodly: but unto all that fear the Lord and departs from Iniquity, even unto
such the end of all these things shall be good, even Mercy, and Peace, and
their sorrow shall be turned into joy.

And as for us, we are not faint-hearted, though it be supposed that we are in
our last days, and as though our ruin were nigh to come, but we believe other
wise, for we have clearness of Conscience toward God and all men, and walks in
Faith and patience, and knowing this assuredly, that if we be persecuted and
afflicted in Person or Estate by you that now are in Power, yet it is for
Righteousness sake, and for the Lords sake, and not for the guilt of any
Rebellion against you, that you have or ever can have to Charge upon us, for we
cannot befound in these things for we can neither secretly flatter to make
peace with you, neither can we openly rebel against you, or resist you; but as
our right from God and you, we claim the LIBERTY of the Exercise OF OUR
CONSCIENCES, in the Matters of Faith and a holy Life toward God, that we may
mind the things of Gods Kingdom, and may so walk and worship, as to have peace
with God in our Consciences, that no burden of Sin and Iniquity may lie upon
us, but that we may live and dye in peace with God, this is all we Claim of
you; But and if you will not allow it us, but will persecute us, and seek to
destroy us only for our Conscience Sake, and because of our Faith and Religion,
if you do make and execute Laws against us, in opposition to the Law of our
God, that you may take an occasion against us to destroy us because thereof,
then Innocent blood and cruel suffering will be upon you, and the weight of it
will sink you into confussion, when your measure is full; and if you should
destroy these vessels, yet our Principles you can never extinguish, but they
will live for ever, and enter into other bodies to live, and speak, and act
through other vessels, for our Principles are standing and unchangeable through
Ages, and Generations, and may be clouded but can never be extinguished, for
every man has a Light in his Conscience which Christ has enlightened them
withal; which Light reproves Men for sin and with it they know they should not
Lie, nor Swear, nor be Drunk, nor deal doubbly, nor walk in any sin: but and if
they do these things, and live contrary to the Light in their own Consciences,
then they deny Christ and are unbelievers, and they are condemned, and have
trouble in their Consciences; but if men do own that Light in their Consciences
which does reprove them for sin, then it leads them to Repentance, and to the
forsaking of all sin, and they cease from all Iniquity, and receive Jesus
Christ and his blood to cleanse them. And the Light of the Spirit of God leads
them into all Truth, to do, and speak the Truth in all things, and then he has
peace with God in his Conscience: And these are some of our Principles, which
can never be Subdued by all the Powers of the Earth, though the vessels which
now retain these were out off, yet these Principles are unchangeable in
themselves, and can never be extinguished; so that this our Religion cannot
come to ruin, but they that think so, they are indeed deceived, and whosoever
shall seek to destroy that which Gods purpose is to exalt, woe shall be unto
them; and as they purpose toward others so shall it come upon them, from the
Lord in his Day and Season.

And thus I have answered the Queries directed to the Quakers, and subscribed,
Tradite hanc Amico Regis, and I do desire that the Friend of the King, and all
his Friends, and he himself, may receive and road over these my Answers, and
may consider them in coolness and moderation, for they may be to their
Edification if they be Sober minded. I am a Friend unto all men as men and
creatures, and a lover of all Souls, and am in Principles and Practices one of
them scornfully called, a Quaker.

E. B.

An OBjECTION Answered, concerning the KINGS SUPREMACY.
ANd whereas it is Objected by some, Whether or not we will be obedient
Subjects, accepting of him as our Lawful King, and own his Supremacy, and will
obey him willingly or unwillingly, and be Subjects in Conscience, or against
our Consciences?

Answ. It is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, to be obedient
Subjects to whatsoever Power or Authority of man, or men, as have been in being
over us, either by doing and fulfilling their just Commands, or by suffering
under their Commands which have been unjust, and thus we are persuaded and
resolved in the Lord to continue, even to be obedient to the Commands of Men in
Authority, which are just and according to our Consciences; but and if any
thing or matter be required of us, and Imposed upon us, which is contrary to
the Law of God and our Consciences, that we must fulfill by Suffering
whatsoever is put upon us by him; or any under him; and so we own him and
accept him, as knowing and believing that he is set to Rule in this Nation, not
without, but by, and according to the purpose of the Lord, and that he has
secretly purposed and Suffered the accomplishing of these things; and thus we
account that he is CHIEF MAGISTRATE, because these things are Effected through
the Lords Power, who does whatsoever he will, and we do own that he is set and
proclaimed to be the Head and Supreme over this Nation, in Civil and Outward
Affairs and Matters, and in those things that are related to the outward man;
and all his Commands which are just we can willingly be subject unto, even in
Conscience, and all his Commands which are otherwise, we are willingly and in
our Consciences contented in patience to bear what men shall put upon us; and
thus we do accept of the King and his Government, as he, and it, are according
to God, and answerable unto him, if it be so, we are willingly and in
Conscience accepting thereof, and shall be obedient Subjects thereunto; but if
it be otherwise, that is to say, if he Rule in Tyranny and Oppression, and his
Government be unjust and unrighteous, and contrary to God, then we must give
our witness against him, and it; yet not so, as by outward opposition, and
rebellion, to seek the overthrow of him or the Government by Carnal Weapons;
but shall patiently bear, and that for Conscience sake, all that Cruelty or
Injustice, and suffering, which can be Imposed upon us: And as for owning his
Supremacy, if it be meant his Supremacy over the Church, as if he were Head of
the Church, and were Supreme Lawgiver and Judge, and King in Church State, as
to give and prescribe Laws for Worship and Faith, and to pass all Judgment in
matters that are Spiritual, and appertaining to Conscience, and about the
things of the Kingdom of God; if by his Supremacy this be meant, and intended
thus, we cannot own his Supremacy but must deny it, and we do ascribe Supremacy
only to JESUS CHRIST, in, and concerning all these things mentioned, and that
he alone is Judge, and King, and Lawgiver in all the matters concerning his
own Spiritual King dome, and he must prescribe for us Faith and Worship, and
must be the only Judge in all cases of Conscience and Spiritual matters, and
not Charles Stuart King of England, etc. nor any other man upon the Earth; for
let it not be understood that we deny his Supremacy in opposition to the Pope
of Rome, as if we should own the Popes Supremacy over the Church, for that we
do not, nor any man upon the Earth, as I have said, but only JESUS CHRIST is
Principal in that relation, and to him we give the Dominion in all the cases of
his own Kingdom; but if owning his Supremacy it be intended, whether we will
own him to be Head and Ruler, as in the affairs of this Nation, pertaining to
men's Persons and Estates, without any relation to the Worship of God, or
matters of Conscience, so we own him as I have before mentioned, and must be
Subject for Conscience Sake in fulfilling all his commands whatsoever, either
by doing or suffering; and this is our principle which we are persuaded in, and
resolved herein to continue and abide.

E. B.

TO CHARLES STUART, Who is PROCLAIMED KING, And to all You that are called and
known by the Name of ROYAL PARTY and CAVALEIRS, and who have Suffered in your
Cause, and for your Principle.
FRIENDS,
THE Lord God who is greater than all, that does whatsoever he will, has given
you a Day, and you are raised up again out of your Suffering State; Oh that you
would consider the end of it, and wherefore the Lord has done, and suffered it
to be done; and that you would make right use and improvement unto God and this
Nation, of this your Deliverance and Promotion; for certainly there has been
an absolute purpose in the Counsel of the Lord, that these things should be
thus, and his hand has even suffered it to be accomplished, even in a strange
and mavelous way, through the confounding of your Enemies, and giving of them
up to the folly of their own hearts in their Councils, that they should destroy
themselves, and bring in you over their heads, and make you a Mountain, and
break down their Mountain, and make it as a low Valley; and certainly these
things are in the Justice of the Lords hand, and it will be well for you if you
can consider it, and acknowledge it: You have been a suffering People it is
true, for these diverse years, and Orignally your Suffering was partly just as
from the Lord, for there was a great measure of Iniquity and Oppression
fulfilled in this Nation, on the part of Kings, and your Sins were great
against God; wherefore the Lord was Just in bringing Affliction and Tribulation
upon you, to humble you, and he might Justly raise up others to reprove you,
and to subdue you before them for a season; and thus far even because of your
Iniquities which were great in the sight of God, your Sufferings and
Afflictions were Just: But as for those that the Lord made use of in the
Execution of your Afflictions; they are not justified in all what they did
toward you, but they went beyond (in Violence and Cruelty upon you) what the
Lord called them unto; and thereby they brought a great measure of guilt of
Injustice and Cruelty upon their own Consciences, in proceeding toward you
beyond Justice and Equity: Though some of them might be more sincere and
upright in the beginning of these things, when they began to War against you;
yet it too well appears that many of them soon lost the Just Cause, and began
to have respect to your Estates and Titles of Honor, more than to free the
Nation from Oppressions and Vexations, though they pretended much thereunto,
yet so it was that they became foully corrupted in their way; and though they
Subdued you, yet did they not free the Nation, but became Oppressors themselves
no less than others before them, and they possessed your Riches, and Titles,
(yea and in great measure Unjustly) and then were exalted in Ambition and
Vainglory, and began to strive amongst themselves who should be the greatest,
and set up this, and the other, and some cried one way of Government, and
others another, and they pulled down and set up as they would, and cast down
and exalted whom they would; and thus they continued for some years, rolling up
and down in Confusion, and yet the Nation under very great Oppression and
Vexations, each one crying his Burden was the greatest, while they were
exalted in their Pride and Riches, and lived at ease, notremembring the end
wherefore they were first raised, nor keeping to sincere Principles, but caused
them to suffer deeply that were faithful to the Lord, and walked with him in
sincerity; and all this while you were as asleep, and not thought upon by them,
as if ever you should call them to an Account; but they thought that their
strength was great, and their number many, and therein they gloryed having no
true respect unto the Lord; and because hereof the Lord justly confounded them
in their Counsels, when their measure was full, and made them weak as water;
and you are now justly raised up to reprove and correct them, even those, that
have abused Gods Mercies to them, and that have forgotten God and sought to
exalt themselves for ever, and had no respect unto the Lord and his People;
though these things are not said of them, to upbraid them, nor to kindle your
fury against them, to add Misory upon their Affliction, but they have already
been told of their Treachery, and what would come to pass; And Oh that they
could now humble themselves before the Lord, and confess to the Justice of this
their Affliction; they might yet partake of his Mercy, through great Judgments.

And as for you, Oh that you would consider these things, and by whose purpose
you are restored, and from what cause, and for what end it is accomplished! Oh
that you would mind what your work now is, and that you would not exceed your
Permission! for you are raised up for an end, and there is a work for you to
do, Oh that you could do it with respect unto the Lord, it should be the better
for you; Oh those men that have long Sat as Princes in this Nation, and
Pretended, and Vowed, and promised Reformation in Church and State, but they
have not done it as they ought, but as great Oppressions and Injustice, as
great Superstitions and Idolatries, both in Church and State, were continued
and carried on in their days, as in days before them; Oh how abominable have
these things been! (multitude of words might demonstrate) but now their reproof
and Judgment is come, and their fall is just upon them; Who should pity them,
or mourn for them, seeing they have deserved all this and much more which has
yet happened unto them? as some of them may confess; and those things (their
Treachery, Unfaithfulness, and Oppressions I mean) must needs be avenged one
way or another: How often has it been foretold them, yea it has been often
said unto them, that God would bring them down and destroy their Power? they
have been told that these things were not right, neither could they escape
unavenged, and it new appears as if the day were come; and if you must be their
Executioners, and must execute the wrath upon them, who shall prevent you; or
say unto you, stay your hand? Or rather who of them that sees these things,
shall not be patient while you take vengeance for ths Lords sake, and for the
sake of his People, whom they have long Vexed and Opppessed? Nay, who of the
Lords People shall not say, let the Lords will be done, and his Justice
Executed upon his Enemies? If this be your work that you are called to, must it
not go on till it be finished? They have been Hard-hearted, and Oppressors
toward others; and by a Hard-hearted People, may not the Lord justly deal with
them, and be a Plague unto them in that very manner, that they have sinned
against him? for this is usual with the Lord, even to destroy Oppressors by the
Wickedness of others, and often he Rebukes the sin of a People, by a People as
bad as themselves; he may justly give unto men from the hands of others, what
they love in their own hearts; and even as those men have loved Pride and
Ambition over others, and Oppression and Hard-heartedness toward others; even
so, and much more may justly be done unto them, and that according to the Will
of the Lord; and if this be your work designed you by the eternal hand, who
shall prevent you? But yet, Oh that you would consider, and that you would have
some respect unto the Lord, lest you out-go the end of your Restoration: You
would indeed be happy, if you could forgive your Enemies, if you could reward
them good for their evil; and you would be happy if you could not exceed the
measure of your permission; be not too Hard-hearted toward them but show
Mercy: And Oh you must take heed lest you cause the Righteous to suffer with
the Wicked, and that you cause not the Innocent to groan and mourn in your
execution of Gods purpose upon the ungodly, you must be a ware lest while you
punish Offenders, you smite not them that are free; Oh that you had hearts this
to understand, and that you could walk in the path of fulfilling Gods pleasure,
and not go further, (I mean) though you may be raised to be a Plague upon
Hypocrites, and Disobedient and Treacherous men, and to avenge Gods Cause and
his Peoples; but you are not raised to be Oppressors of the Lords People, nor
to destroy his Heritage, this is not your work; God has not called you to
Destroy and Persecute them that fear his Name, and tremble at his Word, though
you have Power to be avenged on your Enemies: And Oh that your hearts could
understand this, that you might distinguish in your proceedings, between
executing of Justice upon Transgressors, and Persecution for Conscience Sake;
the one you have to do, but the other is forbidden you of the Lord, and you
ought not to do it; for if you Persecute any for good Conscience Sake, or
because they are of such and such an Assembly of People, and Worships in such a
way; if you inflict Tribulation upon any because hereof, or because they are
such or such in their Profession and Religion, then you persecute for
Conscience Sake, and you go beyond the End, and by the Path for which you were
raised; and if you turn your Hand and Power to persecute for good
Conscience Sake, then you divert the End and Purpose of this your Restoration,
and the Lord will require it of you, if that you go beyond his Permission and
Assignment, and go beyond his Pleasure in Persecuting his People, and so turn
your Power to a wrong Use and End; O then the Lord shall suddenly confound you,
and he will find out instruments that shall fulfill his Wrath, and Justice upon
you, as he has found you fit to execute Wrath upon others; and therefore do
not, O do not persecute any for Conscience Sake, if you have nothing against
them but concerning their Faith and Worship, and their Religion, do not lay
your hand upon them, nor let them be touched; for if you do, the Lord will take
it as a heinous offense against him, and in this life, or hereafter, he will
Plague you for it, and you shall not escape unpunished: and therefore I say
once more to you, as the advice of your Friend, let no man be persecuted for
his Faith, and for his Religion-sake, but make a distinction between inflicting
wrath upon offenders that have been hypocritical and deceitful, and that have
made themselves rich through the ruins of others, and that will how to any
thing, or any kind of Worship for their own ends; and between such who have a
Principle and do stand by it, and are humble and acted in the principles of
sincerity, and follows that way of Religion which they suppose and are
persuaded is the best, and the rightest; all such ought to have their Liberty
under you in their Profession, and Faith, and Worship, and ought not to be
Persecuted while they live Peaceably as men with one another, and toward all
men; and the God of Heaven requires it of you, and your Standing, or your Fall,
the Blessing or the Curse unto you, depends hereupon; and this you shall find
to be true unto you in the day of Gods Righteous Judgments: O therefore be not
stout against the Lord, but fear and tremble before him; let his Dread be upon
your Spirits, and do not offend him, nor provoke him against you and this
Nation, lest he tear you to pieces, and number you for destruction, lest he
overturn you suddenly, and deface your glory in its morning: Oh how happy would
you be if you would regard the Lord and reverence him, and take him before you,
and not go beyond in any thing what his purpose and pleasure is, who has given
you this one day to try you, if so be that any of you shall learn his fear and
turn from your Iniquities, that you may be blessed and not confounded; Oh
therefore consider what the Will and Purpose of the Lord is toward you, and
wherefore you are raised up, and may fulfill his purpose, and not your own: Oh
then this day should be made happy unto you; but the contrary works, I mean, if
you do Oppress, and Persecute, and seek to destroy his Heritage, and Rule in
Oppression and Tyranny, then the God of Heaven shall cut your day short, and
diliverance he will bring to this poor Nation without you, and even contrary to
you, and his hand shall be turned upon you, and your Mountain though never so
great, and high, shall be laid low, and an Infant of the heavenly birth shall
leap over it, and shall say, Where is that lofty Babel that exalted it self
ag^^^^ my God?

And as for us, we are a very poor, contemned and despised People, even since
we were a People unto this very day, and have nothing at this present, nor
heretofore to glory in from any Power that has ruled; but the Power, Spirit,
and Presence of God in our Tribulations, Afflictions, Persecutions and unjust
Sufferings, these things have been our portion, even from all; all have trodden
upon us in Contempt and Scorn, and accounted us as Sheep for the slaughter, and
we have not to glory in, any Government that has been since we were a People;
we cannot justify one or another, but we say they have all been Oppressors,
and we have groaned with deep sighs unto the Lord under the burden of their
unrighteous dealing; and herein we assent with you, if you say they have been
unjust men, we say the same; and if you say their Government has been
Oppression and Unequal, we say the same; if you say you have suffered cruelty
and unrighteously by them, we say the same; if you lay they have Ruled by Will
and Forci, more then by Law and Equity, we verify the same; and if you can say
you have suffered Afflictions and Tribulation by them, so have we in another
manner, and far more unjustly: Wherefore we cannot justify them, nor will not
plead for them in opposition to you; but we partly believe we may receive as
much Equity and good Reason from some of you, as we did from some of them; and
thus we have been a suffering People even without cause: And at this day we are
threatened by the rage of men as if we should be cut off and destroyed; but we
regard not those things, but do respect the Lord, whom we fear and Worship in
our hearts; and if we outwardly perish among them that may perish, yet it is
for Righteousness sake, and because of the matters of Gods Kingdom, which we
hold; and if you do Destroy us for this cause we are clear, and Innocent blood
will be upon you, and the guilt thereof will sink you into misery here, or
hereafter. Oh take heed and desilenot your selves, nor load your Consciences
with our guiltless sufferings as many others have done before you, even to
their ruin and woeful destruction; you are yet in a great measure clear from
our Oppressions; we have not much Iniquity yet to charge upon you in our Cause
of Afflictions: Oh it will be well for you if you keep your selves clear, the
less will be your Judgment, and the better success will you have in your
Cause; for Friends, the weight of Innocent Blood it has a loud cry, and God
will hear it; and if you burden yourselves with it, it will soon overweigh
you, therefore keep clear, and condemn them by your Practices, that have said
they would not Persecute for good Conscience sake, but have done it, even
contrary to all Pretenses and Engagements; and if you who profess not so much
in words toward that thing, would do it, how should your Practice condemn
their Hypocrisy in the Sight of God, Men, and Angels? but however I warn you,
and do leave it at your door; and do say unto you, Persecution for Conscience
sake, is the crying Sin, which draws down vengeance upon Kings and
Governments, be you warned through the fall of others least confusion come upon
you, as it has come upon many others for that cause; and be not too confident
in your way, nor too furious against your enemies, but remember your breath is
in your nostrils, and he that gave it you, can soon take it away.

And as for you, we have no enmity toward any of you, nor do we sick the hurt
of your Persons, nor can we rise up in Rebellion against you, or seek your
Destruction by Craft or Policy, neither indeed can we seek Covenant or League
with you by flattery; it is true you are yell in Authority over us outwardly,
and as you are so, we shall ^d subjection to you in any of your just Commands;
and in all things it is our Principle to obey you, either by doing or
suffering; yet we cannot bow, nor fawn nor flatter, nor deny our Principle, nor
our Religion of which we are persuaded by the Spirit of God in our Consciences,
that it is right and according to God; but I say, we cannot revoke our
Principle, neither for advantage to our selves, nor yet to save our lives; you
must find us constant, and not changeable as others are, who turn every way for
their own advantage, and ery up this or the other, and pray and fight on the
behalf of any thing which may make for their advantage, but God is grieved with
such Spirits; yet we are otherwise minded, and must only own your Government
and Authority as it is just and brings forth Righteousness, so we can own it,
and bow before it; but as otherwise, if it be Unjust and Oppression, we must
patiently suffer under it, whatsoever you have power to do; and this is all the
peace we can make with you, or the Engagement that we can bind our selves in
toward you, though we cannot but own that this Day is given you, either in
mercy or in judgment to you, yea, and we cannot but own that you may be Gods
Executioners; yea, what if we say, that you may be raised up to avenge our
Cause upon our Oppressors, though still we must bear witness against that
wicked, loose, profane Spirit, that lives and abounds in some of you, and
among you, and works Unrighteousness even to the dishonor of God, throughout
this Nation; this Spirit we bear witness against that it is evil, and brings
forth bad effects in every City, and Town, throughout the Land, whereby the
Lord is provoked against you, and this Nation in an high measure; Oh that you
would consider of it while there is time to be corrected and amended! before it
have brought forth unpardonable Iniquities, which it hastens to fulfill, and
draws down wickedness as with cords; Oh the excessiveness in Drinking and other
vanities! Oh what destroying of the good Creatures! it greives the hearts of
the Righteous, and vexes the Sober minded to consider it; and also their is a
great deal of Hypocrisy and deceitfull-heartedness amongst many: I have
considered this thing, and it is a vexation to the Lord, and cannot but be
detestable to you; even in that many contrary to their Principles, Engagements,
and Promises, Covenants, do now cry you up for to save themselves, their Lives
and Estates, who have been deeply engaged against you publicly and privately,
and yet now in Hypocrisy are fallen in with you; such their proceedings are
loathsome to God, and your present Cause is no better because of such; though
as for some of you that have stood to your Principle, and suffered for it this
long while, in your state, you are more honorable and rather justified.

Oh, let the King fear and reverence the eternal God, knowing he is but mortal
man, and his breath in his Nostrils, and let him keep himself clear from
Persecution for Conscience Sake, for that will destroy Kings and Governments
who are guilty thereof; and let him be Meek and Sober, and take the Lord before
him in all his proceedings, or else he cannot prosper; his Day, and Time is now
present, that Gods purpose is to try him, if he Rule in Righteousness and
Truth, in Equity and Justice, he may be blessed; But if otherwise he Govern,
and walk not in reverence to the Lord and spare his People; the God of Heaven
shall rebuke him, and deliver his People another way.

Consider of these things in a sober mind, Read them over in meekness.

This was written about the middle of the 3d. month called May. From a Lover of
your Souls, Edw. Borough.

A few QUERIES I do return to you, for you to Consider and Answer, relating to
the present Affairs and Proceedings in this Nation, even to all you, that are
called and known by the Name of ROYALLISTS and CAVALIERS, that are really so,
and have Suffered for that Cause.
Query 1. TO what do you Attribute the first Cause of the Advancement of this
present Government? And whether or no ye believe, that there was any thing of
the purpose and hand of the Lord, by intending and bringing these things about,
without expectation by you, and contrary to the great strength of your Enemies,
who are suddenly of a great and high Mountain, made a low Valley; and you of a
low and trodden down Valley, suddenly raised up into a great Mountain? And to
what do you Attribute this Changing and Overturning of Power, and Authority,
and Rulers, even them that have been as Princes and Potentates, to be Rebels;
and them that have been accounted as Rebels and Traitors, to be Rulers and
Governors; I say, to what do you Attribute these things, on their first Cause,
whether to the Policy of some, or to Accident. or to good Fortune (as some
call it?) Or whether you believe in your Consciences, that the Lord God by his
secret Power has purposed and suffered the effecting and accomplishing of
these things?

Quer. 2. And if you believe that there is any thing of the band and purpose of
the Lord, in doing, or suffering these Transactions; Then wherefore, and for
what Cause do you believe has he done these things? Is it because you are more
Righteous in the sight of God than they who are cast out before you; and
because he loves you, and hates them? Or whether it is not because they have
proved Treacherous and Deceitful, and not answered unto the Lord what he
requires of them, but sought themselves, and forgot the Lord, and took your
Estates and Titles of Honor upon them, and pretended a better Government, and
to Govern better than that way of Monarchical Government, but did not, but were
Oppressors even as others before them? And is not this the Just Cause,
wherefore the Lord has suffered these Overturnings? May not we justly (that
are neither of you) Attribute this to be the very Cause, wherefore the Lord
has brought them down, and raised up you over them; whereas if they had
repented of their Sins, and been faithful to what the Lord required of them,
and what themselves pretended to, and had indeed Governed Justly and
Righteously, and freed the Oppressed, and answered unto the Lord in an Equal
Government according to his Law? Whether may it not be believed, that these
things had never thus been brought to pass?

Quer. 3. Whether or no you believe that there is a GOD so mighty in Power, and
so wise in Counsel and Purpose, that can Turn, and Overturn you and your Power,
and lay you low even as others; and raise up others who are now as low as you
have been for diverse years, Whether you believe that there is a GOD, that by
his Power can effect such a thing, and accomplish it in his wisdom? And whether
do you not believe in your Consciences, that he will do it, if you do not
please him and fear his Name, and forsake allwickedness; and if you be
Oppressors and cruel-heated as others have been, and do not Rule in
Righteousuoss and Equity? And whether you believe not, that the Lord does watch
over you, with his eye that sees you, and marks all your ways? Whether do you
consider, that the Lord looks for good fruit from you, and that you should free
the Land from Oppression? which if you answer not the Will of the Lord in what
he requires, Whether do not you believe, that he is so Wise in Counsel, and
Mighty in Power, that he can and will, whether by Means, or without Means,
Overturn and Confound YOU and your Government?

Quer. 4. Whether you believe in your Consciences, and do acknowledge unto God,
that there was any thing of his JUSTICE in your late Sufferings for these
diverse years? Or whether all of them, or no part of that Suffering, which has
been upon you, were any whit Just as from the Lord? And whether there was not a
great Measure of Iniquity filled up in Monarchical Government; and a great
Measure of Oppression upon the poor people of this Nation, by their Lords and
great men? And whether this Rebuke and Reproof that you have had in this
measure of Suffering that has been upon you, was not in some measure Just as
from the Lord; that you might be humbled before him; though it is by me
acknowledged that your Enemies (these I mean) who are now cast out before you;
brought great guilt upon themselves, in executing Wrath upon you, in that, and
because they proceeded further, and into more Bitterness, and Cruelty toward
you, then they had either Commission or Authority from God; But whether there
was not a Justice as from the Lord in that which partly befell you? And was not
his hand many times against you in Battle, though Number nor Valor was not
wanting on your part, yet are not you sensible how by a Secret hand you were
often Defeated, and Victory given to your Enemies, though the less in Number?
And were not these things in the Justice of the Lords Hand? Whether do you not
believe it, and acknowledge it?

Quer. 5. Whether or no you do intend any Reformation from OLD Oppressions? Or
whether you intend to tread in the very steps and to walk in the very path in
every Particular of Government, as it stood and was carried on in the beginning
of CHARLES the First his days? And whether you ought not in the sight of God
and before him, to consider how to relieve the Oppressed, and break off all
Cruel Bonds of Injustice, and how a Government may be set up, which may be
answerable to the Lord, and not unto your own and other Corrupted men's ends?
but if you shall do so, Whether do you Answer the End or Deny the End,
wherefore the Lord has thus dealt with you, in giving of you this Day
unexpected, and contrary to all your Enemies? And whether do you not believe,
that God has set you between good and evil, between Right and Wrong, between
doing of his Will and the Will of the Devil, in the doing and fullfilling one
or the other by you, whether does not Depend Happiness and Blessedness upon
you; or the Woe and the Curse, your Standing or your Fall, your Renown or your
Dishonor perpetually?

Quer. 6. Whether or no you do not believe in your Consciences, that the
Prosperity, and Continuance, and Happiness of this your Government to your
selves, the King, and Kingdoms; or the Unhappiness, Overthrow, Misery, and
Confusion of the Government it self, the King and these Nations, does not stand
and wholly depend upon the Government and Authority, as it proceeds in
Justice, Righteousness and Equity, or as it is, and proceeds contrary, and is
Injustice, Oppression, and Unrighteousness? And if therein it stand, whether do
you believe in your Consciences that God shall Bless it, and Prosper it; or he
shall Destroy it, and Confound it? for is not the hand of the Lord Stretched
forth in Mercy, or in Judgment accordigly as men walks in his Fear, or
without his Fear? And whether if your CAUSE be Just in it self, yet if-you walk
in Unrighteousness, and Ungodliness, and Oppression, and Cruelty, Whether may
not you thereby destroy your Cause and Loose it, and provoke the Lord to anger
against you, and your Cause, to Confound you, and Destroy you? And whether you
do seriously Consider of this? And is it not your Duty so to do? And ought you
not to endeavor to stop this Flood of Wickedness that is broken out? which if
it it be not stopped may provoke God against you, to overthrow your proceedings.

Quer. 7. What is the very End of Rule and Government outward in this World?
And for what Cause did God at the first ordain it? whether upon this, or not,
really consider; Was it not that Evil Doers might be Punished; And them that
did well, might be Praised? And was not the outward Law added because of
Transgrssion, and to Punish Transgressors; But for the Preserving of the
Peaceable and Meek, who walked in the Law of God; and when the People had
forgotten God, and his Law in their hearts, and his Power that executed
Judgment and Meroy; Was it not then that the Law outward was added, and
committed into the Hands of Men to execute upon such as regarded not the Law of
God in their hearts? And is not this the very End of Rule and Government, and
Magistracy, at this very day? Whether ought it to be extended further than only
over and concerning the Affairs of the outward Man, to keep that in good order,
not to be a Load and Burden, and Vexation, and Bondage upon a Nation and
People; but to Suppress that which would Load and Burden, and Oppress the
Creation and People, that all men may be preserved in their just Right, and not
Vex and Oppress one another Persons and Estates? And if your Government be not
from this Ground and for this very End, shall it ever be blessed and happy,
either to the Governors or Governed?

Quer. 8. What do you believe of, and concerning LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, in all
Matters appertaining to the Kingdom of God? Whether ought not you to give that
LIBERTY in your Government, that every man and all sorts of People may believe
in God, and Worship God according as he or they shall suppose and be persuaded
in his or their Consciences; provided still, that he and they annoy not, or
Oppress his or their neighbors Person or Estate? for if he or they do that,
then he and they go out of the true Faith, and breaks the Law of God; and the
outward Law is to take hold of him and them: But whether it is not a just
Right, and may justly be allowed from you, to all the People of this Nation, to
live under what Ministry, and under what Worship, and to go to what Assemblies,
as they shall suppose or be persuaded in their Consciences is the Best and
Rightest? And whether or no it be not GODS Proper Right alone to be Ruler and
Lord over men's Consciences, and that he alone should Prescribe, Instruct, and
Teach Faith, Worship, and Duty, in all things in the matters of his own
Kingdom? And whether God has committed that Power and Authority, ever since
the days of Christ, to any Emperor, King, or other Ruler whatsoever, to be
Lord, and to exercise Lordship, in, and over men's Consciences in the matters
appertaining to Gods Kingdom? And whether it is not Gods only and alone
Peculiar Privilege to be Lord there; and not any man to impose one upon
another in Spiritual Matters? And whether you your selves would be Imposed upon
in such case? (that is) Whether you would have such a Church Government and
Ministry, Imposed upon you, upon such or such a Penalty, which you Know, or
Believe, or Suppose is not Right, nor according to God, nor Suiting with your
own Consciences? And then how can you with good Conscience in the sight of God,
Impose upon others, whenas your selves would not be Imposed upon in such a Case?

Quer. 9. Whether or no, if that you cause any to Suffer Loss, or be Afflicted
in Person, or Estate, for and because of their Conscience sake (that is)
because they are of such a Faith, and of such a Worship, and of such a
Principle in Religious matters, though different from others and from you; yet
if they walk Honestly, and Soberly, and Peaceably as men, and not Plotting and
Contriving any Mischief in the Nation: I say, if you Cause any Such to Suffer
upon that account, while you can charge nothing against them, but matters of
Faith and Judgment, and Opinion in Spiritual things; Again I say, Whether or no
such Suffering is not absolute Persecution, (and Innocent on his or their part
that so Suffers any Injustice, Cruelty, Tyranny, and Oppression) on your part
that does Inflict? And will not the Lord require it of you, if you bring
Innocent blood, and Cruel Sufferings upon your selves? And is not that Innocent
blood which is Spilt, and Unjust, and Cruel Sufferings which is Inflicted upon
a man or a People, for his and their Conscience, and Religions-sake, when no
matter of wrong or evil dealing amongst men, And in that Relation, is, or can
be Charged upon them? And whether do you not believe, that God will Avenge such
a Suffering, which is for Conscience sake, upon the Heads of the Causers and
Inflictors of it in his Day and Season?

Quer. 10. Whether or no you have not so much Reason and Conscience in you, as
will give you to descern, and cause you to put a difference between such, who
have Acted and been Zealous against you, from corrupt Principles of
Self-seeking, and have raised themselves into Worldly Honor, and great Estates
through your Suffering and Losses, and have Lorded it over you in Ambition;
though now such may Bow under you, and Fawn upon you? I say; Whether will you
not, or Whether ought you not, to put a difference both in respect of
Guiltiness in your Cause of Suffering, and in respect of your dealing toward
them in Reward, and between such as have formerly Acted against you, upon
Sober, Reasonable Principles, and have not raised themselves to Honor and
Great Riches, not by your Afflictions, but ceased to act against you, when they
perceived the Wickedness, and Injustice, and evil Proceedings of your Enemies?
(and many such there are) And whether or no you have not so much Reason and
Equity in your Consciences, as to put a difference between such in your
Proceedings toward them?

Quer. 11. What is the truest Honor that can be given to the King, and his
Government; and wherein, and in what kind of Words, and Actions, and Practices,
does true Honor consist? And whether or no you do believe in your Consciences,
that these kind of Practices, as Drinking Healths, and Bonfires, and this
exceeding Lewdness, and Wickedness brought forth in the Nation, by way of
rejoicing for the King, and his Government, be true Honor, and Rightly
Honorable proceedings, and practices, to him and his Government? Or whether
these things and ways be not woefully dishonorable unto you and him, and this
whole Nation: And the Cause wherefore the wrath of God may justly come upon the
whole Nation it self; if these things be not speedily Repented of, and
forsaken? And whether the Life and Practice, and Subjection of an Upright
QVAKER (so called) whose Principle is to obey all just Commands, and patiently
to suffer under all that which is unjust, and that lives in Meekness, and Fear,
and Soberness, and love toward all men; Whether or no such men, and such
Practices, are not more Honorable, and Blessed in the sight of God and Men,
Than this kind of Rudeness and Wickedness, Singning, and Drunkenness, Ringing,
and Swearing, and (...) Ribbins and Feathers about themselves, and their
Horses, and many other things which are said to be done in Honor to the King
and his Government? But whether there be not a Principle in your Consciences,
which dothrather Condemn your selves, ^han Justify you for these things, and
rather Iustifies a Sober Life, and is not that more blessed?

Quer. 12. Whether or no all that cry you up, and your Government, do it
really, and out of good Conscience, and from Principles of Sincerity? Or
whether they are turned to you in Feignedness, and Hypocrisy, and to save
their Heads and Estates, which some of them have gotten, even such as have been
your Enemies, and Preached, and Prayed, and Fought against you, and now cries
you up, and Prays for you; but whether can you trust that these will be
faithful to you, that thus denies their former ways, and Religion, and
Worship? And whether thus to deny their Principles, their Faith, their
Religion, their former Oaths, and Engagements, is Commendable, and Justifiable
in the sight of God and you? Or whether a Quaker (so called) that will stand to
his Principles, and not deny his Faith, nor Religion, though he suffer for it,
nor will bow and bend in Hypocrisy under every sort of men, is not more
Justifiable and commendable in the sight of God and your Consciences also? I
say, do they not condemn these Hypocrites, that have Fought against you, and
Prayed against you, and yet now bows under you with deceitful hearts in the
time of their danger?

Quer. 13. Whether or no you do not believe, and know in your Consciences, that
the QUAKERS (so called) are a Sober, Innocent, and harmless People, and of an
upright Conversation, dealing justly toward all, and such as does not Envy the
Persons of any, not Plot and Project Mischief toward you or any? And whether
if you should proceed to persecute, and seek to destroy such a People,
concerning whom you have such a witness in your Consciences, Justifying them as
aforesaid, would not be greatly unjust in the sight of God, and the very Cause,
to provoke God to destroy you, and your proceedings, if so be that you
persecutethem for their Conscience sake, while they live Soberly and Uprightly
as men, and injureth no man's Person or Estate by their Religion?

Quer. 14. Whether or no you do not believe, or may not have just Cause to
believe, that your present Proceedings are not, and may not prove to be the
very natural Cause of Outward, Visible, external Judgments upon you and the
Nation, even Judgments of Pestilence and Famine? And do not you proceed in the
very path hereof? Is not your spending the Creation in such Excessive manner,
in Eating and Drinking, and wasting the good Creation after this manner as you
do; Whether is not this a natural Cause to bring want and Poverty, and also
oppressing your very bodies with Excessiveness in Drunkenness, Inflaming your
selves through Excessiveness of Wine and Beer, and through the abounding of
Lust, and uncleanness, through excess; and as well Defiling, and Oppressing
your very Persons, as wasting the Creation by so doing; Whether this is not a
very Natural Cause to bring and beget Pestilence and Famine (besides your
provoking the Lord through this means) as being works in themselves hateful and
abominable in his sight, and for which Cause he may justly bring Wrath and
Judgments, even Plague and Famine, if there were no other Cause for it? And
whether you ought not seriously to Consider of this thing, and to Turn from
these Transgressions, which are Natural Causes of great Judgments, and also
provokes the Lord to hasten and inflict Judgment: Oh that the Sober minded
among you would lay this to heart.

Consider these Queries in the Spirit of Soberness, for they are worth your
regarding, and be not high-minded, nor wicked in your way, least the Lord who
has all Power in his hand meet you, and bring you down and destroy your Cause,
which he can do, if you provoke him.

This was written in the middle of the 3d. month called May. 1660. E. B.

THE END.

