The true STATE OF CHRISTIANITY, Truly DISCRIBED, And also DISCOVERED unto all
PEOPLE.

What it was in its beginning and purity, And what it now is in its Apostasy
and Degeneration.

And hereby, by true testimony is declared to the whole World; how and wherein,
in diverse particulars, the Christians through all the World (so called) now,
are fallen and gone backward, and revolted from what the true Christians once
were.

And this shows unto all the World, the woeful state and condition, wherein
them that are called Christians now stands, being departed and revolted from
the spirit of Christ, and from its teachings.

And this is given forth, that all people may understand concerning the times,
and the changing of times, and concerning what has been, what now is, and what
suddenly comes to pass in the earth.

Written by a friend to the Creation: A servant of the Lord, Edward Borough.

Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

A Table of the Contents whereby all may come (...) understand what the subject
is, and the particulars which in this volumn is declared.
FIrst, Concerning the name of Christian, and how and when the people of God
were first so called; and also of the increase thereof through World. Secondly,
Concerning the decrease, and degeneration of the Christians, and how and when
the Apostasy came upon them which has overshadowed them for many Ages.
Thirdly, Concerning Wherein, and in what particulars they are fallen, and
degenerated, from the life and practice of true Christianity. First, In respect
of being made Christians, and receiving the name (herein they differ) and are
not agreeable to what the Christians once were. And Secondly, In respect of the
operation of the spirit of Christ. Thirdly, In respect of unity and fellowship.
Fourthly, In respect of holiness, and purity of life and conversation.
Fifthly, In respect of the Ministry: 1. In its Call. 2. In its practices. 3. In
its Maintenance.
Sixthly, In respect of worship, and of that in many particulars, is showed the
degeneration of Christianity. Seventhly, The present state of Christians (so
called) truly measured, and compared with the state of the Jews in their
rebellion, and found altogether equal, and agreeable in many things. Eighthly,
A true Testimony against all that abomination and Idolatrous Worship now
practiced amongst the Christians (so called) with many other things, etc.

To all people upon Earth that are called Christians, this is a faithful and
true Testimony concerning you.
BEhold and hearken, give ear and listen diligently all ye people through the
whole world that are called Christians; all you I say, that goes under that
name, and that bears that name, and are named Christians, from one end of the
earth to the other, through all Nations and Countries whether you are scattered,
upon the face of the whole earth; behold and take notice what the Word of the
Lord is unto you, and what the testimony of Christ is toward you all, for the
line of true judgment is laid upon you, and the measuring Rod is put forth to
reach over you, and the servant of the Lord has viewed your state and
condition, and what you were in your beginning and increase, and what you now
are, in your decrease and woeful Apostasy, into which you are fallen and
degenerated from the life of Christianity. Oh, let your ears be open to
instruction, and regard well what I through the Lord do say unto you, even all
you, and every particular of you under heaven, that makes a profession of
Christ in words, and are known through the world by that name of Christians;
hearken I say and consider, and remember from whence, and into what you are
fallen, and return and repent, the Lord has with you a controversy, and he
will plead with you, because of your backslidings and revoltings, for you are
gone away backward, and you are turned aside from the life of Christ, and from
his Spirit, and are now without that which was the reason and true ground of
your name, Christian, and you have lost the true character of the name, and now
has only the name without the life and power thereof, and are dead to Christ
and his life, and has a name to live, but are dead, and having lost that which
gave you a true title to the name of Christian, you deserve no^ that name, nor
to be called by the name of Christ, because you are departed from his Spirit;
and this is to be declared to you in the Name of the Lord, that you may take a
view of your own estate, to the end that you may be awakened to return from
whence you are degenerated.

The Lord had a people in all generations, unto whom he was a God, and they
feared him, and served him, and worshipped him, and his name was precious
amongst them, who were his chosen people, and with whom he dwelt, and his power
and presence was amongst his people that did walk with him, under what name
soever they went in the world; but the first time that ever the people of the
Lord were called Christians, or was known by that name from other people, it
was at Antioch, in the time of the Apostles, who were followers of Christ, as
you may read, Acts 11. 26. And the disciples were called Christians first in
Antioch, and before that time the people of the Lord were never called
Christians, and this name was given to them by the Heathen, because they were
for Christ and of his part, and did follow him, and preach him to be followed,
and in all things exalted his name, and did and suffered all things for the
Name of Christ, therefore were they named Christians, and that name was true
unto them, for they had upon them the express image and character of Christ,
and followed his Spirit, and preached him unto all people for life and
salvation, and that all people might come to Christ and become followers of
him, and therefore they were rightly named Christians, to be known by that name
from all other people upon earth, who were not followers of Christ, who could
not rightly be called Christians, because they were not of his part; and from
thenceforth unto this day, all people whatsoever that believed in Christ, and
became followers of him, and that professed him, were called Christians, from
that original and foundation of the name which then was laid, also you may read
Acts 26. 28. v. And A^rippa said unto Paul, almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian; here again Paul followed Christ and preached him, and was on his
part altogether, and highly extolled his name; therefore King Agrippa called
him Christian, and was almost persuaded to be a Christian, to wit, a man for
Christ, to take part with him, and to be on his side, and the name interpreted,
this is the signification, and all that has this character does truly deserve
the name of Christians, for they are anointed people, and this was the
beginning of the Christian name: and before that time, as I have said, were the
people of God never called Christians in any generation; and ever since that
time, through all ages, all that professed Christ, and believed in him,
throughout the whole world were called by the name of Christians, and the Name
and Religion of Christians were honorable, and greatly beloved of God, for
that people were the peculiar people, a chosen generation, as you may read, 1
Pet. 2. 19. and whilst the life of Christ was manifest, and the Spirit of
Christ did lead them and teach them in all their ways and practices of
Religion, and whilst I say they retained the power and life of that, of which
they had the name, the power and presence of the Lord was amongst them, and
above all the people of the earth were they blessed, and more then all people
upon the earth besides had they the countenance of God shining amongst them,
and upon them, and pure unity with God, and one with another, had they in his
life, whereby they were made a terror and a fear to all nations while they
stood in the council of God, and were Christians in life, and power, and
practice, as well as in name, and the Lord greatly increased them in number;
for as you may read through the Acts of the Apostles, through all the world
many believed in Christ, and became followers of him, and received the
knowledge of him, and became anointed people, and received the name of
Christians, sometimes thousands at one Sermon were converted to the faith of
Christ, and became subject to his spirit, and had his mark upon them, and all
such were called Christians, and the Apostles went through many Nations, and of
the Jews and Greeks, and of the Heathen, and all other people, some of each
were converted, from that way in which they had walked, to follow Christ, and
they became Christians, and here was the increase of Christianity, and through
many (...) of the world they planted Churches and assemblies of Christians; and
as I said, while they stood in the council (...), the Name and Religion, was of
him greatly beloved.

But now the Christians are Apostatized, and degenerated from the spirit of
Christ; and from that which gave the^ the true Name of Christian, and the name
is retained only; and the life and power lost: and now many have a name to
live, but are dead; and that is departed from, which gave the true interest and
title in the name. Hear this all ye Christians, that life, light and power of
God, which was amon^ the Apostles and Christians once, you are departed from,
and have lost the sense and knowledge of, and has the name and not the thing,
which was the reason and ground of the name: wherefore all ye through the
world, that are called Christians, look back to your original, look unto the
Apostle^ who were the first that were called Christians, from who^ you had the
name, and see how you are degenerated and (...) len from the life that they
were in, and though you retain the name of Christians, yet you are not
followers of Christ, no^ taught by his Spirit, and none in the days of the
Apostle^ were truly counted or called Christians, but who followed the Spirit
of Christ, and were first converted to him, and changed by his power from sin
to righteousness, and from^ death to life, and such as were so, were truly
called Christians. But now all such as are called by that name, and (...) not
followers of the Spirit of Christ, nor converted to hi^* neither changed by his
power from death to life, and (...) sin to righteousness, such are in the
degeneration, from (...) life of Christianity, and has a name without the life
(...) power thereof. And now it remains to be showed, how and when the
degeneration came upon the Christians, and wher^in they are apostatized and
degenerated from that life, and spirit and practice which was amongst the
Apostles that were first called Christians.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke through the Apostles, and foretold of a falling
away from the truth, and from the true Christian life, and Paul said, Acts 20,
29, 30. said he, Grievous ^olves shall arise and enter in, who would not spare
the flock, (...) from among themselves should men arise, speaking perverse
things to draw disciples after them; and he also said, 1 Timothy 4. 1. That some
should depart from the faith, and give heed to seducing spirits; and he also
said, that it should come to pass, that people should become wicked, departing
from the truth, having the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof;
and such were led away with diverse lusts, and men of corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the faith; and the Apostle ^eter also foretold, that there
should false teachers arise among the Christians, who should bring in damnable
heresies, and many Christians should follow their pernicious ways, by reason
of which, the way of truth should be evil spoken of; And the Apostle John (...)
that many false Prophets were gone out then, and many Antichrists were then
come in among the Christians; now all these does show and declare of a
degeneration and falling away of Christians from the life of Christianity, and
we see these Prophe^ies fulfilled, and flocks of Christians are devoured from
the life of Christ, by devouring wolves which has entered among them, who has
led them into pernicious ways, and into damnable heresies, whereby the name of
Christianity is become reproachful among the Heathens, that never were called
Christians; and many thousands are departed from the true faith, from that
faith which did purify the hearts of the Saints, and many of the Christians
have given heed to seducing spirits, and has the form of godliness, but denies
the power thereof, and they are led of diverse lusts, and are become men of
corrupt minds, and are reprobate, and without the true faith; and the Apostles
prophesied of the degeneration which we see fulfilled in these our days, and
even while some of the Apostles were yet living, they saw the Christians
Apostatizing and falling away, and the Spirit of the Lord spoke through John,
Rev. 2. 3. to the Christian Churches in Asia, who were already departing from
the Christian life, some of them was departed already from their first work,
and some of them were given to the doctrine of B^laam, and to the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, which thing the Lord did hate, and others of them were seduced
by Jezabel, and taught to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols, and others o^ them had a name to live, but were dead, and others of them
were neither hot nor cold, and the Lord said he would (...) them out of his
mouth.

Now here the Christians were falling away you may see, and as before it had
increased, so now the true Christian life began to decrease, and the glory
thereof became darkened through all Asia: And also Rev. 13. 11. 1. 16. John saw
one beast arise out of the Sea, and another out of the earth, which set up a
Kingdom over the whole world, and caused all people upon earth to worship the
beast, and the beast has been great in his power, and he has ruled over the
world in great dominion; and all that would not worship him, he has had power
to kill, and has killed them, so that the true Christian life and Religion, as
the Apostles received it and practiced it, has been extinguished for many
generations, and people has had the form of godliness, but denied the power,
and lived under the name and profession of Christianity, but has been without
the life, and this is to be considered of and diligently searched into, by all
you that go under the name of Christians through all the world, for unto you
only I direct my words.

And now it remains to be showed what the state of Christians are at this day,
and wherein particularly they are Apostatized and degenerated from the true
life and practice of the postles who were the f^rst Christians; for wherein the
Christians now are contrary and not agreeable to the Apostles, in Faith, in
practice, in Worship, in Ministry, and in the entrance into Christianity, and
in any other thing whatsoever. I say, wherein they are contrary, and not
agreeable to the true Christians of old, to wit, the Apostles, therein are they
degenerated and fallen from the true life of Christianity, and this shall be
the Rule of judgment to try all you that are called Christians upon the face
of the earth; wherefore awake and come forth to judgment, for the measuring
rod is laid upon you all, whereby you shall be truly measured and compared with
them that were the first Christians upon earth; and the Heathens shall see your
nakedness and your shame, and hiss at you, when they behold how woefully you are
fallen from that (...) in the purity thereof, of which you do profess the
words, (...) shall not they rise up in judgment against you; who never had the
name of Christians, who are not fallen nor degressed from what they have
professed in any measure, comparable to you, who now retains only the name of
Christian (...) are departed from the life of Christ.

First, concerning the entrance into Christianity, and the way and means
whereby people are now made Christians, (...) receives that name; In this will
your fall and degeneration appear.

For the Apostles and first Christians upon Earth, before they were Christians,
or were called so, they were first converted, and changed and translated from
death to life, as you (...) read, 1 John 3. 14. and Col. 1. 13. and they first
received Christ, and became followers of him, and received his spirit to teach
them, and to guide them: For the Apostle said, If any man have not the spirit
of Christ he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. to wit, no Christians; and the Apostle
said, as many as were the sons of God, were led by the spirit of God; and also
it was promised by Christ to all that were his, the Comforter should come, the
spirit of truth* and he should lead them into all truth; which promise, all
that were Christians did receive, and they were led into all truth by the
teachings of the spirit of Christ, which dwelt in them; for all that were sons,
God sent the spirit of his Son into their hearts, which spirit sanctified them
through the obedience thereof. Now these were Christians, and were truly so
called; For they had the mark of Christ and his Image upon them, and he dwelt
in their hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. These I say were truly called
Christians; and none but such at that day of their Original were called
Christians, or had Fellowship in the Christian life: nor were any looked upon
by the Apostles to be Christians but by them that were such.

But look back all ye Christians upon earth, and see your ^all, and wherein you
are contrary, and not agreeable to the true Christians in their first and pure
estate. I say look back to your Original, and see how you are Apostatized from
them in your entrance into your profession of Christianity; for though you have
the name of Christians, yet you were no^ made so* nor received that name by
being first converted and changed, and translated from death to life, and (...)
being the children of disobedience, to be the children of God, through the work
and operation of the spirit of God in you, for hereof are thousands and ten
thousands of Christians now wholly ignorant, and altogether without the feeling
of the spirit of God, to change them, to convert them, and to translate them,
but are accounted Christians b^ tradition, or natural education, and because of
being sprinkled with a little water upon the face, being Infant^, or by a bare
confession and profession of the name of Christ in words, and professing of a
bare belief in the Scriptures, by this way and means were you made (and
received you the name of) Christians without any real change from darkness to
light, and from Satan to God, as I have said.

Now here appears to be a woeful degeneration in the very entrance of the
thing, and this is not agreeable, but rather contrary unto that way of
Christianity, wherein the Christians in their beginning were so made and
called, for then none were Christians, or so called, but who through the
preaching of the Gospel were first converted, changed, and renewed as I have
said, but now in these nations all are called Christians that are sprinkled
upon their faces with water by a teacher, when they are infants, or that does
but profess Christ in words, though they are not guided particulerly by his
spirit; neither has received Christ to dwell in them, and to be King over
them, and here again appears a wo^ul Apostasy: for none in the beginning of
Christianity in the world were made Christians, or so called, but who received
Christ, and in whom he dwelt, and was in them: as you may read, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
and who were followers of him, and had his spirit in them, the comforter to
teach them and to lead them into all truth, but now thousands upon thousands
who has the name of Christians, have not received Christ to dwell in (...) nor
to rule them, neither is he manifest in them by his spirit to teach them, and
they are not led into all truth; but lives in (...) and unrighteousness, and
are not followers of Christ, (...) follows their own hearts desires, and their
own hearts lusts: and are condemned in their own consciences, and has not
received the comforter, the holy Spirit, to be their guide and leader out of
all unrighteousness; and here appears a woeful degeneration: and that you
Christians through all the world are revolted and gone backward from
Christianity, as it was in its Original; a lamentation may be taken up because
of this woeful fall into which you Christians are fallen: consider of your own
state, and return, and repent.

Again, the Christians were begotten of God, and born of him, 1 John 5. 18. and
they were born of the word of God* and of the incoruptible seed; 1 Pet. 1. 23.
and they were created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. and they
were new Creatures, (...) things were done away, 2 Cor. 5. 17. they had put off
the body of sin and death, ^oll. 1 18. and were the servants of right^ and free
from sin, Romans 6 22. as you may read;

But now also, woeful are you Christians degenerated from this; for thousands
upon thousands of you are not born nor begotten of God, though you have the
name of Christians, neither are you born of the word of God which lives for
ever, nor of the incoruptible seed, neither are created again: nor become new
creatures; nor have put off the body of sin and death, neither are the servants
of righteousness, nor free from sin.

But on the contrary, are the servants of sin, and free from righteousness, and
are in the corruptible state, and are old creatures, and are not washed, nor
purified, as the Saints were, as you may read, 1 Cor. 6. 11. and here is a
woeful degeneration of the Christians now, from what the Christians were in the
beginning: the Christians then were new creatures; and put off the body of sin,
and were washed, and sanctified; but the Christians now, are not so, but the
contrary, to wit, unwashed and unsanctified, remaining in the pollutions of the
world, and are of the birth which is born of the flesh, and are in the old
nature, serving sin and the lusts of their own hearts, and thus are you fallen
from that which the true Christians possessed; for being compared to them, you
are not agreeable but rather contrary to them in all these things; and the Lord
is now come to search you and to try you; and to all people shall you be
discovered, for the Lord is now risen to bring all to trial and to judgment;

And again, herein will the Apostasy of the Christians appear, in respect of
unity and fellowship, for the Christians in their beginning while yet the life
of God was not darkened amongst them, they were of one heart, and one mind, and
one soul as you may read, Acts the 4. 32. and the Lord promised that he would
give unto his people one heart and one way: and Ezekiel the 11. 19. the Lord
promised to give his people one heart and a new spirit: which promise the
Christians received, and they that believed were of one beart and there was no
lack amongst them, but some sold their possessions, and distributed to them
that had need: and they were members of Christ* and he was head amongst them,
and over them: and they were flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, Ephesians. 5.
23. 30. and all the Christians were of one faith, Ephesians. 45. and had unity and
fellowship in the life which was made manifest in them; for they had tasted and
handled, and seen, and heard, the word of life, and they had fellowship with
the father, and with his son Jesus Christ.

But all ye Christians upon earth, how are you degenerated, and how great is
your fall in this, for you are not of one heart and mind, nor in unity and
fellowship one with another, but are of diverse sorts and sects, and are run
into many opinions, and devisions, and are of many ways, and minds, and hearts;
diverse sorts there are of Papists, and diverse sorts of (...) so called, which
are all divided in opinions, and striving, and contending about faith and
Religion, and the worship of God, and are opposing one another, and putting one
another to death, because of a difference in those things; how great is the
difference through many nations amongst Christians about those things? which
shows that the Christians are woefully fallen in respect of unity, and it is
manifest such Christians have not received the promise of God, as the Apostles
had; for now the Christians can suffer one another to lack, and to perish, and
die and starve for hunger and want: (...) in this all ye Christians generally
how you are fallen; then in the beginning of Christianity, no lack nor want was
amongst them; they that had much, sold it, and gave to them that had none; but
now thousands are oppressed through want, while others have too much; some are
feeding and clothing excessively with their multitude of dishes, and changes
of raiment, while others has scarce whereon to feed, or to cover their
nakedness; and this manifests that you are not members of the body of Christ,
neither is he head in you, nor amongst you, but you are members of an harlot,
and joined to a h^rlot, and one with a harlot, for you profess many faiths;
some say they believe Christ is given to all, others believes not so; some say
they believe he died for all, others they say, they believe contrary to that;
and thus the one faith which the Apostles had, the Christians of this
generation have lost, and they have lost the one head Christ, and has many
heads, every Sect has their head, many heads among the Protestants, many heads
among the Papists, but thus it was not in the beginning of Christianity;
therefore you Christians are subverted from the true life of Christ; the
Christians then were of one faith, but now of many; the Christians then had one
head Christ, but now the Christians (so called) has many heads; the Christians
then could lay down their life one for another, and were written in the hearts
of one another by the spirit of the living God; but the Christians now, are in
envy one toward another, and in strife one with another; the great men does
oppress the poor, and they go to Law one with another for earthly things, and
one stealing from another, and one hanging another, and murdering one another,
and making slaves one of another, and robbing one another, and seeking utterly
to destroy one another, and yet such has the name of Christians, amongst whom
all this is acted; but consider how woeful is your fall, and how wicked is your
degeneration from the life of God, and from the true Christian life and unity,
which was amongst them in their beginning, then they were of one heart, and of
one way, but now divided, and in strife and contention about Religion, and the
worship of God, and also about earthly things, for which they destroy one
(...)* and seek so to do; then they could lay down their life one for another,
but now they are taking the life one from another, through wickedness, a woeful
Apostasy, and great night of darkness is upon you; then none amongst them had
lack of any thing, nor none destroyed through wasting any thing upon their
lusts, but now thousands perishes for want, while others has too much, and
are destroying it upon their lusts; then had the Christians one head Christ,
but now the b^ast reigns that has many heads; then they were of one faith* but
now the Christians profess many faiths; then the Christians handled, saw, heard
and felt, of the Word of life in the^, and they had fellowship with the Father
and with the Son, but now thousands of thousands of Christians are without the
sense, and feeling, and knowledge of the Word of life in them, and walks in
darkness and in ignorance, and has no fellowship with the Father nor with the
Son. Behold, behold ye Christians, how ye are fallen, and how great is your
fall! a mourning and lamentation may be taken up for you, the garment of
righteousness is rent from you, and the beauty of the Son of God appears not
upon you: (...), alas, what does it advantage you, to have the name of
Christians, seeing you are thus woefully degenerate from that love, unity and
life, in the fellowship of God, which was among the Apostles, who were the
first Christians, and from whom ye derived the name, but are without the life,
as hereby i^ manifest to all the world.

Again, herein does the Apostasy of Christians appear, in respect of holiness
and purity of life; for the Christians were of a holy life and conversation,
the Apostle said, 1 These. 47. God has not called them unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness; and as you may read, Tit* 2. The aged men were to be sober,
grave, temperate, sound in the faith, in charity, in patience; and the aged
women likewise, their behavior was to be as became holiness, and the young
women were to be discreet, and Chaste, and young men were to be sober minded,
and servants were to be obedient to their Masters, and to show good fidelity;
for says the Apostle unto the Christians, The grace of God had appeared,
teaching them to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present (...) for
that end was Christ given, that he might redeem them from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Now here in short is a description of the true Christian life and
conversation, which was exhorted to, and no doubt but practiced by the
Christians, in the days when Christ was manifest amongst them; but from this
practice are the Christians degenerated: for, how are the aged men and women
now given to covetousness, and earthly-mindedness, and are pi^vish, and
perverse, and immoderate, and in the works that are evil, showing that they are
not in the Apostles doctrine, and not in the Christian life, but to it are
become dead, bringing forth fruits contrary to the fruits that the aged men and
women brought forth in the beginning of Christianity, showing they are not of a
holy life and conversation as the Christians were, and ought to be; and also
how are the young men, and the young women degenerated from the true Christian
life, and now are given to wantonness and pleasures of the world, and the lusts
which are evil; following vanity, and pride, and vain glory, and Masters, and
servants being corrupt in their places, serving themselves one of another, and
making a prey one upon another; and thus all sorts of Christians are fallen
from the Christian life, and holy conversation, and shows that they own not
the grace of God, which has appeared to all men to be their teacher, (...) the
true Christians once did, for it is manifest that the Christians now (so
called) has not denied all ungodliness and worldly lusts, neither does live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, as the Christians did;
but on the contrary, how, are ye Christians fallen from the pure and holy life,
abounding in wickedness, and in all ungodliness* how does pride abound among
Christians? how does lying, swearing, drunkenness and whoredom, and all the
works of the flesh abound; dissimulation, backbiting, envy, wrath, and all
that ever c^n be called evil is abounding amongst ye Christians so called? this
shows that your Apostasy is great, from that life and conversation which the
Apostles and Churches of Christians were in, who had denied all ungodlin^s and
worldly lusts, but generally ye live in all ungodlin^h and worldly lusts; judge
ye of this back*sliding into which you are fallen; they were taught to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, but ye live
unrighteously and ungodly, and out of the fear of God, and the grace of God is
not your teacher as it was theirs; also you may read how much the Apostles
exhorted the Christians to a holy life and conversation; the Apostle said, 1
Cor. 3. 17. The Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, speaking to the
Christians, and he said, Ephesians. 1. 4. They were chosen in Christ, that they
should be holy and without blame before him, in love; and Col. 1. 22. they that
had been sometimes enemies to God in their minds, were reconciled to present
them holy and unblameable in his sight.

And 1 Pet. 1. 15. the Apostle exhorted the Christians to be holy in all manner
of conversation; and Phil. 3. 20. the Christians witnessed that their
conversations were in heaven. Now herein does the fall of Christians appear, in
respect of their life, and conversation, and walking; for the Christians in the
Apostles days were of a holy life, and exhorted all thereunto, but the
Christians now, Teachers and people, are degenerate in their conversation, and
lives in all unrighteousness as I have said; and the conversation of Christians
now, being compared with what the Christians conversation was then, it is
altogether contrary, and shows, that though you have the name of Christians,
ye are not followers of Christ, nor led by his Spirit, but by the Spirit of
Antichrist. Oh, how woefully are you fallen you Christians from the life of
Christ* having a name to live, but are dead; the Lord God is coming against
you, to break you to pieces, for you have poluted his name in that you profess
to be his people in words, but in works does deny him. Oh remember, remember,
from whence you are fallen, and return, least the anger of God consume you from
off the earth, for your conversations greatly dishonor the true God; oh what
gluttony and drunkenness is amongst Christians? what pride and vain glory? what
cruelty, envy and murder one against another? what whoredoms and fornication?
what cozening? what cheating? how does all wickedness abound amongst you, in
your lives and (...); let the Lord be witness, and your own consciences be
witnesses against you for your abominations; they that were true Christians,
who followed Christ, lived not in, but were redeemed from such transgressions,
but you live in them, and acts them, wherefore be ye witnesses against your
selves, that ye are fallen and digressed from the true Christian estate.

Again, herein will you Christians appear to be degenerated from true
Christianity in respect of your Ministry; for the Ministers of Christ in the
(...) of Christianity they were made Ministers by the gift of the Holy Spirit,
which was given to them; for they were commanded to wait at Jerusalem for the
promise of the Father, and they were not to go forth till they had received
power from God by the gift of his holy spirit, and when that was come, they
should be witnesses and Ministers of Christ, Acts 1. 48 and as they were
waiting with one accord in one place, the Holy Ghost fell among them and filled
them, and then they began to speak as the spirit gave them utterance, and they
went up and down, and testified to the World of what they had heard and seen,
Acts 2. 4. now this was the call of Christian Ministers, and this was the
authority by which they went forth into the World, to wit, the spirit of God
poured upon them, and by authority of this only they went up and down the
World, and declared what they had handled, seen and tasted of the Word of of
life, 1 John (...) and as every man had received the gift, so they might
minister the same one to another, 1 Pet. 4. 10. and this was the practice of
the Christian Ministers in the beginning of Christianity, concerning their call
to the Minist^ry.

But how is the Christians here d^generated from what the Apostles were in, for
by another way then this are your Ministers made, not by the gift of the holy
Ghost received from God, neither do the Christians now wait for such a thing,
to go forth by authority and power thereof, but they are made Ministers by
natural learning, and education at School, having authority by man, and are
^pproved of man and not of God, and a man knows who of his children he will
make Ministers, when they are Infants, and thereupon pu^s him to Schools to
learn Arts and knowledge of earthly things, (...) so long time, till he have
gained so much knowledge and craft to be approved of such and such men (and as
is (...) knowledge, and opportunity serves; withal, having a great place
provided, where there is great store of maintenance) such a man becomes a
Minister and a Preacher to others, having never received, nor thought to
receive the gi^t of the Holy Ghost, neither having heard, se^n, tasted, nor
handled any thing of the Word of life from G^d in his own particular; neither
has he received the gift of Christ to be made a Minister by: this shows
greatly your degen^ration from the true Christian spirit; none then Ministers
among Christian^* but them who had received the gift by the Holy Ghost, and
power from on high; but now Ministers are made and approved, and sent forth
amongst Christians, because of natural learning and education, without
receiving the gift (...) the holy Spirit; and the Ministers of Christ then
spoke (...) the spirit gave them utterance, but now Ministers studies for what
they speak, and reads old Authors to gather forth matte^ to preach to the
people; then the Christian Ministers heard, and tasted, and handled of the Word
of life in themselves; but now the Ministers has their knowledge from book^,
and what they have heard and read without them. Oh how great is your Apostasy
ye Christians! and in respect of your Ministry, how greatly are you degenerated
from the Ministry which the Christians once had? be hold and consider this all
ye Christians upon earth, your Ministry is proved not to agree, but rather to
be contrary to that Ministry which was amongst Christians in the purity of
Christianity, as hereby is manifest; and you are fallen from the Ministry made
by the gift of the holy Ghost, to a ministry made by natural learning; consider
all ye Christians how great is this fall.

Again, in respect of the maintenance of your Ministry, your degeneration does
appear, for the Ministers of Christ amongst Christians, as they were called by
the spirit, so they were maintained in the work of their Ministry by the free
gift of the people, who received their Ministry, and they were to give freely,
and minister freely, as they had received freely, (...). 10. 8. 2 Cor. 11* 7.
The Apostle preached the Gospel of God (...), and would not make it chargeable
to any*. 1 Cor. 9. 18. and the Ministers of Christ among Christians at that
day, went through the world and preached freely the things that they had
received from God, and they sought no man's money, nor g^d, nor apparel, Acts
20. 33. and says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12 14. I seek not yours, but you, and
that was their end altogether to bring people to God by their Ministry, only
Christ did allow, Luke 9. 4. Into whatsoever house they entered that was worthy,
they might there abide, eating and drinking such things as were set before
them; and it was the Apostles practice sometimes to reap carnal things, where
they had sown spiritual things, and it was a small matter that they did so; yet
by a free gift they desired to reap it, and not by force and violence, did they
ever obtain any thing.

But concerning this; great is the degeneration of Christians in this
generation, for now the Ministers amongst you Christians are maintained by an
outward power, through compelling maintenance of Tithes and other set wages,
from the people, even from them that does not receive their Ministry, and they
do not preach freely, but makes their preaching chargeable to whole nations,
and the maintaining of Christian Ministers is become a burden to whole
nations, and great oppressions upon the poor; and now the Ministers seeks men's
money; and gold; and it does not appear that they only seek a people to God, but
on the contrary they seek peoples money to themselves; and it does not sa^ the
Ministers now to eat and drink such things that is set before them in a house
that is worthy, but they must have so much a year, and so much a sermon, and so
much from every particular man of his parish be they worthy or unworthy; to the
value, of 100. or 200 l. by the year; whereby poor people are greatly
oppressed; and they will reap carnal things by force and violence; from them to
whom they sow no spiritual things; for they are suing at Law, and putting in
prison, and distraining peoples goods by force and cruelty, to maintain them
and their familes in pride and idleness, which things the Christian Ministers
formerly in the days of the Apostles never did; but were often under great
sufferings, in (...) often, and in cold and nakedness often: Laboring with
their hands; 2. Cor. 11. 27.

Wherefore ye Christians, behold how you are fallen and how your Ministry is
degenerated both in its call and in its maintenance, being diverted (...)
contrary to what the Christian Ministry was once; behold I say how you are
fallen: and your Ministry quite subverted, from what the Ministry was in the
days of the Apostles; then the maintenance of Ministers was by a free gift
from them that received their Ministry, and they would not make their Ministry
chargeable to any, but now the maintenance of Ministers is by force and
cruelty, and great oppression of many people, and their preaching is chargeable
to many Nations; then they sought no man gold nor money, nor sought ^ot riches
from the people, but only sought the people to God; but now men's m^ney and
riches are sought and taken from them by violence, without regard of see^king
people, or bringing people to God* then to eat and drink (in a house that was
worthy) such things as were set before them, and to reap carnal things, as
meat, and drink, and necessaries, by a free gift, from them that received their
Ministry, thi^ was a sufficient maintenance for the Christian Ministers, but
now so many hundred pounds by the year, to maintain themselves and their
families in pride and idleness, and to reap it by compulsion and injustice from
poor people; in this manner are the Christian Ministers now maintained, which
i^ mani^est to be quite contrary to the practice of Christian Ministers in the
Apostles days. Behold your fall ye Christians, and how you are degenerated;
the Lord is come to try you, and to search you, y^u are weighed and are found
too light, you are measured and are found wanting; what the Christians were
once in their purity, you are no^ in many things, but the contrary, which
shows that you have the name of Christians (...) ^y tradition, but are
without the life, and being paralel^'d with the Christians who truly followed
Christ, you are no whit equal to them in any thing, but wholly contrary in all
things, showing you follow another spirit, then they who were followers of the
spirit of Christ, so (...) to the whole world, that you are degenerate out of
Christ the true Vine, and are branches in a degenerate stock, which brings
fr^it forth through you, which honors not God, but grieves his pure spirit,
and be ye witnesses against your selves, that you are fallen and degenerate
from that life and practice which was amongst the Apostles and Christians,
Again, as concerning your worship, which is now practiced amongst you
Christians through the world; herein also will your Apostasy greatly appear,
for the worship of the Christians was one, and guided by one spirit, and was in
the spirit and in the truth, says Christ, John 4* concerning the worship of
Christians, God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth, and s^ith the Apostle, We are the circumcision that
worship God in spirit, and rejoices in Christ Jesus, and has no confidence in
the flesh, Phil. 3. 3. And these were Christians, and also, Rom* 6 7. They
worshipped God not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, and the spirit guided them in all things, and was their teacher in all
their worship; for the Spirit taught them to pray, and they prayed in the
spirit, and they knew not (...) they should pray for as they ought, but the
spirit made interc^ssion for them, Romans 8. 26. and the Christians were exhorted
to pray in the Holy Ghost, Jud* 20. and the preaching of Christians, it was in
the spirit, and by the teachings of the Spirit; for they preached as the spirit
gave them utterance, Acts 2. And Philip was led by the spirit, and the Spirit
of the Lord moved Philip to go and preach to the Eunuch, Acts 8. And the
Apostles went up and down, as they were moved and led by the Spirit, and
preached and prayed in what place, and at what time and season as the spirit
moved them, and gave them utterance; sometime in the fields, and sometime in
houses, this was the practice of the Christians in their preaching and praying;
and also the Apostle said, I will pray with the spirit, and with understanding,
and I will sing with the spirit, and with understanding; and he exhorted the
Christians to (...) in psalms and spiritual songs, singing to the Lord, and
making melody in their hearts to him, Ephesians. 5. 19. N^w this is the ^mony
concerning what the worship of Christians was, its manifest that it was in the
spirit, and by the teaching^ of (...) spirit, their preaching, praying and
singing, were in the (...)* taught and exercised therein by the spirit which
they had received from God.

But now the worship of Christians at this day, is not agreeable to this, but
being laid to the line of judgment, is proproved contrary; for first the
Christians now are divided in their worship, and has many forms of worship,
some worshipping after one manner, and others after another, so that amongst
the Christians there are diverse forms of worshipping, and they are striving and
contending about their worship, every one praising their own form, and striving
one against another form of worship; and this shows that the Christians now
are not guided nor exercised by the own spirit of God, in their worship; and
this shows that the Christians now are degenerated from the true worship of God
in spirit, which once the Christians worship stood in; for then the worship of
Christians was one, and in one spirit, but now the worship of Christians are
many and diverse, and divided one from another, and they are not in unity in
their worship, but in stri^e and division; and herein you are Apostatized from
the (...) of Christianity, and its manifest that the worship of Christians now,
is not in the spirit and in the truth, but in vain traditions, learned in
natural knowledge by people that are no^ converted unto God, and any part of
the worship which is now practiced amongst Christians, whether amongst Papists
of any ^ort, or amongst Protestants of any sort; I say every part of the
worship now practiced amongst Christians through the world, may be taught unto,
and learned of, and exercised in, by a man that knows not God, neither is in
the truth, nor converted to the truth; neither has the Spirit of God guiding
nor leading of him; and I say, that which may be done or practiced by a man
that is not in the spirit, nor in the truth, nor is yet converted to the
knowledge of God, nor is not in any measure guided by the Spirit of God, is no^
the worship of the true God which is in the spirit and truth; but as I have
said, any part of the worship now practiced amongst Christians, may be done and
practiced by a man that is (...) of the spirit, and out of the truth, and
unconverted to the knowledge of God; and therefore the worship now practiced
amongst Christians, is not the true worship of the true God, which is in the
spirit and in the truth, and which cannot be practiced without it. Many more
things might be said, as to prove the worship of Christians n^w, as practiced
by them, is not the true worship of the true God; but this is true which I have
said, that which is practiced without the spirit of God, is not the true
worship of God, which must be in the spirit, and cannot be practiced without
it; but such is the worship of Christians, for the Christians now generally
prays, some after one form, and some after another, in their own wills and
times, and knows not the movings of the spirit of the Father thereunto, nor
guiding them therein, but in such a manner as they set unto themselves, or as
the custom of the Country instructs therein, and knows not the (...) of the
Spirit of the Father in them, nor knows ^ot the praying in the Holy Ghost; and
as for the preaching of Christians, it is not now practiced as the Christians
of old practiced it, nor by the same Spirit* now they study for what they
speak, and gathers out of the Scriptures, some having it written in a book what
they will preach to the people, and this is not to preach as the spirit gives
them utterance, neither (...) from the teaching or moving of the Spirit of God,
but by humane Art, and humane (...), knowing before hand, (...), and how much
to speak, so much as they have collected in their thoughts from such a verse,
and how long to preach, til a glass be run, and knows what to have for
preaching; and this, and such like is the manner of the preaching now (...)
Christians, which has no savor in it of Gods Spirit* o^ of the teachings or
leadings of Gods Spirit in it, but altogether contrary, to wit, this practice
savours of idolatry, and of vain traditions and superstitions.

And in short, this practice of preaching amongst the Christians now is not in
the same manner, neither by the same spirit, nor for the same end as the
preaching of the Christians was in the days of the Apostles, which shows
that the Christians now, are Apostatized and greatly degenerated from what the
Christians were then: For again the Christian Ministers now does not go as they
were moved of the Lord up and down from country to country to convert people
to God, as the Christian Ministers did then: but inquires for places of great
maintenance, where there is great store of Tithes and set wages; and if they
can, there they settle themselves, and preaches in manner as I have said; and
this practice savours nothing of the teachings of the spirit of God, nor of the
movings of that spirit, whereby the Christian Ministers of old were guided,
which shows that the Christiam Ministers now are in the Apostasy, and in the
degeneration from God, and from what the Christian Ministers were then. And as
concerning the practice of singing now amongst Christians, it is not in the
spirit, nor with a good understanding, but in a vain form, and tradition, and
not in the spirit of the Lord; for now the Christians many of them in a form
sings the conditions of others; as David's prayers, and praises, and troubles,
and afflictions; when as themselves are in a condition quite contrary to what
David was, and so sings that which unto themselves is false, as being out of
that condition of which they sing, and this is not singing with the spirit,
neither is it to sing spiritual songs* and others of Christians have another
manner of singing; (...) which singing of Christians now has no ^avour of the
teachings of Gods spirit in it, neither is it according, (...) by (...) ^e
spirit, as the singing of the Christians once (...) A woeful Apostasy is fallen
among you, ye Christians through the world, and you are fallen, you are fallen
from the life of Christ, and from the true practice of Christianity. (...) the
first Christians were in, then their praying was in the spirit, and in the Holy
Ghost, but now without the spirit, in forms and traditions; their preaching
then was as the spirit led them, and as it gave them utterance, but now by
humane learning and policy, a^ such a place for so much a y^ar, an hour by a
(...)* what they have gathered by (...) upon (...) m^ns wolks; (...) the
singing of Christians was in the spirit* and their whole worship was spiritual,
in the spirit and in the truth, but the singing of Christians now, and all
their worship, is in vain traditions, exercised without the leadings and
movings of the spirit of God; then the worship of Christians was one, and by
one spirit, now it is diverse, and in division, and in many contrary spirits.
Alas, oh ye Christians, consider how (...) is your fall, and how woeful your
degeneration, in respect of your worship, fallen greatly from the teaching of
the Spirit of God, in your praying, in your preaching, and in your singing, to
follow humane learning, and worldly policy, and vain traditions, the customs of
the Country, and your own imaginations, in your praying, preaching, and
singing, as I have proved unto you: Oh consider how great is your Apostasy from
the true life of true Christianity, greatly do you err from the pure way,
wherein the true Christians walked, and being truly paralel'd with them, and
measured with the spirit of true judgment; you are sound not equal to them in
any measure, but rather contrary altogether, showing you are guided by another
spirit then once the Christians were, and that you follow another teacher then
once they did, your practices does make it manifest, which are contrary, and
not according to what the practice of the Christians once were, is not my
judgment just upon you? have you not lost that, and are departed from it which
gave the name of Christian, and so has the name without the thing? a
profession of Christianity, but no true title therein; but having lost that
which gave the true title to the name: so (...) this is your state, and this is
your condition generally ye Christians through the world; a name you have of
Christianity, but to the true life thereof, in every particular, are you dead.

And now all ye Christians upon earth, behold, behold, how you are fallen and
degenerated in all these things and many more, which might be named, fallen I
say from the true Christian life and practice, wherein the Christians once
were, showing fully to all the world, that the spirit of Christ does not now
guide ye Christians, but another spirit, which brings forth through you other
works and fruits, and of another nature then what the Christians once brought
forth and being compared with them, you are no whit equal, in the very way and
means whereby you are made Christians, you differ from them, and in all your
practices, and in life and conversation you are contrary to them, and in
respect of your worship and Ministry, in every part thereof, are you altogether
contrary unto what the Christians once were* yea, in your very apparel you show
a degeneration from the true life and practice in Christianity; for the Apostle
exhorted the Christians to adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broidred hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array, 1 Timothy 2. 9. And the Christians were there exhorted, that their
adorning should not be the outward plaiting of the hair* or of wearing of gold,
or putting on of apparel.

But now amongst ye Christians, is a practice found quite contrary; what vanity
and excess is in your apparel, striving to excel one another in pride and vain
glory, in your gold, and silver and costly array, spending the creation of God
to satisfy their lust^ul minds; showing another spirit then was amongst the
Christians of old, whose words and name ye profess, but are degenerated from
the life, in things of greater and less moment.

Alas, alas, Oh woe is me for you! how is my spirit (...) oppressed in the
remembrance of your woeful fall? what shall ^ say unto you but this? you are
revolted and gone away backward from the way of life, and you have altogether
forgotten God, and are degenerated from Christ the living Vine, and the anger
of the Lord is now greatly kindled (...) you, to consume you, and to confound
you, because you are revolted and turned aside from the pure and perfect way of
God, which once was manifest amongst Christians, and your back sliding and
Apostasy is truly compared to that of the Jews, who did retain the name of the
people of God, (...) they were turned aside from his commandments, even (...)
you do retain the name of Christians, though you are departed from Christ; for
the Jews had seen and known much of the power and presence, and hand of the
Lord, in many (...) victories and deliverances, and the Lord had chosen them
above any other people at that day, to place his name (...) them, and amongst
them; and yet after all that, they forgot (...) wondrous works, and rebelled
against him, and became (...) and hard-hearted people, much more then any other
besides them, and they would not be instructed, nor reclaimed by the voice of
the Prophets, but smote them, and slew them, and when Christ their Savior
came, they would not receive him, nor walk in his ways, but crucified him,
saying, they would not have that man to reign over them.

And to this in every particular, are the Christians now found equal, and
agreeing with backsliding Israel, for much of the hand and power of the Lord
was the Christians made partakers of, and the Lord wrought great deliverances
for them, when they were few in number, and under heavy yokes and bondage,
through persecution and cruel dealing* (...) then the Lord was with them, and
increased them greatly in number, and gave them victory in a great measure
over all their enemies; but now are they revolted even as the Jews, and have
forgotten God, and greatly rebelled a^ him, and have turned his love to their
lusts, abusing his loving kindness, and are become a (...), and a hard-hearted
people as ever were the Jews, and now you will not be instructed nor reclaimed
from the error of your ways, but abounds in all manner of unrighteousness, and
will not (...) to the voice of the Lord, nor return to him, but are (...)
people, and will not return unto him from whom you are fallen, but hates the
light which Christ has lightened you withal, neither will have Christ to reign
over you, (...) the life as the Jews did.

And as the sacrifices and oblations, the Sabboth-keeping of the Jews, and all
the works of righteousness, were abomination to the Lord after they were
departed from him, even their very practice of those things which God had once
commanded them to perform, became a burden to the Lord, and (...) soul could
not away with them, even their new Moons and Sabboths, his soul hated, Isa. 1.
and all their sacrifices were as if they cut off a dogs neck, and their
oblations as if they offered swines blood, and their burning incense, as if
they blessed an Idol, Isa. 66. I say, the very practice of the Jews, after they
were revolted, and become disobedient children, in those very things, which God
had commanded them to do and practice, and which once the Lord accepted the
doing of by his people, yet after they were turned aside from the leading of
his spirit, the practice of the very same works were hateful in the sight of
the Lord, when they performed works of righteousness to him, and yet their
hearts went after their covetousness, and then, their practicing of that which
God had once commanded to be done, their doing of it was Idolatry, and was a
burden to the Lords soul, and their righteousness, and all their practices
therein, were as filthy rags, even loathsome in his presence, when their fear
toward him was taught by the precepts of men, and they had lost that pure fear
which once was taught them of God, but they were gone from his fear, which
should have kept their hearts clean; and their hearts were defiled and
polluted, and therefore not any of their performances to him could be accepted,
but were altogether become an abomination.

And even thus is it at this day, as concerning the sacrifices and performances
of Christians, being as I have said, and made manifest, departed from the Lord,
and from the spirit of Christ; all their prayings, and preachings, and
singings, their Baptisms, and breakings of bread, and even all that which you
perform as unto God, as the worship of him; is not accepted, but abomination
unto him; and his soul is ^thened with all these things, you not being led with
the spirit of Christ; and even your practicing of these things, which the
Saints and Christians once practiced, and were accepted of the Lord in so
doing, while they were led by the spirit of Christ* I say the very practice of
those things now, by the Christians being degenerated, is become idolatry and
abomination to the Lord; and this I declare in the fear and presence of the
Lord, even all your praying, and preachings, and profession, all your Sabbath*
keeping, and set days of humiliation, and even all your practices of Religion,
which you do and perform is idolatry, and a burden to the Lords soul, in the
state that now you stand, not being led with the spirit of Christ, but being
from it departed, and your works not brought forth by it, but by another
spirit. And now says the Lord unto you Christians, (who are degenerated from
the spirit of Christ) to what purpose is your preaching, praying and singing,
they are a vexation and a burden to the righteous soul, and the Lord has no
delight therein; away with it, away with it, your profession and practices
stinks in the nostrils of the Lord; all your Baptisms, and your Sacraments,
which ye perform in a vain tradition, and not by the Spirit of the Lord, they
are hateful in his sight, away with them, away with them, they shall crumble to
the dust, and immediate desolation in one day; the Lord will break them down,
and never build them up again; your preaching by a glass for so much a Sermon,
or so much a year, what you have gathered out of books, and studied for from
other men's words, down with it, down with it, it is an abomination to the Lord;
and your Ministry which is made and sent forth at Schools, and by natural
learning, through the attainment of such Arts and Sciences, and being approved
of such and such men, and sent forth to such and such a Parish, to have so much
money by the year for preaching what has been studied for, and not by the gift
of the Holy Ghost; away with this Ministry, away with it, its a mocking of
God, and a deceiving of souls, the Lord will confound it, and bring it to
destruction, and your singing of the Saints words in Rhyme and Meeter, and their
conditions, which your selves never knew; this is abomination to the Lord, and
a practice which his soul hates, away with it, the Lord is risen to confound
it; away with all your worship, which is not in the spirit nor in the truth, but
in vain traditions of men, practiced by you in a vain form, and not in the
power of God, the Lord will bring it down to the ground, and re^, and establish
his own worship, which is in spirit and in truth; and he will give, and has
given his Ministry again by the gift of the Holy Ghost, which has been lost
for many ages, while this night of Apostacy has overspread the world, and the
Lord shall no longer be worshipped in vain traditions of men, but his people
shall be restored and renewed, to worship him in spirit and truth; and the
Christian life shall again be brought forth, and the spirit of Christ shall be
the leader and teacher of his people; and now the day of the Lords visitation
is again revived, for to gather his people, and to restore them again to his
perfect way and worship.

Therefore hearken and behold ye Christians, this is the testimony of the Lord
concerning you; you have been fallen and degenerated from the life of
righteousness, and from the true way and worship of the true God; and you have
long been slumberi^g and sleeping in this long night of darkness* which
overshadowed you, and darkened that glorious appearance of the Son of God,
which once shined upon the Christians, and in blindness and darkness have
you walked for many ages, and your worship has been superscribed to the
unknown God; and woefully have you been wallowing in unclean paths, and you have
erred, you have erred from the life of Christ, and from his spirit, and you
have gone from your husband, and followed other lovers, and you have been
drenched in iniquity, and altogether polluted by transgression, and the state
in which you now stand, is a state separated from God; a state of great
ignorance and darkness, and a state of heinous rebellion against God, whose
soul and spirit is greatly oppressed and grieved because of your degeneration;
who is become more ignorant of God then the Ox is of his owner, or the Ass of
his masters crib, and even the very same vision (...) seen concerning you, as
the Prophet saw concerning Israel; Therefore here oh heavens, and give ear oh
earth, for the Lord does speak unto you Christians; I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me; and the Ox knows his
owners, and the Ass his masters crib, but the Christians does not know, the
people does not consider. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evel doers, children that are corrupted, that have forsaken the right
way, and provokes the living God to anger, and ye are gone away backward, the
whole head is sick, the whole heart is (...), and from the sole of the foot
even unto the head there is no soundness, but your conditions are wounds and
bruis^* and putrefying sores; you are not closed, neither bound up, neither
mollified with ointment, and your country is desolate and your cities is burnt
with fire; your land strangers devo^ it in your presence, and it is desolate
and overthrown by strangers; and but that the Lord of Hosts has left us a
small (...), even a seed, ye Christians would have been as So^; if any man have
an ear to hear, let him hear; this vision is as true unto you Christians
throughout all the World, (...) ever it was unto the seed of the Jews; this is
your state, and this is your condition; and thus ye stand in the sight of the
Lord, though in your beginning (in the beginning of Christianity I mean) the
Lord brought up the Christians and nourished them by his living word, and with
his word he cherished them, and they grew unto a goodly state, and were (...)
in Christ* Col. 2. 10. and they were come to the spirits (...) men made
perfect, and unto mount Sion the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumer able company of Angels, to the general Assembly
and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge
of all, Heb. 12. 22, 23. 24.

TO this state were the Christians nourished and brought up, in the days when
they were first brought forth, when they were begotten and born again of the
Immortal Word that abides for ^ever, and they were sanctified, and purified,
and made clean; unto this were they nourished and brought up out of darkness,
and from under the shadow of death; but notwithstanding this, the Christians
now have rebelled against the Lord, and does rebel against him; and though he
has been unto them as an owner to the Ox, and as a crib to the Ass, even as
thus has the Lord been unto the Christians, yet they know it not, neither does
the Christians consider, but is indeed grown sinful, and laden with iniquity,
and the seed of evil doers brings forth its fruit through Christians, being
become children that are corrupters, having forsaken the Lord and his way,
which was made manifest in the days of the Apostles, and the Lord is greatly
provoked, for the Christians are gone backward from what they were in their
beginning, as I have fully made manifest, and this vision of the Lord is unto
you, all ye Christians, even as a Tree that is of the most precious seed, and
the most noble Vine that is planted in a good soil, that is dug and dressed,
and grown to a goodly stature; and bringing forth some acceptable fruit unto
the good husbandman for a season; yet this Tree becomes blasted by an
unwholesom air, and becomes degenerate from its virtue and property, and
nature, and becomes a wild vine, and a plant of great disgrace, ceasing to
bring forth any good fruit, and becomes fruitful in all evil, and the labor of
the good husbandman is ^ost; for while he looks for good fruit, nothing
appears, but fruit of an evil taste, which is altogether loathsome unto the
good husbandman. This parable is unto you Christians, and this is your state,
and your condition; Therefore behold what shall the Lord do unto this Tree;
shall he not cut it down to the ground and cast it into the purging fire, shall
he not lay his Ax to the root, and cause all its branches utterly to wither,
and cause it to cease in being, even as it has ceased in bringing forth fruit?
shall not the good husbandman destroy this Tree with all its corrupt fruit, and
shall not his own hand accomplish the purpose of his own heart? this Tree shall
be fuel for this fire of his anger, he will pluck it up and not plant it again,
because it is degenerated. G^e car all ye Christians to the Testimony which is
concerning you, you are fallen, you are fallen, and being compared to what the
Christians were, you are no whit equal; but a^ diverted in all your practices,
from that spirit which led the Apostles and Christian Churches; and your works
show another spirit then the spirit of Jesus: Wherefore great i^ your fall, and
to be lamented, and though you have the name of Christians, yet you want the
life.

THE END.
AN OBJECTION.
BUt whereas it may be objected by some and said, seeing the state of
Christianity is thus discovered what it was i^ its beginning and purity, and
what it now is in its degeneration; and seeing the present state of Christians
is thus condemned, what do I believe concerning the state of Christianity to
come? what shall succeed this present degeneration? And may it be expected that
ever Christianity shall be restored to that state of purity as it was in its
beginning? And whether may people expect to come into the same life again, and
to know the same power, and worship, and unity, which was amongst the Apostles
and first Christians Churches? And whether do I judge that ever the Ministry
can be again received by the gift of the holy spirit only, without natural
learning and languages? And whether the same spirit is to be waited for and
received? And whether the same anointing can be known in this age, or any age
to come, as it was in and among the Apostles and Christians, before the
Apostasy and degeneration.

ANSWER.
To all this I answer, and do say, that the present state of Christianity is
woeful, and to be condemned of the Lord, as being degenerated from his life,
power and spirit, whereby all hearts are darkened, and all minds estranged from
the Covenant of life and peace, and from the sense and feeling of the life of
God: and now in all the ways, and worships, and practices of Christians they
are fallen and degenerated from that life in which the Christians once were;
and the beast has reigned over all for many ages, and because of his power,
and greatness, and dominion, who has been able to make war with him; he has
killed the Saints, and has subjected all Nations under his power, and every
Nation has received the mark of the beast, and born his Image for generations,
and all flesh has s^ggered, and has been made drunk with the ^up of
fornication, that has been i^ the hand of the whore who has set upon this
beast, who has caused both small and great to worship him, and all that would
not, he has had power to kill them; and this Government has ruled over the
whole Christendom, and the worship practiced has been but the worship of the
beast, while people have been erred from the spirit of Christ, and not guided
by it only; and people has been compelled to worship by Laws of men, they
have been compelled to sprinkle their Infants, and they have been compelled to
go to Steeple houses, and compelled to keep a Sabbath, and compelled to hire
Priests, and to pay them wages against their wills, and all this compelling by
an outward power, has not been the worship of God, but savoured altogether of
the worship of the beast; for you may read, Rev. 13. 12, 15, 16, 17. how the
beast caused all, both small and great to worship him, and all that would not
worship him by his power, he has had power to kill them; and all compelling
and causing to worship by an outward power, is the worship of the beast, for
Christ nor his Apostles never caused any to worship God by an outward power;
for while Christianity kept its purity and authority, they begot people to God,
and to worship him, by the word of God, and by the power of the spirit; and
they did not bring any into their Sect, nor to worship with them by an outward
Law and authority; for that is in the Government of the beast, it was he that
first caused both small and great to conform to his worship, and it is his
power that upholds it, and maintains it unto this day.

But now the seed of God is arising, which is able to make war with the Beast,
and his kingdom, and his worship shall be thrown down to the ground, and all
this causing and compelling to worship, causing to keep a day, and causing to
hire Teachers to maintain them; and this causing to go to Steeple Houses, and
to maintain them, and all this causing to pay tithes, it shall all fall to the
ground, and be beat down by the (...) of God, which is a rising, and it shall
be no more found among true Christians, nor the Beast shall not be worshipped,
(...) his authority any more of force; for the day of the Lord has now
appeared, and the light is sprung forth which has made all things manifest,
and now the difference is known between the worship of the beast, and the
worship of the true God: And concerning the state of Christianity to come, this
I ^new and believe, a glorious restoration thereof shall appear throughout the
whole christendom, and christianity shall again be restored to its former
purity, and Christians shall, and may receive the same spirit, from which the
Christians has been degenerated; and the same life, the same power, and the
same worship and Unity shall be revived amongst Christians in the restoration;
even the same that was in the beginning before the Apostasy, and the glory of
God shall again appear among his people, and they shall again worship him in
spirit and in truth only, as they did before the Apostasy, and all this
traditionall worship, and false imitations which has been set up since the
Apostles days, shall be overthrown and confounded; the Lord is risen and will
dash down and overthrow all this idolatry now practiced amongst Christians. And
a great shaking and counfounding shall suddenly come among Christians; for the
Lord will break down that which has been builded because it is polluted; and
he will pluck ^p that which has been planted, because it is defiled; and a
mighty work will the Lord work in the Earth, the kingdoms of this world will he
change into the kingdoms of Christ, and Christ shall reign in and among his
people, and his spirit shall be the teacher and leader of his people, and all
false ^chers will the Lord confound and consume; all these hirelings, who go
for gifts and rewards, and all this manner of preaching and teaching, which are
come up since the Apostles days; all this preaching which they study for, and
by a (...), and for so much money a year, all this shall be tumbled down into
the pit; Gods vengeance shall come upon it all, and the annoynting shall be
received, and it shall dwell in people, as it did in the Apostles; and the
people shall need no other teacher but as that anointing teaches all things,
and for this spirit and anointing, all that fear God may wa^ to receive it in
this present age; which Spirit brings into the same unity and life, into the
same worship and fellowship that was amongst Christians in the beginning before
the Apostasy; and this state may Christians be restored to, and for this state
all that fear God and love him are to wait, for this shall come to pass in the
world.

And as concerning the Ministry, I know and do believe it may be, and is
received again as the Apostles and Christian Ministers first received it, to
wit, by the eternal spirit and gift thereof, through the revelation of Christ
Jesus in them* and such may and does preach the Gospel freely, as they do
receive it freely, and without natural learning and languages.

For by that can none be made Ministers of Christ, nor by any thing without the
gift of the holy Spirit, and Christ's Ministry shall again be received thereby;
this I believe: and all this Ministry made and sent forth by natural learning,
and without the gift of the holy Spirit, the Lord will confound it in this Age;
for this is come up since the Apostles days, to make Ministers by natural
learning, and it stands in the apostasy from the life, and spirit of Christ,
and its call, and work, and maintenance, savours not of the kingdom of Christ,
and the Lord will bring it down, and the gift of his Ministry will he restore
by his Spirit; and this is, and shall come to pass, and it may be waited for
in this present age; and the Lord will restore his Ministry as in the
beginning, and his work shall be glorious; for many there are, is, and shall be
converted to God, and brought out of the degeneration, and to that shall people
come which all Christendom has been apostatized from, and shall receive the
same spirit, and the same anointing which was amongst the Christian Churches;
and life and immortality shall again be brought to light through the Gospel,
which has been hid for ages while darkness has been over the minds of people;
and I say and testify before all the world, that Christianity shall be
restored to its former state; Life shall spring forth, and Truth shall be
increased, and faith shall wax strong, even the same (...) that the Apostles
had, which gave them victory over all the world which shall again give people
the same victory; and this shall be known in the earth: For the marriage of the
Lamb shall come, and all his people shall be joined unto him, and they shall be
one way, and one worship, and one teacher, and every man shall fit under
Christ's Vine, and none shall make afraid: Yea, and more then a Vine shall he be
known ^d more then a door, and more then a Shepherd shall he be known to be to
his people, and greater then a rock shall he be witnessed to be, and more then
a Teacher in the wilderness. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear: more
and greater is he becoming to his people, then is lawful yet to utter: Eye
has not seen, nor it has not entered into the heart of man, but it is revealed
to us by his Spirit; The joyful day is approaching, the Lambs wife is making
her self ready, the wedding Garment is putting on; and all that which is
polluted is to be done away; and blessed is he that comes to the marriage of
the Lamb, that he may become one spirit with the Creator; here is glory and
rejoicing for ever, when this is known, That the wife has not power over her
own body, but the husband, nor the husband has power over his own body, but
the wife. Where this is known, Death is swallowed up of Life, and (...) is
overcome of righteousness, and the inheritance of life eternal comes to be
possessed, and Death and Hell is cast into the lake, and he which has
deceived, can deceive no more; and blessed is the eye that sees this, and the
heart that understands.

Wherefore all ye Christians upon earth, awake, awake, and put away your
whoredoms, cast off your idolatries, and strip you, and make you clean of all
your adultries; drink no longer of the cup of fornications, nor eat no longer
of the abominable flesh; nor wear no longer your garments of unrighteousness,
but strip ye, strip ye, make ye bare, all your old garments must be put off
before you can appear before the Lord.

A great work will the Lord work amongst you, he will ^ake and overthrow all
your Altars, Images, and Idols which you have set up and worshipped; the Lord
has uttered (...) voice, the beast that has many heads, and many horns, (...)
tremble, (...) one head and one horn only shall be exalted, and the Government
shall be set up, of whose increase there shall be no end; and people shall be
brought into that, and they shall go forth no more, for who comes to this, time
is no longer, and the Kingdom and Government is delivered to the Father, and he
is become all in all.

And all that ever comes to know these things, must first come to the light of
the Lamb in them, with which every man is lightened that comes into the world,
and all that ever knows these things, must first be brought to the principle of
God in them, which they have trangressed against* and all that owns the light
of Christ, and walks in it, shall come to know these things, which to know and
be in them, is eternal life.

Therefore all ye Christians, come to the light which Christ has lightened you
withal, and that will let you see the Government of Satan, and of sin and
death, which has been ruling in you, and the light will teach you to war
against it, till it be subdued, the light will discover unto you that nature,
in which the kingdom of Satan bears rule, it will (...) you see the Devil, who
is the Prince of darkness, who is the adversary of God; who is out of the
truth, and he has dra^ all people out of the truth; but if you love the light
of Christ in you, it will teach you to war against him, and against all that,
that's out of the truth; for all that is of Satan's kingdom, that is out of the
truth, and must be destroyed by the coming of the kingdom of Christ; whose
coming is in the light, which Christ has lightened every man withal, who comes
to destroy the Devil, and his kingdom, and all his works; So to the light must
all minds be turned, which will reveal the kingdom of the man of sin, and
consume (...) the appearance of Christ is light, and Christ is the light of
Israel, which is as a fire, to consume all fruitless trees, which cumbers the
ground, which the Lord will consume by the brightness of his coming: And now is
the man of sin revealed, even in the heart of Christians so called, and he has
long showed himself to be God, but now the Lord will bring him down; for
Antichrist has ruled for many ages, and the Lord of life has been crucified in
spiritual Sodom; but Sodom shall be consumed by fire, and the Lord will avenge
himself of all his enemies, and all people and Nations shall know there is a
God, who executes justice and true judgment, who is a God near at hand to
reward his people with everlasting life, and to give unto his enemies judgment
and condemnation.

THE END.

